EMBO Mol MedEMBO Mol Med1758emmolmed101487380EMMMEMBO Molecular Medicine1757-46761757-4684Nature Publishing GroupPMC6685104PMC6685104.1668510466851043131816610.15252/emmm.201910291EMMM2019102911ArticleArticlesMouse Nr2f1 haploinsufficiency unveils new pathological mechanisms of a human optic atrophy syndrome
Michele Bertacchi et alBertacchiMichelehttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4402-4974Michele.BERTACCHI@univ-cotedazur.fr GruartAgnès KaimakisPolynikis AlletCécile SerraLinda GiacobiniPaolohttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3075-1441 Delgado‐GarcíaJosé M BovolentaPaola StuderMichèlehttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7105-2957Michele.STUDER@univ-cotedazur.fr 
1
CNRS
Inserm
iBV
Université Côte d'Azur
Nice
France

2
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta
Milan
Italy

3
Division of Neurosciences
Pablo de Olavide University
Seville
Spain

4
Centro de Biología Molecular “Severo Ochoa”
CSIC‐UAM
Madrid
Spain

5
CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER)
Campus de la Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
Madrid
Spain

6
Jean‐Pierre Aubert Research Center (JPArc)
Laboratory of Development and Plasticity of the Neuroendocrine Brain
UMR‐S 1172
Inserm
Lille
France

7
University of Lille, FHU 1,000 Days for Health
Lille
France

8
Department of Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
University of Milano‐Bicocca
Milano
Italy
*
Corresponding author. Tel: +33 489150723; E‐mail: Michele.BERTACCHI@univ-cotedazur.fr
Corresponding author. Tel: +33 489150720; E‐mail: Michele.STUDER@univ-cotedazur.fr18720198201911834003910.1002/emmm.v11.8e10291081201907620191262019010820191208201906022020© 2019 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 licensehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Optic nerve atrophy represents the most common form of hereditary optic neuropathies leading to vision impairment. The recently described Bosch‐Boonstra‐Schaaf optic atrophy (BBSOA) syndrome denotes an autosomal dominant genetic form of neuropathy caused by mutations or deletions in the NR2F1 gene. Herein, we describe a mouse model recapitulating key features of BBSOA patients—optic nerve atrophy, optic disc anomalies, and visual deficits—thus representing the only available mouse model for this syndrome. Notably, Nr2f1‐deficient optic nerves develop an imbalance between oligodendrocytes and astrocytes leading to postnatal hypomyelination and astrogliosis. Adult heterozygous mice display a slower optic axonal conduction velocity from the retina to high‐order visual centers together with associative visual learning deficits. Importantly, some of these clinical features, such the optic nerve hypomyelination, could be rescued by chemical drug treatment in early postnatal life. Overall, our data shed new insights into the cellular mechanisms of optic nerve atrophy in BBSOA patients and open a promising avenue for future therapeutic approaches.

astrogliosisBBSOA syndromemouse Nr2f1myelinationoptic nerve atrophy

## Subject Categories
Development & DifferentiationAgence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR)ANR-15-NEUR-0002-04ANR-11-LABX-0028-01Spanish Ministry of Science and InnovationBFU2016-75412-RBFU2017-82375-RPCIN-2015-176-C02-01/ERA-Net NeuronIIInstitutional CBMSO Grant from the Fundación Ramón ArecesJunta de Andalucía, SpainBIO-122Spanish Tatiana Pérez de Guzmán el Bueno Foundation Staining of NR2F1 on human embryonic sections of gestational week (GW) 11 confirmed expression conservation in both the developing neural retina (identified by the retinal marker PAX6) and the ON (Fig  L–L”). Notably, NR2F1 is highly expressed in progenitors (SOX2+) as well as in post‐mitotic differentiated retinal cells (SOX2−; Fig  D–D”). Along the ON, from the optic disc (distal) to the chiasm (proximal) regions, almost all cells are positive for NR2F1 and 93% of them co‐express the astrocytic marker S100β (Fig  M–N”). High co‐expression of NR2F1 with SOX2 and S100β (Figs  O–P’ and E–E”), as well as with BRN3a in the ganglion cell layer (GCL) of the neural retina (Fig  Q–Q”’), is maintained at GW14, indicating that NR2F1 expression follows cell differentiation in both the NR (from progenitor to post‐mitotic RGCs) and the ON. Moreover, oligodendrocytes have not reached the ON at these early stages, but can be distinguished in the preoptic area, where they are generated and co‐express NR2F1 (93% double‐positive cells; Fig  F–F”’). The high expression of NR2F1 in the human and mouse NR, OD and ON suggests a conserved role for this gene in the development of the peripheral visual system. We observed that along the human ON, NR2F1 expression levels seem even higher than in mouse (compare Fig  I–I” with Fig  L–L”), suggesting an important role for NR2F1 in human ON development.

## Optic disc malformations in Nr2f1 mutant mice
In light of the early Nr2f1 expression gradient in the developing optic vesicle, key markers of proximo‐distal (P‐D) eye patterning, such as Pax6 and Pax2 (Schwarz et al, ), were first analyzed in WT, HET, and KO embryos. We found ectopic Pax6 expression in the presumptive ventral OS of HET and KO E10.5 embryos (Fig  A–F), as well as Pax2 downregulation and reciprocal Pax6 upregulation in invaginating E11.5 mutant optic cups (Fig  G–M”). Thus, differently from previous reports (Tang et al, , ), loss of Nr2f1 alone is sufficient to affect early patterning of the developing optic vesicle, indicating that Nr2f1 can control key molecular regulators of early identity acquisition during eye development.
 The refinement of P‐D marker expression is essential for the establishment of a structural border between OS and neural retina (NR), called the optic disc (OD), which forms at the most proximal region of the optic cup. In light of the ventral shift of the presumptive OS/NR border in Nr2f1 mutants, and of BBSOA patients displaying OD abnormalities (Bosch et al, ; Chen et al, ), we decided to closely follow the morphological and molecular development of the OD in Nr2f1 HET and KO eyes. Abnormal positioning and aberrant morphology of the presumptive OD was found in E12.5 Nr2f1 mutants (Fig  A–B”), particularly in Nr2f1 KO optic vesicles, in which Pax2 expression is lost in the proximal OS region and ectopic Pax6+ cells appear to differentiate into Tuj1+ neurons in loco (arrowheads and inset in Fig  C–D”). Cells positive for Pax2 remain abnormally low in the OD domain of Nr2f1 HET and KO mutants until E18.5 (Fig  E and F) and fail to properly surround and constrain the extension of Tuj1+ axons already at E15.5 (Fig  G–G’”). Early tissue patterning defects ultimately impinge on the final morphology and cell organization of the OD at later stages, in which Tuj1+ fibers and Brn3a+ RGC bodies remain severely misplaced in E18.5 KO fetuses (Fig  H–I’). Together, our data show that reduced Nr2f1 expression levels affect P‐D molecular patterning and lead to an abnormal OD organization from which RGC axons exit and form the ON. Interestingly, these defects are reminiscent of various OD abnormalities described in BBSOA patients, including small discs, pale discs, and disc excavations (Bosch et al, ; Chen et al, ).
 

## Pre‐ and early postnatal optic nerve defects in Nr2f1 mutants
Since Nr2f1 promotes cell differentiation in different regions of the CNS (Faedo et al, ; Lodato et al, ; Parisot et al, ; Bertacchi et al, ), we asked whether partial or complete loss of Nr2f1 function in the NR would affect cell proliferation and/or RGC differentiation (Fig  J–V). Retinal neurons start to be generated around E11.5 in the mouse eye and express the neuron‐specific β‐tubulin marker Tuj1 and the RGC marker Brn3a (Heavner & Pevny, ). A reduction of Tuj1+ differentiating cells in the ventral but not dorsal retina was detected in E13.5 HET and KO optic cups (Fig  J–L), and consequently, fewer axons entered the OS (arrowheads in Fig  K and K’). Reduced rates of differentiation were most probably due to an increased number of proliferative EdU+/Ki67+ cells resulting in tissue expansion and bending (arrowhead in Fig  J’ and ). Even if these morphological deformations might resemble a coloboma ( ), which normally results from a failure in ventral fissure closure (Patel & Sowden, ), transverse sections of the optic vesicle depict proper fusion of the ventral fissures in E13.5 Nr2f1 mutants ( ). Therefore, abnormal optic vesicle morphology observed in Nr2f1 mutants arises most probably from tissue bending due to excessive proliferation and delayed cell differentiation.
A delay in RGC ventral differentiation was further confirmed by Brn3a staining, which results particularly reduced in malformed NR regions of E13.5 mutant embryos (Fig  M–N’). However, HET and KO animals gradually recover their initial differentiation defect, since a comparable number of RGCs was quantified at E15.5 and E18.5 (Fig  P). Accordingly, the diameter of the ON encompassing retinal fibers was only slightly reduced in KO animals at birth and not affected in HETs (P0; Fig  Q–Q” and S). However, the number of RGCs decreased again in P7 KO and HETs (Fig  P) and remained low at P28 (Fig  O and P), in line with the affected ON size (Fig  R and S; note that KO animals do not survive past P8). To assess whether RGC death could explain this postnatal defect, we stained KO and HET retinae with Brn3a and Caspase3, a marker for apoptotic cells. The number of apoptotic Brn3a+ RGCs was increased in both E18.5 HET and KO retinae compared with WT (Fig  T–U’), but only slightly changed at P5 and was no more detected at P7 (Fig  V, M.S., M.B. unpublished observation). Together, our data show that reduced dosage of Nr2f1 not only delays RGC differentiation prenatally, but also induces acute RGC death around birth resulting in progressive ON hypoplasia at early postnatal stages.

## Altered astroglia/oligodendroglia balance in Nr2f1‐deficient optic nerves
The observation that ON atrophy worsens postnatally in mutant mice suggests that additional defects other than reduced RGC number and perinatal cell death might contribute to ON degeneration. Astrocytes and oligodendrocytes are two key glial populations supporting the stability and function of axonal fibers in the ON (Tsai & Miller, ; Hernandez et al, ). While primary astrocytes are mainly generated in loco from Pax2+ cells of the OS inner layer and express NF1A and S100β (Tsai & Miller, ; Sun et al, ), mouse oligodendrocyte precursors originate from the preoptic area of the ventral forebrain and enter the ON at the chiasmal region around E18.5. They subsequently migrate, proliferate, and differentiate along the ON until P28, when myelination is accomplished (Ono et al, ). Oligodendrocytes can be labeled by Sox10 and myelin basic protein (MBP) expression. MBP is exclusive of fully differentiated oligodendrocytes that actively embed axonal fibers in myelin sheets to allow for efficient signal transmission (Stolt et al, , ). NF1A and Sox10 mutually antagonize each other to control glial sub‐lineage differentiation (Glasgow et al, ); hence, these markers are specific for their lineages (astrocytes versus oligodendrocytes, respectively) and virtually never overlap.
Since Nr2f1 is expressed at high levels in both astro‐ and oligodendrocyte cell populations of the developing ON (Figs  and ), we analyzed the effects of Nr2f1 reduced dosage on the differentiation of both lineages at different developmental times. We found an increase of Pax2+ astrocytic progenitors and NF1A+ precursors in the inner layer of the OS in Nr2f1 mutants at E13.5, and in the retinal, medial, and chiasmal regions of the ON at E15.5 and E18.5/P0 (Fig  A–I). An increased NF1A+ astrocyte production is still maintained at P7 and leads to an over‐represented astrocytic population in both HET and Null animals (Fig  J–L). Strikingly, this abnormal astrocytic pool, intermingled between Tuj1+ fibers, shows a hypertrophic morphology (Fig  M–O”). This is confirmed by the presence of expanded astrocytic processes containing large bundles of intermediate filaments in P8 KO transmission electron microscopic (TEM) thin sections (arrowheads and red dotted lines in Fig  P and Q). Astrocytes appear to form a tight network and to display stress granules and a more heavily stained cytoplasm in mutants, not detected in WT, and compatible with a “reactive” state observed during neuroinflammation ( ). Although there was a clear difference between WT and mutant ON astrocytes prenatally, they seem to acquire a hypertrophic phenotype right around the first week of age, as described in other cases (Bovolenta et al, ). We thus assessed the presence of reactive astrocytes at P28, when their development was over, using Sox2, normally upregulated by pro‐inflammatory signals triggering astrocytic proliferation (Bani‐Yaghoub et al, ). P28 Nr2f1 HET ONs show a 25% increase of high‐expressing Sox2+ astrocytes with abnormal morphology compared with WT Sox2‐expressing cells (Fig  R–T). This was confirmed by TEM analysis illustrating enlarged astrocytic processes in HET ONs (Fig  U and V). Interestingly, astrocyte inflammation was associated with abnormal mitochondrial morphology (Fig  ), in line with a recently described mitochondrial involvement in BBSOA pathogenesis (Martin‐Hernandez et al, ). At P8, astrocyte mitochondria become hypertrophic (1.78 ± 0.15 times larger than WT ones) with disorganized cristae, whereas RGC axonal mitochondria have a normal size (Fig  A–F). However, RGC somata show increased staining of the mitochondrial ATPase inhibitor ATPIF1 at later stages (Fig  G–H’), suggesting that mitochondrial biogenesis and function might be also altered in RGC cells. Together, these data show that reduced Nr2f1 dosage promotes an inflammatory process starting at early postnatal stages and possibly involving mitochondrial dysfunction.
 

## Miconazole treatment rescues improper oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelin lamination observed in Nr2f1‐deficient mice
While the astrocytic population is over‐represented in Nr2f1‐deficient P8 ONs, the Sox10+ oligodendrocyte population shows a dose‐dependent opposite trend (Fig  A–C), in a way that the glial population is imbalanced with astrocytes outnumbering oligodendrocytes (Fig  C). Thus, we evaluated the proportion of proliferating, migrating, and differentiating oligodendrocytes by co‐labeling Sox10+ cells with the proliferative marker Ki67, the apoptotic marker Caspase3, and the terminal differentiation protein MBP in normal and mutant ONs (Fig  ). While there is no difference in proliferation or apoptosis between Nr2f1 mutants and WT littermates, the ratio of undifferentiated (Sox10+/MBP−) versus differentiated (Sox10+/MBP+) oligodendrocytes is significantly increased in HET and KO Nr2f1 mutant ONs (Fig  A–I), indicating failed oligodendrocyte maturation upon reduced Nr2f1 expression. More Sox10+ cells are present in the proximal versus distal ON portions in both HET and KO animals (Fig  H), suggesting also defective oligodendrocyte migration along the nerve. Thus, deficiency in Nr2f1 genetic dosage affects migration and differentiation of developing oligodendrocytes (summarized in Fig  J).
 Next, we asked whether impaired oligodendrocyte development would affect fiber myelination using MBP as a late marker. At P8, the proximal and distal ON portions of both HET and KO animals show a drastic reduction of MBP immunostaining compared with WT (Fig  D–J). Notably, Nr2f1 HET mice have impaired myelination at the proximal end to an extent similar to that of KO animals (Fig  E, F and J), indicating that fine regulation of gene dosage is essential for proper oligodendrocyte differentiation. TEM analysis confirmed a lower amount of myelinated fibers in both HET and KO ONs, although with different severity (Fig  K–N). The few myelinated fibers in P8 KO animals display thin and incomplete sheets (Fig  M, inset). Poor myelination is still maintained in P28 HET animals (Fig  O–Q), thus excluding a transient defect. Indeed, high‐magnification EM images show that several HET fibers are surrounded by disorganized and poorly compacted myelin sheaths (g‐Ratio: 0.63 ± 0.04), when compared with the dense myelin layer of WT animals (g‐Ratio: 0.74 ± 0.02; Fig  R and S). Together, our findings show that Nr2f1‐deficient oligodendrocytes fail to properly migrate and differentiate during development, ultimately leading to reduction of myelin surrounding optic nerve fibers in juvenile mutant mice.
Miconazole and Clobetasol act as two potent inducers of oligodendrocyte differentiation, as they trigger fast maturation of MBP+ cells in both physiological and pathological conditions (Najm et al, ; Su et al, ). Given our observations, we asked whether a similar treatment could be of use in the BBSOA mouse model of optic neuropathy. Using previous protocols (Najm et al, ), we injected Miconazole or Clobetasol daily in control and Nr2f1 HET pups from P2 to P8 (Fig  A). Miconazole, but not Clobetasol, which resulted toxic for the pups (M.B., M.S. unpublished observations), increased the number of Sox10+ precursors in Nr2f1 HET ONs and improved fiber myelination to a level comparable to that of WT littermates (Fig  B–E). Miconazole has been showed to specifically enhance ERK1/2 activity (Najm et al, ). Consistently, the phosphorylated (i.e., activated) form of ERK is upregulated upon Miconazole treatment (Fig  F and G), as quantified in whole ON (Fig  H) and specifically in the cytoplasm of Sox10+ oligodendrocytes (Fig  I). To understand whether the short Miconazole treatment was enough to sustain fiber myelination even at later stages, we analyzed P2‐ to P8‐treated animals at P28 ( ). Notably, treated ONs maintain oligodendrocyte number and myelination recovery at later postnatal stages ( ). Furthermore, myelin compaction is partially rescued by Miconazole treatment (Fig  J–M). However and interestingly, the number of Sox2+ reactive astrocytes and their aberrant morphology are not modified in treated pups and remain similar to untreated ones (Fig  N–Q), strongly suggesting that astrocyte alterations are not secondary to myelination defects in Nr2f1‐deficient animals.
 

## Thalamic and cortical visual regions are reduced in Nr2f1‐deficient mice
Since Nr2f1 is also expressed in the visual thalamus and cortex (Armentano et al, ; Chou et al, ), we wondered whether the thalamic relay of RGC visual fibers, the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN), was altered in Nr2f1‐deficient animals (Fig  ). At both P0 to P8, the size of the dLGN, measured in Nissl‐stained sections, was progressively and significantly reduced in both HET and KO animals when compared with WT (Fig  A–F), as also reported in thalamic‐specific conditional Nr2f1 KOs (Chou et al, ). Furthermore, and possibly related to the reduction of both the RGC number and the dLGN size, DiI‐labeled E18.5 RGC axons were less efficient in invading the dLGN as compared with their WT counterparts (Fig  G–I). Moreover, since Nr2f1 is one of the major genes orchestrating cortical arealization (Zhou et al, ; Armentano et al, ; Alfano et al, ), we wondered whether reduced Nr2f1 expression would also affect the size of neocortical areas, particularly sensory areas (including the visual cortex). Consistently, the Lmo4‐expressing visual cortex of HET animals is slightly reduced, even if not as severely as observed in KO brains ( ). Together, our data indicate that Nr2f1 haploinsufficiency affects the development of the entire visual system, from the retina to the visual cortex.
 

## Reduced axonal conduction velocity in the visual pathway of Nr2f1 mutant adults
To test whether anatomical alterations in the Nr2f1 heterozygous visual system had functional consequences, we quantified the conduction velocity of nerve impulses along the visual pathway by implanting recording electrodes into their dLGN, superior colliculus, and visual cortex (Fig  A and B). Alert‐behaving WT and HET adults were stimulated with light flashes presented bilaterally 40 times per session at a rate of 6/min. As previously described (Wiggins et al, ; Meeren et al, ; Sanz‐Rodriguez et al, ), flash stimulations evoke an early positive–negative–positive field potential followed by some late oscillatory components in the dLGN (Fig  C). The latency values for the first positive component in WT mice are in line with reported mouse field potentials and unitary recordings evoked by photic stimulation (Lintas et al, ; Sanz‐Rodriguez et al, ). Notably, HET animals display a significantly (t = −6.385 with 22 degrees of freedom; P < 0.001) longer mean conduction velocity (15.79 ± 048 ms) for the first component of the evoked field potential than WT mice (12.38 ± 0.25 ms; Fig  C and D), suggesting decreased transmission of retinal impulses upon Nr2f1 reduced dosage. At the level of the superior colliculus, field potentials present a succession of negative‐positive components that last for > 80 ms. In this case, the latency to the initiation of the first negative component is also significantly longer (t = −2.148 with 18 degrees of freedom; P = 0.046) in Nr2f1 HET (17.60 ± 0.58 ms) than in WT (15.95 ± 0.50 ms) mice (Fig  C and D). Finally, field potentials evoked in the primary visual cortex produce an early and noticeable positive–negative–positive component followed for a long‐lasting (> 80 ms) succession of negative waves sometimes riding on the top of a slow positive wave (Fig  C; Wiggins et al, ; Meeren et al, ; Ridder & Nusinowitz, ). The latency to the first positive component is again significantly longer (t = −3.073 with 26 degrees of freedom; P = 0.005) for Nr2f1 HET (16.75 ± 0.41 ms) than for WT (14.64 ± 0.55 ms) mice (Fig  D). Taken together, these data show that Nr2f1‐deficient mice exhibit a significant defect in the transmission of visual stimuli from the retina to the visual cortex. Since these differences were similar (≈2 ms) among the three recording sites, we can assume that the deficits in axonal conduction velocity are mainly restricted to the optic nerve.
 

## Visual and associative learning deficits in Nr2f1 heterozygous mice
BBSOA patients have been diagnosed with cerebral visual impairments (CVI; Bosch et al, ; Chen et al, ), a condition in which visual stimuli are not properly interpreted and associated, and which relates to damage or malfunction of the visual pathway or visual centers in the brain. To understand whether Nr2f1 heterozygotes encountered similar associative visual and learning disorders, we tested their performance firstly in a light‐dependent operant conditioning task (Fig  E, top panel) and later in the same box, but with a cue depending on a small light bulb switched on or off (Fig  E, bottom panel). WT (n = 13) and Nr2f1 heterozygous (HET; n = 18) mice were trained in a Skinner box to obtain a food pellet every time they press a lever in 10 daily sessions of 20 min each. In this preliminary training, the two groups reached the selected criterion (Fig  F) at the same time (U = 142.000; P = 0.703; Mann–Whitney rank sum test). In addition, they performed similar numbers of lever presses (t = −0.733 with 18 degrees of freedom; P = 0.473; Fig  G). After this pre‐training, mice were subjected to a more complex task, where pressing the lever was only rewarded with a pellet during those periods (20 s) in which a small light bulb located above the lever was switched on (light on/light off protocol, Fig  E, bottom panel). In this case, the WT group reached the selected criterion by the sixth conditioning session, while Nr2f1 HETs were unsuccessful in completing this task (Fig  H). Values collected for the light on/light off coefficient (see ) were significantly higher for WT mice compared with HETs [F
(1,135) = 6.129; P = 0.026]. A best linear fit to the collected data points indicates that WT mice increased their performance across training (slope = 0.0632; r = 0.75; P = 0.046), whereas HET animals failed to show any sign of improvement (slope = −0.0118; r = 0.199; P = 0.809; Fig  H). A further analysis indicated that Nr2f1 HET mice were unaware of the working code represented by the light bulb. Indeed, and as shown in Fig  I, while WT mice learned to press the lever preferentially (t = 5.272 with 24 degrees of freedom; P < 0.001) during the light on (≈75%) versus the light off (≈25%) periods, HETs pressed the lever equally (≈50% each) during these two periods (t = 0.091 with 16 degrees of freedom; P = 0.929). In conclusion, Nr2f1 heterozygous mice show a significant deficit in associating the dim visual cue with the operant task. Although the negative slope value of the regression line illustrated in Fig  H suggests the possibility of a learning deficit, not necessarily related to visual limitations, the fact that HETs acquired the initial training in a well‐illuminated box similarly to controls support the presence of a relevant deficit in the acquisition/processing of visual cues.

## Discussion

## BBSOAS, a new pathogenic model for optic atrophy
Dominant optic atrophy is the most common form of autosomally inherited (non‐glaucomatous) optic neuropathy characterized by optic nerve pallor and reduced visual acuity. RGC alterations have been proposed as the main cause of optic neuropathy. RGCs are long projection neurons with an initial long unmyelinated intraretinal segment that is thought to be particularly vulnerable to insults, at least in cases of LHON and OPA1 mutations, the major forms of optic atrophy described so far (Lenaers et al, ; Chun & Rizzo, ; Jurkute & Yu‐Wai‐Man, ). The underlying mechanisms that mediate RGC death and progressive ON degeneration are still not completely elucidated in the various forms of neuropathies. Our study now offers different mechanisms to explain optic atrophies of the BBSOA type (schematized in Fig  ).
 First, Nr2f1 heterozygous mice, analogous to NR2F1 haploinsufficient patients, recapitulate important features of BBSOA patients, such as OD malformations and ON atrophy, and could serve as a model to study the pathogenesis of optic neuropathies and visual impairments. Furthermore and in contrast to what previously reported (Tang et al, , ), we demonstrate that Nr2f1 deletion alone is sufficient to induce major optic abnormalities in mice that, as in humans, do not seem to be compensated by its homolog Nr2f2. This contention is also supported by our novel observation that the expression pattern of NR2F1 is strongly conserved between human and mouse, at least in the developing eye. In humans, NR2F1 point mutations cause visual deficits with high penetrance, apparently in the absence of any additional gene mutation, indicating that our mouse model can be used to unravel the molecular/cellular mechanisms leading to human BSSOA syndrome, and more generally to understand the pathophysiology of ON neuropathy and/or degeneration. Why our findings differ from those reported by Tang et al ( , ) is unclear; however, the most likely explanation reside in the use of a conditional mutant (Rax‐Cre Nr2f1), in which the removal of the gene occurs either too late or less efficiently than in our model based on constitutive gene loss. We thus consider that mice heterozygous for Nr2f1 well replicate the pathology of patients haploinsufficient for NR2F1.
Second, Nr2f1 seems to directly act on the migration and differentiation of oligodendrocytes and ultimately on the myelination degree of the ON. Oligodendrocyte precursors appear in the preoptic area of the ventral telencephalon around E12.5 in the mouse and migrate caudally toward the ON, where they form myelin sheaths wrapping axons (Ono et al, ). Nr2f1 is highly expressed in the preoptic area (Armentano et al, ; Lodato et al, ) and co‐localizes with Sox10 in ON oligodendrocytes, suggesting that Nr2f1 expression follows oligodendrocyte development from its source to its target. Our data show a progressively reduced number of Sox10+ from the proximal to the distal ON portions in both Nr2f1 HET and KO mutants indicating a delay of migrating oligodendrocytes in reaching more distal parts of the ON. This is in accordance with ON hypomyelination at P8, although with different severities between HET and KO, and in HET mutants at P28. Strikingly, postnatal treatment with Miconazole, a potent inducer of oligodendrocyte differentiation in several brain regions (Najm et al, ; Su et al, ), efficiently rescues the myelination grade of Nr2f1 mutants via ERK signaling activation, showing that this chemical drug can counteract hypomyelination in the context of the BBSOA mouse model. This is a first step not only in understanding the pathophysiological features of a complex syndrome, but also in proposing possible therapeutic approaches. If proved efficient and safe in humans, Miconazole could be used in the future as a treatment to trigger oligodendrocyte maturation/differentiation and eventually improve ON signal conductance in BBSOA patients.
Third, our data show increased astrogliosis in the postnatal ON of Nr2f1‐deficient mice. Differently from late‐generated cells such as oligodendrocytes, astrocyte precursors are already present in the OS and ON at early stages and constitute the principal glial population at E18.5. Later on, they still represent the major glial cell type in the non‐myelinated ON heads in most mammals (Hernandez et al, ) and respond to damage by changing from a quiescent to an activated state. During development, Pax2+ astrocyte precursor cells express guidance molecules at the OD through which RGC axons exit (Chu et al, ). At later stages, NF1A‐ and S100ß‐expressing astrocytes are intermingled with oligodendrocytes along the ON providing structural support and nutrients to axons, as well as forming a scaffold around endothelial cells to help maintaining the integrity of the blood–brain barrier. Astrocytes become reactive and re‐express the progenitor marker Sox2 in response to a range of pathological conditions, from acute traumatic injury to chronic neurodegenerative diseases (Bani‐Yaghoub et al, ). In the eye, glial cell proliferation and/or activation (gliosis) usually occur as a reactive change associated with ON degeneration and/or glaucoma (Hernandez et al, ; Pekny et al, ). Reactive astrocytes are generally identified by morphological changes (hypertrophy, thicker cell processes, larger and more vesicular nuclei, and in this case abnormal mitochondria) and tend to form a mesh (or glial scar) that alters the microenvironment of fibers, likely contributing to Wallerian degeneration and thus RGC cell death (Sofroniew, ; Conforti et al, ).
We found that Nr2f1 protein is expressed in the astrocytic population at early stages in mice as well as in humans, and that already at E13.5 the Pax2+ astrocyte precursors are over‐represented along the ON of mutant embryos. Abnormally high production of astrocytes continues at later stages in both HET and KO animals, suggesting that Nr2f1 might play an intrinsic role in modulating the generation of astrocytes during ON development. This is supported by the finding that Nr2f1 cell‐intrinsically drives progenitors toward neurogenesis by repressing astrogliogenesis in adult neural stem cells of the hippocampus (Bonzano et al, ). In its absence, neurogenesis is reduced at the expense of astrocyte production and, conversely, high Nr2f1 protein levels can rescue the hippocampal neurogenesis–astrogliogenesis imbalance due to neuroinflammation (Bonzano et al, ). Thus, Nr2f1 might finely modulate astrocyte production/proliferation not only during adult neurogenesis, but also, as shown in this study, during ON development. We propose that the appearance of reactive astrocytes along the ON at P8 and P28 is a consequence of astrocyte over‐proliferation occurring at early prenatal stages, which might progressively impact on ON physiology and, ultimately, lead to neurodegeneration, as observed in other optic neuropathies (Carelli et al, ). This is also supported by the fact that ON demyelination but not gliosis can be rescued by Miconazole treatment in early postnatal life, suggesting that the two processes develop separately in this syndrome.
Our data disclose that gradual gliosis coupled to hypomyelination most likely contribute to the optic atrophy phenotype characterized in mutant mice and described in BBSOA patients. However, we cannot exclude that this atrophy might be caused by the altered ratio between proliferation and differentiation of RGCs during early development, leading to a reduced number of fibers exiting the retina at the proper developmental time. We believe that the reduced number of differentiating RGCs upon Nr2f1 downregulation represents only a delay in differentiation, which is gradually rescued. Indeed, the ON size between WT, HET, and KO animals at birth is only slightly affected, even in KO animals, but worsen at later stages (20% of reduction found in HET animals remains constant over time). We propose that this postnatal atrophy is due to transient RGC apoptosis at perinatal stages, combined with further axonal damage due to reactive gliosis. Indeed, Miconazole treatment recovers the oligodendrocyte number and myelination defects in HET ONs, but does not seem to rescue the overall size of the ON, suggesting that atrophy is independent of the ON myelination grade. Thus, Nr2f1 is a strong regulator of astrocyte production and reduced dosage of Nr2f1 results in astrocyte overproduction and gliosis ultimately affecting ON growth and stability.
Fourth, we found abnormal axonal conductance and impaired visual learning upon reduced Nr2f1 dosage. OD malformation, optic nerve atrophy, and defective myelination of axonal fibers might ultimately lead to decreased signal transmission in our BBSOA model. In fact, by directly measuring the conduction velocity along the optic nerve and in following relay points along the visual system, we could demonstrate that Nr2f1 deficiency affects normal visual conductance. Notably, in comparison with WT mice, Nr2f1 HET animals presented more than 20% delay in the latency of field potentials evoked in the dLGN, suggesting a deficit in the transmission velocity of retino‐geniculate fibers. The deficit in axonal conduction velocity seems to be restricted to the ON, since the latency to field potentials evoked at the superior colliculus (1.65 ms; 10.6%) and to the visual cortex (2.1 ms; 12.6%) presented similar (not significantly different) delays.
BBSOA patients often display visual acuity and image processing deficits, besides ON atrophy (Bosch et al, , ; Chen et al, ). Even if we focused here on the “periphery” of the visual system (the retina and ON), our data on the role of Nr2f1 in structures along the visual pathway, such as the thalamic dLGN and the visual cortex, unveil further abnormalities, possibly contributing to the visual deficits of HET mice and suggesting a causative link with patients’ CVI. According to the present results, the performance of Nr2f1 HET mice in the Skinner box was mostly based on somatosensory and olfactory cues, since they failed to acquire the visual‐dependent operant conditioning task. Nevertheless, the negative slope of their performance in the Skinner box could evince that this learning deficit is ascribed to more general limitations in the acquisition of complex learning tasks and not (exclusively) to visual difficulties. However, since Nr2f1‐conditional mice have been proved to be capable of learning complex behavioral tasks (Flore et al, ), we preferentially advocate for a specific deficit in the perception and elaboration of visual stimuli at neocortical levels rather than a general defect in the learning process. Further studies will be necessary to specifically challenge the role of Nr2f1 in the development and functioning of thalamic and neocortical visual structures.

## Materials and Methods

## Animal procedures
All mouse experiments were conducted in accordance with relevant national and international guidelines and regulations (European Union rules; 2010/63/UE) and have been approved by the local ethical committee in France (CIEPAL NCE/2019‐548) and Spain (JA/CAPD 06/03/2018/025). Nr2f1 heterozygous (HET) and homozygous (KO) mice were generated and genotyped as previously described (Armentano et al, ). Littermates of HET and KO mice with normal Nr2f1 alleles were used as control mice (herein called WT). Midday of the day of the vaginal plug was considered as embryonic day 0.5 (E0.5). Control and mutant mice were bred in a 129S2/SvPas background. Both male and female embryos and pups were used in this study; age is specified for each embryo/pup used in specific experiments. Standard housing conditions were approved by local ethical committee in France (CIEPAL NCE/2019‐548) and Spain (JA/CAPD 06/03/2018/025); briefly, adult mice were kept on a 12 h light–dark cycle and housed three per cage with the recommended environmental enrichment (wooden cubes, cotton pad, igloo) with food and water ad libidum.

## Immunofluorescence
Mouse embryonic heads were dissected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) at 4°C for 3 h in agitation, then washed in PBS 1X and dehydrated in 25% sucrose overnight at 4°C. P8 brains and eyes were fixed by intra‐cardiac perfusion of 4% PFA, then processed as previously described (Armentano et al, , ). Primary antibodies used: NR2F1 (Abcam ab181137, 1:1,000, rabbit; R&D H8132, 1:1,000, mouse), ATPIF1 (Thermo Fisher 5E2D7, 1:500, mouse), Phospho‐ERK (Cell signaling #4370, 1:200, rabbit), Sox10 (Santacruz sc‐365692, 1:200, mouse), Sox2 (R&D AB2018, 1:500, mouse), NF1a (Abcam ab41851, 1:1,000, rabbit), MBP (Abcam ab7349, 1:1,000, rat), Brn3a (1:1,000, mouse, kind gift of Thomas Lamonerie, IBV, Nice), Cleaved Caspase3 (Cell signaling #9661, 1:2,000, rabbit), Pax2 (Abcam ab79389, 1:1,000, rabbit), Pax6 (Millipore AB2237, 1:500, rabbit), Ki67 (Thermo Fisher PA5‐16446, 1:1,000), GLAST (1:1,000, rabbit), GFAP (Dako, 1:200, rabbit), S100β (Dako Cytomation Z0311, 1:200, rabbit), and Tuj1 (β‐III TUBULIN, Covance MRB‐435P, 1:1,000; or Sigma T8660, 1:1,000, mouse). Alexa Fluor 488, 555, 594, and 647 anti‐mouse, anti‐rabbit, or anti‐rat IgG conjugates (Thermo Fisher scientific, all 1:500) were used as secondary antibodies.

## Nissl staining
Cryostat sections were left to dry for 60 min at room temperature. The slides were briefly washed in MilliQ water, post‐fixed in 4% PFA 10 min at room temperature, and then immersed 5 min in the following staining solution: 0.025% thionine acetate (Sigma, T2029‐5G), 0.025% Cresyl violet acetate (Sigma, T2029‐5G), 100 mM sodium acetate, 8 mM acetic acid. Slides were then washed in ethanol/acetic acid (80/0.05%) for a variable time depending on the rate of clarification. Slides were dehydrated by two brief washes in ethanol 100% and finally 2 × 5‐min washes in xylene. Sections were cover‐slipped using Eukitt mounting medium (KO Kinder GmbH D‐79110).

## 
In situ hybridization (ISH)

Lmo4 RNA probes were in vitro transcribed from previously used plasmids (Alfano et al, ). Heads for ISH were fixed overnight with PFA 4% at 4°C, dehydrated in 25% sucrose, and embedded in OCT resin, then stored at −80°C. ISH was carried out on 14‐μm cryosections, as previously described (Armentano et al, ).

## DiI labeling of mouse optic nerves
E18.5 mouse heads were fixed O/N in 4% PFA at 4°C. Lenses were gently removed from the eyes using sharp forceps, and a DiI crystal (Invitrogen, Life Technologies) was inserted inside the optic nerve head. To help keeping the crystal in position, the lens was placed back inside the eye. Heads were kept in 4% PFA at 37°C for 3–4 weeks, allowing for DiI diffusion along the nerve. When ready to be processed, heads were washed in PBS, dehydrated in 25% sucrose, included in OCT, and 14‐μm‐thin sections were obtained by cryostat cutting. DAPI counterstaining was performed before slide mounting.

## Transmission electron microscopy
Eyes, with their ON attached, from P8 and P28 WT and Nr2f1 mutants were fixed O/N at 4°C with 3% glutaraldehyde in PBS and then washed in PBS. ON were separated from the eye bulb and the surrounding muscle and treated with 1% osmium tetroxide in double‐distilled water and 1% potassium ferrocyanide for 1 h at 4°C. After washing, the ONs were incubated in 0.15% tannic acid in 0.1 m PBS, pH 7.4 followed by staining with 2% uranyl acetate in distilled water for 1‐h RT in darkness. After washing, the tissue was dehydrated with an ascending series of EtOH dilutions up to 100% at 4°C, followed by a stepwise incubation in propylene oxide. Tissue was then infiltrated stepwise with Epoxy resin (TAAB 812; TAAB Laboratories) and encapsulated in flat molds taking into accounts the proximo‐distal orientation of the nerves. Blocks were polymerized for 48 h at 60°C. Semithin (1 μm) sections were stained with Toluidine blue, and ultrathin sections (70–80 nm) were collected along three different proximo‐distal levels of the ONs, using an ultramicrotome (Leica Ultracut UCT) with a diamond blade (Diatome). Sections were collected on Cu‐Pd boutonniere grids covered by Formvar and stained in drops of 2% aqueous uranyl acetate for 7 min, followed by Reynold's lead citrate for 2 min. Grids were analyzed and photographed with a JEM 1010 transmission electron microscope operated at 120 kV and recorded at different magnifications using a CMOS 4 K × 4 K, F416 of TVIPS camera. Images were taken to cover the entire major and minor axis of the nerve in order to have an equivalent representation of ON.

## Miconazole treatment
Miconazole (Sigma, QB‐6813‐5G) was resuspended in DMSO to a concentration of 200 μg/μl, aliquoted, and stored at −20°C. Mouse pups were treated with Miconazole (intra‐peritoneal injection; 10 μg/g) between postnatal day (P) 2 and P8. The day of the injection, Miconazole stock was diluted 1,000× in physiological solution, to obtain a 0.2 μg/μl injectable solution.

## Collection and processing of human fetuses
All experiments involving the use of human samples conformed to the principles set out in the WMA Declaration of Helsinki and the Department of Health and Human Services Belmont Report. Tissues were made available in accordance with French bylaws (good practice concerning the conservation, transformation, and transportation of human tissue to be used therapeutically, published on December 29, 1998). Furthermore, the studies on human fetal tissue were approved by the French agency for biomedical research (Agence de la Biomédecine, Saint‐Denis la Plaine, France, protocol n°: PFS16–002). Non‐pathological human fetuses (11 and 14 gestational weeks, n = 2) were obtained from voluntarily terminated pregnancies after obtaining written informed consent from the parents (Gynaecology Department, Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, Lille, France). Fetuses were fixed by immersion in 4% PFA at 4°C for 7 days. The tissues were then cryoprotected in 30% sucrose/PBS for 3 days, embedded in Tissue‐Tek OCT compound (Sakura Finetek, USA), frozen in dry ice, and stored at −80°C until sectioning. Frozen samples were cut serially at 20 μm using a Leica CM 3050S cryostat (Leica Biosystems Nussloch GmbH, Germany).

## Electrophysiological recordings in behaving animals
Following the associative learning task, the same mice (13 WT and 18 HET) were prepared for the chronic recording of field potentials evoked at the visual pathway by flashes of light. To this end, animals were anesthetized with 4% chloral hydrate and stereotaxically implanted with two recording electrodes in the left lateral geniculate nucleus (2.06 mm posterior to Bregma, 2.0 lateral to the midline, and 2.5 mm depth from brain surface), the right superior colliculus (3.8 mm posterior to Bregma, 1.25 lateral to the midline, and 1.5 mm depth from brain surface), and the left visual cortex (3.8 mm posterior to Bregma, 2.5 lateral to the midline, and 0.5 mm depth from brain surface). Electrodes were made from 50‐μm Teflon‐coated tungsten wire (Advent Research Materials, Eynsham, UK). Two bare silver wires were affixed to the skull as ground. Electrodes were connected to two 4‐pin sockets (RS‐Amidata, Madrid, Spain) that were fixed to the cranium with dental cement. After surgery, animals were allowed 5 days for proper recovery.
Flashes of light were provided by a xenon arc lamp located 30 cm in front of the animal's eyes, and lasted ≈ 1 ms (Photic stimulator, Cibertec, Madrid, Spain). Photic stimulations were triggered from a programmable CS‐20 stimulator (Cibertec). For recordings, each alert‐behaving mouse was placed in a transparent box (5 × 5 × 5 cm), dark adapted for 30 min, and presented with a total of 40 stimuli at a rate of 6 per min. The recording box was located in the center of a larger (30 × 30 × 30 cm) cage made of polished aluminum and connected to a ground system to avoid unwanted electric interferences. Each animal received two stimulation sessions (Sanz‐Rodriguez et al, ).

## Histology after electrophysiology
At the end of the electrophysiological recording experiments, mice were deeply re‐anesthetized and perfused transcardially with saline and 4% PFA. Selected sections (50 μm) including the implanted electrodes were mounted on gelatinized glass slides and stained using the Nissl technique with 0.1% Toluidine blue, to determine the proper location of stimulating and recording electrodes. Photomicrographs were taken using a Leica DMRE microscope equipped with a Leica DFC550 camera and with the LAS V4.2 software (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany). Photomicrograph reconstructions were made with the Microsoft Office Professional Plus 2010 and CorelDRAW X4 software.

## Behavior—instrumental conditioning
Operant conditioning took place in commercial Skinner box modules (n = 5) measuring 12.5 × 13.5 × 18.5 cm (MED Associates, St. Albans, VT, USA). The conditioning boxes were housed within sound‐attenuating chambers (90 × 55 × 60 cm), which were constantly illuminated (19 W lamp) and exposed to a 45‐dB white noise (Cibertec, S.A., Madrid, Spain). Each Skinner box was equipped with a food dispenser from which pellets (MLabRodent Tablet, 20 mg; Test Diet, Richmond, IN, USA) can be delivered by pressing a lever. Each box was also equipped with a small light bulb located over the lever (Fig  E). Before training, mice were handled daily for 7 days and food‐deprived to 90% of their free‐feeding weight (Madronal et al, ; Jurado‐Parras et al, ). In all cases, training sessions lasted for 20 min. The start and end of each session was indicated by a tone (2 kHz, 200 ms, 70 dB) provided by a loudspeaker located in the recording chamber (Fig  E).
In a first experimental step, mice (13 WT and 18 HET) were trained to press the lever to receive pellets from the food tray using a fixed‐ratio (1:1) schedule (Fig  E, top panel). Animals were maintained on the 1:1 schedule for 10 training sessions. Mice typically reach criterion (pressing the lever ≥ 20 for two successive sessions) after 4–9 days of training (Madronal et al, ; Jurado‐Parras et al, ), but for the sake of homogeneity, all mice where trained for 10 days.
After this preliminary training, mice were further conditioned using a small bulb light on/light off protocol for 10 additional days. In this program, only lever presses performed during the light period (20 s) were reinforced with a pellet (Fig  E, bottom panel). The cued light was provided by the small bulb located over the lever. Lever presses performed during the dark period (20 ± 10 s) were not reinforced and restarted the dark protocol for an additional random (1–10 s) time. The light on/light off coefficient was calculated as follows: (number of lever presses during the light period − number of lever presses during the dark period)/total number of lever presses). In this case, the criterion was to reach a positive performance (i.e. a larger number of lever presses during the light on than during the light off periods) for two successive sessions. Conditioning programs, lever presses, and delivered reinforcements were controlled and recorded by a computer, using a MED‐PC program (MED Associates, St. Albans, VT, USA).

## Statistical analysis
All the data were statistically analyzed and graphically represented using Microsoft Office Excel software. Quantitative data are shown as the mean ± standard error (SEM). For operant conditioning, statistical significance of differences between groups was inferred by two‐way ANOVA (sessions by groups) for repeated measures (sessions), with a contrast analysis (Holm‐Sidak method) for a further study of significant differences. The best fit for a linear equation was settle for each group across the operant conditioning sessions. Data collected from the electrophysiological experiments were subjected to normality (Shapiro–Wilk) and equal variance tests and then compared using a Student's t‐test between control and experimental groups. The same test and procedure were used to check differences on the percentage of lever responses between the light and dark periods in both mouse groups.
For cell percentage/number quantification after immunofluorescence (IF), measurements were performed on at least nine sections coming from 3 to 5 different animals, unless otherwise stated. To minimize subjective bias, sample identity (e.g. genotypes) was randomized by associating an identification number to each sample before processing. Fixed embryos with damaged tissues were excluded from any further analysis/processing. Microscope images were processed with Photoshop or ImageJ software, by randomly overlapping fixed‐width (100 μm) rectangular boxes on the area of interest (e.g. the retina), then quantifying positive cells inside the boxes. For ON cross‐sections, the whole ON area was considered for the analysis, without placing any box. In the specific case of EM images, the myelination grade was evaluated as the average number of myelinated fibers found inside randomly placed 100‐μm2 boxes. When calculating percentages over the total cell number, the latter was quantified by counting DAPI+ nuclei, unless otherwise specified. Data were compared by two‐tailed Student's t‐test (when comparing two data group) or by ANOVA (analysis of variance; for comparison of three or more groups) and statistical significance was set as follows: *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; ***P ≤ 0.001. While Figure legends only show P‐value ranges, exact P‐values can be found in the corresponding and/or in the main text.

## Author contributions
MS and MB conceptualized and designed the research study. AG and JMD‐G designed, conducted, and analyzed the electrophysiological/behavioral experiments. MB, PK, CA, and LS conducted the experiments and acquired the data. PG provided the human samples. MB, MS, and PB analyzed the data. MB, MS, and PB wrote the paper.

## Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## For more information
BBS optic atrophy (BBSOA) syndrome resulting from NR2F1 deletions/mutations is now listed as a rare genetic disease (OMIM: #615722; ORPHANET: #401777). Updated information concerning BBSOA patients and their families can be found on the NR2F1 Foundation website (https://www.nr2f1.org; or: https://www.facebook.com/NR2F1/).

## The paper explained

## Problem
Optic nerve (ON) atrophy denotes the loss of part or all the retinal ganglion cell (RGC) fibers in the optic nerve, leading to reduced visual acuity and gradual vision loss. As recently shown, mutations/deletions in the NR2F1 locus lead to a rare hereditary form of ON atrophy associated with intellectual disability, epilepsy, and autism, named Bosch‐Boonstra‐Schaaf optic atrophy (BBSOA) syndrome. Despite the increasing number of patients identified in the last few years, the molecular and cellular etiology of BBSOA syndrome remains elusive, due to the absence of a suitable animal model.

## Results
In this study, we report that Nr2f1 mutant mice (both heterozygotes—HET and homozygotes—KO) recapitulate key features of BBSOA patients, such as optic disc malformations, optic nerve atrophy, and cerebral visual impairment. By taking advantage of the mouse model, we identified multiple cellular features, such as delayed RGC differentiation and apoptosis, decreased ON myelination, and increased astrogliosis, ultimately resulting in reduced axonal conduction velocity from the retina to higher order centers. At adult stages, Nr2f1 HET mice have visual and associative learning deficits, reminiscent of the cerebral visual impairment described in patients.

## Impact
Our findings show that Nr2f1 mutant mice can be used as a model to reproduce the BBSOA syndrome and, more broadly, can serve as a tool to test possible therapeutic approaches aimed at counteracting ON neuropathies. As a proof of concept, we tested Miconazole as a chemical drug to rescue demyelination defects in early postnatal pups. Miconazole restores appropriate oligodendrocyte number and myelination levels. If proved efficient and safe in humans, Miconazole could be used in the future as a potential treatment to improve ON signal conductance in BBSOA patients.

## Supporting information
Appendix
Click here for additional data file.
Expanded View Figures PDF
Click here for additional data file.
Review Process File
Click here for additional data file.

## Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Eya Setti for technical help and to the whole Studer laboratory for feedback on the study. We thank Simona Casarosa and Federico Cremisi for useful hints during the initial design of the research study. We thank Ms. M. Sanchez‐Enciso and Mr. J.M. González‐Martín for their help in animal handling and care, as well as for instrumental design for electrophysiology and behavioral experiments. We also thank the iBV PRISM Microscopy facility for their regular support, and the iBV animal facility, particularly Kevin Moneret, for animal care. The help of Milagros Guerra and M. Teresa Rejas of the CBMSO EM facility is also acknowledged. This work was supported by an ERA‐NET Neuron II grant (ImprovVision) ANR‐15‐NEUR‐0002‐04 and by “Investments for the Future” LabEx SIGNALIFE (grant ANR‐11‐LABX‐0028‐01) to M.S., and by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Ville de Nice, France (“Aides Individuelles aux Jeunes Chercheurs”) to M.B. Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation BFU2016‐75412‐R (with FEDER funds), PCIN‐2015‐176‐C02‐01/ERA‐Net NeuronII and an Institutional CBMSO Grant from the Fundación Ramón Areces to P.B. The electrophysiological and behavioral study was supported by grants from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (BFU2017‐82375‐R), the Junta de Andalucía (Spain, BIO‐122), and the Spanish Tatiana Pérez de Guzmán el Bueno Foundation to A.G. and J.M.D.‐G.