3799acsptsACS Pharmacology & Translational ScienceACS Pharmacol Transl SciAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC76174597617459119150424004642610.1021/acsptsci.4c00719EMS203540Comparative Evaluation
and Profiling of Chemical Tools
for the Nuclear Hormone Receptor Family 2
LewandowskiMax BuschRomy MarschnerJulian A MerkDaniel 1Department of Pharmacy, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 81377 Munich, Germany*Email: daniel.merk@cup.lmu.de.
202202583854854–8702022026© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society

## Abstract
 Nuclear receptors regulate transcription in response
to ligand
signals and enable the pharmacological control of gene expression.
However, many nuclear receptors are still poorly explored and are
not accessible to ligand-based target identification studies. In particular,
most members of the NR2 family are among the least studied proteins
of the class, and apart from the retinoid X receptors (RXR), validated
NR2 ligands are very rare. Here, we gathered the NR2 modulators reported
in the literature for comparative profiling in uniform test systems.
Most candidate compounds displayed insufficient on-target activity
or selectivity to be used as chemical tools for NR2 receptors, underscoring
the urgent need for further NR2 ligand development. Nevertheless,
a small NR2 modulator set could be assembled for application in a
chemogenomic fashion.
Keywords: transcription factor, chemical tools, chemogenomics, orphan nuclear receptors, RXR

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Dec 10; Accepted 2025 Jan 22; Revised 2025 Jan 14; Collection date 2025 Mar 14.

There are 48 ligand-activated
transcription factors in humans forming the superfamily of nuclear
receptors (NRs, a), , which translate (endogenous) ligand signals
into changes in gene expression patterns. The multifaceted roles of NRs span pivotal physiological processes,
encompassing metabolism, inflammation, and cellular differentiation. Over decades, the NR1 and NR3 receptor families,
including (steroid) hormone receptors and lipid sensors, have emerged
as well-explored therapeutic targets of essential drugs like, for
example, glucocorticoids as anti-inflammatory drugs, estrogen receptor
modulators as contraceptives and anticancer agents, and PPAR agonists
as oral antidiabetics. − Despite this progress, a significant portion of the
NR superfamily remains understudied, particularly within the NR2 family,
which comprises the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 receptors (HNF4α/γ;
NR2A1/2), the retinoid X receptors (RXRα/β/γ; NR2B1–3),
the testicular receptors (TR2/4; NR2C1/2), the tailless-like receptors
(TLX and PNR; NR2E1/3), and the COUP-TF-like receptors (COUP-TF1/2,
V-erBA-related gene; NR2F1/2/6). , Apart from RXR, all
NR2 receptors are considered as orphan, and their ligands remain widely
elusive. Therefore, chemical tools for most NR2 receptors are rare
and poorly annotated, posing an obstacle to target identification
and validation studies. To enable chemogenomics on NR2 receptors and
improve annotation of the few available ligands, we gathered a small
collection of NR2 modulators (agonists, antagonists, inverse agonists)
for comparative evaluation and profiling. While the NR2B family (RXR)
is well covered with high-quality ligands, and a few early tools are
available for NR2E1, we found the available ligands of the NR2A and
NR2C families of insufficient quality to be used as chemical tools.
 

## Structure and Function of NR2 Receptors
The archetypal
structure of NRs correlates with their biological
function and encompasses six common regions ( b). The N-terminal domain (NTD) is the least
conserved among NRs and has a disordered and variable structure. As
target of diverse post-translational modifications, and as site of
the ligand-independent activation function 1 (AF-1), the NTD plays
a role in regulating NR activity. − The subsequent DNA binding
domain (DBD) is the most conserved domain among NRs and is responsible
for recognizing specific DNA sequences termed response elements (RE).
The DBD spans approximately 70 amino acids and comprises two subdomains each with four cysteine residues coordinating
a zinc ion in a zinc finger motif. The
first subdomain features the DNA reading helix (helix 1), which interacts
with the major groove and facilitates sequence-specific recognition
of the hexameric half-site of an RE. , , The second subdomain establishes nonspecific interactions
with the DNA backbone, and the adjacent loop—termed D-box—is
important for receptor dimerization. , , The DBD is connected to the ligand binding domain
(LBD) via a flexible hinge region which is also a target of post-translational
modifications and contains a nuclear localization signal. , , 
The LBD mediates (endogenous)
ligand binding and coregulator interaction
as key features for ligand-dependent activity ( c). , , Despite rather low conservation of the LBD over the NR family (<35%),
it has a common architecture featuring 11–13 α-helices
that form three antiparallel sheets, known as an α-helical sandwich. , This intricate folding creates a hydrophobic cavity for the binding
of lipophilic ligands in most NRs. , Ligand binding
via allosteric mechanisms induces conformational changes in the LBD
to alter the NR’s activation state. The ligand-dependent activation
function 2 (AF-2) located in the C-terminal helix of the LBD is highly
dynamic and can form an interaction site for coregulator proteins
containing an LXXLL motif. , Ligand binding modulates
the mobility of the C-terminal helix. , , While it is typically unordered and dynamic in the
unliganded apo-state, agonist binding stabilizes the AF-2 in the activated
conformation bound to the core of the LBD. This conformational change
promotes the release of corepressors which are bound to the NR in
the inactive state and the recruitment of coactivators (LXXLL motif)
to form an activated holo-complex and initiate transcription. , The dynamic properties of the C-terminal helix allow the existence
of several states between the inactive and fully activated conformations.
Therefore, different modulators may exhibit varying levels of activation
efficacy, ranging from weak partial agonism to full agonism. − Antagonists, by contrast, prevent the binding of (endogenous) agonists
without inducing conformational changes required for activation while
inverse agonists stabilize the inactive state. The latter type of
ligands is particularly relevant for NRs possessing an autoactivated
conformation and thus constitutive activity like retinoic acid receptor-related
orphan receptors (ROR, NR1F) and NR4A receptors. , , 
In addition to ligand-dependent binding
of coregulators, dimerization
is critically involved in the regulation of NR activity. Although
NRs can act as monomers on DNA, they more frequently adopt homodimeric
structures or engage in heterodimeric complexes with RXR. , This oligomerization adds another level of complexity and specificity
as REs on the DNA distinguish different NR dimers. A large fraction of NRs mainly dimerize with RXR giving
this member of the protein family particular importance. , , RXR heterodimers can be classified
as permissive (PPAR/RXR, LXR/RXR, FXR/RXR), conditional (RAR/RXR),
and nonpermissive (VDR/RXR, TR/RXR). In
nonpermissive heterodimers, activity is independent of the presence
of RXR agonists and RXR plays a subordinate role as a silent partner
without directly influencing activity. , In conditional
and permissive heterodimers, in contrast, RXR ligands can affect activity
and potentiate (conditional dimers) or even induce (permissive dimers)
transcriptional activity. , Therefore, RXR modulators
can have manifold biological effects via the various RXR heterodimers
and the also relevant RXR homodimers.
Apart from the remarkable
role of RXR as a universal dimer partner,
the repressor activity of several NR2 receptors (NR2C and NR2E) is
another important feature of this family. Diverging from conventional
NR counterparts, these receptors share a common structural feature
known as the autorepressed conformation. , It is induced by a kink between helices 10 and 11 causing helix
11 to collapse into a space that typically corresponds to the ligand
binding site in the conventional NRs. Consequently, the AF-2 obstructs
the cofactor binding site, preventing the binding of common coactivators. , This unconventional conformation, however, offers a binding pocket
for a conserved Atro-box motif (ALXXLXXY) beneath helix 12 enabling
the recruitment of atrophin proteins, which may function as general
corepressors for the repressive group of orphan nuclear receptors,
as observed, for example, with TLX, PNR, TR4, and COUP-TF2. Disrupting
this special structural feature through deletions or mutations in
helix 12 has been shown to impair the ability of the receptors to
repress gene transcription. 

## Roles and Potential of NR2 Receptors
Although the majority
of the 12 NR2 receptors are among the least studied NRs, there is
preliminary evidence for therapeutic potential of every NR2 member.
Of note, apart from the widely distributed RXRs, most NR2 receptors
display narrow expression patterns and are restricted to few tissues
and organs, suggesting potential for specific therapeutic modulation
with limited risk for systemic adverse effects. However, the lack
of chemical tools to study the effects of pharmacological NR2 modulation
as a therapeutic approach hinders further exploration of these promising
targets.
The NR2A subfamily comprises the orphan hepatic nuclear
factors HNF4α (NR2A1) and HNF4γ (NR2A2). HNF4α is predominantly expressed in hepatocytes,
enterocytes, and pancreatic β-cells while its redundant paralog
HNF4γ is exclusively found in the intestine. , HNFs function as obligate homodimers with constitutive transactivation activity. HNF4α serves as a key regulator of genes involved in gluconeogenesis
and lipid metabolism in liver and acts as a master regulator of islet
gene expression in the pancreas. − Dysregulation of HNF4α
is associated with gastrointestinal diseases, metabolic disorders,
and gastrointestinal cancers. − Most notably, mutations in the HNF4α gene cause
the heritable form of type 2 diabetes, maturity-onset diabetes of
the young 1 (MODY-1), highlighting the receptor’s critical
role in metabolic homeostasis. − 
The NR2B subfamily comprises
the three retinoid X receptor (RXR)
subtypes, which exhibit a pivotal role in NR signaling as universal
heterodimer partners. Due to their widespread distribution over all
tissues and cell types, dysregulation of RXR signaling contributes
to various pathologies such as metabolic and inflammatory diseases,
cancer, and neurodegeneration. , , To date, bexarotene, the only FDA-approved synthetic RXR ligand,
has been extensively studied in clinical trials across various cancers,
including non-small-cell lung cancer, acute myeloid leukemia, breast
cancer, thyroid cancer, and melanoma. These trials consistently demonstrate
therapeutic benefits, underscoring the potential of RXR modulation
in malignancies. − Beyond cancer, RXRs have been identified as promising targets for
the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases, particularly multiple
sclerosis (MS) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). − 
The orphan testicular receptors (TR2/4, NR2C) are involved
in the
transcriptional regulation of metabolism, , bone physiology, and neuronal development. , TR2 is primarily expressed in the prostate, seminal vesicle, and
testis, while TR4 exhibits a broader expression profile across the
testis, prostate, ovary, cerebellum, and hippocampus. , Dysregulation in TR2 and TR4 activity has been associated with a
spectrum of cancers (prostate, breast, liver, pituitary corticotroph
tumors) − and enhanced tumor metastasis and progression. 
The NR2E receptors’ tailless homologue (TLX,
NR2E1) and
photoreceptor-specific nuclear receptor (PNR, NR2E3) are orphan receptors
with very specific expression profiles and a link to neuronal (TLX)
and ocular (TLX, PNR) diseases. TLX is exclusively found in neuronal
stem cells (NSCs) and retinal progenitor cells, and the only human
NR with no documented hepatic expression. , It is pivotal for maintaining NSCs in a proliferative and self-renewing
state to enable neurogenesis. , The characteristic
autorepressed conformation of TLX allows binding of various corepressors,
including atrophin-1, histone deacetylases (HDACs), and lysine-specific
demethylase (LSD1). , , Several lines of evidence support the potential of TLX in neurodegenerative
diseases. TLX deficiency in rodents caused reduced neurogenesis, increased
aggression, and cognitive deficits. , Conversely,
TLX overexpression enhanced memory function and learning. Additionally, involvement of TLX in psychiatric
disorders (bipolar disorder and schizophrenia) as well as in various
cancers has been proposed. , , PNR is found in retinal photoreceptor cells and plays a key role
in both their development and maintenance. , In the developing retina, PNR acts as a dual transcriptional modulator
by repressing cone-specific genes and enhancing transcription of rod-specific
genes, leading to the proper development of both rod and cone photoreceptors. , PNR knockout resulted in disruption of the retinal architecture
and a slow progressive retinal degeneration, characterized clinically
by panretinal spotting, and histologically by whorls and rosettes. , Furthermore, PNR is necessary for the repression of cone-specific
transcription and the activation of rhodopsin expression in adult
rod photoreceptor cells, ensuring the functional integrity of rods
and preventing them from adopting a nonfunctional hybrid photoreceptor
phenotype. Mutations in the PNR gene
are associated with several inherited retinopathies such as enhanced
S-cone syndrome (Goldmann-Favre syndrome) and retinitis pigmentosa. , , − 
The poorly
studied NR2F family comprises the two closely related
chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factors (COUP-TF1/2,
NR2F1/2) as well as the more different NR2F6 receptor. COUP-TFs are expressed during early vertebrate
development, where COUP-TF1 dominates in the peripheral and central
nervous system and COUP-TF2 is present in the mesenchymal area of
internal organs. COUP-TF1 is essential for central nervous system
development while COUP-TF2 acts as a
crucial regulator of cell differentiation and angiogenesis, contributing
to tissue homeostasis and maintenance. − In cancer, COUP-TFs
have various roles, with COUP-TF2 affecting angiogenesis and tumor
growth. NR2F6 is also involved in carcinogenesis
and correlates with poor prognosis in several cancer types. − Additionally, the NR2F receptors are implicated in metabolic regulation
and immune system modulation, particularly in T-cell differentiation
and function. , 

## Challenges in Orphan NR2 Receptor Ligand Discovery
Apart from the RXRs, which are the only well-characterized NR2 family
members, identifying NR2 receptor modulators is challenging for several
reasons. Most NR2 receptors have unique structural and functional
features that hinder ligand discovery. The lack of high-quality cocrystal
structures for many NR2 receptors restricts structure-based approaches
and the absence of defined ligand binding sites, for example, in the
transcriptional repressors NR2C and NR2E, where the classical orthosteric
binding site is obstructed by a collapse of helix 11, is a significant
obstacle complicating molecular modeling and ligand design. , Moreover, the pronounced hydrophobicity and broad specificity of
ligand binding pockets, for example, in the NR2A family hinder the
development of selective and high-affinity ligands. , − It has been proposed that (natural) ligands
of certain receptors, such as the NR2A family, may act as structural
components or prosthetic groups rather than as modulatory molecules,
adding another layer of complexity to modulator design. , Besides these structural challenges, incomplete knowledge on NR2
receptors provides obstacles in assay development. For example, poorly
characterized coregulator interactions of many NR2 receptors hinder
the use of coregulator recruitment assays based on fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET) or fluorescence polarization. Screening campaigns
utilizing differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF) or cellular reporter
gene assays have yielded promising ligands, but orthogonal validation
is often inadequate as secondary assays are lacking. − 
Nevertheless, progress has been made in ligand discovery for
NR2 receptors, and a number of early chemical tool candidates have
been reported in the literature as summarized in the following.

## Evaluation of NR2 Modulators as Chemical Tools

## NR2A (HNF)
NR2A receptors have been deorphanized by
the discovery of saturated fatty acids (e.g., palmitic and myristic
acid) binding as natural ligands. However,
fatty acids are not suitable as tools to study the biology of HNF4
and synthetic ligands are needed. The two HNF4 subtypes α and
γ exhibit high similarity especially in the LBD and very similar
ligand binding can hence be hypothesized. Despite the knowledge of
natural ligands and the availability of cocrystal structures, HNF4
ligands are still very rare but a few potential chemical tools have
been reported from three medium screening campaigns − of drugs and drug fragments. Kiselyuk et al. discovered BIM5078 (1) as inhibitor of human
insulin promoter activity and hypothesized HNF4 as molecular target.
Quenching of the intrinsic Tyr/Trp fluorescence of HNF4α by 1 was considered as evidence of direct binding with an EC50 of 11.9 nM and BIM5078 (1) was found to suppress
the expression of HNF4α and a set of its target genes in T6PNE
cells. Using the same screening system, Lee et al. reported benfluorex (2) and alverine (3) as HNF4α agonists based on their ability to activate
the human insulin promoter with intermediate micromolar EC50 values. Both drugs induced the expression of HNF4α and some
HNF4α regulated genes and diminished protease stability of HNF4α
protein as a hint for direct interaction. A drug fragment screening
using a Gal4-HNF4α hybrid reporter gene assay additionally identified
the inverse HNF4α agonists 4 and 5. Both compounds exhibited low micromolar
potency in the reporter gene assay and binding affinity in ITC, and
diminished expression of the HNF4 target gene fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase
1 (FBP1) in HepG2 cells. Nevertheless, fragments 4 and 5 are too weak HNF4 ligands for use as tools, and further
optimization is required. The possibly more potent 1-3 have not been extensively validated or profiled for selectivity
and nonspecific effects, and thus require additional evaluation and
annotation before being considered as early tools to study HNF4 biology.
We have hence acquired HNF4 modulators 1–3 ( )
for further characterization.
 

## NR2B (RXR)
RXRs are the only NR2 subfamily that has
been extensively studied in terms of ligand discovery and pharmacological
modulation. Vitamin A metabolites and
fatty acids are natural RXR activators,
and several synthetic RXR agonist scaffolds have been designed based
on the natural ligand 9-cis retinoic acid (reviewed in ref ( )). The pan-RXR agonist
bexarotene (6) , − is an approved drug for second-line cancer treatment and was used
in various preclinical models to explore the potential of RXR in other
diseases. , However, 6 and
related rexinoids are highly lipophilic , and not fully
selective , for RXR. Accordingly, clinical
use of 6 is associated with potentially severe adverse
effects such as elevated triglyceride and cholesterol levels, leukopenia,
hypothyroidism, and an increased risk of acute pancreatitis. , Improved rexinoids such as V-125 and 9cUAB30, however, demonstrated
that major drawbacks of bexarotene (hypothyreotism and elevated triglyceride
levels) could be decoupled from RXR agonism. − This has also inspired the development of further second-generation
RXR agonists with improved features, selectivity, and safety/toxicity
profiles. , The RXR agonist 7 is available as a community-approved chemical probe complying with
highest quality criteria and offering a negative control compound
(8). , Medicinal chemistry efforts
have additionally yielded several RXR antagonists (reviewed in refs ( , )) which were available via structural extension
of agonist scaffolds. Furthermore, based
on recent studies suggesting that RXR side effects may result from
overstimulation by common full agonists, several structurally diverse
partial agonists , have been developed, providing
sufficient RXR activation for therapeutic effects while reducing adverse
effects. − , As the three
RXR subtypes (RXRα, RXRβ, RXRγ) exhibit remarkable
similarity and comprise identical ligand pocket-forming residues, , the vast majority of RXR ligands exhibit equal activity on all three
subtypes. Only very few RXR agonists with subtype preference − , have been identified so far,
which indicates that selective modulation can be achieved, but significant
efforts will be needed to eventually develop fully subtype-selective
RXR ligands. Valerenic acid (9) acting as RXRβ agonist (EC50 5.2 μM, 69-fold
act.) with strong functional preference over RXRα (EC50 27 μM, 9-fold act.) and RXRγ (EC50 43 μM,
4-fold act.) is a notable example and may have value as chemical tool
for in vitro studies.
As various potent RXR agonists and antagonists
are available as chemical tools for in vitro studies, the choice of
an optimal orthogonal set should be made based on potency, selectivity,
level of annotation, physicochemical properties, stability, absence
of nonspecific cytotoxicity and availability to the community. Several
RXR ligand scaffolds contain polyenic substructures (e.g., AGN-194204) and/or acrylic acid motifs (e.g., CD-3254) which both represent undesirable structural
elements due to potential instability and PAINS character. The chemical
probe 7 is among the most potent and selective RXR agonists
and suitable as a chemical tool in terms of activity profile and physicochemical
features. Bexarotene (6) and the analogues LG100268 (10) and SR11237 (11) have been widely used as
tools and are thus very broadly annotated. Despite having some off-targets,
these RXR agonists add chemical orthogonality to 7 and
thus appear as suitable candidates for an RXR targeting CG set. As
the commercial availability of 10 is limited, 6 and 11 were selected for further profiling. The RXRβ
preferential ligand 9 offers access to a preliminary
evaluation of RXR subtype relevance. As RXR antagonists, UVI3003 (12) and HX531 (13) , are potent, lack polyenic substructures, and are commercially available
to complement the set. 6, 7, 9, and 11-13 ( ) were thus selected for comparative profiling
to assemble an optimal set of chemical tools for RXR.

## NR2C (TR)
NR2C ligands potentially suitable as chemical
tools have not been reported in the literature to date. 44 putative
NR2C modulators are annotated in ChEMBL (v. 33), but the majority
of these reported activities are unrelated to NR2C and refer to TAK1.
Only two compounds have been tested for NR2C modulation in the context
of selectivity profiling of revERB modulators but were found inactive. The lack of NR2C ligands to study the biology
of these orphan NRs underscores the need for further efforts to develop
chemical tools for unexplored NRs. 

## NR2E (TLX, PNR)
Despite increasing interest in NR2E,
ligands for this subfamily are still very rare, and selective high-affinity
modulators are lacking. In 2004, Benod et al. reported the discovery
of a first set of TLX modulators from a differential scanning fluorimetry
(DSF) based screening of approximately 20,000 compounds. 365 compounds
inducing a Tm shift ≥0.9 °C were considered as primary
hits. Filtering for PAINS elements and privileged structural features
predicted based on the TLX structure, secondary screening by surface
plasmon resonance and full dose–response profiling resulted
in three structurally unrelated TLX ligands (ccrp1–3, 14-16) with Kd values
of 6.6 μM, 650 nM, and 27.5 μM, respectively. Validation
studies in a cellular reporter gene assay indicated TLX activation
with EC50 values of 9.2 μM (14), 1.0
μM (15), and 250 nM (16) and 15 showed a trend toward SIRT and SLC1a1 but not p21 induction
in human glioblastoma cells (T98G) in qRT-PCR experiments. Importantly, TLX expression was not affected
by 15. A small selectivity
panel suggested a preference of 14–16 for TLX over ERβ, LXRβ (DSF), PNR, RXRα, and COUP-TF2
(reporter gene assays). Low toxicity
in a WST-1 assay in HEK293T cells further supported the suitability
of 15 as an early chemical tool to study TLX modulation
despite low stability against microsomal degradation (t1/2 < 15 min). However, the TLX agonist activity of 15 was not reproducible by other groups , and additional validation is required.
In 2020, the synthetic
retinoic acid mimetic BMS453 (17) was reported as a TLX
modulator in reporter gene assays (TLX/Gal4: IC50 367 nM;
full-length TLX: IC50 159 nM). DSF and nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) experiments suggested direct target engagement of 17 and a fluorescence polarization (FP) assay using a fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled atrophin nuclear receptor interaction
fragment and unlabeled TLX LBD protein indicated displacement of atrophin
by 17. As a synthetic retinoid, 17 also
activated RARs and RXRs. Additionally, 17 was found to exhibit pronounced toxicity in HEK293T cells
used for the reporter gene assays. 
Screening of 480 drug fragments for TLX modulation in a reporter
gene assay yielded 14 further TLX ligand scaffolds after orthogonal
validation. Subsequently, propranolol
(18) was identified as a TLX agonist (Gal4-TLX: EC50 32 μM; full-length TLX: EC50 37 μM)
with confirmed binding to the TLX LBD (Kd 0.5 μM in ITC). 18 also modulated TLX-regulated
SIRT1 and PTEN/TET3 expression in qRT-PCR experiments. However, the
β-adrenoceptor antagonist is too weak as a TLX modulator to
be considered as a tool. Structural
fusion of fragment screening hits additionally yielded the TLX agonist 19 (Gal4-TLX: EC50 0.25 μM; full-length TLX:
EC50 0.7 μM) with high selectivity in the NR family. 19 also induced SIRT1 expression with no effect on TLX expression
levels and ITC supported binding of 19 to the TLX LBD
but revealed unfavorable thermodynamic properties. 
Evaluation of drug fragments also identified xanthines
as TLX modulators
with 1-methylxanthine counteracting the repressor activity of TLX
in reporter gene assays (IC50 9 μM). Subsequent SAR studies revealed extension in
8-position with small (hetero)aromatic systems and the alkylation
pattern as driving factors for TLX activity. Comparison with the xanthine SAR for adenosine receptor antagonism
highlighted 8-(2-chlorophenyl)-theophylline (20) as a
TLX modulator (IC50 0.5 μM; Kd 0.8 μM) with substantial preference over adenosine
receptors. Direct interaction with the
TLX LBD was evident from ITC and NMR-based binding studies. Moreover,
the effects of xanthines on TLX activity were not affected by adenosine,
suggesting no involvement of the adenosine receptors, and mutagenesis
indicated interaction with an epitope around F226W/I230E in helix
5 of the TLX LBD. In mechanistic studies using labeled TLX LBD and
homogeneous time-resolved FRET (HTRF), xanthines promoted TLX homodimerization
and heterodimerization with RXR as potential molecular mode-of-action,
and treatment of human glioblastoma cells with xanthines altered expression
of the TLX-regulated genes SIRT1, p21, and SLC1a1. Despite the known
activity of xanthines on multiple targets and the lack of a fully
TLX selective derivative, selected compounds of this class may contribute
as early tools to studies on the biology of TLX. 
Overall, ligand discovery and optimization for TLX
have yielded
some chemical tool candidates that may be suitable to form an initial
CG compound set. Considering commercial availability to enable broad
use, we acquired 15, 17, 18, and the xanthine 21 ( ) for profiling as CG compound candidates.
Additionally, we have included 19 in the profiling which
is not commercially available but has been specifically designed as
a TLX ligand.
Ligand discovery for PNR is also at a very early
stage. Two high-throughput screening
(HTS) campaigns
using either a cellular reporter gene assay based on Gal4-NCOR and
PNR-VP16 fusion proteins (PubChem ID 602229) or an HTRF assay to observe the PNR-RetCOR interaction (PubChem
ID 2300) each screened >300,000 compounds
(Biomol Inc. Bioactive Lipid and Orphan Ligand libraries, or subset
of the NIH library) for PNR modulation. A total of 2392 confirmed
hits reducing reporter activity were obtained by the cellular approach and the HTRF assay campaign identified 379
primary hits but no selective PNR ligands
and no follow-up structural optimization were reported. However, by
further computer-aided evaluation of the cellular HTS results, Nakamura
et al. identified two structurally unrelated synthetic inverse PNR
agonists termed as photoregulin1 (22, PR1) and photoregulin3
(23, PR3). , , 22 (IC50 0.25 μM) and 23 (IC50 0.07 μM) repressed reporter activity in the
Gal4-NCOR/PNR-VP16 assay and were inactive in control experiments
using Gal4-VP16. In murine retinal cells, 22 and 23 caused a dose-dependent reduction of
rhodopsin expression, which is a well-described target of PNR, in
immunofluorescence and qRT-PCR experiments. 23 additionally
decreased Rho mRNA expression. , ITC data to confirm
direct binding to PNR have only been reported for 23 (Kd 67 μM) but show high dilution heat and
very weak (if any) heat of binding and a strong disconnect between
cellular potency and affinity. Moreover, selectivity profiling of 22 and 23 is pending but essential to interpret
their biological effects as also various other NR (particularly RXRs,
THRβ, COUP-TFs, revERB, RORβ) are involved in photoreceptor
cell development and maintenance. − 
Connor et al. identified biliverdin
(25) as an endogenous PNR ligand via MS-based binding
experiments of retina extracts to PNR. Cellular reevaluation showed
an approximately 3-fold PNR activation with an EC50 value
of 5 nM in a reporter gene assay in 293F cells. A dose-dependent UV
spectral change of biliverdin induced by the addition of MBP-PNR-LBD
protein indicated direct binding with a Kd value of 200 nM. Interestingly, PNR mutations associated with Enhanced
S-Cone Syndrome (ESCS) lowered the affinity of biliverdin to a Kd of 9 μM. Treatment of retinoblastoma
cells with 1 μM biliverdin induced a 2-fold increase in PNR
protein levels according to Western blot analysis, which was considered
a hint for cellular target engagement as PNR has been reported to
control its own expression. , Selectivity testing
by an MS-based binding experiment with MBP-NR2E1-LBD showed no interaction,
indicating selectivity of biliverdin over TLX but effects on other
NRs playing a role in the retina have not been evaluated. 
Overall, although very few PNR modulators
have been reported to
date, the inverse PNR agonists 22 and 23 emerge as early chemical tool candidates and the putative endogenous
ligand biliverdin (25) was considered for profiling,
too ( ).

## NR2F
The orphan NR2F receptors are poorly studied in
terms of ligand discovery with only seven NR2F1 modulators and two
NR2F6 modulators annotated in ChEMBL (v. 33). In 2021, Khalil et al.
reported the first synthetic NR2F1 modulator from a virtual screening
of 110,000 compounds on a model of the autorepressed NR2F1 LBD which
was computationally transformed into an active conformation based
on the LBD of RXRα. From 150 initial hits, 67 were selected
for in vitro characterization in a reporter gene assay and C26 (26) was found to enhance reporter activity by approximately
2-fold (EC50: 0.5–1 μM) in two cell lines.
Cellular NR2F1 knockout experiments using CRISPR-Cas9 supported the
NR2F1 dependence of the effects of 26. Moreover, 26 induced expression of the NR2F1-regulated genes SOX9, RARβ,
and p27 in chicken embryo chorioallantoic membrane tumors and inhibited
tumor growth and metastasis of head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) in mice. However, 26 treatment of T-Hep3 cells
inoculated onto chicken embryo chorioallantoic membrane caused a 2.3-fold
increase in NR2F1 mRNA and a 10-fold increase in protein levels indicating
potentially that induction of NR2F1 expression rather than direct
activation mediated the observed effects. 
In 2020, Wang et al. reported inverse COUP-TF2 agonists from
a reporter gene assay-based cellular HTS of >300,000 compounds
(Molecular
Libraries Probe Production Centers Network chemical library; PubChem
AID: 686940). Counter-screenings of primary hits using Gal4-VP16 supported
the COUP-TF2 mediated activity of the structurally related inverse
agonists CIA1 (27) and CIA2 (28) with IC50 values of 3.2 and 2.8 μM, respectively. Direct interaction
with the receptor was investigated via a cellular thermal shift assay
and in pulldown experiments using biotinylated 27. Additionally,
mutagenesis studies indicated a loss of binding of 27 to COUP-TF when W249 and F253 were mutated. Both 27 and 28 were profiled for selectivity on the related
NRs HNF4α, RXRα, PPARα, LXRα, GR, PR, ER,
RAR, RORγ, AR, and COUP-TF1 which revealed no relevant interaction
in a pulldown assay. Based on the high structural similarity of NR2F
receptors, it is surprising that no COUP-TF1 binding was observed.
In prostate cancer cells, 27 and 28 treatment
altered expression of the COUP-TF2 target genes FOXM1 and CDK1 suggesting
cellular target engagement. Moreover, both compounds suppressed the
growth of four prostate cancer cell lines with IC50 values
ranging from 1.2 to 76 μM (27) and from 2.2 to
10.2 μM (28), respectively, and 27 (2.6 mg/kg) inhibited prostate cancer tumor growth and angiogenesis
in a xenograft mouse model. 
Considering
the very scarce collection of NR2F ligands, the only
reported NR2F1 agonist 26 and the inverse NR2F2 agonist 27 appeared to be the best suitable as early chemical tool
candidates for NR2 targeted CG and were included in further profiling
( ). , 28 was excluded due to its close structural similarity
to 27 and lack of commercial availability.

## Comparative Profiling of NR2 Modulators
To probe the
potential of the available NR2 ligands as chemical tools for CG, we
evaluated their on-target activity and in-family selectivity in a
uniform cellular Gal4-hybrid reporter gene assay platform ( ). , These assays rely on chimeric receptors composed of the LBD of a
human nuclear receptor and the Gal4 DNA binding domain from yeast.
A Gal4-responsive firefly luciferase construct served as reporter
gene, and a constitutively expressed (SV40 promoter) renilla luciferase
was used as internal control gene. This assay provides a favorably
uniform setting to characterize nuclear receptor modulators and their
selectivity. As a control experiment to observe unspecific effects
on reporter transcription, we tested the impact of all compounds on
the activity of the ligand-independent transcriptional activator Gal4-VP16 replacing the chimeric nuclear receptor under
otherwise identical conditions. As another key feature of chemical
tools for cellular studies, we additionally tested all NR2 ligand
tool candidates for their cytotoxicity in a multiplex toxicity assay
monitoring proliferation, apoptosis, necrosis, and metabolic activity
using orthogonal reagents and dyes. The NR2 ligands were comparatively
evaluated in these settings ( ) at a minimal test concentration sufficient for full
target engagement and chosen based on the observed cytotoxicity and
reported activity profiles.
 The NR2A (HNF4) ligand candidates 1-3 could not be validated in the hybrid reporter
gene assay. Despite testing concentrations well above the reported
EC50/IC50 values ( ), no effects on HNF4 activity were detectable
for BIM5078 (1, IC50(lit.) 0.9 μM) at
3 μM, benfluorex (2, EC50(lit.) 24.4
μM) at 30 μM and alverine (3, EC50(lit.) 3.5–6.8 μM) at 30 μM. Despite lacking off-targets
and toxic effects, 1-3 thus disqualified
as chemical tools or chemogenomics compounds for NR2A.
 The hybrid reporter gene assay fully confirmed
the activity of
all of the studied NR2B (RXR) modulators. The full RXR agonists 6, 7, and 11 mediated strong RXR
activation at 1 μM, the preferential RXRβ agonist valerenic
acid (9) expectedly exhibited weak RXRα activation
at 10 μM, and the RXR antagonists 12 and 13 robustly blocked bexarotene-induced RXR activation at 1
μM. At these active concentrations, the RXR modulators were
nontoxic supporting suitability for cellular studies. The agonists 6 and 7 as well as the antagonists 12 and 13 were selective for RXR, whereas 6 also activated RAR, TR2, and PNR, and 11 displayed
off-target activities on TR2, TR4, and PNR.
Profiling of putative
NR2E1 (TLX) ligands confirmed TLX activation
by 19 and inverse agonism by 21. Both compounds
were selective over other nuclear receptors and nontoxic at the selected
active concentration and thus appear suitable as early tools. TLX
modulation by 15 and 17 was not observed
and, expectedly, 17 activated RAR. Modulation of NR2E3
(PNR) by 22, 23 as well as 26 was confirmed albeit with rather low efficacy. Nevertheless, favorable
selectivity profiles and lack of cytotoxicity support 22, 23, and 25 as early tools ( ).

## Proof-of-Concept Application of Chemical Tools for NR2 Receptors
in Functional and Phenotypic Settings
Using the small collection
of NR2 modulators with sufficient reproducible on-target activity
and selectivity (6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25), we
next explored their application as a chemogenomics set. To probe the potential of the collection to
link phenotypic effects and target in a complex cellular setting,
we determined compound effects on the differentiation of adipocyte-derived
stem cells (ASC). Under cyclic treatment with insulin, isobutylmethylxanthine,
dexamethasone, and the PPARγ agonist pioglitazone, these cells develop into adipocytes and accumulate
large amounts of fat. However, adipogenesis is orchestrated by many
transcription factors and could potentially
involve a role of NR2 receptors. Indeed, treatment of ASC with insulin,
isobutylmethylxanthine, dexamethasone, and the NR2 ligand collection
revealed diverse effects on differentiation and fat accumulation ( a). Although bexarotene
(6) increased the overall Oil Red O positive area, there
was no uniform effect of RXR modulators on fat deposition in adipocytes,
possibly due to diverse off-targets, indicating that RXR activation
did not affect adipocyte differentiation. Among TLX ligands, the agonist 19 increased the amount of fat and lipid particle size, pointing
to enhanced adipogenesis. The inverse TLX agonist 21 had
no effect. PNR ligand effects in the adipogenesis model were generally
weak.
 Next, we evaluated the potential impact of the
NR2 modulator set
on endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in an ATF6 activity assay ( b). The activating
transcription factor 6 (ATF6) participates in the unfolded protein
response and is activated under ER stress. Tunicamycin-induced ATF6 activity was not affected by RXR and TLX
modulators but was reduced by the inverse PNR agonists 22 and 23. However, a consistent PNR effect could not
be derived as the PNR agonist 25 slightly diminished
ATF6 activity, too, suggesting that rather off-targets mediated the
observed effects.
While these preliminary observations on the
NR2 modulator impact
on adipocyte differentiation and ER stress require further exploration,
they indicate that the selected NR2 modulator set encompasses sufficient
redundancy and chemical orthogonality to serve as a tool to generate
new biological hypotheses in cellular settings.

## Conclusions
Several nuclear receptors of the NR1 and
NR3 families mediate the
effects of highly important and valuable drugs, demonstrating that
members of this protein family generally hold strong therapeutic potential.
Nevertheless, most NRs representing the NR2 family are still very
poorly explored for their roles in health and disease, which is to
a large part due to a lack of potent and well-characterized ligands.
High-quality chemical tools are only available for RXRs (NR2B) among
the NR2 receptors, but even highly optimized RXR modulators lack subtype-selectivity,
emphasizing the need for improved ligands for all NR2 receptors. Although
a few synthetic modulators for other NR2 receptors have recently been
reported, consistent in vitro characterization in uniform assays and
independent validation are widely lacking. As a preliminary attempt
to overcome this issue and identify potential early tools for the
orphan NR2 receptors, we acquired NR2 ligands reported in the literature
and subjected them to comparative profiling in a uniform assay platform
to determine on-target activity and in-family selectivity in a cellular
setting. This exercise failed to reproduce modulation of the respective
NR2 target for several of the tested entities underscoring the urgent
need for increased efforts to develop NR2 ligands with improved potency
and selectivity and robust orthogonal validation. Nevertheless, a
few ligands for the NR2E family could be confirmed as early tools
for in vitro studies, in addition to several well-characterized RXR
modulators. The eleven selected NR2 modulators displayed no cytotoxicity
and sufficient NR selectivity at active concentrations for application
in a chemogenomics fashion to probe the role of NR2B and NR2E receptors
in phenotypic and functional cellular models.
The very scarce
collection of NR2 ligands and the high attrition
rate of compounds failing to modulate their annotated NR2 target in
comparative profiling underscore that the coverage of this important
protein family with chemical tools for target validation is insufficient.
More attention of medicinal chemistry for NR2 modulators is urgently
needed to provide high-quality chemical tools for NR2 receptors to
reveal new therapeutic opportunities.

## Experimental Procedures

## Compound Selection
To identify modulators for NR2A,
NR2C, NR2E, and NR2F, data was extracted from “PubChem, ChEMBL (v.33), IUPHAR/BPS, chemicalprobes.org, and Probes&Drugs (v. 02/2024). Additionally, Pubmed and Google Scholar were
searched for scientific publications with the search terms “NR2A/NR2B/NR2C/NR2E/NR2F
and modulator” or “HNF4/RXR/TR/TLX/PNR/COUP-TF and modulator”.
NR2B ligands were rationally selected as described in the main text.
Commercial availability for this resulting collection of NR2 ligand
candidates was then checked (Sigma, Cayman Chemicals, Selleckchem,
MilliporeSigma, BLD, and MedChem Express) and available compounds
were acquired for comparative testing.

## Adipogenesis Assay
Differentiation experiments of ASC52telo,
hTERT cells (ATCC SCRC-4000) were conducted according to a previously
described procedure. In brief, the cells
were grown in DMEM high-glucose medium supplemented with 10% fetal
calf serum, sodium pyruvate (1 mM), penicillin (100 U/mL), and streptomycin
(100 μg/mL) at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The cells were
seeded in standard culture medium at a density of 5 × 103 cells per well in 96-well plates. After adherence overnight,
the cells were incubated with differentiation medium, composed of
standard culture medium supplemented with human insulin (10 μg/mL,
#I3536, Merck KgaA, Darmstadt, Germany), dexamethasone (1 μM,
#D4902, Merck KgaA, Darmstadt, Germany,), isobutylmethylxanthine (0.5
mM, #I5879, Merck KgaA, Darmstadt, Germany), DMSO (final concentration
0.1%) and the respective test compounds or pioglitazone at 1 μM.
The cells were kept in a differentiation medium for 48–72 h
followed by a 24 h incubation with standard culture medium supplemented
with 10 μg/mL insulin only. This cycle was repeated five times
accounting for a total differentiation time of 18 days. The indicated
test compounds at 0.1% DMSO or 0.1% DMSO alone as vehicle control
were supplemented freshly with every medium exchange. After the 18-day
differentiation procedure and test compound treatment, the cells were
washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) once and fixed with formalin
(10%, stabilized with methanol, 100 μL per well, #15071, Morphisto
GmbH, Offenbach am Main, Germany) for 15 min at room temperature.
The fixing solution was aspirated, and the fixed cells were washed
twice with 50% ethanol solution with the second wash step incubating
for 15 min at room temperature to equilibrate the specimens for staining.
Oil Red O (#O0625, Merck KgaA, Darmstadt, Germany) was prepared at
0.5% (w/v) in 50% ethanol (v/v) and 5% salicylic acid (w/v), filtered
with grade 595 Whatman filter paper (#311611, Schleicher & Schuell
GmbH, London, U.K.) and a 0.2 μm syringe filter (FP 30/0,2 CA-S,
#10462200, Schleicher & Schuell GmbH, London, U.K.). Upon equilibration,
specimens were incubated with 100 μL of 0.5% Oil Red O solution
for 45 min at room temperature before the staining solution was aspirated,
and the wells were washed once with 50% (v/v) ethanol solution and
three times with ddH2O. Specimens were kept in ddH2O for subsequent analysis. For each well, two pictures were
taken at a 4× magnification using a MoticAE31E inverted microscope
and a Moticam 1080 (Motic Hong Kong Ltd.). Images were corrected for
skewed illumination, Oil Red O crystal precipitates were identified
and removed, and the resulting processed pictures were dichromized
to extract gray values from the red channel using CellProfiler (Version
4.2.6). An appropriate gray value threshold was selected for the dichromized
binary pictures and quantified (overall Oil Red O positive area and
average size of Oil Red O positive fat droplets, I.e. particles) using
ImageJ 1.54f. Each sample was tested in four biologically independent
experiments (n = 4).

## Cytotoxicity Assay
COS- 7 cells (DSMZ #ACC 60) were
cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in DMEM high-glucose
medium supplemented with sodium pyruvate (1 mM), penicillin (100 U/mL),
streptomycin (100 μg/mL), and 10% fetal calf serum (FCS). After
aspirating the wells, the cells were seeded at 1 × 105 cells per well in complete culture medium. After 24 h, the cells
were treated with the respective test compounds (concentrations indicated
in ), including
positive controls Doxorubicin (100 μM) and Bexarotene (100 μM),
in DMEM high-glucose medium, which was supplemented with 0.1% FCS,
penicillin (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100 μg/mL) and 0.1% DMSO,
or 0.1% DMSO alone as an untreated control. Each sample was prepared
in at least 4 biologically independent replicates. After incubation
for 24 h, the wells were aspirated and incubated for 30 min with stimulation
medium containing 1 μM NucView 405 fluorogenic caspase-3 substrate
(#10405, Biotium, Fremont) and Live-or-Dye Nuc-Fix Red (0.05x, Biotium,
Inc., Fremont, CA, 1691) to detect apoptosis and necrosis, respectively.
After incubation, a total of 6 fluorescence images per well at 10×
magnification were taken to detect NucView-positive (Ex: 381–400
nm, Em: 414–450 nm) and Live-or-Dye-positive cells (Ex: 543–566
nm, Em: 580–611 nm) using on a Tecan Spark Cyto (Tecan Group
AG). Reference readings for background correction and detection of
autofluorescence were taken at 414–450 nm prior to staining.
Thereafter, wells were aspirated, the cells were incubated for 3 h
with 90 μL culture medium (0.2% FCS) and 10 μL Cell Counting
Kit-8 solution (CCK-8, MedChem Express #HY-K0301), and absorbance
was measured at 1, 2, and 3 h of incubation at 450 nm on a Tecan Spark
Cyto to assess metabolic activity of the cells. Before drug administration,
after the first medium exchange, 24 h after drug administration, and
after fluorescence imaging cell confluence was assessed using the
Tecan Spark Cyto, to account for changes in cell confluence due to
drug administration and cell handling. The number of apoptotic cells,
metabolic activity, and changes in cell confluence in response to
drug treatment were all normalized to the vehicle control of each
biological replicate individually.

## Hybrid Reporter Gene Assays
Gal4-hybrid reporter gene
assays were performed as described previously using the plasmids pFA-CMV-hTHRα-LBD, pFA-CMV-hRARα-LBD, pFA-CMV-hPPARα-LBD, pFA-CMV-hPPARγ-LBD, pFA-CMV-hPPARδ-LBD, pFA-CMV-revERBα-LBD, pFA-CMV-hRORα-LBD, pFA-CMV-hLXRα-LBD, pFA-CMV-hFXR-LBD, pFA-CMV-hVDR-LBD, pFA-CMV-hCAR-LBD, pFA-CMV-hHNF4α-LBD, pFA-CMV-hRXRα-LBD, pFA-CMV-hTR2-LBD, pFA-CMV-hTR4-LBD, pFA-CMV-hTLX-LBD, pFA-CMV-hNR2E3-LBD, pFA-CMV-hNur77-LBD, and pFA-CMV-hSF1-LBD encoding the
hinge region and the LBD of the canonical isoform of the respective
human nuclear receptors. pFR-Luc (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) was used
as a reporter plasmid, and pRL-SV40 (Promega, Madison, WI) was used
for normalization of transfection efficiency and cell growth. HEK293T
cells (German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Culture GmbH,
DSMZ) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM), high glucose supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS),
sodium pyruvate (1 mM), penicillin (100 U/mL), and streptomycin (100
μg/mL) at 37 °C and 5% CO2 and seeded in 96-well
plates (3 × 104 cells/well). The medium was changed
to Opti-MEM without supplements, and cells were transiently transfected
with one pFA-CMV-hNR-LBD clone, pFR-Luc, and pRL-SV40 using Lipofectamine
LTX reagent (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Five hours after transfection,
the cells were incubated with the test compounds in Opti-MEM supplemented
with penicillin (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100 μg/mL), and 0.1%
DMSO. Each sample was set up in duplicates and tested in at least
three independent experiments. After 16 h incubation, luciferase activity
was measured using the Dual-Glo Luciferase Assay System (Promega)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol on a Tecan Spark luminometer
(Tecan Deutschland GmbH, Crailsheim, Germany). Firefly luminescence
was divided by Renilla luminescence and multiplied by 1000 resulting
in relative light units (RLUs) to normalize for transfection efficiency
and cell growth. Fold activation was obtained by dividing the mean
RLU of the test compound by the mean RLU of the untreated control,
and relative activation was calculated by dividing the fold activation
of a test sample by the fold activation of the respective reference
agonist. Antagonistic effects were evaluated by coincubation of the
test compound with the respective reference ligand. The following
reference ligands were used: THRα–1 μM T3; RARα–1
μM tretinoin; PPARα–1 μM GW7647; PPARγ–1
μM pioglitazone; PPARδ−1 μM L165,041; RORγ–1
μM SR1001; LXRα–1 μM T0901317; FXR–1
μM GW4064; VDR–1 μM calcitriol; CAR–1 μM
CITCO, RXRα–1 μM bexarotene.

## ATF6 Activity Assay
Hela cells containing a Renilla
luciferase reporter gene for ATF6 activity (ATF6 Leeporter Luciferase
Reporter-HeLa Cell Line, Abeomics Inc.; #14–138ACL) were cultured
in DMEM supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FCS, penicillin (100
U/mL), streptomycin (100 μg/mL) and puromycin (3 μg/mL)
at 37 °C and 5% (v/v) CO2 and seeded in 96-well plates
(1 × 105 per well). After 24 h, the cells were incubated
with the test compounds solubilized with 0.1% DMSO in the same medium
without puromycin. After 4 h of incubation, tunicamycin (100 ng/mL)
was added. After another 18 h of incubation, the cells were assayed
for renilla luminescence using DualGlo reagent (Promega) on a Tecan
SPARK Cyto (Tecan). Test samples were normalized to the 0.1% DMSO
control.

## Acknowledgments
This research was cofunded by the European
Union (ERC, NeuRoPROBE,
101040355; to D.M.). Views and opinions expressed are, however, those
of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the
European Union or the European Research Council. Neither the European
Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.
This work has received funding from the Innovative Medicines Initiative
2 Joint Undertaking (JU) under grant agreement no. 875510. The JU
receives support from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation program, EFPIA, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research,
Royal Institution for the Advancement of Learning McGill University,
Kungliga Tekniska Hoegskolan, and Diamond Light Source Limited.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsptsci.4c00719.
Schematic representation of the hybrid reporter gene
assays (Figure S1); detailed results and statistics of in-family profiling
of NR2 modulators (Figure S2); and detailed results and statistics
of selectivity profiling of NR2 modulators in the nuclear receptor
family (Figure S3) (PDF)

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
pt4c00719_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
pt4c00719_si_001.pdf