3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC9593815959381595938153630411010.1016/j.isci.2022.105279A multi-omics approach to visualize early neuronal differentiation from hESCs in 4D
SamaraAthina SpildrejordeMari SharmaAnkush FalckMartin LeithaugMagnus ModafferiStefania BjørnstadPål Marius AcharyaGanesh GervinKristina LyleRobert EskelandRagnhild 1Division of Clinical Paediatrics, Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden2Astrid Lindgren Children′s Hospital Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden3PharmaTox Strategic Research Initiative, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway4Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway5Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway6Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway7Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway8Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway9Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology (CLINTEC), Karolinska Institutet, Alfred Nobels Allé 8, SE-14152 Stockholm, Sweden10Center for Fetal Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, SE-14186 Stockholm, Sweden11Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety Research Group, Department of Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway12Division of Clinical Neuroscience, Department of Research and Innovation, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway13Centre for Fertility and Health, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway∗Corresponding author athina.samara@ki.se
∗∗Corresponding author robert.lyle@medisin.uio.no
∗∗∗Corresponding author ragnhild.eskeland@medisin.uio.no
14Present address: Department of Cancer Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, and KG Jebsen Centre for B-cell malignancies, Institute for Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway
15Present address: Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, and University of Oslo, Norway
16Present address: Department of Analysis and Diagnostics, Section for Molecular Biology, Norwegian Veterinary Institute, Ås, Norway
17Present address: Istituto di Genetica Molecolare, CNR - Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Pavia, Italy
18These authors contributed equally
19Lead contact
4102022251110527910527926102022© 2022 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Summary
Neuronal differentiation of pluripotent stem cells is an established method to study physiology, disease, and medication safety. However, the sequence of events in human neuronal differentiation and the ability of in vitro models to recapitulate early brain development are poorly understood. We developed a protocol optimized for the study of early human brain development and neuropharmacological applications. We comprehensively characterized gene expression and epigenetic profiles at four timepoints, because the cells differentiate from embryonic stem cells towards a heterogeneous population of progenitors, immature and mature neurons bearing telencephalic signatures. A multi-omics roadmap of neuronal differentiation, combined with searchable interactive gene analysis tools, allows for extensive exploration of early neuronal development and the effect of medications.
Subject areas: Neuroscience, Cell biology, Omics

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Multi-omics charting a new neuronal differentiation protocol for human ES cells
•Single-cell analyses reveal marker genes during neuronal differentiation
•Identified transcriptional waves similar to early human brain development
•Searchable tools to visualize single-cell gene expression and chromatin state

Neuroscience; Cell biology; Omics

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Mar 1; Revised 2022 Aug 22; Accepted 2022 Sep 28; Collection date 2022 Nov 18.

## Introduction
Brain region and cell-specific transcriptional and epigenetic landscapes are fundamental for investigating disease mechanisms and therapeutic interventions. However, the role of epigenetic regulation on the establishment and maintenance of cellular identity during early neuronal differentiation is not well understood ( ; ). Studies of chromatin modifications and global open chromatin in early human brain, neuronal differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and organoid model systems have been insightful on the regulation of neuronal gene programs ( ; ; ; ). Single-cell resolution analyses have further subtyped the neuronal cells present in human fetal brain development and organoids ( ; ; , ; ).
Developmental trajectories can only be spatiotemporally resolved by single-cell omics systematic studies which characterize cells at intermediate differentiation timepoints. Although neuronal differentiation of pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) is an established method to study early development, disease and neurotoxicity ( ), fewer omics studies have targeted 2D neuronal differentiation from hESCs and how well they recapitulate early human brain development.
Applying dual SMAD/WNT signaling inhibition for neural induction of hESCs ( ; ; ; ; ) we developed a 2D differentiation protocol towards a heterogeneous population of progenitors and neurons bearing telencephalic signatures ( ).
Combining RNA-seq, global DNA methylation, single-cell RNA-seq and ATAC-seq data and analyzing the integration across four timepoints (4D analysis), we constructed a molecular timeline and correlated transcription factors (TFs) with time- and population-specific chromatin states in hESCs, early fate commitment and during differentiation. We provide access to the single-cell data in user-friendly, interactive web applications that enable visualization of gene cluster regulation during the neuronal differentiation protocol for novel insights and as a basis for future studies. This integrative analysis delineated transcription programs and identified over 26,000 putative cis regulatory elements that link to expressed genes during 2D neuronal differentiation.

## Results

## Initial validation of the neuronal differentiation protocol
After establishing the 2D neuronal differentiation protocol for hESCs ( ) we analyzed the hESCs (Day 0) and derivative cell populations at three timepoints. We empirically defined the end of the neural induction phase (Stage I) at Day 7, the end of the self-patterning phase (Stage II) at Day 13 and the end of the maturation phase (Stage III) at Day 20 ( A). For the neural induction of unsynchronized HS360 hESCs ( ; ), the LSX cocktail (LDN193189, SB431542 and XAV939), antagonizes BMP, TGFβ and WNT signaling pathways driving cells to anterior neuroectoderm ( ; ; ; ). By the end of Stage I, cells form thickened neural rosettes, and self-pattern at Stage II before the final Stage III FGF2/EGF-induced maturation ( B). Despite absence of inhibitors at the self-patterning stage II, the anterior forebrain identity is retained, and cells proceed to maturation, as shown by the ddPCR results ( C).
 Neural induction significantly decreased expression of the pluripotency transcription factors (TFs) POU5F1 and NANOG (p < 0.00001). At Day 7 expression of the early neural markers SOX2 and NES increased and stabilized, whereas PAX6 expression peaked at Day 7 before decreasing significantly at Days 13 and 20 (p < 0.0001). Expression of OTX2, the TF which regulates neurogenesis and antagonizes ground state pluripotency, the late onset pan-neuronal marker TUBB3 and also MAP2 and FOXG1, increased as cells differentiated. Immunofluorescence imaging of OCT4, OTX2, SOX2, PAX6, NESTIN and TUBB3 showed localization with protein expression levels correlating with ddPCR ( ).

## Global expression profiles reveal neuronal differentiation and maturation signatures
To increase gene expression sensitivity, we performed bulk gene expression analysis with higher sequencing depth ( and ). Overall, we found 11,313 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) comparing cells from Day 0 to 20 ( ). More genes were differentially expressed during neural induction (Day 0 to 7), compared to the later stages, with self-patterning (Day 7 to 13) and maturation (Day 13 to 20) stages ( ). The most extensive transcriptional changes occurred between Day 0 and Stage I, with loss of pluripotency and gain of neuralization markers ( A, A, and S2F). We confirmed that bulk RNA-seq analysis for selected marker genes correlates well with ddPCR ( B and G).
 Specific gene expression patterns drive the loss of pluripotency towards neuronal maturation ( ). These may be steep decreases after neuronal induction, as seen for LIN28A and CDH1, expression peaking at Day 7 or Day 13 (such as RAX and FOXG1, respectively) or gradual increase for genes, such as OTX2 and SOX6 ( A, A, and S2B). Moreover, the expression of neuroectodermal patterning Wnt/β-Catenin negative regulator AMER2 ( ), and neuronal differentiation marker STMN2 ( ) increase at Day 13, and increase further at Day 20 ( A, D, and S2E). On Day 20 we also find genes correlated to specific neuronal types, such as GRIA1, and GNRH1 ( F) and the top 50 differentially expressed genes between Days 0 and 20 were plotted as a heatmap ( C).
We further identified biological processes (BP) enriched among the DEGs with gene ontology (GO) analyses ( D; ), which revealed upregulated BPs related to neuronal maturation from Day 0 to 20 ( D). Stage-specific GO analyses revealed enrichment of BPs involved in neurogenesis and neuron development differentiation at stage I, and BPs involving synaptic organization and neurotransmitter regulation and secretion at the end of the maturation stage ( ).

## DNA methylation correlates with neuronal transcriptional programs during differentiation
DNAm in human cells is mainly restricted to CpG sites and is essential for normal development ( ). As hESCs transition to differentiated neurons, dynamic DNAm changes regulate gene expression and the establishment of cell-type specificity ( ). To assess DNAm in the present protocol, we identified CpGs which are differentially methylated (DMCs) between Day 0, 7, 13 and 20 ( and ). As expected, comparing Day 0 and 20 reveals massive DNAm changes (n = 210,049 DMCs, ). Although we observe major changes in DNAm during the differentiation protocol ( ), the bulk DNAm levels and the distribution of unmethylated and methylated CpGs remains the same across all four timepoints ( A, B, and S3C).
 Deconvoluting these changes temporally, the highest number of DMCs was observed between Day 0 and 7 (n = 161,600), with fewer changes in the self-patterning phase (Days 7–13, n = 39,545) and during cell maturation (Days 13–20, n = 47,676) ( ). Next, we used GOMETH analysis ( ) to explore shared biological functions among DMCs. In line with the gene expression results, from Day 0 to 20 we observed enrichment of BPs involved in neurogenesis, brain development and others ( C) showing how DNAm modulates neuronal differentiation ( A). Similarly, these analyses identified DMCs between Day 0 to 7 and Day 0 to 13, with BPs involved in neuron projection morphology, which fits well with the cell transitions ( D and S3E). One of the most significant GO terms is “neuron migration”, evidenced by expression of genes such as DCX and its partner PAFAH1B ( ) ( ).
To explore the correlation between DNAm and gene expression, we combined the DNAm and RNA-seq data sets based on CpG probe location and gene locus ( D, F, and S3G; ). Of the Stage I gene annotated DMCs, 72% overlap with differentially expressed genes, inferring functional impact on gene expression. For genes with DMCs we generally observed a decrease on transcriptional activation or an increase for genes becoming repressed during the course of differentiation. The expression levels of the majority of the differentially expressed genes between Day 0 and 20 are predicted to be associated with DNAm changes (8,011 of the 11,313 DEGs). The expression of markers of late trophectoderm (e.g., KRT18), pluripotency maintenance (POU5F1), suppression of pluripotency (NR6A1) ( ), metabolic reprogramming (LDHA) ( ), or spatiotemporally regulated cortical TFs and cell cycle related genes (LHX2, CDKN1C) ( ; ) and neuronal differentiation and maturation markers, (such as DCX), may be regulated by one or more CpGs ( C, F, and S3G; ).
Methylated non-CpGs (mCpHs) have been associated with transcriptional repression in the mouse genome ( ), and also detected in human ESCs, brain and organoid models ( ; ; ). We demonstrate that the distribution of methylated non-CpGs vary across timepoints ( B). Non-CpG DNAm levels were enhanced at Day 0 cells and declined during differentiation ( B), similar to the decline observed during differentiation of hESC to cerebral organoids ( ).

## Identification of heterogeneous populations of progenitors, mature and immature neurons with telencephalic signatures
To characterize the gene expression signatures, composition, differentiation pathway trajectories and the maturation level of the cell types derived, we performed single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) analyses at Days 0, 7, 13 and 20 ( and ; ). We used the batch correction algorithm Harmony on the unfiltered data and found our data to be very consistent across replicates ( D and S4E). Moreover, differential expression analyses between days were performed to investigate if DEGs were comparable between bulk RNA-seq and scRNA-seq ( ). We found an overlap of genes between DEGs for global RNA-seq and scRNA-seq of 62–91%, confirming a high correlation between the two datasets. The scRNA-seq data can be visualized in the open access webtool “hESC Neuronal Differentiation scRNA-seq” (hESCNeuroDiffscRNA) where expression of genes can be explored per cell, cluster and timepoint. A total of 9,337 cells from two time-course experiments were aggregated and projected in UMAPs, 1,900 Day 0 cells, 2,368 Day 7cells, 2,045 Day 13 cells and 3,024 Day 20 cells) ( A and and hESCNeuroDiffscRNA, cell information tab, orig.ident).
 

## Inferring quantitative analysis of cell cycle phase
Neuronal development involves major cell cycle alterations. G1-phase lengthening is associated with the transition to more differentiated cell types, whereas S-phase duration is linked to progenitor cell expansion ( ). The cell cycle-specific gene trajectories documented the decreased proportion of cells in S phase and an increased proportion of cells in G1 phase as cells transition from Day 0 to 20 ( B and hESCNeuroDiffscRNA). Although, terminally differentiated neurons are found in G0 (not in G1), and the analyses tools currently available cannot accurately predict cells in the G0 phase, the results are consistent with previous studies showing that maintenance of proliferation and pluripotency in PSCs, neural stem cells and progenitor cells are cell cycle-regulated ( ; ; ; ). The cell cycle regulator CDK1 was expressed by 60% Day 0 cells, 45% at Day 7, 53% at Day 13, and reduced to 33% at Day 20 ( G, % from the hESCNeuroDiffscRNA). Moreover, utilizing CytoTRACE to predict single-cell hierarchies ( ) showed that cell potency gradually decreased from Day 0 to 20 ( C), confirming the cell cycle phase prediction.

## Development and differentiation markers used for cluster resolution and annotation
For a preliminary assessment of the cell types in our neuronal differentiation dataset, we utilized a scRNA-seq Human Brain dataset ( ) and RNA-seq data from Human Primary Cell Atlas ( ) ( D and F). According to the Human Primary Cell Atlas, D0 hESCs overlap with ESCs and IPSCs, whereas the majority of D7, D13 and D20 cells overlap with neuroepithelial cells ( F). When we compared our datasets to the La Manno Brain Data, the D0 cell population correlated with ESCs, and D7, D13 and D20 cells that are dividing and REST positive ( B and 4F) annotate to human neuronal progenitors whereas the cells in the D20 clusters R11-13 correlated with neuroblasts ( D).
The four timepoints were resolved into 15 clusters (R1-R15, E and B). Corresponding cell numbers per cluster and cells per timepoint per cluster are shown ( ). Based on expression, the genes POU5F1, TDGF1, GAL, LRRC75A, RAX, LIX1, TYMS, HES1, HES5, HES6, FGF17, DLX5, DLX6, GAP43, STMN2 and GNRH1 were used for R1-R13 cluster annotation ( E). For R14, consisting of 27 Day 0 cells, we used KPNA2, a gene associated with OCT4 localization ( ). For R15, a pool of 90 cells from Days 7, 13 and 20, we used FABP7, which is expressed in NSCs during development ( ).

## Characterizing the unsynchronized hESC population
We identified three Day 0 clusters (R1-3) where all cells expressed POU5F1 ( G) verifying their pluripotency. TFs essential in establishing and maintaining pluripotency (i.e., GAL, TDGF1, ID1, FOXH1 and SOX2) were highly expressed in clusters R1-3 ( F and S4G, as can be observed hESCNeuroDiffscRNA). R3 cells expressed the highest levels of LRRC75A ( G). As others have reported ( ), PHC1 was highly expressed in hESC clusters R1-R3, and its expression was greatly reduced in differentiating cells. Downregulation of PHC1 was compensated by increased PHC2 expression, indicating a role for PHC2 in human neuronal differentiation ( F and B). Focusing on the FOX family of TFs, a clear switch was observed from FOXH1 expression in R1-R3, to the expression of the master regulator of brain development FOXG1 ( ; ) in all other clusters ( F and B).

## LSX forebrain induction cues evident at the end of stage I
Under LSX induction, hESCs undergo morphogenetic events and form neural rosettes. These Day 7 cells mapped to a single cluster (R4, F), enriched in the rostral marker LIX1 ( G). In contrast, expression of the preplacodal genes EYA1 and SIX1 ( ; ) and of the caudal markers PAX5 and GBX2 ( ; ) was low throughout differentiation, confirming that the LSX efficacy is enabling cell-fate commitment persistence.
Upon neural induction, the key neural TF PAX6 is upregulated and interacts with SOX2 ( ). R4 cells were SOX2 positive showing high PAX6 and RAX expression ( G), and express neuronal rosette markers, such as DACH1, POU3F2,NR2F1 and NR2F2 ( ). A distinct switch from CDH1 (Epithelial Cadherin) to CDH2 (Neural Cadherin) expression was observed ( F), and other developing forebrain specification and differentiation stage markers (such as OTX2, HESX1, FOXG1, LIN28A, and FABP7) were detected.

## Self-patterning does not affect fate commitment
At Day 13, which marks the end of the self-patterning stage, 75% of the cells mapped to cluster R5 and most of them expressed REST ( F and G). SIX3, DLX5 and BMP4 ( G) were expressed in the FGF8/HES1 enriched R6 cells. Moreover, R6 was enriched in TAGLN, but absent in the R5 cells co-expressing NKX2.1 and SOX6. CNTN1, a potent inducer of neuronal migration and Notch ligand ( ) and potent inducer of neuronal migration ( ), was exclusively expressed in R6 cells negative for NTN1, DLL1, FABP7 and POU3F2. Comparing to results of 8 week human embryonic tissue ( ), no midbrain and hindbrain markers were detected at Day 13, confirming that the self-patterning phase does not affect fate commitment.

## Characterization of the day 20 heterogeneous population
Day 20 cells retained their identity and clustered in R7-13 ( G). Some cells expressed high levels of CDK1 ( G), whereas other cells were still regulated by REST and expressed DLX5 and CDKN1C. CDKN1C, which forms complexes with histone deacetylases to repress neuronal genes in non-neuronal cells ( ) is inversely correlated with REST expression and enhanced in R11-13 ( F). Of interest, ARX, a regulator of cortical progenitor expansion by repression of CDKN1C ( ) was only expressed in R13 cells ( G). Neuronal differentiation correlated with CDK6 upregulation and G1 shortening. CDK6 is directly regulated by GLI3 and expression of GLI3 ( ) (detectable at R4) dropped significantly in R12-13. REST is known to be downregulated during neurogenesis and in differentiating neurons and the pattern was recapitulated in this study ( F).

## Neuronal maturation signatures
Day 20 cells were highly enriched for MAP2, and clusters R11-13 were enriched for DCX, which is a marker of migratory neurons. Genes expressed in proliferating neuroblasts associated with cortical migration control and developing rostral brain structural patterning, such as EMX2 ( ; ; ), decreased in clusters R11-R12 and were undetectable in R13 ( G). FGF8, an anterior-posterior patterning molecule, acting mainly via EMX2 repression ( ), was expressed in R4 and R6 cells and in a few Day 20 cells, mainly in R8 and R10 clusters. Furthermore, FGF17 ( G) and FGF18 were mostly expressed at Day 20 R8 cluster. HES6-enriched cluster R11 ( G) was composed of Day 13 and 20 cells, and most of the R11 NEUROG1-negative cells were Day 13 cells. Neural stem and progenitor marker ZEB1, which was downregulated on neuronal differentiation to permit proper migration of immature neurons ( ), was expressed in almost all cells ( G). In addition, FOXG1-enriched R13 cells also express high levels of DLX5 ( G).
Of note, the expression of GNRH1 (Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone 1) was expressed in 30% of the R12-13 cells (9% of Day 20 cells) ( G). Of these cells, some expressed GABAergic or glutaminergic processing enzymes. As the mechanisms that contribute to the development of extrahypothalamic GnRH neurons are not fully described, such data are vital for studies of development, puberty and reproduction.

## Chromatin accessibility analysis identifies regulation signatures during differentiation
In line with the bulk RNA-seq data, the scRNA-seq results showed downregulation of pluripotency genes and upregulation of brain development genes correlating with neuronal transcriptional programs during differentiation. To further assess the epigenetic landscape changes on differentiation, we performed single-cell assay for transposase accessible chromatin sequencing (scATAC-seq). The analysis focused on chromatin-based gene regulation from loss of pluripotency at Day 0 to Day 20 ( and ).
 

## Reanalyzing scRNA-seq datasets for integration with scATAC-seq data
To integrate scATAC-seq and scRNA-seq, the scRNA-seq datasets for Day 0 and Day 20 were reanalyzed. 1910 Day 0, and 3033 Day 20 cells were projected in 13 clusters ( A) and in accordance with the maturation trajectory seen in the corresponding CytoTRACE plot ( B). scRNA-seq clusters were numbered and annotated, cohering to the initial four-timepoint analysis ( A, A, and S5B). Thus, Day 0 cells resolved into five clusters (R0-3 and R14) whereas Day 20 clusters were resolved into nine clusters (R7-13 and R15).

## Chromatin accessibility changes globally during differentiation
The analysis of 4,901 Day 0 nuclei and 2,847 Day 20 nuclei and the scATAC-seq data showed good distribution of fragment sizes, fragment numbers, and transcriptional start site (TSS) enrichment ( C–S5F). The supervised pseudotime trajectory scATAC-seq analysis, which predicts paths for gene regulatory changes in cells during differentiation, showed a similar profile to the single-cell gene expression CytoTRACE analysis ( B and 5C). We mapped four chromatin accessibility clusters at Day 0 (C1-4) and five at Day 20 (C9-5; D). Genome tracks demonstrate differential chromatin opening in scATAC-seq clusters for gene loci POU5F1, REST, GAD2 and DCT ( G). We next generated a gene score matrix heatmap representing a score of chromatin opening of 200 kb genomic regions. Higher gene scores for genes related to regulation of pluripotency, such as POU5F1, NANOG, ID1, and known enhancer specific binding factors in development, such as ZIC2 ( ) were found in Day 0 clusters (C1-C4) ( E and B). SOX2 is regulated by several enhancers and interacts with multiple but distinct groups of TFs, including POU3 class partners ( ; ; ; ). The scATAC-seq data showed that chromatin accessibility for SOX2, POU3F1/BRN1 and POU3F3/BRN3 increased with differentiation clusters (C9-C5) ( E). Moreover, neuronal genes SOX21, NFIB ( ), and the OTX2 locus which is associated with early neuronal development regulation, showed a more open chromatin organization in neuronal clusters C5-C9. The gene score of NEUROD1 showed increased chromatin accessibility in neuronal clusters C7-C5 ( E).

## Correlation of chromatin regulatory dynamics and gene expression
To better connect the regulatory open chromatin with gene expression we performed integrated analysis of scATAC-seq with scRNA-seq using ArchR ( ). Following constrained alignment of cell populations after integration of scATAC-seq and scRNA-seq, the integrated clusters were renamed to correspond to the previously annotated scRNA-seq clusters ( F and B). Pluripotency clusters C1-C4 remapped to two of the four Day 0 scRNA-seq clusters, R0 and R2 ( D–5G and I). Day 20 clusters C9-C7 mapped to cluster R7, correlating chromatin openness and gene expression in single cells for markers such as HES1 and CDK1 ( D–5G, B, and S5I). Cluster C6 mapped to R9, which was marked by expression of REST, HES1 and ASCL1 ( D–5G, B, S5G, and S5I). Endpoint cluster C5 remapped to R12, which has high STMN2 and NTRK1 expression D–5G, 5I, B, and S5I). We assessed scATAC-seq peaks across TGDF1, CDH1, CDH2, STMN2, and DCX loci across the integrated clusters (R0, R2, R7, R9 and R12) and found cluster-specific chromatin opening correlating with detected level of gene expression in single-cell transcriptome data ( I and J). Furthermore, the peak-to-gene co-accessibility arcs show that the expressed genes STMN2, TDGF1, CDH1, CDH2 and DCX are linked to potential cis regulatory regions (CREs).
To explore the interaction of putative CREs with gene expression, we mapped 95,800 peak-to-gene links grouped into 25 clusters and observed a clear correlation of the predicted CREs and gene expression ( G). Chromatin accessibility peak annotation analysis revealed varying enrichment across integrated clusters at promoters, intronic, exonic and distal regions ( H) but with a clear enrichment at TSS in every cluster ( H). These results agree with previous studies showing that neuronal gene activation in early human brain development depends on multiple distal regulatory regions ( ; ; ; , ; ).
To understand the dynamics of lineage-defining factors at pluripotency and differentiation endpoint, we mapped motifs within accessible chromatin regions for TFs found in our analyses ( J and K). Motif footprinting for POU5F1 underlies a regulatory function in accessible chromatin in pluripotent clusters R0 and R2, whereas ASCL1 and OTX2 footprints were more enriched in differentiated clusters R12 and R7. The motifs of POU5F1, DLX6, ASCL1 and OTX2 and motif enrichment in open chromatin in individual cells illustrate how lineage-defining TFs can dynamically regulate gene expression programs during neuronal differentiation ( J and K).

## Molecular signatures of neuronal differentiation
To further elucidate the molecular regulation during neuronal differentiation we focused on Day 20 and linked chromatin accessibility to gene expression to identify potential novel enhancers. We identified 26, 189 putative CREs in five linked groups (k-means clusters 1–5) ( A and 6B; ). GO enrichment for the linked genes for groups 1–2 and to a lesser degree group 5 were linked to processes such as “nervous system development”, “neurogenesis”, “neuron differentiation” and “anterograde trans-synaptic signaling” ( C; ). Corresponding GO enrichment for the identified putative CREs in km 1–5 by GREAT ( ) showed very similar BPs for all groups such as “nervous system development”, “neurogenesis” and “generation of neurons” ( ). A total of 1183 potential CREs overlapped with enhancer regions from a collection of Ensembl Human Regulatory Regions ( ; D; ). As many of the annotated Ensembl enhancers may operate in other cell types, we next compared our integrated peak-to-gene link Day 20 data with a similar dataset from early human brain. We utilized a single-cell atlas from human cortical development post-conceptional weeks 16–24 and extracted the linked genes from inferred peak-to-gene link pairs after a pseudotime annotation from all five interaction clusters ( ) ( E; ). Of interest, we observed that CRE-linked genes from all the five k-means groups of Day 20 in vitro neuronally differentiated cells overlapped with 1275 out of 1862 linked genes from a pseudotime cortical neuron lineage.
 Human telencephalon enhancer activity patterns are a subject under intense study ( ). To address whether any of the putative Day 20 CREs may function as enhancers we compared their genomic location with the coordinates of active VISTA enhancers for ASCL1 and ID4. We show an overlap with enhancers hs967, hs988, hs1354, hs1533 and hs1540 previously described to be active in the brain of transgenic mice, but no overlap was observed for hs1114 ( F) ( , ). However, other CREs did not overlap with previously characterized VISTA enhancers and may potentially be new candidate enhancers. For example, we have shown that GNRH1 was expressed in R12-13 cells and our integrative analysis identified a set of potential CREs 3.5 kilobases upstream of the GNRH1 locus ( F). This genomic distance from GNRH1 is similar to a rat E2 upstream Gnrh1 enhancer that has been shown together with enhancers E1 and E3 to be important in driving robust neuronal expression ( ). To better understand the regulation of neuronal differentiation programs we mapped TF motifs that were enriched in the putative CREs and correlated these with expression in Day 20 cells ( G and 6H; ). Motif enrichment with higher correlation included neuronal TF regulators such as neuronal marker NHLH1, the ONECUT family known to promote neuronal differentiation ( ), and proneural factor NEUROG1 with representative sequence logos ( I; ).
We also generated peak-to-gene links for hESCs and identified 13, 463 putative CREs in five groups (k-means clusters 1–5) ( A and S6B; ). Because of fewer peak-to-gene links identified in Day 0, the GO functional enrichment analyses of the linked genes in the five groups displayed less overlap and more general processes such as “regulation of cellular process”, “biological regulation” and this was also true for the corresponding GREAT analyses of potential CREs ( C; ). Furthermore, 388 of the putative CREs overlapped with annotated enhancers from the Ensembl regulome ( D; ). Reflecting a smaller dataset, fewer TF expressed in hESCs with motifs enriched identified linked putative CREs were identified ( E and S6F; ). HMGA1, an architectural chromatin protein that previously has been shown to be highly expressed in hESCs and can prevent differentiation ( ), showed both high expression and motif enrichment in Day 0 cells with representative sequence logo ( G).

## Exploration of single-cell data using interactive webtools
It is generally necessary to have expertise in bioinformatics for the analysis of large single-cell sequence data analysis. Open-access interfaces based on open-source tools enabled us to make our scRNA- and scATAC-seq data available to more people, abiding by the Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reusability (FAIR) principles ( ; ).The users can explore scRNA-seq data in hESCNeuroDiffscRNA and plot high resolution figures of their genes of interest under seven different tabs ( A–S7H; ). This includes exploration of 1) Gene expression UMAPS as illustrated for POU5F1 and NTRK1; 2) gene co-expression analysis, here shown for PHC1/PHC2 and NEUROG1/NTRK1; 3) different gene and cluster expression configurations, such as heatmaps, violin-, box-, proportion- and bubble plots. The platform also allows for correlation with other published gene expression datasets ( H).
To exemplify the web-interface, we focus on TFs ZIC2 and ZIC4 ( ). ZIC proteins are known for their role in proliferation and early neuronal developmental processes ( ; ). Global expression analysis shows that ZIC2 is present at Day 0 and peaks at Day 7, whereas expression of ZIC4, mostly undetectable at early timepoints, appears at Day 13 and peaks at Day 20 ( A). DNAm levels at the CpGs in the ZIC2 locus were stable, whereas DNAm of 13 CpGs in the ZIC4 locus were positively or negatively correlated with gene expression across differentiation ( B). Differential expression of ZIC2 and ZIC4 across individual cells at Day 0, 7, 13 and 20 in UMAPs ( C) can be compared and correlated with TFs important in the neuronal differentiation protocol ( C).
 The scATAC-seq data can be explored in “hESC Neuro Differentiation scATAC seq” (hESCNeuroDiffscATAC) ( I–S7N; ). Users can visualize chromatin accessibility, motif enrichment or integration of scATAC-seq with scRNA-seq in different UMAPs ( I). The webtool enables investigation of gene score and motif matrix, showing the representative sequence logo calculated from open regions. (gene examples at J). Chromatin opening can be explored across the genome for different clusters, as shown for SOX2 and POU5F1 or in different heatmaps ( K–S7N; ). Pseudotime trajectories or peak-to-gene linkage can be viewed as heatmaps, which define linked chromatin opening peaks with promoters of expressed genes ( ) and may deduce enhancer promoter interactions ( ). Gene score and gene integration analysis showed that ZIC2 and ZIC4 were active in different cells ( D) whereas their footprints and representative sequence logos were identified. Our 4D approach highlights the epigenetic regulation and gene expression of these genes using this neuronal differentiation protocol.

## Discussion
Here we present comprehensive multi-omics analyses to characterize a 2D neuronal differentiation protocol from pluripotent hESCs towards a ventrally committed, telencephalic population of progenitors, mature and immature neurons. We assessed stage-to-stage transition using ddPCR and immunofluorescence imaging and used bulk RNA-seq and scRNA-seq to validate gene expression and cell populations over time. The scATAC-seq and DNAm analyses further characterized the epigenetic and gene regulatory landscapes. We have identified cis-regulatory elements and DNA binding TFs that regulate neuronal differentiation gene expression programs.
The deconvolution of early human neuronal differentiation at the level of molecular regulation provides insight to an otherwise inaccessible developmental window. Animal models are valuable, but evidence shows that the human neocortex develops under the effect of additional mechanism ( ; ; ). Thus, neuronal differentiation studies from PSCs provide an alternative method to characterize developmental transcriptome trajectories and the roles of specific genes in human brain formation and patterning.
To specify the patterning and cell maturation identities, we followed up the trajectories of major TFs ( ). Ventral telencephalic markers, such as EMX2 and ASCL1, were already expressed at the end of Stage II, whereas dorsal markers such as EMX1 and NEUROG2 were absent. Absence of expression of HOXB2, PAX7, and GBX2, confirmed that self-patterning after neural induction, had no effect on lineage commitment.
GO analyses revealed stage dependent enrichment of biological processes correlated to neurogenesis, pattern specification, signaling and neurotransmitter regulation, migration, synaptic organization and neuronal maturation. The DNAm analyses showed alternating, stage-dependent changes for various patterning genes and TFs important to neurogenesis. In most developmentally regulated genes involved in neuronal lineage commitment, DNAm levels decreased on transcriptional activation and increased for genes becoming repressed during the time of differentiation. We also observed that sometimes downregulation of gene expression in the self-patterning stage might intersect the upregulation of gene expression seen both in stage I of neural induction of hESCs and during maturation at stage III. This could be because of the combined effect of non-CpG and CpG DNAm implicated in the regulation of RNA splicing in ESCs and neurons, respectively ( ; ). Non-CpG DNAm accumulates in neurons during synaptogenesis and synaptic pruning ( ), and CpH DNAm is associated with transcriptional repression ( ; ). Whether and how CpH DNAm plays a role in self patterning following the LSX induction is not known, and future studies are needed to explore this. Furthermore, the in vitro model for DNAm changes presented here is advantageous for neuropharmacological studies. Whether these changes can be translated to distinct early developmental events, cannot be ascertained. The direction of causality of epigenetic regulation for early brain development can, however, further correlate in vitro models to sets of open cis-regulatory elements and the regulation of TF-centered networks. The identification of common DNAm modification sites and chromatin openness regions may present candidate loci for future studies of early human development and may advance translational studies of the impact of drugs used early in human pregnancy.
The effect of loss of pluripotency towards neuralization, irrespective of the intermediate timepoints, was investigated through an integrative analysis of the scATAC- and scRNA-seq. We used ArchR ( ) for this analysis as this pipeline was flexible for small scATAC-seq and scRNA-seq datasets. The juxtaposition of the transcriptome to the regulatory elements in ESCs and differentiating Day 20 cells allowed us to infer neuronal gene regulatory network information.
We identified linked sets of genes and putative CREs unique to hESCs and Day 20 that enabled us to infer epigenome regulation. Less than 2.7% of the putative CREs identified in Day 0 or Day 20 overlapped with the annotated ENSEMBL enhancers. However, our functional assessment of the potential CREs suggests that we have identified new enhancers specific for neuronal differentiation. A greater number of expression linked putative CREs was identified for Day 20 than in the more homogenous hESCs, and the functional annotations for the linked analysis correlates with the BPs from differential analysis of RNA-seq and DNAm. Our multi-omics approach showed that the in vitro 2D neuronal differentiation protocol recapitulates stages of neuronal progenitor proliferation and specification. Thousands of transient chromatin accessible regions linked to expressed genes have been mapped in early human brain development ( ; , ; ). Using the same correlation based approach for scATAC-seq and scRNA-seq integration, we were able to compare CRE-linked genes that were active in Day 20 with CRE-linked genes from human brain tissue, at weeks 16 to 24 after conception ( ). A total of 68% linked genes from the early human brain single-cell pseudotime integration overlapped with the Day 20 CRE-linked genes. Moreover, we show that the genomic location of some of the putative CREs for neuronal genes overlapped with active early human brain enhancers assessed in transgenic mouse embryos ( ). Future work need to establish the functional role of the predicted Day 20 CREs in neuronal differentiation. Analyses of datasets from studies such as ours could define the epigenetic regulatory programs preceding and regulating gene expression during cortical development. The causal direction of epigenetic regulation in early brain development was further corroborated with the in vitro differentiation via sets of open CREs and the regulation of neuronal TF-centered networks. However, only 10% of regulatory TFs identified in putative CREs in the same pseudotime developmental brain program overlapped with Day 20 mapped regulatory TFs ( ) ( ). Buenostro et al. have reported observations that epigenetic regulation are found to precede transcription ( ). We suggest that some of the detected chromatin accessible regions in Day 20 cells define gene expression for future cellular states. Our comprehensive gene expression and epigenetic regulation network is a resource for future studies including, but not restricted to, the effect of specific disease variants or drugs in early brain physiology and development.

## Strengths of study
Although numerous studies have used the LSX cocktail for neural induction, to our knowledge this is the first study that has shared all scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq data in such transparent and interactive format. Thus the strength of this study is the high quality data and the presentation of our single-cell data in two visualization tools, ShinyCell and in-house developed ShinyArchR.UiO ( ; ), that are openly available for users. These tools allow the users to explore candidate genes and utilize a comprehensive set of functionalities, beyond the analysis presented. These tools enable insight into the molecular and structural partners of stage-specific markers and time-stamped TFs, their transcriptional regulation and cell cluster identities. Programming scripts for data analysis are made available and can be easily customized for further studies and the incorporation of other data.

## Limitations of the study
The protocol described is an in vitro study, and as such, it is difficult to know how well it reflects the in vivo dynamics. Furthermore, this study has several limitations at the level of neuronal subtype characterization, as we did not assess neuropeptide diversity or secretion and the membrane electrochemical and electrophysiological maturation properties were not evaluated. Protein quantification or intracellular localization of markers and trajectories were also beyond the scope of this multi-omics characterization. A limitation of scATAC-seq is the relatively low genome-per-cell coverage, thus open chromatin regions relevant for the individual cell or cell populations may have been missed. Lastly, we were unable to accurately classify the cells in the G0 phase. This challenge is not a limitation of this particular study, highlighting the need to better understand G0 dynamics. The outcome would be the design of tools that can accurately predict the cell cycle phase in differentiating and differentiated neurons.
In conclusion, in this study we describe the characterization of a 2D neuronal differentiation protocol where the unparalleled power of multi-omics was used to decipher fate specification. We assessed the functional regulation of transcription factors and developmentally regulated genes, from loss of pluripotency towards neuronal differentiation. Integration of scATAC-seq and scRNA-seq provide invaluable insight on the complexity of fate decisions and enable other researchers to fine-tune future studies. Finally, the reader has access to the single-cell sequencing data in two searchable, user-friendly webtools to visualize intra- and inter- time point and cell cluster regulation, interactively.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact Ragnhild Eskeland (Ragnhild.Eskeland@medisin.uio.no).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Experimental model and subject details

## Human embryonic stem cell culture and maintenance and neuronal differentiation protocol
The hESC line HS360 (Stockholm Medical Biobank, Sweden, KIe009-A) ( ; ) was used in this study. hESCs were maintained in Essential 8™ Medium (Thermo Fisher), in feeder-free conditions on Geltrex Matrix solution (Thermo Fisher) pre-coated culture plates and media was replaced daily. The full description of hESC cultivation and a step-by-step description of the 2D neuronal differentiation protocol, all stock solutions and dilution recipes, coating instructions and times, critical points of the protocol, a Day-by-Day timeline of high-resolution brightfield images, immunocytochemistry, qRT-PCR marker genes for HS360 are available at STAR Protocols ( ). Brightfield images were acquired on an EVOS® FL Cell Imaging System AMF4300 (Thermo Fisher).

## Methods details

## Immunofluorescence analysis
In brief, cells grown on 13mm glass coverslips, were washed once and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature (RT). After 3 washes, the cells were permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X-100 (Thermo Fisher) in blocking buffer containing 2% BSA (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.01% Tween in 1×PBS for 30minat RT, washed 3 times, and blocked with 10% horse serum for 30 min. Primary antibodies were diluted (as in KRT) in 1×PBS containing 0.03% Triton X-100, and coverslips were incubated overnight at 4°C. Next, coverslips were equilibrated at RT for 2 h and washed 3 times. The secondary antibodies were diluted (see ) in 0.01% Tween-20 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% horse serum (BioNordika) in 1×PBS, and coverslips were incubated for 1 h at RT. The coverslips were washed 3 times and mounted on microscope slides using the ProLong™ Gold Antifade Mountant containing DAPI (Fisher Scientific) to counterstain cell nuclei. Washing steps lasted 15 min and used 1×PBS. Images were obtained with a DeltaVision high resolution widefield microscope (GE Life Sciences, USA) using the Resolve 3D software and 100×1.45NA oil objective and processed using the open-source software Fiji ( ).

## DNA/RNA isolation
Genomic DNA and total RNA were isolated by direct lysis in the culture well followed by column-based isolation using RNA/DNA purification kit (Norgen Biotek). The RNase-Free DNase I Kit (Norgen Biotek) was applied for on-column removal of genomic DNA contamination from RNA isolates. Three RNA isolates were processed using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) followed by DNase-treatment using RNAse-Free DNase Set (Qiagen). All isolations were done according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Nucleic acid quantification was performed using Qubit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), purity was measured using Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), whereas RNA and DNA integrity was assessed using 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies) and 4200 TapeStation (Agilent Technologies), respectively.

## Droplet digital RT-PCR and RNA expression analysis
Reverse transcription of total RNA was performed using QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen). Subsequent ddPCR reactions were set up using ddPCR Supermix for Probes (No dUTP) (BioRad) and Taqman assays (Thermo Fisher) or Universal Probes (Roche) in combination with target primers (Eurofins) as outlined in KRT/Oligonucleotides. Droplets for droplet PCR amplification were generated using the QX200 Droplet Generator (BioRad). Data acquisition and primary analysis was done using the QX200 Droplet Reader (BioRad) and QuantaSoft software (BioRad). All steps were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To calculate the number of target copies per ng RNA input, samples were normalized using RPL30 and RAF1 as normalization genes ( ). Results were visualized in R using the tidyverse package ( ). Statistical comparisons for ddRT-PCR and RNA expression analysis were performed in R using t-test in ggpubr package v.0.4.0 ( ).

## Global RNA-seq
The sequencing library was prepared with TruSeq Stranded mRNA Library Prep (Illumina) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The 19 libraries were pooled at equimolar concentrations and sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 S1 flow cell (Illumina) with 100 bp paired end reads. The quality of sequencing reads was assessed using BBMap ( ), and adapter sequences and low-quality reads were removed. The sequencing reads were then mapped to the GRCh38.p5 index using HISAT2 ( ). Mapped paired end reads were counted to protein coding genes using featureCounts ( ). Differential expression analysis was conducted in R version 3.5.1 ( ) using SARTools v.1.6.8 ( ) and the DESeq2 v.1.22.1 ( ), and genes were considered significantly differentially expressed with an FDR <0.01. Normalized counts were visualized using the tidyverse package v.1.3.0 ( ). The heatmaps were generated using the pheatmap package version 1.0.12 ( ). The Wald test was used to calculate p-values and Benjamini-Hochberg was used to correct for multiple testing. The gene ontology (GO) analysis of a ranked list of differential expressed genes were performed using GSEA software ( ) looking at biological process (BP) terms.

## Illumina EPIC array
DNA methylation status of 22 samples was assessed using the Infinium MethylationEPIC BeadChip v.1.0_B3 (Illumina). Quality control and pre-processing of the raw data was performed in R using Minfi v.1.36.0 ( ). No samples were removed because of poor quality (detection p values > 0.05). Background correction was performed using NOOB method ( ) and β values (ratio of methylated signal divided by the sum of the methylated and unmethylated signal) were normalized using functional normalization ( ). Probes with unreliable measurements (detection p values > 0.01) (n = 8,818) and cross-reactive probes ( ) (n = 43,256) were then removed, resulting in a final dataset consisting of 814,112 probes and 22 samples. Probes were annotated with Illumina Human Methylation EPIC annotation 1.0 B5 (hg38). Differential methylation (DM) analysis was performed on the M values (log2 of the β values) using the Limma package ( ), and CpGs were considered significantly differentially methylated with an FDR <0.01. GO analysis was performed using top 10% DM CpGs (DMCs) as input to GOMETH in the missMethyl package version 1.24.0 ( ) for BP terms.

## Integration of RNA-seq and DNA methylation data
Data from matching DNA and RNA samples (extracted from the same wells, n = 16) were subsetted to undergo statistical integration. Multi-Omics Regulation (MORE) ( ) was used to identify CpGs that regulate gene expression by applying Generalized Linear Models: normalized counts for differentially expressed genes (from DEseq2) were used as the response variable, CpG M-values (from Minfi) and experimental covariates (Day) were used as predictors. First, CpGs with low variability were filtered and multicollinearity was reduced by grouping highly correlated CpGs. Variable selection was then performed with Elastic Net regression and stepwise (two-ways backward) regression. CpGs were considered to significantly regulate gene expression when the regression coefficient p-value was <0.05. Significant CpG regulators of gene expression were visualized using the Tidyverse package ( ) using beta values (n = 22) and normalized counts (n = 19) from all samples.

## Collection of cells and scRNA-seq
HS360 hESCs were differentiated in two separate time-course experiments. Cells harvested on Days 0, 7, 13 and 20 were washed twice in wells with 1xPBS and detached using Accutase (STEMCELL Technologies) at 37°C for 7 min. Cells were triturated 10–15 times to separate into single cells and transferred to centrifuge tubes containing the appropriate base media with 0.05% BSA (Sigma-Aldrich). Counts were performed using Countess II FL Cell Counter (Thermo Fisher Scientific), cells were centrifuged at 300x g for 5 min and the supernatant was discarded. Cell pellets were then resuspended in base medium containing 0.05% BSA and cell aggregates were filtered out using MACS SmartStrainers (Miltenyi). The cells were recounted and processed within 1 h on the 10x Chromium controller (10x Genomics). Approximately 2,300 cells were loaded per channel on the Chromium Chip B (10x Genomics) to give an estimated recovery of 1,400 cells. The Chromium Single Cell 3′ Library & Gel Bead Kit v3 (10x Genomics) and Chromium i7 Multiplex Kit (10x Genomics) were used to generate scRNA-seq libraries, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries from 16 samples were pooled together based on molarity and sequenced on a NextSeq 550 (Illumina) with 28 cycles for read 1, 8 cycles for the I7 index and 91 cycles for read 2. For the second sequencing run, libraries were pooled again based on the number of recovered cells to give a similar number of reads per cell for each sample (33,000–44,000 reads/cell).

## scRNA-seq data analysis
The Cell Ranger 3.1.0 Gene Expression pipeline (10x Genomics) was used to demultiplex the raw base-call files and convert them into FASTQ files. The FASTQ files were aligned to the GRCh38–3.0.0 human reference genome, and Cell Ranger count was used with default parameters for computing read counts for Days 0, 7, 13 and 20.
We utilized Harmony for batch correction after merging and performing log normalization on the two replicates ( ). We aggregated sequenced replicates for each day into single datasets using Cell Ranger Aggr command. The Seurat Package v.4.0. ( ) was used to perform quality control and normalization on the count matrices obtained after the aggregation. The gene count per cell, UMI count per cell and percentage of mitochondrial and ribosomal transcripts were computed using the functions of the Seurat package. Low quality cells expressing few genes (less than 200) were excluded from the downstream analysis. Genes expressed in less than three cells were removed. Duplicates, dead cells and cells with greater than 5 median absolute deviations (MADs) for mitochondrial reads were filtered out ( ). We used the MAD-based definition of outliers, using the Isoutlier function of scater package version 1.0.4, to remove putative low-quality cells from the dataset. For normalization we used scTRANSFORM to better understand cell to cell heterogeneity after performing cell cycle regression analysis ( ; ). Counts were adjusted for cell-specific sampling (‘normalized’) using the scTRANSFORM function with regression of cell cycle genes and mitochondrial content. To cluster the cells, we used resolution of 0.55, obtained by determining the optimum number of clusters (cell grouped together sharing similar expression profiles) in the dataset using the Clustree R package ( ) ( B and S4C). SingleR ( ) was used to annotate the cells against two different reference data sets. Global RNA-seqdata from Human Primary Cell Atlas was accessed using the celldex ( ), and scRNA-seq data from a Human Brain dataset ( ) was accessed using the scRNAseq R package . Cell types with < 15 cells annotated were excluded from the plots ( F and D). FindMarkers from the Seurat R package was used to perform differential expression analysis between days.

## Cell-cycle state assessment using scRNA-seq data
The cell cycle state assessment was performed using a gene set and scoring system previously reported ( ). The S and G2M scores were calculated based on 43 S phase-specific genes and 54 G2 or M phase-specific genes and the Seurat package Cell cycle scoring function was used for calculation of actual scores.

## Clustering and dimensionality reduction
The Resolution for finding clusters were computed using scClustviz SNN- based clustering ( ). Then, principal component analysis was performed using RunPCA function of the Seurat package. For UMAP visualization, clusters were identified using FindNeighbors and FindClusters Seurat function using resolution 0.55, followed by the RunUMAP function across samples with the same parameters. UMAP preserves aspects of global structure in larger datasets and was therefore preferred for visualization over t-SNE ( ). We used FindMarkers or FindAllMarkers functions to compute differentially expressed genes between the clusters.

## CytoTRACE
We utilized CytoTRACE (Cellular (Cyto) Trajectory Reconstruction Analysis) ( ) with gene counts for all datasets (Merged Days 0, 7, 13 and 20 and Day 0 and Day 20) for prediction of differentiation state of cells from scRNA-seq data. In short, CytoTRACE leverages single cell gene counts, covariant gene expression and local neighbourhoods of transcriptionally similar cells to predict ordered differentiation states from scRNA-seq data. CytoTRACE uses smoothing steps within the dataset to remove confounding factors associated with direct comparison of genes expressed by each cell in cross-study differences in depth and sensitivity.

## scATAC-seq Library Preparation and sequencing
Cells from HS360 hESCs were differentiated in one time-course experiment, and at Day 0 and Day 20, the cells were washed twice with 1xPBS and detached to single cell suspension by application of Accutase (STEMCELL Technologies) at 37°C for 7 min. The detached cells were washed with appropriate base media with added 0.04% BSA (Sigma-Aldrich) and filtered using MACS SmartStrainers (Miltenyi Biotech) to remove cell aggregates. Nuclei isolation was done according to the 10x Genomics protocol CG000169 (Rev D) using 2 min of incubation in lysis buffer diluted to 0.1x and 0.5x for Day 0 and Day 20 cells, respectively. We used the Countess II FL Cell Counter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to quantify nuclei and confirm complete lysis and microscopy to confirm high nuclei quality. Nuclei were further processed on the 10x Chromium controller (10x Genomics) using Next GEM Chip H Single Cell Kit (10x Genomics), Next GEM Single Cell ATAC Library & Gel Bead Kit v1.1 (10 x Genomics) and Chromium i7 Multiplex Kit N Set A (10x Genomics) according to the Next GEM Single Cell ATAC Reagent Kits v1.1 User Guide (CG000209, Rev C). The targeted nuclei recovery was 5,000 nuclei per sample. The resulting 4 sample libraries were sequenced on a NovaSeq Sp flow cell (Illumina) with 50 cycles for read 1, 8 cycles for the i7 index read, 16 cycles for the i5 index read and 49 cycles for read 2.

## scATAC sequencing analysis
Cell Ranger ATAC version 1.2.0 with reference genome GRCh38–1.2.0 was used to pre-process scATAC-seq raw sequencing data into FASTQ files. Single cell accessibility counts for the cells were generated from reads using the ‘cellranger-atac count’ pipeline. Reference genome HG38 used for alignment and generation of single-cell accessibility counts was obtained from the 10x Genomics (https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-atac/software/downloads/). Downstream analysis of the scATAC-seq data was performed using the R package ArchR v1.0.1 ( ). A tile matrix of 500-bp bins was constructed after quality control, removal of low-quality cells and doublet removal using the doubletfinder function of ArchR. The ArchR Project contained the filtered cells that had a TSS enrichment below 3 and <1000 fragments. ArchR has implemented Harmony for batch correction ( ). A layered dimensionality reduction approach utilizing Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) and Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) applied on Genome-wide tile matrix. Uniform Manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) was performed to visualize data in 2D space. Louvain Clustering methods implemented in R package Seurat ( ) was used for clustering of the single-cell accessibility profiles. We also obtained links (peak2genelinks) between gene TSS and putative CRE’s to expression profiles of genes from ArchR. The peak2genelinks pair represents enhanced gene interactions. We correlated the putative CREs to a list of Human Regulatory Regions (GRCh38.p13) from Ensembl Regulatory Build ( ). The active enhancer sequences for ASCL1 and ID4 were extracted from the VISTA Enhancer Browser (https://enhancer.lbl.gov/) ( ) for visualization with putative D20 CREs in UCSC genome browser ( ). We next performed GREAT analysis on D0 and D20 potential CREs on each timepoint separately to identify biological processes associated with peak2genelinks clustered together with 5 k-means ( ). Positive TF regulators were identified, given JASPAR motif and accessibility is correlated with their gene activity either on a gene score matrix (gene expression) or on gene integration matrix (integrated scATAC-seq with scRNA-seq experiments, storing matched scRNA profiles).

## Single-cell ATAC sequencing analysis
Cross platform linkage of scRNA-Seq data with a scATAC-seq data unconstrained and constrained integration aims to align cells from scATAC-seq and scRNA-seq experiments by combining them both together. A constrained integration can improve the quality of cross-platform alignment by limiting the alignment search space based on prior knowledge of the celltype. ArchR performs an unconstrained integration to determine preliminary cluster identities, followed by a refined constrained integration based on this prior knowledge ( ). As part of the scATAC-seq and scRNA-seq integration, the GeneIntegration matrix containing linked gene expression data is added to HDF5 formatted arrow files. The GeneIntegrationMatrix enabled us to compare the linked gene expression with the gene score estimates of gene expression. The genes associated with known and new marker genes related to pluripotency, neuronal differentiation, and cell cycle of single cell RNA-seq were constrained and used as new labels of integrated clusters.

## Pseudo-bulk replicates and peak calling
Using ArchR’s addReproduciblePeakSet() function utilizing MACS2 for peak calling, we created a reproducible MACS2-derived merged peak set ( ; ). The new peak matrix was added to the ArchR project using AddpeakMatrix function on MACS2-derived merged peak set. AddMarkerFeatures() was used to compute unique peaks for each cluster or group of clusters. Using the markerHeatmap() function we visualized marker peaks in heatmaps and the Plotbrowsertrack function to visualize the tracks. Motif enrichment was used to predict what TFs may mediate the binding events that create the accessible chromatin sites. By examining the differential peak opening in the different cell populations, we can identify motifs that have a high level of enrichment. A motif’s presence in a peak set was determined using the AddmotifAnnotation function. PeakAnnotation was performed using peakAnnoEnrichment() on Jaspar2020 ( ). To compute representative seq logo for the motifs from position weight matrix we used the ggSeqlogo package ( ).

## ChromVAR deviations enrichment with ArchR
ChromVAR deviations for each single cell were calculated using the “addDeviationsMatrix” function ( ). To visualize transcription factor (TF) footprinting we used the “plotFootprints” function with the normalization method “subtract” which subtracts the Tn5 bias from the ATAC-seq footprint.

## TF footprinting
We used the ArchR addCoAccessibility() function to store the peak co-accessibility information and the getCoAccessibility function to retrieve it at the loop ( ). Peak co-accessibility is a correlation of accessibility between two peaks across many cells. We performed peak-coaccessibility analysis to predict regulatory interactions in the scATAC-seq dataset and the integration with scRNA-seq data such that upstream CRE activity can be predicted through peak-to-gene linkage analyses. We also used the Peak-to-gene linkage analysis to plot Peak2GeneHeatmap, containing two side-by-side heatmaps, one pertaining to scATAC-seq gene score data and the other to scRNA-seq gene expression data. In addition, we analyzed the enrichment of TF binding motifs using the peakAnnoEnrichment function implemented in ArchR ( ).

## Pseudo-time trajectory analysis
We constructed a cellular trajectory spanning constrained integrated clusters R0, R2, R7, R9 to R12, using the addTrajectory function implemented in ArchR on GeneScore, GeneIntegration, Peak and Tilematrix ( ).

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed in R version 4.1.2 ( ) using SARTools v.1.6.8 ( ), DESeq2 v.1.22.1 ( ), Limma ( ), ArchR ( ), Seurat ( ; ), MORE ( ) and ggpubr package v.0.4.0 ( ). Details are described in the relevant methods sections above.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Marit Ledsaak (University of Oslo), Naima Azouzi (University of Oslo), Knut Waagan (University of Oslo) and Akshay Akshay (University of Bern) for technical assistance. The majority of informatic analysis was performed at Saga super computing resources (Project NN9632K) provided by UNINETT Sigma2—the National Infrastructure for High Performance Computing and Data Storage in Norway. The sequencing service was provided by the Norwegian Sequencing Centre (www.sequencing.uio.no), a national technology platform hosted by Oslo University Hospital and the University of Oslo and supported by the “Infrastructure” programs of the Research Council of Norway and the Southeastern Regional Health Authorities PharmaTox Strategic Research Initiative was supported by Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Oslo. We acknowledge funding from Research Council of Norway 262484 (R.E.), 241117 (R.L.), and 287953 (A.S.); the Swedish Research Council 2019-01157 (A.S.) and grants from the Swedish Brain FO2019-0087 (A.S.) and the Freemasons Children's House of Stockholm (A.S.). We thank University of Oslo for open access publication support. The graphical abstract was generated in Biorender.com.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, A.S., K.G., R.L., and R.E.; Methodology, A.S., M.S., R.L., S.M., K.G., R.E., A.Sh., M.L., and M.F.; Writing – Original Draft, A.S., M.S., A.Sh., M.L., K.G., R.L., and R.E.; Writing – Review & Editing, A.S., M.S. R.L., K.G., R.E., A.Sh., M.L., M.F., and G.A.; Software, Formal Analysis, and Visualization, A.Sh., M.S., K.G., P.M.B., R.L., and R.E.; Investigation and Validation, A.S., M.F., M.S., M.L., S.M., and R.E.; Funding, R.L., A.S., and R.E., Supervision, R.L., K.G., A.S., and R.E. Resources G.A., R.L., and R.E.

## Declaration of interest
The authors declare no competing interest.

Published: November 18, 2022

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.105279.

## Contributor Information
Athina Samara, Email: athina.samara@ki.se.
Robert Lyle, Email: robert.lyle@medisin.uio.no.
Ragnhild Eskeland, Email: ragnhild.eskeland@medisin.uio.no.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Tables S1 and S7

## Table S2. GSEA for all timepoints in the protocol, related to Figs. 2 and S2

## Table S3. Overview of significant CpG regulators of genes, related to Figs. 3C and S3F and S3G

## Table S4. Quality control, cell metadata, and cluster information, related to Figs. 4 and S4
(A) Cell Ranger QC output. (B) Cell numbers and cluster populations (%) per timepoint. (C–G) Differential gene expression analysis between Days 0, 7, 13 and 20. (H) Percent overlap significantly differentially expressed genes between RNA-seq and scRNA-seq, related to Fig. 4.

## Table S5. Inferred peak to gene links, TF motif and GO-term enrichment of Day 20
(A) Inferred peak to gene links Day 20. (B) GOProfiler GO terms for Day 20 K- mean clusters 1–5. (C–G) Gene ontology annotation for peak2genelink k-mean clusters 1–5 for Day 20 using Great Tool. (H) Comparison of linked genes (P2G links) of Day 20 with Trevino et al., 2021, Cell Table S3. (I) TF motif enrichment in Day 20 five interaction clusters (k-mean clusters 1–5). (J) TF motif enrichment in Day 20 five interaction clusters (k-mean clusters 1–5) compared to Trevino et al., 2021, Cell TF motif enrichment (Trevino Fig. 3G), related to Fig. 6.

## Table S6. Inferred peak to gene links, TF motif and GO-term enrichment of Day 0
(A) Inferred peak to gene links Day 0; (B) GOProfiler GO terms for Day 0 K-mean clusters 1–5; (C–G) Gene ontology annotation for peak2genelink K-mean clusters 1–5 for Day 0 using Great Tool; TF motif enrichment in Day 0 five interaction clusters (k-mean clusters 1–5), related to Fig. S6.

## Data and code availability

•All original code has been deposited at https://github.com/EskelandLab/scNeuronaldiff. DOIs are listed in the .
•The single-cell RNA-seq/ATAC-seq, RNA-seq and DNA-methylation data reported in this study cannot be deposited in a public repository because the data could be potentially traced back to a single embryo and the donor. To request access, contact the lead author and the Stockholm Medical Biobank. It may be required to establish a Personal Data processing (PDP) Agreement and/or Data Transfer Agreement (DTA) according to General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
•Processed datasets have been deposited at NCBI’s GEO Super series GSE192858. Accession numbers are listed in the . Single-cell data are shared for visualization in two open access webtools at https://cancell.medisin.uio.no: https://cancell.medisin.uio.no/scrna/hescneurodiff/ and https://cancell.medisin.uio.no/scatac/hescneurodiff.archr/

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Tables S1 and S7

## Table S2. GSEA for all timepoints in the protocol, related to Figs. 2 and S2

## Table S3. Overview of significant CpG regulators of genes, related to Figs. 3C and S3F and S3G

## Table S4. Quality control, cell metadata, and cluster information, related to Figs. 4 and S4
(A) Cell Ranger QC output. (B) Cell numbers and cluster populations (%) per timepoint. (C–G) Differential gene expression analysis between Days 0, 7, 13 and 20. (H) Percent overlap significantly differentially expressed genes between RNA-seq and scRNA-seq, related to Fig. 4.

## Table S5. Inferred peak to gene links, TF motif and GO-term enrichment of Day 20
(A) Inferred peak to gene links Day 20. (B) GOProfiler GO terms for Day 20 K- mean clusters 1–5. (C–G) Gene ontology annotation for peak2genelink k-mean clusters 1–5 for Day 20 using Great Tool. (H) Comparison of linked genes (P2G links) of Day 20 with Trevino et al., 2021, Cell Table S3. (I) TF motif enrichment in Day 20 five interaction clusters (k-mean clusters 1–5). (J) TF motif enrichment in Day 20 five interaction clusters (k-mean clusters 1–5) compared to Trevino et al., 2021, Cell TF motif enrichment (Trevino Fig. 3G), related to Fig. 6.

## Table S6. Inferred peak to gene links, TF motif and GO-term enrichment of Day 0
(A) Inferred peak to gene links Day 0; (B) GOProfiler GO terms for Day 0 K-mean clusters 1–5; (C–G) Gene ontology annotation for peak2genelink K-mean clusters 1–5 for Day 0 using Great Tool; TF motif enrichment in Day 0 five interaction clusters (k-mean clusters 1–5), related to Fig. S6.

## Data Availability Statement

•All original code has been deposited at https://github.com/EskelandLab/scNeuronaldiff. DOIs are listed in the .
•The single-cell RNA-seq/ATAC-seq, RNA-seq and DNA-methylation data reported in this study cannot be deposited in a public repository because the data could be potentially traced back to a single embryo and the donor. To request access, contact the lead author and the Stockholm Medical Biobank. It may be required to establish a Personal Data processing (PDP) Agreement and/or Data Transfer Agreement (DTA) according to General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
•Processed datasets have been deposited at NCBI’s GEO Super series GSE192858. Accession numbers are listed in the . Single-cell data are shared for visualization in two open access webtools at https://cancell.medisin.uio.no: https://cancell.medisin.uio.no/scrna/hescneurodiff/ and https://cancell.medisin.uio.no/scatac/hescneurodiff.archr/