SOURCE URL: https://www.elsevier.com/about/policies-and-standards/pricing
FINAL URL: https://www.elsevier.com/about/policies-and-standards/pricing
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=utf-8
======================================================================
Journal pricing | Elsevier policy Skip to main content Unfortunately we don't fully support your browser. If you have the option to, please upgrade to a newer version or use Mozilla Firefox , Microsoft Edge , Google Chrome , or Safari 14 or newer. If you are unable to, and need support, please send us your feedback .

 Academic & Government Academic & Government 

 Health Health 

 Industry Industry 

 Insights Insights 

 About About 

 Support Support 

 Security Security 

 Publish with us
 
 Open Search 
 Location Selector 
 
 Sign in to products 

 menu 

 Elsevier policies 

 Home 

 About 

 Elsevier policies 

 Journal pricing

 Pricing

 Price setting 

 Publishing charges 

 Subscription prices 

 GPOA Pilot 

 Previous 
 Next 

 Transparent price setting
 Elsevier publishes journal articles under two separate models to suit author preferences:
 Subscription articles funded by payments for reading made by subscribing individuals or institutions

 Open access articles funded by payments for publishing made by authors, their institution or funding bodies, commonly known as Article Publishing Charges (APCs)

 We calculate pricing for each of these models separately. Subscription prices are set excluding open access articles; in other words, open access articles are not factored in when setting subscription prices. This fundamental principle is enshrined in our strict no double dipping policy (see below).
 At Elsevier, we publish more articles and at higher quality relative to other major publishers, yet our average list price per subscription article remains lower (by 2-3 times) than that of others. Since 2010, the number of articles submitted to Elsevier journals grew by 11%, and the volume of subscription articles published increased by 5% (compound average growth rate 2010-2021). Our average list price per subscription article grew by just 0.2% over that time (2011-2021) across our entire portfolio of journals.

 Journal article price

 Average list price per subscription article 
Indexed weighted average of list prices for 2021 subscription year versus articles published in 2021 taking Elsevier as baseline (Source: Publisher websites, Scopus data)

 Average list price per subscription article over time 
5-year (2017-2021) and 10-year (2012-2021) compound annual growth rates (Source: Publisher websites, Scopus data)

 Key facts on article growth, value and quality opens in new tab/window 

 Frequently asked questions on pricing

 What do fees pay for?
 
 The fees that authors pay help to support the extensive work that goes into the editorial review, peer review and publishing process that ensures research is reliable and helps to accelerate progress for society
 Our 2,700 journals enhance the record of scientific knowledge by applying high standards of quality in everything they publish and ensuring trusted research can be accessed, shared and built upon by others. In 2021, we received 2.5 million research papers from authors. These were carefully reviewed by our 2,000-strong in-house editorial teams in collaboration with 29,000 editors and 1.4 million expert reviewers around the world, resulting in over 600,000 articles being enhanced, indexed, published and promoted following a peer review.

 Can you be more transparent in what you charge?
 
 We are constantly striving to be more transparent in all aspects of what Elsevier does, including pricing. We try to support requests for information within the bounds of financial reporting requirements and competition rules.

 How are we transparent for authors?
 
 We provide the price of publishing gold open access on each journal homepage and in 
 a central list opens in new tab/window 

 During the publication process, we automatically notify authors who are entitled to free or discounted gold open access, for example where there is an agreement with their institution or funder

 During the publication process, we automatically notify authors who are entitled to free or discounted gold open access because they are in a lower- or middle-income country — our APC waiver policy explains this process

 How are we transparent for librarians?
 
 We provide a range of information on our website opens in new tab/window about our pricing competitiveness; how our pricing corresponds to quality; and publishing model uptake across subscription and open access

 We publicly announce significant agreements, including our open access pilots

 We provide a list of our journal subscription prices 

 We describe the process we follow to calculate list prices

 We describe the process to ensure we do not double dip
 We also show the number of articles that are published gold open access, and the number which are financed through subscriptions, on each journal homepage, to allow librarians to validate this

 Do you double dip, i.e., charge for the same article twice?
 
 We do not ‘double dip’. We can be reimbursed for an article in two ways — through an Article Publishing Charge (APC) to publish the article and make it available to read by everyone, or a subscription fee to pay for reading the article. We either charge for publishing an article or reading an article but we never charge for the same article twice. We have a strict no double-dipping policy.

 How do you help authors who cannot afford to pay to be published?
 
 As part of our commitment to inclusion in science, we believe it is critical to support researchers from low and middle-income countries to publish gold open access, if they wish to do so. When publishing in fully open access journals, we fully waive all open access charges for authors from 69 countries ( Group A opens in new tab/window ) and give a 50% discount for authors from 57 countries ( Group B opens in new tab/window ).
 We offer a choice of journals with open access publishing charges ranging from $150 to $9,900. We will also consider requests for accommodations on a case by case basis for authors who are required to publish open access but do not have the financial means to do so. We provide high-quality subscription publishing options in our journals, so authors always have a choice of how they publish.

 If more authors are publishing gold open access, why don’t you reduce your subscription fees?
 
 Subscription fees are based on a range of factors, including the volume of subscription articles, the quality of a journal, journal usage and market and competitive considerations. When calculating subscription prices, we only take into account subscription articles; the number of articles published gold open access has no bearing on the way we set subscription fees.
 We publish more articles and at higher quality relative to other major publishers, yet our average list price per subscription article remains lower (by 2-3 times) than that of others. Since 2010, the number of articles submitted to Elsevier journals grew by 11%, and the volume of subscription articles published increased by 5% (compound average growth rate 2010-2021). Our average list price per subscription article grew by just 0.2% over that time (2011-2021) across our entire portfolio.
 See here for more information on Elsevier article volumes, value and quality.

 Article Publishing Charges (APCs)
 Irrespective of the publishing model chosen by the author, our goal is to ensure articles are published as quickly as possible, subject to appropriate quality controls, and widely disseminated.
 Where an author has chosen to publish open access, which typically involves the payment of an article publishing charge (APC) by the author, their institution or funding body, we make their article freely available immediately upon publication on ScienceDirect in perpetuity with the author’s chosen user license attached to it.
 Elsevier’s APCs are set on a per journal basis, fees range between approximately $200 and $11,400 US Dollars, excluding tax, with prices clearly displayed on our APC price list opens in new tab/window and on journal homepages.
 Adjustments in Elsevier’s APCs are under regular review and are subject to change. We set APCs based on the following criteria which are applied to open access articles only:
 Journal quality (as measured by journal quality Field Weighted Citation Impact Tier);

 The journal’s editorial and technical processes;

 Competitive considerations;

 Market conditions;

 Other revenue streams associated with the journal.

 A small percentage of titles may support more than one APC, for example when a journal supports one or more article types that require different APCs.
 We do not vary the APC prices for our proprietary journals based on the user license chosen by the author. However, we also publish journals on behalf of learned societies or other third parties that reserve the right to determine their own prices and pricing policies. Any deviations in pricing from Elsevier’s standard APC price list per journal will be clearly displayed on the journal’s homepage.
 Download APC prices opens in new tab/window 

 Retrospective open access policy 
 Authors who have published their article under the subscription model in a hybrid journal may be able to convert the article to open access, subject to payment of the associated article publishing charge (APC). Please contact us opens in new tab/window to make a retrospective open access request. 

 Fee waivers to support researchers
 Our goal is to effectively bridge the digital research divide and ensure that publishing in open access journals is accessible for authors in developing countries.
 We grant waivers in cases of genuine need, therefore we automatically apply APC waivers or discounts to those articles in gold open access journals for which all author groups are based in a country eligible for the Research4Life program opens in new tab/window . When publishing in fully open access journals, we fully waive all APCs for authors from 69 countries ( Group A opens in new tab/window ) and give a 50% discount for authors from 57 countries ( Group B opens in new tab/window ).
 If an author group from a non-Research4Life country cannot afford the APC to publish an article in a gold open access journal, we will consider individual waiver requests on a case-by-case basis at our discretion.
 Our waiving policy does not apply to hybrid journals. Authors publishing in hybrid journals can publish under the subscription model at no cost and make use of the Elsevier sharing policy .
 For patients and caregivers , we will consider individual waiver requests on a case-by-case basis.
 Open access agreements and funding body arrangements
 Elsevier supports over 2,000 institutions globally to publish open access through transformative agreements .
 We have established arrangements to help authors comply with the open access requirements of the major funding bodies and how they can be reimbursed for publication fees when publishing in Elsevier journals.
 Reimbursement policy
 To ensure Elsevier does not charge twice for the same article, we will fully refund an APC when alternative funding is provided for the open access article. For example, where an open access article is part of a Special Issue which is later made available in its entirety on an open access basis, such as through sponsorship by an organization, we will fully refund individual APCs paid by an author or on their behalf.
 Elsevier will offer a credit for use against a future open access publication in the following circumstances:
 A delay in delivering open access : When an article is not available open access on ScienceDirect by the time the issue in which the article is included is published in its final version, we will offer a credit for use against a future publication with Elsevier.

 Incorrect licensing : When an article is made freely available on Science Direct in final published form but does not display the author’s chosen user license due to our error, we will offer a credit for use against a future publication with Elsevier.

 No refund or credit will be offered in the following circumstances:
 Article retraction or removal : Elsevier has provided publishing services. The later retraction or removal of the article is typically for reasons beyond our control, and does not detract from the publishing services provided, nor from our ongoing maintenance of the scientific record, e.g., corrections to the record.

 Delays resulting from editorial decisions or author changes : These are a standard part of the publishing process.

 License changes : Where an author requests a change to the user license they initially chose we will endeavor to respond to these within 5 working days.

 Circumstances beyond our control : This may include, for example, where natural or other disasters prevent us from fulfilling our obligations.

 Article unavailable on another platform : Elsevier’s responsibility is to ensure that the definitive published versions of articles we publish are available on ScienceDirect, or any successor platform, in ways that are accessible to all. We provide APIs to enable third party platforms to manage this process themselves, for example to identify and pull gold open access articles or to update their platforms to reflect changes subsequently made to the article, such as author license choice changes, errata, and retractions. Elsevier is not responsible for ensuring third party repositories maintain accurate metadata and full-text.

 Subscription prices
 Elsevier publishes subscription articles whose publication is funded by payments that are made by subscribing individuals or institutions. Subscription prices are set independent of open access articles and open access articles are not included when calculating subscription prices. Subscription prices are calculated and adjusted based on the following criteria:
 Article volume

 Journal quality (as measured by journal quality Field Weighted Citation Impact Tier)

 Journal usage

 Editorial processes

 Competitive considerations

 Other revenue streams such as commercial contributions from advertising, reprints and supplements

 These criteria are applied only to subscription articles, not to open access articles, when setting list prices. For specific information please see our subscription price list for librarians and agents .
 Purchasing options
 Elsevier provides a range of purchasing options for subscription articles which are tailored for a wide variety of people. These include:
 For libraries and institutions: 
 There are a number of subscription options available which are tailored according to the specific customer situation and reflect a number of factors. For customers who purchase collections these considerations include competitive considerations, market conditions, the number of archival rights they purchase, and agreement specific factors like agreement length, currency and payment terms. Collection prices are adjusted on an annual basis, and any adjustment is based on factors including competitive considerations, market conditions, the number, quality, and usage of subscription articles published, and on technical features and platform capabilities. Open access articles are not included in these calculations. Please find more details on pricing .

 Individuals: Researchers who are not affiliated to an institution, or who would simply like convenient access to a title not available from their library, can take advantage of our personal access options. These options include credit card based transactional article sale and article rental.

 Please find more information on our free and low-cost access programs .

 Geographical Pricing for Open Access (GPOA) Pilot details
 The pilot sets APC prices for roughly 300 fully gold open access journals according to the income level of the country affiliations of the author group for each article.

 For these pilot journals, we will waive the APC for publications in which all authors are based in low-income countries, as classified by the World Bank opens in new tab/window as of July 2026. 

 For other articles, the APC will be set based on the country affiliations of the author group. The APC geo-price will range from 20 percent to 90 percent of the APC list price depending on whether the authors are based in lower-middle-income or upper-middle-income countries where R&D intensity (domestic expenditure on R&D expressed as a percentage of GDP according to OECD) is below two percent.

 GNI Per Capita 
 Country Group
 From
 To
 APC Price
 
 Low-income
 $0
 $1,175
 0% of list price
 
 Lower-Middle-Income
 $1,176
 $4,635
 20% of list price
 
 Upper-Middle-Income: Group 1
 $4,636
 $7,881
 45% of list price
 
 Upper-Middle-Income: Group 2
 $7,882
 $11,128
 65% of list price
 
 Upper-Middle-Income: Group 3
 $11,129
 $14,375
 90% of list price

 *Based on World Bank - 01 July 2026 
 Policy
 Elsevier will use GNI per Capita ( Atlas Method) opens in new tab/window as the key indicator for determining the APC pricing tier. This is a widely used economic indicator provided by the World Bank and has proved to be a useful, easily available and annually updated indicator that is closely correlated with other, nonmonetary measures of the quality of life. The Atlas method, with three-year average exchange rates adjusted for inflation, lessens the effect of exchange rate fluctuations and abrupt changes.
 The GPOA pilot methodology calculates discounts on the list APC as a percentage of the list price differently for each group of countries. To do this, we use the middle point of each group as a reference. This middle point is determined by comparing it to the starting threshold set for high-income countries by the World Bank.
 Elsevier may grant additional waivers to countries where full waiver policies are currently in place for specific reasons, or in cases where Elsevier is unable to receive payments due to trade sanctions ( read more ). The article publishing charge that applies is automatically calculated as part of the submission process and will take this into consideration. If you have any further questions, please contact researcher support.
 Country Groups
 Low-income 
(No APC to be paid) 
 Low-income 
(No APC to be paid) 
 Low-income 
(No APC to be paid) 
 
 Afghanistan
 Gambia
 Rwanda
 
 Burkina Faso
 Guinea-Bissau
 Sierra Leone 
 
 Burundi
 Liberia
 Somalia
 
 Central African Republic
 Madagascar
 Sudan
 
 Chad
 Malawi
 South Sudan
 
 Congo, Democratic Republic
 Mali
 Syrian Arab Republic
 
 Eritrea
 Mozambique
 Uganda
 
 Ethiopia
 Niger
 Yemen
 
 Lower-middle income 
(20% of APC to be paid) 
 Lower-middle income 
(20% of APC to be paid) 
 Lower-middle income 
(20% of APC to be paid) 
 
 Angola
 Honduras
 Papua New Guinea
 
 Bangladesh
 India
 Sao Tome and Principe
 
 Benin
 Kenya
 Senegal
 
 Bhutan
 Kiribati
 State of Palestine
 
 Bolivia
 Kyrgyzstan
 Tajikistan
 
 Cambodia
 Lao People's Democratic Republic of
 Tanzania, the United Republic of
 
 Cameroon
 Lebanon
 Timor-Leste
 
 Comoros
 Lesotho
 Togo
 
 Congo
 Mauritania
 Tunisia
 
 Côte d'Ivoire
 Morocco
 Uzbekistan
 
 Djibouti
 Myanmar
 Vanuatu
 
 Egypt
 Namibia
 Venezuela
 
 Eswatini
 Nepal
 Zambia
 
 Ghana
 Nicaragua
 Zimbabwe
 
 Guinea
 Nigeria
 -
 
 Haiti
 Pakistan
 -
 
 Upper-middle income 1 
(45% of APC to be paid) 
 Upper-middle income 1 
(45% of APC to be paid) 
 Upper-middle income 1 
(45% of APC to be paid) 
 
 Algeria
 Indonesia 
 Samoa
 
 Azerbaijan
 Iran
 South Africa
 
 Belize
 Iraq
 Sri Lanka
 
 Botswana
 Jamaica
 Suriname 
 
 Cabo Verde
 Jordan
 Thailand
 
 Ecuador
 Libya
 Tonga
 
 El Salvador
 Micronesia
 Turkmenistan
 
 Equatorial Guinea
 Mongolia
 Ukraine
 
 Fiji
 Paraguay
 Viet nam
 
 Guatemala 
 Philippines
 -
 
 Upper-middle income 2 
(65% of APC to be paid) 
 Upper-middle income 2 
(65% of APC to be paid) 
 Upper-middle income 2 
(65% of APC to be paid) 
 
 Armenia
 Cuba
 Marshall Islands
 
 Belarus
 Dominica
 Moldova
 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Dominican Republic
 North Macedonia
 
 Brazil
 Gabon
 Peru
 
 Colombia
 Georgia
 Tuvalu
 
 Upper-middle income 3 
 (90% of APC to be paid) 
 Upper-middle income 3 
 (90% of APC to be paid) 
 Upper-middle income 3 
 (90% of APC to be paid) 
 
 Albania 
 Maldives
 Saint Lucia
 
 Argentina
 Mauritius
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
 
 Grenada
 Mexico
 Serbia
 
 Kazakhstan
 Montenegro
 Turkey
 
 Malaysia
 -
 -

 Elsevier may grant additional waivers for author groups in countries where full waiver policies are in place for specific reasons. In addition, there may be deviations from the World Bank country list in cases where we are prohibited from considering submissions due to trade sanctions ( read more ). 
 View the list of participating journals 

 Footer navigation
 Useful links
 Submit your paper 
 Shop Books & Journals opens in new tab/window 
 Open access 
 View all products 
 Elsevier Connect 

 About
 About Elsevier 
 Careers 
 Global Media Relations 
 Advertising, reprints & supplements opens in new tab/window 
 Modern slavery act statement opens in new tab/window 

 Support
 Customer support 
 Resource center opens in new tab/window 
 Sign in to products

 Global | English

 LinkedIn opens in new tab/window Twitter opens in new tab/window Facebook opens in new tab/window YouTube opens in new tab/window 
 
 opens in new tab/window 
 Copyright © 2026 Elsevier, its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
 Terms & Conditions 
 Privacy policy 
 Accessibility 
 Cookie settings