SOURCE URL: https://community.cochrane.org/sites/default/files/uploads/inline-files/Transform/201912_LSR_Revised_Guidance.pdf
FINAL URL: https://resources.cochrane.org/sites/resources.cochrane.org/files/uploads/inline-files/Transform/201912_LSR_Revised_Guidance.pdf
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: application/pdf
======================================================================
 
Trusted evidence. 
Informed decisions. 
Better health. 
Guidance for the 
production and 
publication of Cochrane 
living systematic 
reviews:  Cochrane 
Reviews in living mode 
 
Version December 2019 
 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  2 
 
 
2 
Contents 
1 Introduction to the guidance 4 
1.1 How to use this guidance 5 
2 Introduction to living systematic reviews 6 
2.1 Definition of a living systematic review 6 
2.2 How do living systematic reviews differ from other approaches to updating reviews? 7 
2.3 Why are living systematic reviews needed? 7 
2.4 Principles underpinning the Cochrane living systematic review model 8 
3 When to do a living systematic review 9 
3.1 When is a living systematic review worth doing? 9 
3.2 When is a living systematic review feasible? 10 
4 Production and publication workflow and methods 12 
4.1 Overview of Cochrane living systematic reviews 12 
4.2 Planning and publishing living systematic review methods 16 
4.2.1 Registering a title for a new living systematic review 16 
4.2.2 Planning LSR methods 16 
4.2.3 Publishing LSR methods 17 
4.3 Producing and publishing a living systematic review 18 
4.3.1 Producing a baseline review 18 
4.3.2 Publishing the baseline review 18 
4.3.3 Preparing for the transition to living mode 18 
4.3.4 Once the review is in living mode 19 
4.3.4.1 Updating LSRs whenever new evidence is likely to impact review conclusions 19 
4.3.4.2 Updating LSRs on a fixed-interval schedule 23 
4.4 Informing readers about the currency of living systematic reviews 23 
4.4.1 What’s New Table 23 
4.4.1.1 What’s New table for the LSR baseline review 23 
4.4.1.2 What’s New table for LSRs that are updated whenever new evidence is likely to impact 
review conclusions 24 
4.4.1.3 What’s New table for LSRs that are updated on a fixed-interval schedule 26 
4.5 Implications of living systematic reviews for peer review, copy-editing and screening 27 
4.5.1 Peer review of living systematic reviews 27 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  3 
 
 
3 
4.5.2 Copy-editing living systematic reviews 28 
4.5.3 Screening living systematic reviews 28 
4.6 Language translation of living systematic reviews 28 
4.7 Periodic review of a living systematic review 29 
5 Living systematic review enablers 30 
6 Managing searches for living systematic reviews 33 
6.1 Starting out 33 
6.1.1 Search methods for a new LSR protocol and baseline review 33 
6.1.2 Search methods when transitioning an existing review to an LSR 34 
6.2 Ongoing evidence surveillance 34 
6.3 Reporting the search results 35 
6.4 Assessing and refining search methods 36 
7 Authorship and living systematic reviews 37 
8 Transitioning a living systematic review out of living mode 38 
8.1 When to transition a living systematic review out of living mode 38 
8.2 Process for transitioning a living systematic review out of living mode 39 
9 Resources for LSR teams 41 
9.1 Cochrane’s living systematic reviews website 41 
9.2 Living Evidence Network 41 
10 References 42 
11 Appendix 1. List of contributors 45 
12 Appendix 2: Cochrane LSR protocol and LSR templates 47 
 
 
 
Contributors:  Joanne Brooker, Anneliese Synnot, Steve McDonald, Julian Elliott and Tari Turner  
with  Rebecca Hodder, Laura Weeks, Juliane Ried, Harriet MacLehose, Elie Akl, Lara Kahale, John Hilton,  
Ella Flemyng, Toby Lasserson, James Thomas, Nicole Skoetz, Justin Clark, Robin Featherstone, Anna 
Noel-Storr, Nicole Martin, Rachel Marshall, Mark Simmonds, Matthew Bagg, Paolo Fusar-Poli, Ambrish 
Singh, Roger Chou and the Living Evidence Network (see member listing in Appendix 1).   

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  4 
 
 
4 
1 Introduction to the guidance 
The Cochrane living systematic reviews: Interim guidance for pilots (Version 0.3) was released in 
April 2017 to guide Cochrane authors and editorial groups involved in the pilot of Cochrane 
living systematic reviews. The interim guidance was subsequently revised and renamed 
Guidance for the production and publication of Cochrane living systematic reviews:  Cochrane 
Reviews in living mode (Version 1.0) and released in December 2019.   
The core guidance for producing and publishing Cochrane living systematic reviews (LSRs) 
remains largely unchanged. However, based on our learning from the LSR pilot, this version of 
the guidance includes updated and/or additional sections on: LSR enablers; managing searches; 
informing readers about the currency of LSRs; implications for peer review, copy-editing and 
quality screening; language translation of LSRs; periodic review of an LSR; authorship; 
transitioning an LSR out of living mode; and resources for Cochrane LSR teams. Appendix 2 
includes an updated template for a Cochrane LSR protocol and a new template for a Cochrane 
LSR. 
The purpose of the guidance is to outline the methods, production and publication processes for 
living systematic reviews of interventions published in the Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews (CDSR). This document is primarily designed to provide practical guidance for authors, 
information specialists, Review Groups, and Editorial & Methods Department staff involved in 
producing and publishing Cochrane LSRs. It is intended to complement the Cochrane Handbook 
(1) and Methodological Expectations of Cochrane Intervention Reviews (MECIR) (2) both of which 
continue to apply to Cochrane living systematic reviews. While the guidance has been prepared 
for the Cochrane context, much of the conceptual information included may be relevant to 
readers involved in producing and publishing LSRs outside Cochrane. Readers interested in 
learning more about similarities and differences between LSRs published within and outside 
Cochrane can follow the findings of a living methodological survey of the conduct and reporting 
of living systematic reviews (3). 
 
The approach described in this guidance is based on: 
• literature relevant to living systematic reviews, including a series of papers published in 
the Journal of Clinical Epidemiology on behalf of the Living Evidence Network (4-7) 
• consultation with Living Evidence Network members, both within and external to 
Cochrane (see Appendix 1 for a list of Living Evidence Network members) 
• experiences of teams involved in the pilot of Cochrane LSRs (8-12) and 
• the formal evaluation of Cochrane and non-Cochrane pilot LSRs (13). 
 
The new evidence ecosystem is evolving quickly. Approaches to producing and publishing LSRs 
will continue to develop, and we expect this guidance will continue to evolve. We welcome 
questions and feedback and invite you to share your experiences of using this guidance. Your 
feedback can assist in shaping future versions. 
 
Questions and feedback about the living systematic review guidance can be sent to:  
lsr@cochrane.org  
 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  5 
 
 
5 
1.1 How to use this guidance 
This document is designed for individuals with varying Cochrane roles and therefore some 
sections will be more relevant than others, depending on the reader’s role.  Table 1 below 
highlights the likely relevance of each section by role. 
The main body of the guidance introduces the concept of living systematic reviews before 
describing Cochrane LSR production and publication workflow and methods.  This is followed 
by sections on specific aspects of LSRs including:  enablers; managing searches; authorship; and 
transitioning an LSR out of living mode.  
 
 
TABLE 1:  RELEVANCE OF GUIDANCE SECTIONS BY COCHRANE ROLE  
Guidance Section 
 
Authors Information 
Specialists 
Cochrane 
Review 
Group 
Editors 
Editorial & 
Methods 
Department 
Staff 
2 Introduction to LSRs *** *** *** *** 
3 When to do an LSR *** *** *** ** 
4.1 Overview of Cochrane LSRs *** *** *** ** 
4.2 Planning and publishing LSR methods ***  ***  
4.3 Producing and publishing a living 
systematic review 
***  ***  
4.4 Informing readers about the currency 
of LSRs 
*** ** *** *** 
4.5 Implications of LSRs for peer review, 
copy-editing and screening 
**  *** *** 
4.6 Language translation of LSRs ***  *** *** 
4.7 Periodic review of a living systematic 
review 
*** *** ***  
5 LSR enablers *** *** ** ** 
6 Managing searches for LSRs *** *** **  
7 Authorship and LSRs ***  ** ** 
8 Transitioning an LSR out of living mode ***  ***  
9 Resources for LSR teams *** ** **  
12 Appendix 2:  Templates for Cochrane 
LSR protocol and Cochrane LSR 
***  *** ** 
 
Table legend   *** Key sections ** Additional information 
 
Appendix 2 provides an LSR protocol template and an LSR template that step 
authors through LSR-specific considerations for RevMan sections and provide 
suggested text and examples. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  6 
 
 
6 
2 Introduction to living systematic reviews 
2.1 Definition of a living systematic review 
An LSR is “a systematic review that is continually updated, incorporating relevant new evidence 
as it becomes available” (4).  
 
Practically, this means that, while they are in living mode, Cochrane LSRs: 
 
• are underpinned by continual, active monitoring of the evidence (i.e. monthly searches 
of core databases) 
• incorporate in a timely manner any new important evidence (i.e. studies, data or other 
information), as per pre-specified decisions about when the LSR will be updated 
• are supported by up-to-date communication about the status of the review and any new 
evidence that is in the process of being incorporated or yet to be incorporated into the 
review (4) 
 
Living systematic reviews are an approach to updating reviews, rather than a review type or 
method (4, 14). Cochrane Reviews may transition in and out of living mode at various points in 
their lifecycle.  
 
While core review methods are not fundamentally different to other Cochrane Reviews, LSRs 
additionally include explicit, transparent and pre-specified decisions on: 
 
• how frequently new evidence is sought and screened; and 
• when new evidence is incorporated into the review  
 
Detailed guidance about what to pre-specify in an LSR protocol is provided in Appendix 2. 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  7 
 
 
7 
2.2 How do living systematic reviews differ from other approaches to updating reviews? 
Table 2 outlines the key differences between LSRs and other approaches to maintaining review 
currency.  
 
TABLE 2. COMPARISON OF KEY FEATURES OF LSRS WITH OTHER SYSTEMATIC REVIEW APPROACHES 
 Living 
systematic 
review 
Frequently 
updated 
review 
Rapid 
review 
Standard 
systematic 
review 
Explicit, pre-defined methods 
describing search frequency      
Explicit, pre-defined methods 
describing when new evidence is 
incorporated into the review 
    
Continual evidence surveillance   ?   
New evidence is immediately flagged 
for reader or incorporated into review  ?   
Standard SR methods (e.g. screening, 
data extraction and risk of bias 
assessment) 
  ?  
 
2.3 Why are living systematic reviews needed? 
Systematic reviews are a vital link between the results of health research and evidence-based 
health decision-making. To be useful, systematic reviews must be valid and reliable. This means 
that the methods employed must be trustworthy, and reviews must reflect all results of relevant 
research, including the most recently published data.  
 
The original vision for Cochrane was that it would “include a library of trial overviews, which will 
be updated when new data become available” (15). Cochrane has led the way in systematic 
review conduct and been committed to updating reviews as necessary, however, achieving the 
vision of continually maintaining the currency of Cochrane Reviews has proven impossible in 
practice. Cochrane Reviews often take more than 12 months to complete and are infrequently 
updated. Like other systematic reviews, this means that Cochrane Reviews risk not 
incorporating new evidence that might change the review conclusions (16).  
 
Cochrane authors are now encouraged to make more explicit decisions about when and if to 
update their reviews. The Updating Classification System provides a decision framework that is 
informed by the impact of incorporating any known new studies, data, information or methods 
into the review (17). Reviews on particularly ‘hot topics’, for which the evidence base is emerging 
or changing and the question is a high priority for decision-makers, may benefit from a 
continual, living, updating model. 
  
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  8 
 
 
8 
Living systematic reviews, in alignment with Cochrane’s updating guidance, offer a new 
approach to provide evidence on these ‘hot topics’ that is both trustworthy and current. While 
similar to frequently updated ‘standard’ Cochrane Reviews, LSRs aim to achieve a high degree of 
currency by continual monitoring of the evidence and require authors to make explicit 
commitments as to the frequency and methods of updating. By harnessing new review 
production approaches and technologies, LSRs provide an opportunity to realise the original 
vision of Cochrane. 
 
 
2.4 Principles underpinning the Cochrane living systematic review model 
The following principles were applied in developing the Cochrane living systematic review 
model: 
• Keep the end-user in mind: maximise the utility of Cochrane Reviews at all stages 
• Minimise additional workload (for authors, information specialists, peer reviewers, 
editors, publishers, language translators and others involved in review production and 
publication) 
• Maximise visibility of the latest findings for the reader 
• Maximise efficiencies through technology and involving the crowd 
• Streamline workflows and editorial processes 
• Build on existing processes and platforms, rather than reinventing the wheel 
• Focus on workable, not perfect, solutions 
• Remain flexible to incorporate new developments in the broader evidence ecosystem 
 
 
Box 1: Cochrane’s living systematic review activities 
 
During 2017-2018, five pilot Cochrane LSRs were published in the Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews (CDSR) (8-12). Cochrane conducted an evaluation of these pilot LSRs and three non-
Cochrane LSRs from the perspective of those involved in the production and publication process 
(e.g. authors, editors, information specialists, peer reviewers) (13). LSRs were found to be an 
acceptable and feasible approach to keeping high quality evidence synthesis continually up to date 
(13).   
 
Cochrane is committed to building on the success of the pilot LSRs and supporting all Cochrane 
Networks to produce and publish LSRs. Increasingly, Cochrane teams are: 
 
1. transitioning existing standard systematic reviews to LSRs (8-12), when appropriate 
 
2. publishing protocols for new LSRs (18-20) before producing reviews that commence their 
lifespan as LSRs 
 
Further information about Cochrane’s LSR activities can be found at: 
• https://community.cochrane.org/review-production/production-resources/living-
systematic-reviews 
• https://community.cochrane.org/review-production/production-resources/living-
systematic-reviews/lsrs-cochrane-library 
 
 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  9 
 
 
9 
3 When to do a living systematic review 
The decision to undertake an LSR includes considering whether the topic is suited to an LSR (i.e. 
is it worth it?) and whether the necessary resources are available to maintain an LSR (i.e. is it 
feasible?). As with other Cochrane Reviews, the decision to initiate a new LSR, or transition an 
existing review into living mode, rests with the editorial base. 
 
3.1 When is a living systematic review worth doing? 
The LSR approach is appropriate for a subset of Cochrane Reviews and possibly only for part of 
their life cycle. Authors and editorial teams need to make an explicit and careful decision about 
the appropriateness of commencing a new LSR or transitioning an existing review into living 
mode. Equally, authors and editorial teams need to make explicit and careful decisions about 
when to transition a review out of living mode. 
 
Consideration of the conditions under which an LSR is appropriate has been informed by recent 
guidance on updating systematic reviews (21). As described by Elliott and colleagues (4), an LSR 
is appropriate when all three of the following criteria are met:  
 
i. The review question is a particular priority for decision-making  
 
With current review production and publication systems, LSRs are only appropriate when the 
topic is sufficiently important to health decision-making to make the allocation of the necessary 
resources worthwhile.   
 
In considering the importance of a topic, teams can refer to the Cochrane priority reviews list 
and the guidance note provided by the Cochrane Knowledge Translation Working Group on 
Priority Setting (22).  
 
Recent access and usage of an existing review can provide an indication of how important the 
review question is for decision-making. Therefore, when considering whether to transition an 
existing Cochrane Review to an LSR, review teams can examine article-level metrics of the 
existing review (e.g. number of downloads and citations; Altmetric score (23)). Similarly, the rate 
of publications related to a proposed LSR topic in recent years may indicate its importance for 
health decision-making.  
 
In addition to Cochrane priority reviews, other suitable topics might include rapidly emerging 
health issues or technologies. For example, participants in Cochrane’s evaluation of pilot LSRs 
identified questions pertaining to disease outbreaks as appropriate topics for LSRs (13).  
 
Ideally, the importance of the question would lead to the LSR being linked to living 
recommendations, living guidelines, policy statements or other active approaches to translating 
the results of the review into practice and/or policy. Given the resources required to maintain an 
LSR, authors and editorial teams are encouraged to explore opportunities for knowledge 
translation at the outset, including identifying topics in collaboration with external stakeholders 
(e.g. guideline developers, professional societies, consumer organisations, funders, health 
technology assessment agencies). It is also helpful to inform Cochrane’s knowledge translation 
team about new LSRs. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  10 
 
 
10 
 
ii. There is an important level of uncertainty in the existing evidence 
 
A living systematic review is only likely to be useful when the current body of evidence is 
uncertain and the answer to the review question is not settled. Uncertainty in Cochrane Reviews 
is often indicated by the GRADE assessment of the body of evidence. Review conclusions with a 
high level of certainty (those with the GRADE certainty rating of ‘high’) are not likely to change 
with addition of new evidence.  
 
Uncertainty in the existing evidence may also relate to an absence of good quality systematic 
reviews on the question of interest; gaps in the primary evidence (e.g. lack of studies in 
particular populations or settings); or changes in the topic area (e.g. new interventions being 
tested in primary studies). 
 
iii. There is likely to be emerging evidence that will impact on the conclusions of the LSR  
 
An LSR is appropriate when the research field covered by the review is moving relatively quickly 
and new evidence is being generated that is likely to impact on review conclusions.  
 
The review team may already have a good understanding that new research is expected because 
of their familiarity with the research field, as well as through other activities such as checking 
clinical trial registries, corresponding with researchers working in the field of interest and 
examining relevant conference proceedings. It can be helpful to involve an information 
specialist in scoping searches and horizon scanning searches for emerging evidence to 
determine whether a topic meets the criteria for an LSR. 
 
Not only should there be emerging evidence (e.g. trials underway), the nature of such evidence 
should have the potential to impact on the LSR conclusions, for example, through reducing the 
level of uncertainty in the existing evidence.   
 
3.2 When is a living systematic review feasible? 
All systematic reviews require substantial time and other resource inputs from authors and 
editorial teams. In addition to the usual resources required to produce a systematic review, LSRs 
require a sustained commitment for the period that the review remains living. As such, 
important considerations regarding the feasibility of maintaining an LSR include whether: 
 
• the author team has the capacity, skill, resources and motivation to sustain an ongoing 
LSR commitment (acknowledging that the author team may evolve over time) 
• the editorial base has the resources to support a Cochrane Review as an LSR 
 
Note:  For some topics, an LSR approach to updating a review may be more efficient over the 
lifespan of a review than the standard approach to updating Cochrane Reviews (i.e. intermittent 
updates that involve substantial resources for limited periods) (13). However, as no research has 
yet compared the resources required for these two different approaches, a conservative 
approach to allocating resources is recommended.   
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  11 
 
 
11 
The following questions are designed to assist authors and editorial teams in evaluating 
whether an LSR is feasible in their current circumstances: 
 
• Does the team have access to someone who will take responsibility for project management; 
e.g. distributing workload, including assigning roles among team members and setting 
expectations about associated responsibilities; and providing continual oversight of the LSR 
process, including coordinating monthly and less frequent tasks to ensure timelines are 
met? 
 
• Does the team have access to an experienced information specialist, or other search expert, 
to manage the monthly search process and regularly assess the search methods over the 
lifespan of the LSR? 
 
• What is the estimated average monthly workload for the LSR team? This should take into 
account:  
o how many citations are expected to be retrieved each month 
o how many new included studies are expected to be found each month 
o how often it is anticipated that the LSR will be updated (i.e. a new version published) 
 
• What resources (e.g. funding, staffing) are available to both the author and editorial teams to 
support the ongoing maintenance of the LSR? 
 
• Are two or more authors available to screen search yields on an ongoing (i.e. monthly) basis, 
and undertake data extraction and risk of bias assessment as needed? 
 
• Will author contributions be stable over time? Are you able to maintain a consistent direction 
and approach to the review if the available team composition changes? 
 
• Do all authors agree with the plan to manage authorship implications and expectations? (For 
guidance about authorship issues, see section ‘7: Authorship and living systematic reviews’). 
 
• Would the authors be prepared to handover leadership of the LSR if the team were no longer 
able to sustain it, and another author team was able and willing? 
 
  
Before registering a title for a new living systematic review or transitioning an existing Cochrane 
Review to living mode, availability of the required resources needs to be considered very carefully. 
LSRs have workload implications for Cochrane Review Group editorial teams, especially 
Information Specialists, and for other tasks in the editorial process. Further information about LSR 
workload implications for Information Specialists can be found in section ‘6: Managing searches 
for living systematic reviews’. Section ‘4.5: Implications of living systematic reviews for peer 
review, copy-editing and screening’ provides an overview of implications for others involved in the 
LSR process. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  12 
 
 
12 
4 Production and publication workflow and 
methods 
4.1 Overview of Cochrane living systematic reviews 
LSR methods have been developed, piloted and evaluated for intervention reviews 
• This guidance has been developed with a standard Cochrane intervention review in mind.  
The Cochrane LSR pilot only included intervention reviews. While the LSR approach may 
transfer to other review types (e.g. diagnostic or prognostic test accuracy, qualitative, mixed-
methods), the complexity of the methods used for other review types was not examined in 
the pilot. There may be important differences in how an LSR approach can be applied to 
different review types (e.g. determining whether there is an important level of uncertainty in 
the evidence or when new evidence is likely to impact on the conclusions of the LSR).  
 
New reviews and existing reviews can be LSRs 
• A new Cochrane Review can be set up as an LSR at the outset, or an existing Cochrane 
Review can be updated and transitioned into living mode. 
 
LSRs build on a standard Cochrane Review 
• Whether an author team is publishing a new review, or transitioning an existing review into 
living mode, there will need to be an up-to-date ‘baseline’ review to build upon. That is, 
authors need to produce a baseline review based on an up-to-date search before 
commencing the process of screening ongoing monthly searches. This baseline review will 
be either an entirely new review for a new LSR topic or an updated version of an existing 
Cochrane Review. 
 
An LSR must involve continual evidence surveillance and continual updates regarding the 
LSR status, and articulate an explicit approach to updating the LSR itself 
• LSRs include active, ongoing evidence surveillance (i.e. monthly searches and monitoring of 
any identified ongoing studies). Each month, readers are informed of the LSR status (e.g. 
whether the LSR is up to date or whether new relevant studies have been identified and an 
update is pending). The LSR itself is updated (i.e. a new version is published) when relevant 
new information (e.g. studies, data) that is likely to impact the conclusions of the LSR is 
identified or on a pre-specified fixed schedule (e.g. every 4 months). Criteria for ceasing 
continual updates of the LSR (i.e. transitioning an LSR out of living mode) should also be 
articulated in the protocol. 
 
Core review methods are largely unchanged 
• Cochrane LSRs follow the same core methods and review steps as standard Cochrane 
Reviews. What differs is that additional a priori decisions are made about how the review will 
be maintained as an LSR, and these are documented in the protocol. 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  13 
 
 
13 
Additional decisions specific to LSRs must be considered  
• An LSR requires explicit, transparent and predefined decisions about: 
o how frequently new evidence is sought and screened 
 Bibliographic databases and clinical trial registries specified in the search 
strategy should be searched monthly. Other sources (e.g. grey literature, 
conference proceedings) may be searched less frequently, as specified in the 
protocol. 
o when new evidence is incorporated into the review 
 Although searches are conducted monthly, it is currently unfeasible to publish 
an update to a Cochrane LSR on a monthly basis. Depending on the rate at 
which new relevant evidence is expected to be found, there are two options 
for the frequency of updating an LSR 
 
1. Update the LSR when new evidence identified is likely to impact the 
review conclusions, as shown in Figure 1; or 
2. Update the LSR on a fixed-interval schedule when a high volume of 
new evidence is anticipated. As an example, the Cochrane pilot LSR 
with the highest rate of new evidence was updated every 4 months 
during the pilot period (8).   
o when methods (e.g. search strategy) will be reviewed. 
o when an LSR will be transitioned out of living mode (see section ‘8: Transitioning a 
living systematic review out of living mode’). 
 
LSR-specific decisions must be documented a priori 
• LSR-specific decisions are planned and reported in the relevant sections of the protocol. 
Where an existing standard Cochrane Review is being transitioned into living mode, the LSR-
specific aspects must be documented in the relevant sections of the main text and in an 
appendix to the review that describes the LSR-specific methods. 
 
LSRs use existing publication processes 
• The Cochrane LSR model makes use of the What’s New table as a way to provide LSR status updates 
to readers, without having to re-publish the Cochrane Review after each monthly search. Guidance 
on how to use the What’s New table is provided in section ‘4.4: Informing readers about the 
currency of living systematic reviews’.   
The What’s New table is currently the preferred mechanism for providing readers with updates regarding 
the status of an LSR. 
• If new evidence is incorporated into the review, the standard updating processes apply and 
all sections of the review must be updated and republished. 
 
The Cochrane living systematic review model is presented diagrammatically in Figure 1.  
 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  14 
 
 
14 
FIGURE 1. COCHRANE LSR WORKFLOW, WITH PUBLICATION OUTPUTS 
 
  


Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  15 
 
 
15 
Notes for Figure 1: 
1. The framework for the workflow is based on the paper by Garner et al published in the BMJ in 2016 (21). 
 
2. When a high volume of new evidence is anticipated, a fixed-interval schedule may be more feasible for the authors and editorial team than updating 
the review each time new evidence that is likely to impact the conclusions is found. 
 
3. Until the functionality to publish a new (updated) protocol for an existing review that is being transitioned to an LSR becomes available, the published 
LSR can describe the LSR-specific methods in the main text, as well as an Appendix entitled “Living systematic review protocol”. (See Appendix 2 for 
detailed guidance). 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  16 
 
 
16 
4.2 Planning and publishing living systematic review methods 
4.2.1 Registering a title for a new living systematic review 
Standard Cochrane processes apply when proposing and registering a new Cochrane Review 
that will be in living mode; see 
https://documentation.cochrane.org/display/EPPR/Cochrane+Review+proposals. The title for a 
new LSR does not indicate that the review is an LSR. Given that an LSR may transition out of 
living mode (see section ‘8: Transitioning a living systematic review out of living mode’ for 
further details), the review title must be appropriate for a standard Cochrane Review.  Before 
registering a title for a new LSR or transitioning an existing Cochrane Review to living mode, 
availability of the required resources needs to be considered very carefully. 
The Managing Editor needs to notify the LSR support team whenever a new LSR title is 
registered or whenever the CRG has approved the transition of an existing Cochrane Review to 
living mode. This will allow the LSR support team (and the EMD) to monitor the progress of all 
Cochrane LSRs.  
4.2.2 Planning LSR methods 
A protocol for a Cochrane LSR will include all the usual information that is reported in a standard 
Cochrane protocol. Living systematic reviews also require that additional specific 
methodological decisions are made and described in the protocol. All LSR-specific methods can 
be incorporated into the standard headings of a Cochrane protocol and Cochrane Review. 
 
LSR protocols require additional information relating to: 
• search methods and frequency (see section ‘6: Managing searches for living systematic 
reviews’)   
• deciding when to integrate new information (e.g. new studies, development of new 
interventions, additional data for included studies, retraction of an included study); see 
Box 2 below for guidance around making this decision 
• deciding whether and how to retain existing ‘legacy’ information (e.g. an intervention 
may no longer be licensed for use) 
• deciding when an LSR should be transitioned out of living mode (see section ‘8: 
Transitioning a living systematic review out of living mode’) 
 
Box 2: When to integrate new evidence into a living systematic review 
For LSRs where a high volume of new evidence is anticipated, it may be deemed most feasible to 
specify in the protocol that the LSR results will be updated on a fixed-interval schedule approved by 
the editorial team (e.g. every four months).  
Ideally, however, updates will occur whenever new evidence likely to impact the review 
conclusions is identified, as shown in Figure 1.  
It is important that author teams consult with the editorial team regarding which of the above 
two options to use. 
There are two key methodological issues associated with determining whether new evidence will 
impact on the conclusions of the LSR. The first relates to whether authors choose to: 
• apply methods to predict if new evidence is likely to impact the LSR conclusions; or 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  17 
 
 
17 
• incorporate the new data and re-run the data analysis to directly determine whether the LSR 
conclusions have changed. 
 
The second issue pertains to specifying what type/degree of changes in LSR conclusions are 
sufficiently important to warrant publication of an updated version of the LSR. Numerical thresholds 
for changes in findings that might warrant an LSR update (e.g. magnitude of change in effect size or 
precision of effect size estimates for primary or secondary outcomes) have not been established. Other 
considerations include whether the new evidence leads to a change in the GRADE certainty rating or 
the direction of effect, or introduces previously unreported interventions, populations, serious adverse 
events or other clinically meaningful findings.  
 
Further guidance regarding methods for determining whether new evidence may impact the 
conclusions of an existing systematic review can be found in an article by Garner and colleagues (24) 
and Cochrane Handbook Chapters IV (25) and 22 (26). For example, Chapter 22 provides an overview of 
the Framework for Adaptive Meta-analysis (FAME) (27, 28).  FAME takes into account all relevant trials, 
including those for which results are not yet available, and uses trial information to predict when a 
reliable aggregate data meta-analysis will be possible. 
 
 
4.2.3 Publishing LSR methods 
The approach to publishing the planned LSR methods for a Cochrane Review varies depending 
on whether the LSR is a new review, or an existing Cochrane Review is being transitioned into 
living mode. 
 
For new reviews: 
 
• Authors incorporate the planned LSR methods into the protocol for the review.  
• The protocol is published according to standard Cochrane processes, including peer 
review. The LSR support team can provide peer review of the LSR methods (29). 
 
For existing Cochrane Reviews: 
 
• Authors can send the planned LSR methods to the LSR support team to check prior to 
updating the review. 
• The LSR-specific methods are integrated in the main text, as well as being included as an 
appendix to the review (see Appendix 2 for an example of a ‘Living Systematic Review 
Protocol’ appendix). 
o Note: This approach may change when the functionality to publish a new 
protocol for existing reviews becomes available in the CDSR. In the interim, the 
LSR-specific methods appendix serves as a substitute for publishing a new 
protocol. 
• If approved for publication, then the Managing Editor will publish the updated review in 
the CDSR. 
 
Considerations for editorial teams: 
• At the protocol planning stage, it is useful for Managing Editors to identify a pool of peer 
reviewers who agree to review the protocol, baseline review and subsequent updates for 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  18 
 
 
18 
a specified duration (perhaps 12 months).  In addition, having an information specialist 
peer review the primary database strategy via a validated assessment instrument (e.g. 
PRESS guidelines (30)) should also be considered at the protocol stage. Further 
information about LSR peer review can be found in section ‘4.5: Implications of living 
systematic reviews for peer review, copy-editing and screening’. 
 
• Following peer review of an LSR protocol, it is useful for the protocol to be screened by 
the relevant Network and Associate Editors, given that LSRs are likely to be highly visible 
reviews (31). 
 
4.3 Producing and publishing a living systematic review 
4.3.1 Producing a baseline review 
Irrespective of whether the LSR is commenced as a new review or an update to an existing 
review, there needs to be an up-to-date Cochrane Review published in the CDSR. This is referred 
to as a ‘baseline’ review. Only after this point will the ‘living’ part of the LSR commence for the 
reader.  
 
The baseline review should be conducted in accordance with Cochrane’s Methodological 
Expectations of Cochrane Interventions Reviews (MECIR) guidelines (2), and be published 
following standard Cochrane processes. All eligible studies should be fully integrated in the 
review, and the LSR methods should be outlined in the Methods section. Where an existing 
Cochrane Review is being transitioned into living mode, the baseline review should also include 
an appendix describing the LSR-specific methods. (See Appendix 2 for detailed guidance on 
reporting the baseline review.) 
4.3.2 Publishing the baseline review 
After peer review, Managing Editors can send the baseline review to the Network Associate 
Editor for quality screening. In addition, LSRs that are not copy-edited by the Cochrane Review 
Group should be sent to Copy Edit Support. Given the necessity for rapid processing times for 
LSRs, it is important that discussions are held well in advance, to agree the turnaround time for 
LSRs. Further considerations regarding LSR publishing workflows are outlined in section ‘4.5: 
Implications of living systematic reviews for peer review, copy-editing and screening’. 
 
The Managing Editor applies the What’s New events applicable to the baseline review at the time 
of publication. The review may not be up to date if searches conducted since the baseline review 
search have identified new evidence that will be incorporated in the next version of the LSR. For 
further details on applying What’s New events to the baseline review, see section ‘4.4: Informing 
readers about the currency of living systematic reviews’. 
4.3.3 Preparing for the transition to living mode 
Once the ‘baseline’ review is published, the review immediately becomes a living systematic 
review in the CDSR.   
 
The Managing Editor can return the review to authoring mode in RevMan. This will allow the 
authors to make any updates to the material over time (e.g. PRISMA, characteristics of excluded 
studies), so that when the time comes to re-publish the review, most of the new evidence will 
already have been incorporated. 
 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  19 
 
 
19 
Maintaining an LSR will require the coordination of multiple recurring tasks associated with 
various versions of the LSR. Before transitioning to living mode, author teams need to consider 
which processes they will put in place to manage concurrent tasks associated with different 
versions of the LSR. For example, teams may be addressing peer review comments for the next 
version to be published, while also working on the data synthesis section for a subsequent 
version at the same time as conducting ongoing screening of titles/abstracts. Accordingly, 
effective version control of data, documents and other files is crucial.   
4.3.4 Once the review is in living mode 
The ongoing searches are run and screened at their pre-specified frequency (i.e. monthly for 
bibliographic databases and clinical trial registries, and typically less frequently for other 
sources). The team may have commenced the monthly searches some months earlier (e.g. 
setting up bibliographic database auto-alerts immediately following execution of the search for 
the baseline review), in anticipation of the review becoming living. For further details about 
setting up ongoing searches, see section ‘6: Managing searches for living systematic reviews’.   
 
Each month, the authors advise the Managing Editor within the month (i.e. before they receive 
the search yield for the next month) of the outcome of screening the monthly search yield, as per 
the three scenarios described below. In turn, the Managing Editor updates the What’s New table 
to communicate to the reader the current status of the LSR. (For details on using the What’s New 
table, see section ‘4.4: Informing readers about the currency of living systematic reviews’).  
The LSR is updated according to the decisions specified in the protocol. Ideally, updates will 
occur whenever new evidence likely to impact the review conclusions is identified, as shown in 
Figure 1. For LSRs where a high volume of new evidence is anticipated, however, it may have 
been deemed more feasible to specify in the protocol that the LSR results will be updated on a 
fixed-interval schedule approved by the editorial team (e.g. every four months). The procedures 
for each of these two options are described below. (For guidance on deciding when to update an 
LSR, see ‘Box 2: When to integrate new evidence into a living systematic review’). 
 
4.3.4.1 Updating LSRs whenever new evidence is likely to impact review conclusions 
In the case of an LSR for which the timing of updates is determined by the impact of evidence on 
the review conclusions, there are three possible scenarios arising from screening the ongoing 
search yields, as shown in Figure 1. Each scenario has different implications for the authors and 
Managing Editor, the way in which RevMan is used, the need for peer and editorial review, and 
information recorded in the What’s New table. The detail below supplements the information 
provided in Table 3. (For the current information about using What’s New/publishing events, 
please see the Cochrane Editorial and Publishing Policy Resource section: 
https://documentation.cochrane.org/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=117380266.) 
 
Scenario 1:  No new evidence (studies, data, information) is identified 
• The review conclusions remain up to date and the Managing Editor adds a What’s 
New “Amended” event with the description field indicating the most recent 
search date. 
 
Scenario 2:  New evidence is identified but is unlikely to have an important impact on 
review findings and will be integrated later. 
• The review conclusions can be considered up to date. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  20 
 
 
20 
• This option should have been pre-specified in the Methods section of the 
protocol, with specific decision rules pre-specified. The authors’ decision not to 
integrate new evidence should be justified and requires editorial review and 
approval. Cochrane Review Group Editors review the authors’ decision not to 
integrate the new evidence and may seek the opinion of a peer reviewer.  
• Once confirmed, the Managing Editor adds an “Amended” event using the What’s 
New table, with the description field indicating the most recent search date and 
stating how many studies are pending inclusion in the LSR. 
 
Scenario 3:  New evidence is identified that is likely to have an important impact on 
review findings.   
• A full update of the review is undertaken in line with MECIR standards (2). 
• This scenario can be regarded as comprising two stages. As shown in Table 3, 
integrating the new evidence (Stage 1) and then publishing an update (Stage 2) 
have different implications for author and editorial activities, RevMan, the What’s 
New table and the CDSR. 
• During Stage 1 (i.e. before the update is published), the What’s New table is used 
to flag to readers that the authors are integrating new evidence and an update is 
pending. The Managing Editor adds a What’s New “Amended” event to indicate 
that the authors are currently updating the review. The What’s New Description 
field can be used to specify the most recent search date; provide information 
about the new evidence (e.g. number of new studies found; DOIs of new studies); 
and the month-year when the update is expected to be published. 
• Note: Unlike an update for a standard Cochrane Review, the monthly searches 
continue to be run and screened while the new evidence is being integrated and 
the update published. Accordingly, after each monthly search, a What’s New 
“Amended” event needs to be added with the description field stating that an 
update is being prepared with XX studies found up to the last search date 
applicable to the update in progress AND the outcome of subsequent monthly 
searches. That is, the status of ongoing search results must continue to be 
updated each month.   
• During Stage 2 (i.e. publishing the update) Managing Editors may wish to 
consider using the same group of peer reviewers for all versions of the LSR or a 
designated period of time (e.g. 12 months). As with the baseline review, it is 
important that Managing Editors give the Network Associate Editor advance 
notice of the LSR’s arrival. In addition, LSRs that are not copy-edited by the 
Cochrane Review Group should be forwarded to Copy Edit Support with advance 
notice. Providing those checking the LSR with a ‘compare’ version will allow 
them to see what has changed since the last update (32). On publishing the 
update, the What’s New table must be updated to reflect the current status of the 
LSR (See Table 3: Note 4). 
 
For each of the scenarios described above, Table 3 outlines the activities of authors and 
Managing Editors, the way in which RevMan is used, the need for peer and editorial review, and 
the publication and What’s New table implications. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  21 
 
 
21 
TABLE 3. AUTHOR AND EDITORIAL ACTIVITIES FOR THE LSR SCENARIOS ARISING FROM SCREENING ONGOING SEARCHES1 
 
  Once the review becomes living 
  Scenario 1: 
No new evidence 
identified 
Scenario 2: 
New evidence,  
No important 
impact,  
integrate later 
Scenario 3: Stage 1 
New evidence, 
important impact,  
integration in 
process 
Scenario 3: Stage 2 
New evidence, important impact, 
publish the update 
Author 
Activities Alert Managing Editor     
Edit RevMan file        
Submit RevMan file     
RevMan 
RevMan file (mode) Authoring Authoring Authoring Authoring to Editorial, 
then Publish; return to Authoring2 
Editorial activities 
ME adds What’s New event 
and description to indicate 
LSR status 3 
Amended event; No 
new studies 
identified with 
search 
Amended event; New 
information identified 
but unlikely to change 
conclusions  
Amended event; Authors 
currently updating  
 
All studies incorporated from most 
recent search 
Or 
New information identified but unlikely 
to change conclusions 
or 
 Authors currently updating4 
Editorial review?  CRG editors review 
authors’ decision   
Peer review?  ? (if req’d for second 
opinion)    
(in line with peer review policy) 
Cochrane Review publication Unchanged Unchanged Unchanged Update 
 
Abbreviations:   LSR = Living Systematic Review, RevMan = Review Manager, ME = Managing Editor 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  22 
 
 
22 
Notes: 
1. Table 3 describes potential scenarios that may arise when screening the ongoing search yields for LSRs that are updated whenever new evidence is 
likely to impact review conclusions 
2. After an update to the LSR is published, the Managing Editor can return it to Authoring mode in RevMan so that the authors can continue working on 
the LSR (e.g. adding new data into the tables for included studies and excluded studies; updating PRISMA) in preparation for the next update  
3. For detailed guidance on using the What’s New table for LSR status updates, see section ‘4.4: Informing readers about the currency of living 
systematic reviews’. Also see the Cochrane Editorial and Publishing Policy Resource for the current guidance on applying What’s New/publishing 
events for Cochrane Reviews: https://documentation.cochrane.org/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=117380266. 
4. An updated version of the LSR may not be up to date when published, if subsequent monthly searches have yielded additional eligible studies that 
are currently being integrated for publication in a future update 
 
 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  23 
 
 
23 
4.3.4.2 Updating LSRs on a fixed-interval schedule 
In the case of an LSR that is updated on a fixed-interval schedule, scenarios arising from 
screening the ongoing search yields will often be like those described above for LSRs that are 
updated whenever identified evidence is likely to change review conclusions.  
 
However, LSR teams will also need to decide whether they would proceed with an update in the 
following two scenarios and pre-specify these decisions in the protocol: 
 
1. A scheduled update is due to be undertaken, but the ongoing searches have identified no 
new evidence. 
 
2. A scheduled update is due to be undertaken, but the ongoing searches have only 
identified new evidence that is unlikely to change the review conclusions. 
 
 
4.4 Informing readers about the currency of living systematic reviews 
A key finding of the evaluation of Cochrane pilot LSRs was the need to provide CDSR users with 
helpful information about the status of an LSR. The What’s New Description field can be used to 
convey information about new evidence yet to be incorporated into an LSR; e.g. the most recent 
search date; the number of new studies identified; and DOIs of these studies. 
 
 
4.4.1 What’s New Table 
The What’s New table comprises three fields:  date, event type, and description. (See details in 
the Cochrane Editorial and Publishing Policy Resource: 
https://documentation.cochrane.org/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=117380266) 
Notes: 
• To maintain transparency regarding the outcomes of continual monthly searches for an 
LSR, all What’s New events must be moved to the History section, rather than being over-
written.   
• The use of the What’s New table to provide LSR status updates, as described below, is an 
exception to Cochrane policy on the use of the What’s New table that is specific to LSRs. 
4.4.1.1 What’s New table for the LSR baseline review 
The What’s New events and description will vary according to whether: 
 
1. the LSR is an entirely new Cochrane Review or an existing Cochrane Review that has been 
updated in preparation for transitioning into living mode.  Standard Cochrane policy can 
be followed to add a What’s New table entry describing changes between the previous 
version of an existing Cochrane Review and the LSR baseline review. 
 
2. the baseline review is up to date at the time of publication.  A What’s New table entry can 
be added to indicate the outcome of any searches that have occurred since the date of 
the search used to prepare the baseline LSR. 
 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  24 
 
 
24 
Example 1:  Baseline review is up to date at the time of publication 
 
What’s New event Amended 
What’s New 
description 
This is a Living Systematic Review. Searches are run and screened 
monthly. Last search date 30 November 2019. Results of all new 
studies identified have been incorporated. The conclusions of this 
Cochrane Review are therefore considered up to date. 
 
Example 2:  Baseline review is not up to date at the time of publication, as ongoing monthly 
searches have identified new evidence that is likely to change the review conclusions 
 
What’s New 
event 
 Amended 
Explanation This is a Living Systematic Review. Searches are run and screened 
monthly. The next update, with search results to 27 April 2019 (2 new 
studies, 3 new ongoing studies), is due in July 2019. As of the last search 
(27 June 2019) there are also 2 additional new studies to be included after 
the July 2019 update and 4 new ongoing studies. 
 
4.4.1.2 What’s New table for LSRs that are updated whenever new evidence is likely to impact review 
conclusions 
 
Below are examples of What’s New events and descriptions that could be entered for each of the 
scenarios listed in Table 3.   
 
Scenario 1: No new evidence identified in monthly search yield 
 
What’s New event Amended 
What’s New 
description 
This is a Living Systematic Review. Searches are run and screened 
monthly. Last search date 15 June 2019. Results of all included 
studies identified have been incorporated. The conclusions of this 
Cochrane Review are therefore considered up to date. 
 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  25 
 
 
25 
Scenario 2: New evidence identified in monthly search yield but has no important impact 
on review findings; integrate later 
 
What’s New event Amended 
What’s New 
description 
This is a Living Systematic Review. Searches are run and 
screened monthly. One study has been found in searches up to 
15 June 2019 (hyperlink to DOI XXX) but is unlikely to change 
review conclusions (as assessed by the authors and editorial 
team). The conclusions of this review are therefore considered 
up to date. 
 
Scenario 3-Stage 1: New evidence identified in monthly search yield which has an 
important impact on review findings; integration in progress 
 
Example 1:  No new evidence is found by ongoing monthly searches while the authors are 
preparing an update to the review 
 
What’s New 
event 
Amended 
What’s New 
description 
This is a Living Systematic Review. Searches are run and screened monthly. 
The next update, with results to 27 April 2019 search (1 study, hyperlink to 
DOI XXX), is due in July 2019. Screening of monthly searches continues (last 
search date 27 May 2019) and has found no additional new evidence. 
 
Example 2:  New evidence is found by ongoing monthly searches while the authors are 
preparing an update to the review 
  
What’s New 
event 
Amended 
What’s New 
description 
This is a Living Systematic Review. Searches are run and screened 
monthly. The next update, with results up to 27 April 2019 search (3 new 
studies, 2 new ongoing studies), is due in July 2019. Screening of monthly 
searches continues (last search date 27 June 2019) and has found 2 
additional new studies to be included after the July 2019 update and 4 
new ongoing studies. 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  26 
 
 
26 
Scenario 3-Stage 2: New studies identified, likely to change conclusions, publish the 
update 
 
The fact that a new version of the review has been published will be captured in the What’s New 
table, as per standard process for an updated review.  
 
Another What’s New event can be added to indicate that outcome of ongoing searches that have 
occurred while the update was being produced and published, as per below. 
 
Example 1:  No new evidence was found by ongoing monthly searches while the current 
update was being produced and published 
 
What’s New event Amended 
What’s New 
description 
This is a Living Systematic Review. Searches are run and 
screened monthly. Last search date 27 June 2019. Results of all 
new studies identified have been incorporated. The 
conclusions of this review are therefore considered up to date. 
 
Example 2:  New evidence has been found by ongoing monthly searches while the current 
update was being produced and published, such that the current update is not “up to date” at 
the time of publication 
  
What’s New event Amended 
What’s New 
description 
This is a Living Systematic Review. Searches are run and 
screened monthly. The next update, with results up to 27 May 
2019 search (2 new studies [hyperlink to DOI  XXX; DOI YYY], 3 
new ongoing studies), is due in July 2019. Screening of monthly 
searches continues (last search date 27 June 2019) and has 
found no additional new evidence. 
 
4.4.1.3 What’s New table for LSRs that are updated on a fixed-interval schedule 
In the case of an LSR that is updated on a fixed-interval schedule, the scenarios arising from 
screening the ongoing searches will be similar to those for LSRs that are updated whenever new 
evidence is identified, as described above. As such, the examples above can be used to guide use 
of the What’s New table for LSRs updated on a fixed-interval schedule. 
In addition, the following scenarios may arise for such LSRs: 
 
1. A scheduled update is due to be undertaken, but the ongoing searches have identified no 
new evidence. 
a. Teams may have decided to skip the scheduled update in such a scenario, rather 
than publishing a new LSR version which would, in turn, generate a new citation 
version. 
b. If the decision was made to skip an update when no new evidence has been 
found, a What’s New “amended” event would be added, and the description field 
would be used to inform the reader of the date of the last search and that no new 
evidence has been found. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  27 
 
 
27 
 
 
2. A scheduled update is due to be undertaken, but the ongoing searches have only 
identified new evidence that is unlikely to change the review conclusions. 
o If the decision was made to skip an update in such a scenario, a What’s New 
“amended” event would be entered and the description field used to inform the 
reader about the number and DOIs of newly identified studies, the date of the last 
search, and that the new evidence is unlikely to change the review conclusions. 
 
4.5 Implications of living systematic reviews for peer review, copy-editing and screening 
4.5.1 Peer review of living systematic reviews 
Peer review of LSRs must comply with the Cochrane peer review policy (33).  
At the protocol stage, it can be beneficial for Managing Editors to identify a pool of peer 
reviewers who agree to review the protocol, baseline review and subsequent updates. Given the 
potentially long period for which an LSR might remain in living mode, it can be helpful to 
ascertain the duration for which peer reviewers anticipate they can be available. If it is not 
possible to retain the same set of peer reviewers over the lifespan of the LSR, sending new peer 
reviewers key points from prior peer review reports can help maintain consistency of feedback 
to authors across different peer reviewers (33).  
 
The evaluation of the pilot Cochrane LSRs found that peer reviewers wanted guidance on how to 
approach an LSR peer review (13). It can be helpful for Managing Editors to provide potential 
peer reviewers with some information about LSRs (e.g. LSR definition, LSR protocol template 
and LSR template included in this guidance). It is also important to discuss the anticipated 
workload of peer reviewers (e.g. how often new updates will be produced and whether these 
would require full/specialised/no peer review), and agree on turn-around times for LSR peer 
review.  
 
Selective peer review of only those parts of the LSR that have changed from the previous version 
can ease the burden on peer reviewers and support the timely completion of peer reviews 
required for the LSR model. Providing peer reviewers with a ‘compare’ version will allow them to 
see what has changed since the last LSR update (32). 
 
The need for full versus selective peer review should be made in accordance with the Cochrane 
peer review policy (33). Consistent with this policy, Managing Editors can invite peer reviewers 
to focus on particular components of the LSR relevant to their expertise.  
 
The LSR support team is available to peer review LSR-specific methods of protocols and reviews. 
Information specialists with experience in living evidence surveillance methods could be invited 
to peer review LSR search methods. Statisticians with expertise in repeated multiple 
intervention comparisons can peer review LSRs that involve living network meta-analysis. 
Editors can contact the LSR support team for assistance with identifying peer reviewers for LSR-
related aspects of protocols and reviews. 
 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  28 
 
 
28 
4.5.2 Copy-editing living systematic reviews 
Cochrane’s policy is that all new and updated Cochrane Reviews must be copy-edited before 
publication. Given the tight time frames underpinning the LSR model, Managing Editors must 
provide Cochrane Copy Edit Support or their Group’s accredited copy-editor with advanced 
notice of the pending arrival of an LSR. The evaluation of Cochrane pilot LSRs found that the 
time required for copy-editing decreased across subsequent versions of an LSR. Copy-editors 
will usually focus chiefly on content that has changed in the new version of the LSR, but will also 
consider the update as a whole (32), and additional full copy-edits of LSRs will be completed as 
required, potentially annually. 
 
4.5.3 Screening living systematic reviews 
In this context, “screening” refers to Cochrane’s pre-publication quality assurance programme 
which involves checking the quality of protocols and systematic reviews against key criteria 
prior to publication. Given the LSR approach will be applied to topics of high priority to decision-
makers and therefore potentially highly visible, it can be beneficial if the Network Associate 
Editor screens LSR protocols and LSRs, particularly when there have been substantive changes 
from previous versions.  It is also important to follow screening requirements for the applicable 
Cochrane Network and inform Senior Network Editors about new LSRs (31). 
 
The evaluation of Cochrane pilot LSRs found that LSR screening time was comparable to 
standard Cochrane Reviews. Identified opportunities for reducing screening time included using 
the triage tool to facilitate the same person undertaking the screening across different versions 
of a given LSR, thereby increasing familiarity with the content (13). Similar to the peer review 
and copy-editing processes, a ‘compare version’ can assist in identifying changes for a new 
version, as well as text that authors may have omitted to change. It is also helpful if Managing 
Editors provide advance notice of the arrival of an LSR update to the Network Associate Editor, 
and forewarning of whether a more intensive screening process may be required because the 
evidence base has changed considerably since the last update. 
 
4.6 Language translation of living systematic reviews 
Cochrane Reviews are currently being translated into up to 15 languages (34). Translation of 
Reviews currently involves translation of the Abstract and/or Plain Language Summary, at a 
minimum. Translations into Spanish often also include main text sections. Note that the What’s 
New event descriptions are not currently translated.  
 
To facilitate translation of LSRs, it is useful if authors and Managing Editors  
• use standard text, as appropriate, across LSR versions (e.g. using the suggested text for 
the Editorial note included in the Abstract and Plain Language Summary [see the LSR 
template in Appendix 2]; and What’s New Description field;  
• use simple and plain language avoiding complex sentence structures, grammar and 
ambiguities, where possible and appropriate; and 
• edit the text of Abstract, Plain Language Summary and main text when required only; 
non-essential copy-edits should be delayed to the next update of the LSR.  
 
The use of standard text and plain language reduces the resources required for human 
translators, and facilitates the application of artificial intelligence tools including translation 
memory and machine translation. In translation editor software, typically, similar or identical 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  29 
 
 
29 
sentences that have been translated previously, will be suggested automatically to translators 
(via the so called “translation memory”). Likewise, suggestions from machine translation 
engines are usually shown directly in the translation editor, and those perform much better, if 
text follows basic simple and plain language recommendations, as much as possible (short 
sentences, one statement per sentence, active instead of passive voice, remove filler words, 
avoid metaphors and figural speech, avoid complicated syntax, avoid slang and jargon, etc.) 
 
4.7 Periodic review of a living systematic review 
After an LSR has been in living mode for 12 months, a review of the following aspects of the 
review is recommended: 
 
1. Appropriateness of continuing to maintain the review in living mode.   
• See section ‘8: Transitioning a living systematic review out of living mode’ for 
guidance regarding factors to consider in determining whether a living approach 
to the review is still appropriate. 
 
2. Methods 
• Search strategy (see section ‘6: Managing searches for living systematic reviews’). 
• Have any new relevant methods emerged that would be appropriate to integrate 
into the methods?  Examples include risk of bias tools, statistical techniques and 
technological enablers. 
 
3. Author team 
• It is important to consider which authors will work on the LSR over the next 12 
months and set expectations about the criteria for authorship. See section ‘7: 
Authorship and living systematic reviews’. 
 
4. Peer reviewers 
• If a consistent team of peer reviewers has been involved in the LSR over the past 
12 months, it can be helpful for the Managing Editor to inquire whether they will 
be available for the next 12 months. 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  30 
 
 
30 
5 Living systematic review enablers 
While Cochrane has always aspired to produce “a library of trial overviews, which will be 
updated when new data become available” (15), the extensive time, effort and skill required 
have been persistent barriers to achieving this vision. However, recent innovations can 
substantially reduce and potentially overcome these barriers. Table 4 lists some innovative 
enablers that may improve the efficiency of producing an LSR baseline review and continual LSR 
maintenance. This list is not exhaustive and LSR teams can find a wider range of enablers 
through sources such as the Systematic Review Toolbox (35).   
 
Enablers offer potential efficiency gains for many stages of LSR production (7). For example, the 
work involved in conducting ongoing searches can be reduced by setting up automated 
searches in bibliographic databases. Text mining, machine learning and other forms of 
automation, along with citizen science platforms, can substantially reduce the burden of 
screening search results. Author support tools including online task sharing tools provide 
opportunities to support and manage diverse contributor teams. New approaches to quality 
assurance and publication enable rapid publication of high-quality reviews. Each of these 
innovations presents an opportunity to produce better reviews quicker.  
 
Cochrane has developed key enablers of LSRs such as text mining and machine learning tools 
(e.g. RCT classifier), citizen science platforms (e.g. Cochrane Crowd (36)), systems that 
seamlessly integrate multiple enablers (e.g. Screen4Me), and Cochrane’s Author Support Tools 
(e.g. Covidence (37), TaskExchange (38)). These and other enablers make it possible to 
continually assess and curate the evidence base for Cochrane LSRs in a systematic, efficient and 
collaborative way. 
 
At the protocol planning stage, authors and information specialists can identify enablers that 
will be used to produce the baseline review and/or support the ongoing maintenance of the LSR. 
Any use of enablers must be compliant with MECIR standards (2). Tools listed in Table 4 that do 
not require Cochrane Scientific Committee approval include Cochrane Crowd; TaskExchange; 
Covidence; EPPI-Reviewer; Rayyan; RCT classifier; Screen4Me; Project Transform Evidence 
Pipeline; CrossRef; SRA-Helper; RevManHAL; and RevMan Replicant.  Authors wishing to use 
other tools can submit a request to Cochrane’s Scientific Committee so that the tools can be 
considered for use in Cochrane Reviews. 
 
The LSR protocol should describe which tools will be used, for what tasks and how they will be 
implemented. Similarly, the LSR itself should report how tools were used. 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  31 
 
 
31 
TABLE 4. LSR ENABLERS [ADAPTED FROM THOMAS ET AL (7) AND ELLIOTT ET AL (39)] 
 
Review Task 
Category 
Method/Task Enablers 
Establishing 
the team and 
processes for 
collaboration 
Forming a large and 
diverse group of 
contributors 
Crowd participation, citizen science and task-
sharing platforms (e.g. Cochrane Crowd; 
TaskExchange) enable distribution of tasks among 
a large team. 
Establishing 
mechanisms for 
collaboration among 
team members 
Workflow management and collaboration tools 
include Covidence, EPPI-Reviewer (40) and Rayyan 
(41). 
Production Searching Many bibliographic databases support automated 
email alerts (auto-alerts) of new results for saved 
searches.  
Assessing studies for 
eligibility 
During abstract/title screening RCTs can be 
identified using machine learning algorithms (e.g. 
RCT classifier), crowd-sourcing (e.g. Cochrane 
Crowd) and integrated systems (e.g. Screen4Me; 
Project Transform Evidence Pipeline (42)).  
Retrieval of full-text reports can be automated or 
accelerated (e.g. CrossRef; SRA-Helper (43, 44)).   
Extracting data Machine-learning and automated structured data 
extraction tools collect information about PICO 
components and/or risk of bias (e.g. 
RobotReviewer; ContentMine; Graph2Data) 
Data synthesis and 
writing up 
Enablers for data synthesis are in the early stages 
of development. Automatic text generation tools 
include RevManHAL (45) and RevMan Replicant 
(46). 
Publication 
 
 
Peer and editorial 
review 
Cochrane peer review policy permits peer 
reviewers to focus on reviewing changed sections 
of an LSR, rather than the entire manuscript (33). 
Archie compare function enables reviewers and 
editors to identify changes between LSR versions 
(32).   
Dissemination and 
communicating to 
users 
Authors can inform users about the status of LSR 
currency from month to month (including the 
most recent search date and links to new studies 
which have been identified but not yet 
incorporated) using the What’s New table. 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  32 
 
 
32 
It can be helpful to estimate the average number of records expected in monthly searches when 
deciding whether to use enablers in managing the workload of maintaining the LSR from month 
to month. In determining which enablers to use, LSR teams are encouraged to consider any 
limitations on the use of various tools. For example, at the time of finalising this guidance 
document, some Cochrane enablers (e.g. RCT classifier) were available to Cochrane information 
specialists only.  
 
Some technological enablers are further developed and validated than others. Therefore, it is 
helpful to consult the evaluation literature to understand the strengths and limitations of 
available tools. For example, it is important to consider any limitations on the accuracy of 
screening or data extraction tools in the context of risk tolerance for errors. The Cochrane LSR 
support team maintains an LSR Mendeley library to which we regularly add new literature on 
various aspects of living evidence, including evaluations of technological enablers.   
 
The development of systematic review enablers is progressing steadily within Cochrane and 
other organisations. Accordingly, review teams may benefit from keeping up to date with 
websites and scholarly literature on emerging enablers that could be incorporated into a 
revision of LSR methods (e.g. 35, 47, 48). For instance, work is underway within Cochrane to 
develop machine learning algorithms to classify studies according to PICO components. In 
addition, functionality for a living PRISMA flow diagram will soon be available to Covidence 
users. As another example, the Cochrane Linked Data Project offers a repository of structured 
systematic review data that could be harnessed to increase the efficiency of LSR maintenance, 
particularly for assessing study eligibility.   
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  33 
 
 
33 
6 Managing searches for living systematic 
reviews   
Regular searches and timely screening of search results are key characteristics of living 
systematic reviews. It is highly recommended that LSR teams include an information specialist 
to establish and manage evidence surveillance to ensure the efficiency and validity of the 
search.  
In the evaluation of pilot LSRs the time spent by information specialists processing monthly 
search updates ranged from 30 minutes to 6 hours. It is important information specialists are 
aware of the increased workload, and account for it. Depending on the scope of the review and 
the number of records retrieved each month, technological enablers may improve efficiency 
compared to traditional approaches to managing search results. Access to many of these 
enablers (e.g. Screen4Me, RCT classifier, Cochrane Crowd) will require the involvement of a 
Cochrane information specialist. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.1 Starting out 
6.1.1 Search methods for a new LSR protocol and baseline review 
When embarking on a new LSR, the search methods (including sources, search strategies, 
frequency of searches, use of technological enablers, ongoing assessment and evaluation) 
should be described in detail in the protocol and in the baseline version of the review. 
The author team will need to decide when to start the monthly searches. For reviews with 
relatively few studies and manageable search yields, teams may decide to enter living mode 
from the outset (i.e. commence monthly searches from the time when the baseline searches are 
run) and process monthly search results while the baseline version of the review is being 
produced and published. For larger reviews it may be more practical to complete and publish 
the baseline review first and then transition to living mode. In the latter case, the first update 
following publication of the baseline review will require the most effort in terms of screening 
and processing the backlog of search results. 
Box 3: Why information specialists are needed 
These are some of the key roles of information specialists at different stages of an LSR:  
• Protocol: estimate the likely size of monthly search results and advise on the suitability 
of technological enablers (e.g. RCT classifier, Cochrane Crowd, Screen4Me) to increase 
the efficiency of the search. 
• Transition baseline review to living mode: set up monthly searches (e.g. using database 
auto-alerts), establish comprehensive workflows for processing search results. 
• Living mode: manage monthly searches, identify and remove duplicates, apply any 
technology enablers, prepare search results for the author team, maintain accurate 
search records, update PRISMA flow diagram.  
• Annual review: reassess the appropriateness of the search methods (sources, search 
terms, frequency) and ensure any amendments to the scope of the review are reflected 
in the search. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  34 
 
 
34 
6.1.2 Search methods when transitioning an existing review to an LSR 
When transitioning an existing Cochrane Review to living mode, the search methods should be 
described in both the main text of the review and the LSR-specific methods appendix. At the 
time of transitioning to living mode, teams should assess if the search methods are still 
appropriate and revise to ensure ongoing searches perform well and search results are managed 
efficiently. This assessment should include consideration of sources, search terms and the use of 
enablers to process search results (see section ‘6.4: Assessing and refining search methods’). 
Peer review of the primary database strategy by an information specialist working within the 
same Cochrane network is highly recommended. 
Evaluating the search methods when converting a review to living mode will also involve 
assessing the feasibility and usefulness of incorporating technology enablers to process the 
monthly search results. For reviews of randomised trials, the RCT classifier may reduce the 
number of records to screen by around 30% but depending on the monthly yield, you may 
decide that the time spent processing records through the classifier offers only marginal gains in 
efficiency. For reviews that generate a more substantial yield each month (~100 records or more) 
then use of the RCT classifier is worth considering.  
Further guidance on revising and reporting search strategies when updating an existing review is 
provided in the Methodological Expectations of Cochrane Intervention Reviews (MECIR) 
standards (2) and Chapter IV of the Cochrane Handbook (25). 
6.2 Ongoing evidence surveillance 
As a minimum, living systematic reviews require monthly searching of key databases and trial 
registries. Any new version of the LSR published in the CDSR must comply with the following 
mandatory MECIR standards:  
• search of CENTRAL, MEDLINE and Embase (Standard C24)  
• search of ClinicalTrials.gov and WHO ICTRP (Standard C27)  
• reference checking of any new included studies (Standard C30) 
 
Searching other sources (e.g. regulatory agency websites, handsearching journals) or 
conducting supplementary searches (e.g. citation tracking) can be undertaken less frequently, 
for example every three or six months. The frequency of searching other sources will depend on 
literature dissemination activities in a given research area (e.g. availability of proceedings from 
key conferences), but should ideally always be up to date whenever a new version of the LSR is 
published. 
 
Information about the frequency and range of searches that comprise the evidence surveillance 
approach must be clearly described in the protocol, and reported in the baseline review and 
subsequent updates.  
Box 4: Monthly searches 
Currently all Cochrane living systematic reviews conduct monthly searching and screening. There 
is ongoing discussion about the minimal search frequency for a review to be designated ‘living’, 
and whether it might be possible to vary this depending on the review question. The results of 
these conversations will be used to inform future revisions of this guidance. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  35 
 
 
35 
Establishing standard processes for managing the monthly and other ongoing searches will 
increase the feasibility and sustainability of the LSR approach. Standard processes include: 
 
• running monthly saved searches or setting up database auto-alerts, ideally all running on 
the same day or date each month  
• removing duplicates, both from among the batch of new records as well as from records 
that have already been screened  
• integrating the use of enablers, such as the RCT classifier or Cochrane Crowd  
• preparing records to send to the author team (e.g. via email, Covidence or EndNote)  
• maintaining an EndNote library (or equivalent) that captures all the search results over 
the lifetime of the review 
• keeping accurate records of each new search (sources, dates, numbers of records, etc.) 
and what decision is made for each record screened.  
o This latter point is essential for accurate reporting of the search methods in the 
review, including the PRISMA flow diagram. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The distribution of tasks and coordination of the search workload should be determined at the 
outset. Typically, the information specialist will oversee the monthly searches and the authors 
the less frequent supplementary searches (e.g. cited/citing references, handsearching, 
contacting study authors, regulatory websites, etc.). 
 
6.3 Reporting the search results 
Whenever a new version of the LSR is published, the search results must be updated in the 
abstract, main body of the review and the PRISMA diagram. In addition, the What’s New table 
Description field can be used to indicate the most recent search date and the status of 
processing the results of the search. See section ‘4.4: Informing readers about the currency of 
living systematic reviews’ for further information on using the What’s New table. 
  
Box 5: Database searches 
There are three main approaches to generating monthly search results from databases:  
1. setting up auto-alerts in each database (if that functionality exists) and receiving 
notification via email on a set day each month 
2. manually re-running saved searches using appropriate date limiters to retrieve 
only those records added to the database since the previous search 
3. manually re-running saved searches across the entire database, retrieving all 
records and deduplicating against all previous yields. 
Regardless of the approach used, duplicates should be removed from the combined 
monthly search yield and then further deduplicated against the cumulative search yield 
for the review, before providing the search results to the author team. 
 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  36 
 
 
36 
6.4 Assessing and refining search methods 
Author teams, wherever possible, should include an information specialist who works with other 
team members to review the search methods annually, or sooner if changes occur in the 
research field that may impact the search methods. This will include consideration of new 
search terms and sources, and possible changes to the frequency of the supplementary 
searches. Teams could consider scheduling the review of search methods to coincide with the 
announcement each November/December by the National Library of Medicine of changes to the 
MeSH vocabulary.  
Looking at the studies included in the review can determine the contribution of different sources 
(indicating which might be discontinued), as well as help identify search terms that add noise to 
the search, adversely impacting on the performance of the search strategy. This is also the time 
to make sure any changes to the scope of the review (i.e. PICO components) are reflected in the 
inclusion of appropriate thesaurus (e.g. MeSH) and free-text terms, and that the original search 
is current with respect to any new thesaurus terms or changes to database search syntax. 
Note that substantial changes to the review, especially an expansion of scope, may require 
searches to be re-executed across the entire period covered by the original searches.  
Other aspects of managing search results (e.g. whether to use technology enablers) should also 
be reviewed at this time. 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  37 
 
 
37 
7 Authorship and living systematic reviews 
Standard Cochrane authorship considerations apply to Cochrane LSRs (49), and LSRs also 
present unique challenges to managing authorship. For example, the evaluation of Cochrane 
pilot LSRs found that due to the quick turnaround required and number of contributors 
available, some authors on earlier versions of the LSR were either unavailable to contribute to 
core review tasks for subsequent updates, or there was very little review work to be done. For 
many LSRs, it is likely that the relative contributions of authors will vary across versions of an 
LSR. Therefore, it is expected that the author team will evolve over time.   
 
It is strongly recommended that LSR teams discuss authorship management as early as 
possible.  Teams wishing to explore an approach that is not documented in the Cochrane 
authorship policy can contact the EMD Publishing team. 
 
It is important that authors understand how the current versioning functionality applied within 
the CDSR is related to publication metrics, such as number of citations per publication. At the 
time of finalising this guidance, each update of an LSR is regarded as an individual publication 
and has a unique DOI. While this results in an increased number of publications for authors, the 
number of citations for an LSR is spread across all versions, thereby reducing the number of 
citations per individual publication. In the future, it may be possible to group all versions of an 
LSR using mechanisms such as linked DOIs, to produce a metric that accumulates citations 
across all versions of an LSR.  
 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  38 
 
 
38 
8 Transitioning a living systematic review out of 
living mode 
8.1 When to transition a living systematic review out of living mode 
Just as the decision to commence a living systematic review requires careful consideration, 
deciding to cease maintaining a review in living mode also requires consideration and pre-
specification.  
 
It is likely that ongoing continual updating of some LSRs will eventually become inappropriate. 
The reasons for an LSR to be transitioned out of living mode should be predetermined and 
specified in the protocol.   
For example, the review question may no longer meet all three criteria listed above in section 
‘3.1 When is a living systematic review worth doing?’ That is: 
• the research question is no longer a priority for decision-making (e.g. the intervention 
may have been superseded or withdrawn). 
• a reasonable level of certainty has been reached in the existing evidence. 
• research that might impact the conclusions of the review is no longer emerging (e.g. the 
research area is no longer active). 
It is recommended that LSR teams assess the appropriateness of continuing to maintain the LSR 
on an annual basis.  Alternatively, Cochrane Review Groups may want to consider whether a 
given LSR should continue to be maintained as part of priority setting activities. Factors that 
could be examined include article-level metrics (e.g. Altmetrics; downloads; citations); 
knowledge translation activities arising from an LSR, including impact on policy and practice; 
and new research initiated (50).  
In addition, a range of practical factors may influence whether an LSR continues to be 
maintained. These include whether the necessary resources (e.g., funding, author and editorial 
team capacity) remain available.  
 
Note: Similar to the decision to initiate an LSR, the decision to transition an LSR out of 
living mode rests with the editorial team. 
 
Ideally, the author team will make a pre-planned transition out of living mode. That is, one final 
update is undertaken to include any new evidence found since the last update and 
modify/remove text regarding LSR methods. A process for this is described below. When 
resources are not available to transition the LSR out of living mode using the process described 
below, LSR teams can contact the LSR support team for advice. 
 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  39 
 
 
39 
8.2 Process for transitioning a living systematic review out of living mode 
A central aim of the process for transitioning an LSR out of living mode is to inform the reader 
that the systematic review is no longer in living mode. Teams can follow the steps below, once 
the decision has been made to transition an LSR out of living mode. 
 
The following sections of the Cochrane Review will need to be modified: 
 
• Abstract, Plain Language Summary and Background: Modify these to indicate: 
o that the review was previously an LSR 
o the timeframe for which the review was an LSR 
o why the review was transitioned out of living mode 
• Background:  
o Remove text about the rationale for an LSR approach from the sub-section Why it is 
important to do this review 
o If applicable, remove the secondary objective of maintaining the review as an LSR. 
• Methods: Search methods for identification of studies:  
o Remove text about ongoing evidence surveillance (e.g. monthly database and clinical 
trial registries searches; conference abstracts) from the Electronic sources and 
Searching other resources sub-sections. 
• Selection of studies: Remove text about screening the ongoing searches. 
• Data synthesis: Remove LSR-specific text (e.g. immediately extracting and analysing data 
after screening the monthly searches). 
• Methods for future updates:  
o Remove LSR-specific text about reviewing the methods.  
o Remove text about the conditions under which the review will no longer be 
maintained as an LSR. 
• Differences between protocol and review:  
o For an LSR that was transitioned from a standard Cochrane Review to an LSR, this 
section can be adjusted to reflect the transition back to a standard review. 
o For an LSR that commenced as a new review following publication of an LSR 
protocol, this section will need to be modified to reflect that the review has been 
transitioned out of living mode. 
• Appendices:   
o For an LSR that was transitioned from a standard Cochrane Review to an LSR, the 
LSR-specific methods appendix can be removed. (For readers wanting to access the 
LSR methods, a link can be provided to the most recent version of the review that 
included these methods). 
 
• Authors can search the review text for any remaining LSR-related terms (e.g. “living” or “LSR” 
or “LNMA”) to identify other aspects of the review text that may need to be modified or 
removed, as appropriate. 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  40 
 
 
40 
Once the update has been produced and published, the Managing Editor can update the What’s 
New field according to standard Cochrane policy; see 
https://documentation.cochrane.org/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=117380266. 
 
Notes:   
1. Some prior LSRs may be updated in future as per the standard update process for 
Cochrane Reviews. 
2. Teams may choose to suspend automated evidence surveillance methods (e.g. 
bibliographic database auto-alerts). 
3. At the time of finalising this version of the guidance, no Cochrane LSRs had been 
transitioned out of living mode. Accordingly, the process outlined above may evolve over 
time. Teams who have decided to transition an LSR out of living mode are encouraged to 
contact the LSR support team for assistance with the process.  
 
 
 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  41 
 
 
41 
9 Resources for LSR teams 
9.1 Cochrane’s living systematic reviews website 
The Cochrane living systematic reviews website provides links to a range of resources including 
• LSR series in Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 
• List of Cochrane's published LSRs 
• Report on Cochrane’s evaluation of pilot LSRs 
• Cochrane Learning Live webinar introducing LSRs 
• LSR library on Mendeley 
• Living Evidence Network webinars.  Examples include: 
o LSR searching 
o technological enablers for living evidence 
o living network meta-analysis 
 
9.2 Living Evidence Network 
The Living Evidence Network (LEN) is facilitated by Cochrane. Initially named the Living 
Systematic Review Network, it commenced in early 2016 to bring together those involved in 
Cochrane's first LSR pilots. The Network now includes over 270 systematic review and guideline 
development researchers and practitioners, within and outside Cochrane, who are planning or 
undertaking living evidence projects such as LSRs or living guidelines, or are interested in 
certain aspects (e.g. technological enablers).   
 
The purpose of the LEN is to  
• share ideas, information and resources 
• further the thinking on the living evidence concept and methods 
The LEN includes 5 interest groups: 
• Search 
• Technology 
• Methods 
• Publication 
• Knowledge Translation and Stakeholder Engagement 
More information about the LEN can be found in the governance structure, including the roles of 
the Steering Group, Interest Group Co-Leads and working groups. 
 
If you would like to join the Living Evidence Network and be kept up to date about LEN activities, 
including upcoming webinars, please email lsr@cochrane.org 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  42 
 
 
42 
10 References 
1. Higgins J, Thomas J, Chandler J, Cumpston M, Li T, Page M, et al., editors. Cochrane 
Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. 2nd ed. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons; 2019. 
2. Cochrane. MECIR n.d. [Available from: https://methods.cochrane.org/mecir. 
3. Khamis A, Kahale L, Pardo-Hernandez H, Schünemann H, Akl E. Methods of conduct and 
reporting of living systematic reviews: a protocol for a living methodological survey [version 2; 
peer review: 2 approved]. F1000Research. 2019;8(221). 
4. Elliott JH, Synnot A, Turner T, Simmonds M, Akl EA, McDonald S, et al. Living systematic 
review: 1. Introduction-the why, what, when, and how. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 
2017;91:23-30. 
5. Akl EA, Meerpohl JJ, Elliott J, Kahale LA, Schünemann HJ, Agoritsas T, et al. Living 
systematic reviews: 4. Living guideline recommendations. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 
2017;91:47-53. 
6. Simmonds M, Salanti G, McKenzie J, Elliott J, Agoritsas T, Hilton J, et al. Living systematic 
reviews: 3. Statistical methods for updating meta-analyses. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 
2017;91:38-46. 
7. Thomas J, Noel-Storr A, Marshall I, Wallace B, McDonald S, Mavergames C, et al. Living 
systematic reviews: 2. Combining human and machine effort. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 
2017;91:31-7. 
8. Hodder RK, O'Brien KM, Stacey FG, Wyse RJ, Clinton‐McHarg T, Tzelepis F, et al. 
Interventions for increasing fruit and vegetable consumption in children aged five years and 
under. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2018(5). 
9. Spurling GKP, Del Mar CB, Dooley L, Foxlee R, Farley R. Delayed antibiotic prescriptions 
for respiratory infections. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2017(9). 
10. Akl EA, Kahale LA, Hakoum MB, Matar CF, Sperati F, Barba M, et al. Parenteral 
anticoagulation in ambulatory patients with cancer. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 
2017(9). 
11. Kahale LA, Hakoum MB, Tsolakian IG, Matar CF, Barba M, Yosuico VED, et al. Oral 
anticoagulation in people with cancer who have no therapeutic or prophylactic indication for 
anticoagulation. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2017(12). 
12. Kahale LA, Hakoum MB, Tsolakian IG, Alturki F, Matar CF, Terrenato I, et al. 
Anticoagulation for the long‐term treatment of venous thromboembolism in people with cancer. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2018(6). 
13. Millard T, Synnot A, Elliott J, Turner  T. Results from the evaluation of the pilot living 
systematic reviews: What works? What could we improve? 2019 [Available from: 
https://community.cochrane.org/sites/default/files/uploads/inline-
files/Transform/201905%20LSR_pilot_evaluation_report.pdf. 
14. Elliott JH, Turner T, Clavisi O, Thomas J, Higgins JP, Mavergames C, et al. Living 
systematic reviews: an emerging opportunity to narrow the evidence-practice gap. PLoS Med. 
2014;11(2):e1001603. 
15. Chalmers I. Electronic publications for updating controlled trial reviews. The Lancet. 
1986;328(8501):287. 
16. Shojania KG, Sampson M, Ansari MT, Ji J, Doucette S, Moher D. How quickly do 
systematic reviews go out of date? A survival analysis. Annals of Internal Medicine. 
2007;147(4):224-33. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  43 
 
 
43 
17. Cochrane. Updating Classification System 2019 [Available from: 
https://documentation.cochrane.org/display/EPPR/Updating+Classification+System. 
18. Whittle SL, Johnston RV, McDonald S, Paterson KL, Buchbinder R. Autologous blood 
product injections including platelet‐rich plasma for osteoarthritis of the knee. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews. 2019(5). 
19. Whittle SL, Johnston RV, McDonald S, Worthley D, Campbell TM, Buchbinder R. Stem cell 
injections for osteoarthritis of the knee. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2019(5). 
20. Ferrara R, Imbimbo M, Paget‐Bailly S, Malouf R, Calais F, Agazzi GM, et al. Single or 
combined immune checkpoint inhibitors compared to first‐line chemotherapy with or without 
bevacizumab for people with advanced non‐small cell lung cancer. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews. 2019(2). 
21. Garner P, Hopewell S, Chandler J, MacLehose H, Akl EA, Beyene J, et al. When and how to 
update systematic reviews: consensus and checklist. BMJ. 2016;354. 
22. Cochrane. Cochrane Priority Reviews List 2019 [Available from: 
https://community.cochrane.org/review-production/production-resources/cochrane-priority-
reviews-list. 
23. Cochrane Review’s Altmetric Score: Understanding the value. 2016 [Available from: 
https://community.cochrane.org/news/cochrane-review%E2%80%99s-altmetric-score-
understanding-value. 
24. Garner P, Hopewell S, Chandler J, MacLehose H, Akl EA, Beyene J, et al. When and how to 
update systematic reviews: consensus and checklist. BMJ. 2016;354:i3507. 
25. Cumpston M, Chandler J. Chapter IV: Updating a review. In: Higgins JPT, Thomas J, 
Chandler J, Cumpston M, Page MJ, Li T, et al., editors. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic 
Reviews of Interventions version 6 (updated August 2019): Cochrane; 2019. 
26. Thomas J, Askie LM, Berlin JA, Elliott J, Ghersi D, Simmonds M, et al. Chapter 22: 
Prospective approaches to accumulating evidence. In: Higgin JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, 
Cumpston M, Li T, Page M, et al., editors. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Review of 
Interventions version 6 (updated July 2019): Cochrane; 2019. 
27. Rydzewska LHM, Burdett S, Vale CL, Clarke NW, Fizazi K, Kheoh T, et al. Adding 
abiraterone to androgen deprivation therapy in men with metastatic hormone-sensitive 
prostate cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis. European Journal of Cancer. 
2017;84:88-101. 
28. Tierney J, Vale C, Burdett S, Fisher D, Rydzewska L, Parmar MKB, editors. Timely and 
reliable evaluation of the effects of interventions: a framework for adaptive meta-analysis 
(FAME). Society for Clinical Trials Annual Meeting; 2017; Liverpool, UK. 
29. Cochrane. Number and expertise of peer reviewers: implementation. 2019 [Available 
from: 
https://documentation.cochrane.org/display/EPPR/Number+and+expertise+of+peer+reviewers
%3A+implementation. 
30. McGowan J, Sampson M, Salzwedel DM, Cogo E, Foerster V, Lefebvre C. PRESS Peer 
Review of Electronic Search Strategies: 2015 Guideline Statement. Journal of Clinical 
Epidemiology. 2016;75:40-6. 
31. Cochrane. Feedback from Network Associate Editors. 2019 [Available from: 
https://documentation.cochrane.org/display/EPPR/Feedback+from+Network+Associate+Editor
s. 
32. Cochrane. Archie Help: Comparing versions. 2018 [Available from: 
https://documentation.cochrane.org/display/Archie/Comparing+versions. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  44 
 
 
44 
33. Cochrane. Cochrane peer review policy 2019 [Available from: 
https://documentation.cochrane.org/display/EPPR/Peer+review. 
34. Cochrane. Translated Cochrane evidence 2019 [Available from: 
https://www.cochrane.org/news/translated-cochrane-evidence. 
35. Marshall C, Sutton A. Systematic Review Toolbox n.d. [Available from: 
http://systematicreviewtools.com/index.php. 
36. Cochrane. Cochrane Crowd  [Available from: http://crowd.cochrane.org. 
37. Covidence systematic review software. Melbourne, Australia: Veritas Health Innovation. 
38. Cochrane. Cochrane TaskExchange  [Available from: https://taskexchange.cochrane.org/. 
39. Elliott JH, Turner T, Clavisi O, Thomas J, Higgins JPT, Mavergames C, et al. Living 
Systematic Reviews: An Emerging Opportunity to Narrow the Evidence-Practice Gap. PLoS Med. 
2014;11(2):e1001603. 
40. Thomas J, Brunton J, S G. EPPI-Reviewer 4: software for research synthesis. EPPI-Centre 
Software. London: Social Science Research Unit, UCL Institute of Education; 2010. 
41. Ouzzani M, Hammady H, Fedorowicz Z, Elmagarmid A. Rayyan-a web and mobile app for 
systematic reviews. Syst Rev. 2016;5(1):210. 
42. Cochrane. Evidence Pipeline 2019 [Available from: 
https://community.cochrane.org/help/tools-and-software/evidence-pipeline. 
43. Institute for Evidence-Based Healthcare. Systematic Review Accelerator-SRA Helper 2019 
[Available from: http://sr-accelerator.com/#/sra-helper. 
44. Cleo G, Scott AM, Islam F, Julien B, Beller E. Usability and acceptability of four systematic 
review automation software packages: a mixed method design. Systematic Reviews. 
2019;8(1):145. 
45. Torres Torres M, Adams CE. RevManHAL: towards automatic text generation in 
systematic reviews. Systematic reviews. 2017;6(1):27. 
46. Institute for Evidence-Based Healthcare. RevMan Replicant - available in IEBH Systematic 
Review Accelerator  [Available from: http://sr-accelerator.com/. 
47. Marshall IJ, Wallace BC. Toward systematic review automation: a practical guide to using 
machine learning tools in research synthesis. Systematic Reviews. 2019;8(1):163. 
48. Cochrane. Tools and software n.d. [Available from: 
https://community.cochrane.org/help/tools-and-software. 
49. Cochrane. Authorship and contributorship 2019 [Available from: 
https://documentation.cochrane.org/display/EPPR/Authorship+and+contributorship. 
50. Cochrane KT Working Group on Embedding Prioritization. Guidance note for Cochrane 
Groups to define systematic review priorities. 2018. 
51. Wallace BC, Noel-Storr A, Marshall IJ, Cohen AM, Smalheiser NR, Thomas J. Identifying 
reports of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) via a hybrid machine learning and crowdsourcing 
approach. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2017;24(6):1165-8. 
 
  

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  45 
 
 
45 
11 Appendix 1. List of contributors 
Many members of the Living Evidence Network contributed to the conceptualisation of LSRs 
that informed this document, or provided verbal or written feedback on document drafts.   
Living Evidence Network members as at 11 October 2019 include:  
 
Anne Adams 
Thomas Agoritsas 
Morio Aihara 
Claire Ainsworth 
Elie Akl 
Sabina Alam 
Lauren Albrecht 
Angela Aldin 
Amal Alharbi 
Joseph Allencherril 
Gerd Antes 
Makalapua Motu’apuaka 
Rebecca Armstrong 
Anneliese Arno 
Lisa Askie 
Brooke Atkins 
Agnes Au 
Matthew Bagg 
Sophie Paget-Bailly 
Laura Banfield 
James Barker 
Andrew Beck 
Trudy Bekkering 
Jenny Bellorini 
Catherine Boden 
Isabelle Boisvert 
Jamie Hartmann-Boyce 
Robert Boyle 
Linn Brandt 
Alexandra Brazinova 
Sue Brennan 
Charlene Bridges 
Joanne Brooker 
Matteo Bruschettini 
Rachelle Buchbinder 
Paula Byrne 
Greta Castellini 
Chris Champion 
Andreas Charidimou 
Miyoung Choi 
Lee Yee Chong 
Roger Chou 
Rachel Churchill 
 
 
 
Justin Clark 
Laurence Le Cleach 
Maryse C Cnossen 
Cia Connell 
Annette O’Connor 
Marie-Joelle Cossi 
Michel Counotte 
Samantha Cox 
Samantha Craigie 
Kay Crossley 
Gillian Currie 
Philipp Dahm 
Alanna Danilkewich 
Robert Dellavalle 
Emma J Dennett 
Jane Dennis 
Emma Donoghue 
Liz Dooley 
Laura Downie 
Corinna Dressler 
Cathy Egan 
Sarah A Elliott 
Julian Elliott 
Jesse Elliott 
Moritz Ernst 
Imen Farhat 
Caroline Farmer 
Samreen Fathima 
Robin Featherstone 
Ella Flemyng 
Dan Fox 
Ruth Foxlee 
Ioannis Gallos 
Laura Martínez García 
Paul Garner 
Daniela Kuellenberg de Gaudry 
Martha Gerrity 
Deborah Pentesco-Gilbert 
Jennifer Gilbert 
Paul Glasziou 
Marius Goldkuhle 
Joyker Peçanha Gomes 
Cathy Gordon 
 
 
 
Iris Gorgon 
Sean Grant 
Sally Green 
Jeremy Grimshaw 
Anita Gross 
Jeanne-Marie Guise 
Kurinchi Gurusamy 
Neal Haddaway 
Lisa Hartling 
Jill Hayden 
Stephanie A Kolakowsky-
Hayner 
Glen Hazlewood 
Mark Helfand 
Hector Pardo-Hernandez 
Julian Higgins 
Kelvin Hill 
Sophie Hill 
John Hilton 
Kristin Hitchcock 
Rebecca Hodder 
Kay Hogan 
Gareth Hollands 
David Honeyman 
Tanya Horsley 
Kylie Hunter 
Itziar Etxeandia Ikobaltzeta 
Noah Ivers 
Rafal Jaeschke 
Tina Jakob 
Britta Tendal Jeppesen 
Renea Johnston 
Arwel Jones 
Lydia Jones 
Lauren Kadziel 
Lara Kahale 
Reza Kahlaee 
Frances Kellie 
Shannon Kelly 
Homa Keshavarz 
Noemi Kiss 
Amy Knehans 
Nina Kreuzberger 
  
   

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  46 
 
 
46 
Toby Lasserson 
Chris Lassig 
Rebecca Lawrence 
Johanie Lépine 
Zbigniew Leś 
Stefan Leucht 
Nicola Lindson 
Anne Littlewood 
Nicola Low 
Jennifer Lyon 
Andrew Maas 
Harriet MacLehose 
Malcolm MacLeod 
Erin Macri 
Reem Malouf 
Coyrnne Marchal 
Iain Marshall 
Rachel Marshall 
Nicole Martin 
Novella Martinello 
Danielle Mason 
Jennifer Matsuura 
Chris Mavergames 
Lara J Maxwell 
James McAuley 
Steve McDonald 
Luke McGuinness 
Joanne McKenzie 
Emma Mead 
Joerg Meerpohl  
Bronwen Merner 
Maria-Inti Metzendorf 
Tanya Millard 
Paul Miller 
Bradley Mitchelmore 
Stefania Mondello 
(Richard Morley 
Sarah Muir 
Kamso Mohammed Mujaab 
Marcus Munafo 
Zachary Munn 
Melissa Murano 
Reem Mustafa 
Sumanth Kumbargere Nagraj 
Kristine Newman 
Phi Hung Nguyen 
 
Robby Nieuwlaat 
Adriani Nikolakopoulou 
Sarah Norris 
Juan Jose Yepes-Nuñe 
Kate O'Brien 
Denise O'Connor 
Ria Osborne 
Colleen Ovelman 
Matthew Page 
Manisha Pahwa 
Jordi Pardo Pardo 
Loyal Pattuwage 
Robin Paynter 
Leslea Peirson 
Caroline Perron 
Charlotte Pestridge 
Kim Peterson 
Jennifer Petkovic 
Vanessa Piechotta 
Dawid Pieper 
Joanne Platt 
Robert Plovnick 
Paolo Fusar-Poli 
Gail Quinn 
Gabriel Rada 
Philippe Ravaud 
Bernd Richter 
Alison Riddle 
Juliane Ried 
Shawn C Roll 
Rebecca Ryan 
Doug Salzwedel 
Pasqualina Santaguida 
Nancy Santesso 
Benjamin Scheckel 
Holger J Schünemann 
Ian Shemilt 
Diana Sherifali 
Farhad Shokraneh 
Reed Siemieniuk 
Mark Simmonds 
Ambrish Singh 
Balendra Singh 
Nicole Skoetz 
Birte Snilstveit 
Geoff Spurling 
 
Velandai Srikanth 
Mark Stevenson 
Anna Noel-Storr 
Elizabeth Stovold 
Katrina Sullivan 
Annie Synnot 
Annie Synnot 
Pui San Tan 
Rhiannon Tate 
Mark Taylor 
Britta Tendal 
Kris Thayer 
James Thomas 
Heidi Tibollo 
Thomy Tonia 
Michaela Torkar 
Annette Totten 
David Tovey 
Ludovic Trinquart 
Roger Tritton 
Guy Tsafnat 
Peter Tugwell 
David Tunnicliffe 
Alexis Turgeon 
Tari Turner 
Gert van Valkenhoef 
Per Vandvik 
Joshua Vogel 
Daniel Wagner 
Sheila A Wallace 
Byron Wallace 
Chris Watts 
Laura Weeks 
Aaron Weigl 
Karla Soares-Weiser 
George Wells 
Heath White 
Samuel Whittle 
L Susan Wieland 
Wojtek Wiercioch 
Myfanwy Williams 
Luke Wolfenden 
 Jennifer Yost 
Veronika Zelinková 
Liliya Eugenevna Ziganshina 
Hervé Zomahoun 
 
 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  47 
 
12 Appendix 2: Cochrane LSR protocol and LSR templates 
Column 1 of the table below highlights LSR-specific considerations for preparing a living systematic review protocol or producing a living systematic review. 
Column 2 provides suggested text and examples for an LSR protocol, while Column 3 provides the same for an LSR. These templates are intended to 
supplement, not replace guidance provided in the MECIR standards (2) and Cochrane Handbook.  
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
Title   
 The title for an LSR does not indicate that the review is living. Given that an LSR may transition out of living mode, 
the review title must be appropriate for a standard Cochrane Review.  
What’s New   
The What’s New table is used to provide monthly 
updates regarding the currency of the LSR.   
 
Section not applicable to protocol For information and examples relating to using the 
What’s New table for LSRs, please refer to section ‘4.4 
Informing readers about the currency of living 
systematic reviews’ in the main text of this guidance.   
 
History   
 
 
Section not applicable to protocol  For information about the History section, please refer 
to section ‘4.4 Informing readers about the currency of 
living systematic reviews’ in the main text of this 
guidance. 
 
Abstract 
At the end of the abstract, i.e. the end of the Authors 
conclusions section, provide the standard editorial text 
to identify the review as an LSR. 
Section not applicable to protocol  Suggested text 
 
Editorial note:  This is a living systematic review. We 
search for new evidence every month and update the 
review when we identify relevant new evidence. Please 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  48 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
refer to the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
for the current status of this review. 
 
Plain language summary 
At the end of the plain language summary, provide the 
standard editorial text to identify the review as an LSR. 
Section not applicable to protocol  
 
Suggested text 
 
Editorial note: This is a living systematic review. We 
search for new evidence every month and update the 
review when we identify relevant new evidence. Please 
refer to the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
for the current status of this review. 
 
Background 
Description of the condition; Description of the intervention; How the intervention might work  
No changes proposed N/A N/A 
Why it is important to do this review  
It should be clear to the reader why an LSR approach is 
appropriate for your Cochrane Review.  LSRs build on 
recent guidance (24) about when a systematic review 
update is appropriate. 
Broadly speaking, an LSR may be appropriate when all 
three of the following criteria are met:  
● The review addresses a particularly important 
question for practice or policy (now or likely in 
the near future) 
● There is an important level of uncertainty in 
No suggested text is provided, given this will vary from 
review to review.  
 
Example 1 
“This topic lends itself to a living systematic review 
approach for several reasons. First, knee osteoarthritis 
is a condition for which there is a high demand for new 
therapies, due to its prevalence, impact on function 
and quality of life, and paucity of highly effective 
No suggested text is provided, given this will vary from 
review to review.  
 
Example 1 
“We believe a living systematic review approach is 
appropriate for this review for four reasons. First, the 
review addresses an important topic for clinical 
practice; patients with cancer have a relatively high 
rate of VTE, up to 17.7% (Ay 2010). In addition, the 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  49 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
the existing evidence 
● There is (likely to be) emerging evidence (e.g. 
in trial registries) that will impact on the 
conclusions. 
 
nonsurgical treatments. This has led to a 
commensurate increase in the supply of treatment 
options, many of which have been instituted into 
practice before a robust evidence base for their 
effectiveness has been established. Non-
pharmacological therapies, including autologous 
blood product injections, have been well placed to fill 
this gap in the market as they are subject to fewer 
regulatory restrictions than pharmaceutical products. 
PRP injections are now widely used for a variety of 
indications, particularly osteoarthritis and other 
disorders of the knee (Zhang 2016), despite relatively 
little high-quality evidence to date. Second, the use of 
PRP and other autologous blood products for the 
treatment of osteoarthritis is an active area of research, 
with several trials currently in progress. It is likely that 
the conclusions of this review, including estimates of 
the efficacy of the interventions, will change as new 
evidence is added in the near future. Finally, due to the 
large burden of disease attributable to knee 
osteoarthritis, it is important that consumers, 
healthcare providers and policy-makers have the most 
up-to-date summary of the evidence for this 
intervention, in order to make informed decisions” (18).  
occurrence of VTE is associated with a 2.3 increased 
risk of death in patients with breast and non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC), 2.5 times lengthening of hospital 
stay among patients with lung cancer, and 50% higher 
total cost for patients with lung cancer (Chew 2008, 
Chew 2007; Connolly 2012). Second, there remains 
uncertainty in the existing evidence base; the 2014 
update of this systematic review found a potential 
subgroup effect on all-cause mortality at one year, with 
a possible higher reduction in mortality among 
patients with small cell lung cancer (SCLC) compared 
to other types of cancer. Third, we are aware of several 
recently published and ongoing trials in this area that 
will be important to incorporate in a timely manner.” 
(adapted from 10) 
Objectives 
It is appropriate, and likely to be helpful for the reader, 
to make the fact that this review will be updated using 
an LSR approach explicit in the objectives. Rather than 
altering the main objective(s), this can be added as a 
second, or subsequent, objective.  
Suggested text 
 
“A secondary objective is to maintain the currency of 
the evidence, using a living systematic review 
approach.” 
Suggested text 
 
“A secondary objective is to maintain the currency of 
the evidence, using a living systematic review 
approach.” 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  50 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
  
Methods: Criteria for including studies in the review 
Types of studies, Types of participants, Types of interventions, Types of outcome measures  
No changes proposed N/A N/A 
Methods: Search methods for identification of studies 
Electronic sources 
With living systematic reviews, we are particularly 
interested in keeping abreast of emerging and ongoing 
study findings, in addition to existing published study 
reports. As such, as much as possible, all search 
sources should be searched at frequent and regular 
periods (i.e. monthly for the main bibliographic 
databases and clinical trial registries). Search 
frequency for all sources must be stated in the 
protocol. 
To be concordant with Cochrane standards, there 
should be no changes to standard Cochrane guidance 
around search methods. This means scoping or top-up 
searches are not sufficient. As such, searches of all 
electronic databases, clinical trial registries, and 
potentially other sources that will identify trials in 
progress, need to be run each time the search is 
conducted.  
Search strategies also need to be reviewed over time as 
indexing terms (e.g. MeSH) and keywords can change, 
and new search filters may be published. You may also 
Suggested heading 
Living systematic review considerations  
[NEW Level 3 heading at end of this section] 
No suggested text is provided, given this will vary from 
review to review.  
Example 1 
“As a living systematic review, the majority of searches 
will be re-run monthly. For the electronic databases 
and other electronic sources (including clinical trials 
registries), we will set up auto-alerts (where possible) 
to deliver a monthly search yield by email.”  
“Search methods and strategies will be reviewed 
approximately yearly, to ensure they reflect any 
terminology changes in the topic area, or in the 
databases.” 
Suggested heading 
Living systematic review considerations  
[NEW Level 3 heading at end of this section] 
No suggested text is provided, given this will vary from 
review to review.  
Example 1 
“Living review approach: The last major search was in 
February 2016. We have been running monthly 
searches since then. We will incorporate new evidence 
rapidly after it is identified. This review update is based 
on the findings of a literature search conducted on 14 
August 2017. We will reconsider search methods and 
strategies once a year to ensure they reflect any 
terminology changes in the topic area, or in the 
databases”. (10) 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  51 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
find some of your search sources are redundant, or 
other sources should be added. This will be topic-
dependant and should be decided in consultation with 
the Review Group. Your plan to manage this should be 
described. (NOTE: This may change with Cochrane 
system developments such as the Evidence Pipeline 
and Cochrane Crowd). 
 
For further information on LSR searching methods, see 
section ‘6: Managing searches for living systematic 
reviews’ in the main text of this guidance. 
Example 2 
“Database searches will be run monthly from the date 
of the baseline review search. Any studies identified in 
the period from the baseline searches to publication of 
the review will either be incorporated in the review or 
noted in the ’What’s new’ section and included in the 
first update. For the searches of CENTRAL, MEDLINE 
and Embase, we will use auto-alerts in the Cochrane 
Library and Ovid to receive a monthly search yield by 
email. We will also manually search ClinicalTrials.gov 
and the WHOICTRP trials portal. We will review search 
methods (sources, search terms and frequency) 
approximately yearly to ensure they reflect any 
changes in subject headings or textwords, as well as 
any changes in the eligibility criteria of the review.” (19) 
 
Searching other resources 
Searching additional sources may need to be 
undertaken at the same frequency as database or 
electronic sources. For some ‘Other sources’ such as 
websites or conference proceedings, less frequent 
searching may be appropriate (but no less frequently 
than yearly). This should be clearly described in the 
protocol. 
Suggested heading 
Living systematic review considerations  
[NEW Level 3 heading at end of this section] 
 
No suggested text is provided, given this will vary from 
review to review. 
 
Example 1 
“In developing this living systematic review, we will 
note when these key conferences are to be held and 
will search conference proceedings when published. 
We will contact corresponding authors of ongoing 
Suggested heading 
Living systematic review considerations  
[NEW Level 3 heading at end of this section] 
 
No suggested text is provided, given this will vary from 
review to review. 
 
Example 1 
“We are searching other resources (articles published 
in three relevant international peer reviewed journals: 
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, Public 
Health Nutrition, and Journal of the Academy of 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  52 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
studies as we identify them and will ask them to advise 
when study results are available, or to share early or 
unpublished data. We will contact the corresponding 
authors of any newly included studies for advice 
regarding other relevant studies. We will manually 
search the reference lists of all newly included studies”. 
(20) 
 
 
Nutrition and Dietetics; database of published 
dissertations; and grey literature in Google Scholar) 
manually every six months. As additional steps to 
inform the living systematic review, we are contacting 
corresponding authors of ongoing studies as they are 
identified and asking them to advise when results are 
available, or to share early or unpublished data. We are 
contacting the corresponding authors of any newly-
included studies for advice about other relevant 
studies. We are conducting citation tracking of 
included studies in Web of Science Core Collection on 
an ongoing basis. For that purpose, we have set up 
citation alerts in Web of Science Core Collection.” 
(adapted from 8) 
 
 
 
Methods: Data collection and analysis  
Selection of studies 
In an LSR, the searches must not only be run 
frequently, but the yield screened at the same 
frequency. (There is no point running monthly searches 
if they are only screened six-monthly). This must be 
stated in the protocol. 
 
LSRs may use some of Cochrane’s newer systematic 
review enablers (e.g. Screen4Me; the RCT Classifier; 
Cochrane Crowd) and technological enablers 
developed by other organisations (e.g. Systematic 
Review Accelerator). How technological enablers will 
Suggested heading 
Living systematic review considerations  
[NEW Level 3 heading at end of this section] 
 
 
Suggested text to be included in a more detailed 
description: 
“We will immediately screen any new citations 
retrieved by the monthly searches.” 
Example 1 
Suggested heading 
Living systematic review considerations  
[NEW Level 3 heading at end of this section] 
 
 
Suggested text to be included in a more detailed 
description: 
“We will immediately screen any new citations 
retrieved by the monthly searches.” 
Example 1 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  53 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
be used in your LSR should be made explicit.  
 
See section ‘5: Living systematic review enablers’ for 
information about technological enablers. 
“We will immediately screen any new citations 
retrieved by the monthly searches. We expect initial 
search yields to be fairly small, so we intend to screen 
all records manually without applying the RCT 
classifier, however, this or other automation 
techniques may be employed over time if the volume 
of retrieved citations increases substantially.” (adapted 
from 19) 
 
“We will immediately screen any new citations 
retrieved by the monthly searches. As the first step of 
monthly screening, we will apply the machine learning 
classifier (RCT model) (51) available in the Cochrane 
Register of Studies (CRS-Web). The classifier assigns a 
probability (from 0 to 100) to each citation of being a 
true RCT. For citations that are assigned a probability 
score below the cut-point at a recall of 99% we will 
assume these to be non-RCTs. For those that score on 
or above the cut-point we will either manually dual 
screen these results or send them to Cochrane Crowd 
for screening.” (adapted from 8)  
 
 
 
 
 
Data extraction and management, Assessment of risk of bias of included studies 
No changes proposed N/A N/A 
 
Measures of treatment effect, Unit of analysis issues, Dealing with missing data 
No changes proposed N/A N/A 
 
Assessment of heterogeneity, Assessment of reporting biases 
No changes proposed N/A N/A 
 
Data synthesis 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  54 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
Deciding when to incorporate new evidence 
During the life of an LSR, it is expected that review 
teams will identify not only new studies, but other 
potentially important data and information relevant to 
the review and its already included studies. For 
example, new outcome or adverse events data may 
become available for an existing (included) trial, an 
ongoing trial may cease, a now completed trial may 
remain unpublished, or a study publication may be 
retracted.  
Given that LSRs are only likely to be undertaken on 
topics for which new evidence is likely to have an 
important impact on the review conclusions, the 
default position should be that new studies and any 
important new data or information should be 
immediately incorporated into the review. However, 
there may be instances where the new studies, data or 
information do not sufficiently change the findings or 
credibility of the review to warrant immediate 
inclusion. In these instances, the authors may choose 
to wait until the next time this threshold is reached 
before incorporating this new information into the 
review.  
LSR teams can flag the existence of unincorporated 
new information to the reader using the What’s New 
table. 
Authors should pre-specify how they will decide 
whether newly identified studies, data or information 
will not be immediately incorporated into the review. 
Guidance for making this decision is available in Garner 
Suggested heading 
Living systematic review considerations  
[NEW Level 3 heading at end of this section] 
Deciding when to incorporate new evidence 
No suggested text is provided, given this will vary from 
review to review. 
 
Example 1: 
Whenever new evidence (meaning studies, data or 
other information) relevant to the review is identified, 
we will extract the data and assess risk of bias, as 
appropriate. We will immediately incorporate any new 
evidence into the review. 
 
Example 2: 
Whenever new evidence (meaning studies, data or 
other information) relevant to the review is identified, 
we will extract the data and assess risk of bias, as 
appropriate. We will wait until the accumulating 
evidence changes one or more of the following 
components of the review before incorporating it and 
re-publishing the review: 
 
• The findings of one or more primary 
outcomes 
• The credibility (e.g. GRADE rating) of one or 
more primary outcomes  
• New settings, populations, interventions, 
comparisons or outcomes studied 
Suggested heading 
Living systematic review considerations  
[NEW Level 3 heading at end of this section] 
Deciding when to incorporate new evidence 
No specific text is suggested, given this will vary from 
review to review. 
 
Example 1: 
“Whenever we find new evidence (i.e. studies, data or 
information) meeting the review inclusion criteria, we 
will extract the data, assess risk of bias and incorporate 
it in the synthesis every four months, as appropriate. 
We will incorporate any new study data into existing 
meta-analyses using the standard approaches outlined 
in the Data synthesis section”. (adapted from 8) 
 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  55 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
(24; see Step 3: assess the effect of updating the review) 
and Chapter 22 of the Cochrane Handbook (26). Also 
see Box 2 in the main text of this guidance. 
As an alternative to immediately updating the LSR 
when new evidence that has an important impact on 
the review conclusions is identified, a decision may be 
made to update the LSR on a fixed-interval schedule 
when a high volume of new evidence is anticipated. As 
an example, the Cochrane pilot LSR with the highest 
rate of new evidence was updated every 4 months 
during the pilot period (8). Making this decision can be 
helped by checking trial registries and, if the review has 
been published before, checking how many studies 
were found in the last few years. Teams choosing this 
alternative need to consider what actions will be taken 
for the following two scenarios and pre-specify these in 
the protocol: 
1. A scheduled update is due to be undertaken, 
but the ongoing searches have identified no 
new evidence. 
2. A scheduled update is due to be undertaken, 
and the ongoing searches have only identified 
new evidence that is unlikely to change the 
review conclusions. 
• New serious adverse events 
• Other [author teams to specify] 
 
 
 
 
 
Adjustments for repeated meta-analyses 
 
Sequential methods should not be used for the main 
analyses in an LSR or to draw main conclusions. 
Further information about the rationale for not 
applying error-adjustment techniques for repeated 
meta-analyses can be found in Chapter 22 of the 
Adjustments for repeated meta-analyses 
It is optional to make an explicit statement about error 
adjustment techniques. Authors may wish to clarify 
that such techniques will not be applied to Cochrane 
LSRs. 
Adjustments for repeated meta-analyses 
It is optional to make an explicit statement about error 
adjustment techniques. Authors may wish to clarify 
that such techniques will not be applied to Cochrane 
LSRs. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  56 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
Cochrane Handbook (26). 
 Suggested text: 
 
“Formal sequential meta-analysis approaches will not 
be used for updated meta-analyses”. 
Suggested text for a baseline review for a new LSR: 
 
“Formal sequential meta-analysis approaches will not 
be used for updated meta-analyses”. 
Suggested text for an updated review: 
“Formal sequential meta-analysis approaches were not 
applied to the updated meta-analyses”. 
Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity, Sensitivity analysis, Summary of Findings Table  
No changes proposed N/A N/A 
 
Methods for future updates [This is an optional heading in RevMan, which can be activated for LSRs] 
When review methods will be reviewed 
In an LSR approach, authors will not necessarily have 
the same trigger to review the methods for any 
necessary revisions, in the same way that they 
currently do with standard review updates. Authors 
should pre-specify when they will review the methods.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The conditions under which the review will no longer 
be maintained as an LSR 
It is anticipated that reviews may cease to need to be 
living over time, as the review findings become stable, 
Suggested heading 
Living systematic review considerations  
[NEW Level 3 heading at end of this section] 
When review methods will be reviewed 
Suggested text:  
We will review the review scope and methods 
approximately yearly, or more frequently if 
appropriate, in light of potential changes in the topic 
area or the evidence being included in the review (for 
example, additional comparisons, interventions, sub-
groups or outcomes, or new review methods available). 
 
The conditions under which the review will no longer 
be maintained as an LSR 
 
No suggested text is provided, given this will vary from 
review to review. 
Suggested heading 
Living systematic review considerations  
[NEW Level 3 heading at end of this section] 
When review methods will be reviewed 
Suggested text:  
We will review the review scope and methods 
approximately yearly, or more frequently if 
appropriate, in light of potential changes in the topic 
area or the evidence being included in the review (for 
example, additional comparisons, interventions, sub-
groups or outcomes, or new review methods available). 
 
The conditions under which the review will no longer 
be maintained as an LSR 
 
No suggested text is provided, given this will vary from 
review to review. 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  57 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
the credibility improves (e.g. evidence quality becomes 
high) or the question is no longer a priority for decision-
makers. Authors are encouraged to put some thought 
into possible scenarios under which they envisage the 
review may no longer need to be maintained as an LSR, 
acknowledging it is difficult to predict all future 
possible scenarios. 
For information on the process to transition an LSR out 
of living mode, see section ‘8: Transitioning a living 
systematic review out of living mode’. 
 
 
Example 1 
“We will consider each year the necessity for the review 
to be living by assessing ongoing relevance of the 
question to decision-makers and by determining 
whether uncertainty is ongoing in the evidence and 
whether further relevant research is likely”. (20) 
 
 
 
Example 1 
“We will make decisions about whether to stop 
updating when appropriate (e.g. if conclusions are 
unlikely to change with future updates; no meaningful 
effect is likely to be found; the review question is no 
longer a priority for decision-making; or no new 
evidence is likely), and will be guided by ongoing work 
in this area (Elliott 2017).” (19) 
 
Results 
No changes proposed Section not applicable to protocol N/A 
 
Discussion 
Summary of main results  
No changes proposed Section not applicable to protocol N/A 
 
Quality of the evidence, Potential biases in the review process, Agreements and disagreements with other studies o r reviews 
No changes proposed Section not applicable to protocol N/A 
 
 
Authors’ conclusions 
No changes proposed Section not applicable to protocol N/A 
Differences between protocol and review 
For an existing Cochrane Review that is being Section not applicable to protocol Suggested text 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  58 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
transitioned to an LSR, the CDSR function to publish a 
new protocol is not yet available. Therefore, in this 
section authors should note that the updated review 
includes additional methods pertaining to the LSR and 
refer the reader to the living systematic review protocol 
appendix. 
 
This update includes some new methods relevant to 
living systematic reviews, which are described in the 
Methods and Appendix 1 (Living systematic review 
protocol). 
 
Appendices 
For an existing Cochrane Review that is being 
transitioned to an LSR, the CDSR function to publish a 
new protocol is not yet available. In the interim, an 
LSR-specific methods appendix to the published LSR 
serves as a substitute for publishing a new protocol. 
 
Note: This approach may change when the 
functionality to publish a new protocol for existing 
reviews becomes available in the CDSR. 
N/A The information below is only applicable to an existing 
Cochrane Review that is being transitioned into living 
mode. The example appendix below is intended to 
demonstrate the relevant sub-headings to include. The 
text under each sub-heading will vary across LSRs 
according to the specific method decisions made by 
the author team about search methods and data 
synthesis.   
Suggested appendix title:   
Living systematic review protocol 
Appendix text example 1 (adapted from 8) 
The methods outlined below are specific to 
maintaining the review as a living systematic review on 
the CDSR. Core review methods, such as the criteria for 
considering studies in the review and assessment of 
risk of bias, are unchanged. As such, below we outline 
only those areas of the Methods for which additional 
activities or rules apply. 
 
Search methods for identification of studies 
We will re-run electronic database and trial registry 
searches monthly. For the electronic databases 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  59 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
(CENTRAL, Epub Ahead of Print, In-Process & Other 
Non-Indexed Citations, MEDLINE Daily and MEDLINE 
and Embase) and other electronic sources (WHO 
International Clinical Trials Registry Platform and 
clinicaltrials.gov), we will set up auto-alerts (where 
possible) to deliver a monthly search yield by email. 
 
We will search other resources (articles published in 
three relevant international peer reviewed journals: 
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, Public 
Health Nutrition, and Journal of the Academy of 
Nutrition and Dietetics; database of published 
dissertations; and grey literature in Google Scholar) 
manually every six months. 
As additional steps to inform the living systematic 
review, we will contact corresponding authors of 
ongoing studies as they are identified and ask them to 
advise when results are available, or to share early or 
unpublished data. We will contact the corresponding 
authors of any newly-included studies for advice about 
other relevant studies. We will conduct citation 
tracking of included studies in Web of Science Core 
Collection on an ongoing basis. For that purpose, we 
have set up citation alerts in Web of Science Core 
Collection. We will manually screen the reference list of 
any newly-included studies and systematic reviews. 
Also, we will use the ’related citation’ feature in 
PubMed to identify additional articles. We will review 
search methods and strategies approximately yearly, 
to ensure they reflect any terminology changes in the 
topic area, or in the databases. 
 

Guidance for Cochrane living systematic reviews December 2019  60 
 
Methods considerations specific to LSRs LSR protocol suggested text and/or examples LSR suggested text and/or examples 
Selection of studies 
We will immediately screen any new citations retrieved 
by the monthly searches. As the first step of monthly 
screening, we will apply the machine learning classifier 
(RCT model) (51) available in the Cochrane Register of 
Studies (CRS-Web). The classifier assigns a probability 
(from 0 to 100) to each citation for being a true 
randomised controlled trial (RCT). For citations that are 
assigned a probability score below the cut-point at a 
recall of 99% we will assume these to be non-RCTs. For 
those that score on or above the cut-point we will 
either manually dual screen these results or send them 
to Cochrane Crowd for screening. 
 
Data synthesis 
Whenever we find new evidence (i.e. studies, data or 
information) meeting the review inclusion criteria, we 
will extract the data, assess risk of bias and incorporate 
it in the synthesis every four months, as appropriate. 
We will incorporate any new study data into existing 
meta-analyses using the standard approaches outlined 
in the Data synthesis section. Error-adjustment 
methods will not be applied to repeated meta-
analyses. 
 
Other 
At least annually, we will consider the review scope and 
methods in light of potential changes in the topic area, 
or the evidence being included in the review (e.g. 
additional comparisons, interventions or outcomes, or 
new review methods available).  
 