pmcChin Med J (Engl)Chin Med J (Engl)2337chinesemj7513795CM9Chinese Medical Journal0366-69992542-5641Wolters Kluwer HealthPMC11191032PMC11191032.111191032111910323764067910.1097/CM9.0000000000002818CMJ-2022-330713Review ArticleChimeric antigen receptor-immune cells against solid tumors: Structures, mechanisms, recent advances, and future developments
LiXudong – ] When it comes to treating solid tumors, people expect CAR-T cells to show the same results as they do in hematological malignancies. However, the transport problems due to matrix barrier and tumor microenvironments (TMEs), poor T cell persistence, T cell rejection, exhaustion caused by mutations, and a limited number of surface tumor-specific targets greatly limit the application of CAR-T cell therapy in solid tumors.[ – ] Research on natural killer (NK) cells and macrophages has attracted the attention of researchers due to their physical characteristics, which are different from T cells and have been developed into CAR-NK cells and CAR-macrophages (CAR-Ms). In addition to the fact that CAR-NK cells are not dependent on human leukocyte antigen (HLA) or killer immunoglobulin (Ig)-like receptor compatibility, they are also non-toxic and can be obtained from a variety of sources.[ , ] By transferring the edited CAR gene into macrophages, CAR-M is able to bind to the tumor cells through specific antigen recognition and then activate macrophage activity against tumor cells.[ ] Although the preclinical and clinical research conducted in relation to CAR-NK cells and CAR-M is far less than that corresponding to CAR-T cell therapy, they still show great potential in the treatment of solid tumors according to the existing results and are expected to become the successor of CAR-T cell therapy. In this review, we focus on the treatment of solid tumors, briefly introduce the structure of CAR-T cells, CAR-NK cells, and CAR-Ms, summarize the similarities and differences of their mechanisms against solid tumors, and summarize the preclinical and clinical studies on the three in the treatment of solid tumors in recent years. Finally, we will discuss the challenges that these cells experience in dealing with solid tumors in detail, along with possible solutions for the future.

## Structure and Therapeutic Mechanisms of CAR
We summarized the structural characteristics and therapeutic mechanisms of CAR-T cells, CAR-NK cells and CAR-Ms respectively, and compared these three CARs from many aspects [Supplementary Material and Supplementary Table 1, http://links.lww.com/CM9/B679]. Whether they are CAR-T cells, CAR-NK cells, or CAR-M, CARs mainly contain three parts (an extracellular domain, a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular signaling domain) and have developed four generations [Figure ]. The single-chain variable fragment (scFv) on the extracellular domain of CAR-T cells can bypass the step of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) presentation, directly recognize the target antigen, and transduce the extracellular signal into the cell through the CD3ζ subunit, thus playing an anti-tumor effect. The anti-tumor effect of CAR-T cells mainly includes three parts: (1) CAR-T cells secrete perforin and granzyme to kill tumor cells directly through physical action or induce tumor cells to apoptosis; (2) Fas and Fas ligand (FasL) killing pathways are one of the main axes of T cell lysing effect; and (3) CAR-T cells can secrete proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-2 (IL-2), interferon-γ (IFN-γ), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) [Figure A]. The killing mechanisms of CAR-NK cells mainly contain two parts: The CAR-dependent response means that the CAR structure can guide NK cells to target specific tumor cells and enhance its cytotoxic effects; the CAR-independent response involves four processes—the release of perforin and granzyme, the expression of transmembrane receptors (killer immunoglobulin-like receptors [KIRS]; natural killer group 2, member D [NKG2D]; or DNAX accessory molecule 1 [DNAM-1]) that promote caspase-mediated apoptosis of cancer cells, the recruitment of macrophages and dendritic cells (DC), and the stimulation of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC)-mediated cancer cell killing [Figure B]. Macrophages are the central effectors and regulators of the innate immune system. Once macrophages recognize specific tumor antigens via scFv on the CAR, their phagocytosis abilities can be enhanced. CAR-M can also reshape tumor microenvironment (TME) into a pro-inflammatory state and reverse M2 phenotype to M1 phenotype. Additionally, CAR-M can improve the function of T cells and NK cells and reduce Treg cells via upregulating antigen presentation, targeting tumor extracellular matrix (ECM), and overexpressing granzyme B [Figure C].
 

## Recent Advancements of CAR-immune Cells against Solid Tumors
In recent years, an increasing number of preclinical studies have described the role of CAR-T cells, CAR-NK cells, and CAR-Ms in the treatment of solid tumors. These studies have laid a solid theoretical foundation for subsequent clinical experiments and new drug production [Supplementary Tables 2 and 3, http://links.lww.com/CM9/B679]. Here, we reviewed the recent progress of preclinical research on three types of CAR therapies in the treatment of solid tumors.

## CAR-T cells against solid tumors

## Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM)
EpCAM is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein that was originally found to be the main antigen of human colon cancer.[ – ] In some epithelial cancers, including prostate cancer,[ ] EpCAM antigens are also overexpressed in a heterogeneous way. Therefore, EpCAM may be a potential target for CAR-T therapy. Zhou et al[ ] developed EpCAM-CAR-T cells and evaluated their ability to kill cancer cells in vitro. The experimental data showed that the apoptosis of colon cancer cells induced by EpCAM-CAR-T cells was significantly stronger than that of untransfected T cells. The researchers obtained the third-generation of CAR-T cells with redirection specificity to EpCAM via a lentiviral vector. Studies in vivo and in vitro have shown that EpCAM-CAR-T cells have excellent anti-colon cancer ability. In addition, the safety evaluation showed that CAR-T cells had no systemic toxicity to mice, which confirmed the safety of CAR-T cells targeting EpCAM.[ ] According to research conducted by Fu et al,[ ] the cytotoxicity- and cytokine-releasing ability of EpCAM-CAR-T cells to ovarian cancer (OC) cell SKOV3 were verified in vitro, and it was proven that EpCAM-CAR-T cells could significantly reduce the tumor volume of OC xenograft mice in vivo.

## Programed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1)
The advent of immunotherapy for programed death-1 (PD-1)/PD-L1 signals has led to substantial progress in cancer treatment. An increasing amount of evidence shows that PD-L1 can inhibit T cell proliferation and mediate anti-tumor immunity in both tumor cells and TMEs.[ ] PD-L1-targeted CAR-T cells showed strong cytotoxicity to non-small cell lung cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.[ , ] Bajor et al[ ] produced new PD-L1 targeted CAR-T cells based on atezolizumab. PD-L1-CAR effector cells responded strongly with degranulation and the production of cytokines to PD-L1high MDA-MB-231 cells but not in PD-L1low MCF-7 cells. In particular, their research showed that CAR effector cells triggered the expression of PD-L1 in target cells, which led to unique self-amplification in the case of PD-L1-CAR. This self-amplification effect might be the reason for the increased cytotoxicity of PD-L1-CAR-T cells in malignant and non-malignant cells and suggested that extra caution should be taken in introducing PD-L1-CAR strategies into clinical studies. Liu et al[ ] designed a combined immunotherapy for colorectal cancer using T cells sensitized by PD-L1-CAR-T cells and cancer stem cell (CCSC)-DC vaccine. PD-L1-CAR-T cells or the CCSC-DC vaccine alone could only cause moderate tumor remission in vitro and in vivo. However, the combination therapy killed a significant amount of cancer cells and reduced the tumor burden in mice. The findings may provide a new strategy for the clinical treatment of colorectal cancer.

## Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)
HER2 is a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family with a tyrosine kinase function. In solid tumors, the overexpression or amplification of HER2 is associated with poor prognosis. It has been reported that the amplification or overexpression of HER2 has been detected in about 30% of breast cancer and gastroesophageal cancer patients, which is helpful for prognosis prediction.[ ] Although anti-HER2 monoclonal antibodies (such as trastuzumab) have made remarkable achievements in tumor therapy, a considerable number of HER2 overexpression tumor patients (such as breast cancer patients) have shown strong resistance to this intervention.[ ] Against this background, Stancovski's team constructed the first CAR-T cell targeting HER2 in 1993.[ ] Since then, HER2-CAR-T cells have been used in solid tumors, including breast cancer, malignant gliomas, pancreatic cancer, OC, and lung cancer.[ ] In both in vivo and in vitro experiments, HER2-CAR-T cells have shown a cytotoxic effect on non-small cell lung cancer cells and colorectal cancer cells.[ – ] The Seattle Children's Hospital conducted a phase 1 clinical trial (NCT03500991, https://classic.clinicaltrials.gov/) to evaluate the efficacy of repetitive locoregional dosing of HER2-specific CAR-T cells in children and young adults with recurrent/refractory central nervous system (CNS) tumors, including diffuse midline gliomas (DMG). The primary objective was to assess feasibility, safety, and tolerance, while the secondary objectives included the assessment of CAR-T cell distribution and disease response. An interim report supported the feasibility of producing HER2-specific CAR-T cells for repeated administration and suggested that repeated transmission in the CNS might be well tolerated and activate local immune responses in pediatrics and young and middle-aged patients.[ ]

## Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
EGFR belongs to the family of HER erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog (ErbB) receptor tyrosine kinases. An overexpression of EGFR is found in many patients with solid tumors, which makes it possible to use EGFR as a target for CAR-T cell therapy for solid tumors.[ ] EGFR-CAR-T cells showed strong cytotoxic activity against non-small cell lung cancer cell lines in vitro. Moreover, in subcutaneous transplantation in nude mice, EGFR-CAR-T cells could significantly reduce the size and volume of tumors, indicating that EGFR-targeted CAR-T cell therapy could be used in patients with non-small cell lung cancer in the future.[ ] EGFR was also the target of immunotherapy for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Xia et al[ ] proved that the third-generation of EGFR-CAR-T cells showed strong and specific anti-tumor activity against TNBC, suggesting that these EGFR-CAR-T cells might become a clinical immunotherapy tool for the treatment of TNBC. In gliomas, CAR-T cells have also been developed to combat EGFRvIII antigens. EGFRvIII is a mutated form of EGFR that exists in about 52% of glioma cells but not in healthy tissues.[ ] In 2021, Abbott et al[ ] proposed a new type of EGFRvIII-specific CAR called GCT02-CAR-T cells. Researchers have found that the EGFRvIII-specific scFv of GCT02-CAR-T cells has a higher affinity than the reported scFv obtained from reverse engineering of monoclonal antibody and has effective anti-tumor function both in vitro and in human glioblastoma xenotransplantation models.

## B7 homolog 3 protein (B7-H3)
B7-H3, a member of the B7 ligand family, is an important target for antibody immunotherapy that is highly expressed in differentiated malignant tumor cells and carcinogenic cells with limited heterogeneity. B7-H3 is highly expressed in many different types of tumors (accounting for 60% of 25,000 tumor samples) but at a low level in normal tissues, making it an attractive therapeutic target for CAR-T cell therapy.[ ] Liu et al[ ] found that B7-H3-CAR-T cells could effectively inhibit the tumorigenesis of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in vivo and in vitro, indicating that B7-H3 might be used as a target for NSCLC therapy and supporting its further development in preclinical and clinical research. Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (ATRT) usually occur in the CNS of children under 3 years old, and the prognosis is poor. Theruvath et al[ ] found that the intraventricular or intratumoral administration of B7-H3.BB.z-CAR-T cells could mediate an effective antitumor effect on mouse brain ATRT xenografts, with faster kinetics, greater potency, and reduced systemic levels of inflammatory cytokines compared to CAR-T cells administered intravenously. These results identified B7-H3 as a compelling therapeutic target for this largely incurable pediatric tumor and demonstrated the important advantages of local region delivery compared with the systemic delivery of CAR-T cells in the treatment of CNS malignant tumors.

## Mesothelin (MSLN)
As a tumor differentiation antigen, MSLN is also a potential target for CAR-T therapy, for it is overexpressed in many solid cancers such as lung cancer, mesothelioma, and pancreatic cancer and infrequently expressed in normal mesothelial cells.[ ] MSLN targeted CAR-T cell therapy was found to be effective in subcutaneous mouse lung cancer models.[ ] T cells expressing CARs derived from a MSLN-specific scFv showed great therapeutic efficacy in orthotopic human pancreatic cancer animal models.[ ] The findings of Schoutrop suggest that MSLN-directed CAR-T cells can provide anti-tumor immunity against OC.[ ] Lv et al[ ] verified the high expression of MSLN in primary human gastric cancer (GC) tissues and GC cell lines and constructed CAR-T cells targeting MSLN (M28z10T cells). The results showed that M28z10T cells had strong cytotoxicity and cytokine secretion to GC cells in vitro, and M28z10T cells could induce GC regression in different mouse models of xenotransplantation. Importantly, the peritumoral delivery strategy could improve the infiltration of CAR-T cells into tumor tissue and significantly inhibited the growth of GC in the subcutaneous GC model, which proved that M28z10T cells were a promising method for the treatment of GC.

## Mucin-1 (MUC1)
A remarkable depolarized expression of MUC1 glycoprotein throughout the entire cell surface has been reported in a large number of carcinomas of the breast, ovary, rectum, pancreas, colon, and prostate, which enlightened us that MUC1 could be a suitable target for CAR-T therapy. Researchers have reported that MUC-CAR-T cells could identify and eliminate MUC1+ non-small cell lung cancer cells.[ ] Supimon et al[ ] set out to construct a fourth-generation CAR (CAR4) containing anti-MUC1-ScFv and three costimulatory domains linked to CD3ζ (CD28, CD137, and CD27). These anti-MUC1-CAR4 T cells showed specific killing activity against cholangiocarcinoma cells, which supported the development of this method as an adoptive T cell therapy strategy for cholangiocarcinoma. Mei et al[ ] explored the possibility of MUC1-CAR-T in the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). They constructed a second-generation CAR targeting MUC1 and a CAR4 that could secrete IL-22 (CAR-MUC1-IL22). Moreover, they verified the anti-tumor effect of two different CAR-T cells in vitro and in vivo. CAR-MUC1-IL22 T cells had a more effective cytotoxic effect on MUC1+HNSCC cells, which confirmed the potential efficacy of CAR-T cells in the treatment of HNSCC and provided evidence for MUC1-CAR-T therapy.

## Receptor tyrosine kinase like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1)
ROR1, also known as neurotrophic tyrosine, which is widely expressed in many human solid tumors, including lung cancer, breast cancer, and so on, has been considered a target antigen for CAR-T cell therapy.[ ] A study evaluated ROR1-targeted CAR-T cells in sarcomas in 2015. These ROR1-CAR-T cells could produce high levels of IFN-γ, TNF-α, and IL-13, significantly reduced tumor growth in pre-established, local, and systemic disseminated osteosarcoma mice, and significantly prolonged the survival time of local sarcoma mouse models.[ , ] These data supported ROR1-CAR-T cells as a potential treatment for sarcoma. Wallstabe et al[ ] established a microphysiological three-dimensional (3D) lung and breast cancer model similar to the structure and phenotypic characteristics of primary tumors and evaluated the anti-tumor function of ROR1-specific CAR-T cells. The results showed that ROR1-CAR T cells had a strong anti-tumor effect.

## Disialoganglioside (GD2)
The disialoganglioside GD2 is a non-protein target expressed on the cell surface of a variety of human neuroectodermal tumors, such as neuroblastoma (NB), glioma, and melanoma.[ – ] Reppel et al[ ] demonstrated that GD2 was expressed in small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) and NSCLC and could be targeted by GD2-specific CAR-T cells. They used GD2.CAR, which co-expressed IL-15 to promote T cell proliferation and persistence and used an inducible caspase9 gene as safety switch to remove GD2.CAR-T cells to prevent unforeseen toxicity. GD2.CAR-T cells showed antigen-dependent cytotoxicity in both in vitro cocultures and in xenograft models of orthotopic and metastatic tumors. Diffuse propriocapontine gliomas (DIPG) and other DMG with H3K27M mutations are common fatal tumors in the CNSs of children. Majzner et al[ ] presented the clinical experience of the first four DIPG/DMG patients with H3K27M mutations who were treated with GD2-CAR T cells. Three of the four patients had clinical and radiological improvements. These results emphasized the prospect of this method in the treatment of H3K27M+ DIPG/DMG. Straathof et al[ ] reported a phase 1 study (NCT02761915, https://classic.clinicaltrials.gov/) of a second-generation of GD2-directed CAR-T cells in the treatment of 12 children with recurrent/refractory NB. The results showed that of the six patients who received ≥108/m2 CAR-T cells after fludarabine/cyclophosphamide preconditioning, three patients showed regression of soft tissue and bone marrow diseases. This clinical activity was achieved without off-target tumor toxicity, indicating that targeting NB with GD2 CAR-T cells seemed to be an effective and safe strategy. However, further improvements are needed to improve the lifespan of CAR-T cells.

## Other potential targeted antigens
In addition to the nine targets discussed above, many other antigens are being studied in the treatment of solid tumors with CAR-T therapy, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), Claudin18.2, NKG2D, prostate stem cell antigen (PSCA), prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA), fibroblast activation protein (FAP), glypican-3 (GPC3), guanylyl cyclase C (GUCY2C), CD70, and so on.[ – ] At the same time, the clinical trial of CAR-T in the treatment of solid tumors is also in full swing, and researchers believe that CAR-T will emerge as an effective treatment for solid tumors in the future.

## CAR-NK cells against solid tumors

## Lung cancer
SCLC has a high recurrence rate, easy drug resistance, and limited treatment options. Researchers have reported that delta-like ligand 3 (DLL3) is highly expressed in SCLC, which makes it a potential target for CAR-NK immunotherapy.[ ] Liu et al[ ] developed DLL3-specific NK-92 cells and demonstrated that they had a significant cytotoxic effect on DLL3+ SCLC cell lines and promoted cytokine production. In vivo, DLL3-CAR NK-92 cells induced tumor regression in the H446-derived pulmonary metastasis tumor model and showed strong anti-tumor activity in SCLC subcutaneous tumor model, suggesting that DLL3-CARNK-92 cells might be a potential strategy for the treatment of SCLC. Xu et al[ ] constructed a theranostic nanoplatform that introduced upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) and IR-1048 dyes into the lipid-aptamer nanostructrure (UCILA), which was proven to be a multi-functional therapeutic agent. It could be used for five-mode imaging and temperature feedback photothermal therapy (PTT), and more importantly, could cooperate with CAR-NK immunotherapy to remove tumor cells that might remain after PTT, which once again proved the feasibility of combining nanotechnology with targeted immunotherapy for lung cancer. Mesenchymal-epithelial transforming factor (c-Met) has been proven to be an important target for lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). Peng et al[ ] found that the high expression of c-Met was related to the poor prognosis of LUAD. As such, they constructed four kinds of c-Met-CAR-NK cells and tested their anti-tumor effects in vivo and in vitro. They found that all CAR-NK cells could significantly inhibit the growth of tumor cells and transplanted tumors. The CAR-NK cells which contains DAP10 costimulatory domain has the strongest cytotoxicity, indicating that CAR-NK cells targeting c-Met have the potential to be used as a therapeutic strategy for LUAD.

## Glioblastoma (GBM)
Compared with other solid tumors, the use of CAR-NK cells in glioblastoma patients seems to be the most popular among researchers because glioblastoma currently has the most amount of preclinical data. It has been reported that DAP12.CD3ζ.CAR-NK-YTS cells with high expression of C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4) had a significant inhibitory effect on tumors in GBM xenograft models and could greatly prolong their survival time.[ ] Genßler et al[ ] constructed bispecific CAR construct-transduced CAR-NK cells targeting mutant and wild-type EGFR and found that the cells had strong cytotoxicity and increased the secretion of IFN-γ. In the mouse intracranial glioma transplantation tumor model, compared with the monospecific EGFRvIII-guided CAR-NK cells, the bispecific structure showed a better prolongation of survival time. More importantly, there was no antigen escape, which provided a new strategy for solving the treatment failure caused by antigen loss.[ ]

## Breast cancer
Based on the existing preclinical studies, CAR-NK cell therapy has shown a good effect in fighting against breast cancer. HER 2 has always been a potential target antigen of breast cancer. In 2015, studies showed that CAR-NK cells targeting HER 2 had strong cytotoxicity to breast cancer cell lines and inhibited the growth of transplanted tumors.[ ] Meanwhile, Kruschinski et al[ ] targeted primary human NK cells through the gene transfer of activated chimeric receptors targeting HER 2 and found that they could recognize all breast cancer cell lines expressing HER 2, even low-level HER2 expression cell lines, such as MCF-7 and MDA MB 453. Their results also showed that the intensity of the anti-tumor effect of CAR-NK cells was related to the level of HER 2 expression. In patients with TNBC, tissue factor (TF) is also selected as a suitable antigen target for CAR-NK cell design because their expression level can reach 50–85%.[ ] Hu et al[ ] constructed TF-targeted CAR-NK cells co-expressing CD16 (the Fc receptor [FcγIII] mediating antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity [ADCC]). The preclinical studies showed that the co-expressed construct had a stronger killing effect in vitro than TF-CAR-NK cells alone. In addition, TF-CAR-NK cells significantly reduced the size of transplanted tumors in cell lining and in patients' tumor-derived xenograft mouse models.[ ] In addition to HER 2 and TF, NK-92 transduced with bicistronic lentiviral vector encoding IL-15 and CAR targeting EpCAM also showed highly selective cytotoxicity against breast cancer cells expressing EpCAM, providing robust evidence for clinical research in the future.[ ]

## Pancreatic cancer
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a malignancy with poor prognosis and high mortality rate. The enrichment of immunosuppressive stroma leads to the failure of most adoptive cell therapies; therefore, it is hoped that CAR-NK cell therapy can improve this condition. Researchers have reported that Roundabout-1 (ROBO-1) is expressed in pancreatic cancer cells, which makes it a promising target for CAR-NK cell therapy.[ ] The results of ROBO-1-guided CAR-NK therapy combined with125I brachytherapy on an orthotropic mouse model of pancreatic cancer showed that the combination therapy could reduce more tumor volume than 125I brachytherapy alone.[ ] It is gratifying to note that in a case report, a pancreatic cancer patient with liver metastasis was treated with weekly infusion and intratumoral injection of ROBO-1-guided CAR-NK cells, and the disease was stable for 5 months, with only one fever occurring after infusion.[ ] Teng et al[ ] found that PSCA was significantly higher in primary pancreatic cancer tissues than in paracancerous or other normal tissues. As such, they developed frozen, off-the-shelf, allogeneic PSCA CAR-NK cells co-expressing soluble IL-15 (PSCA-CAR_s15 NK cells). The results showed that PSCA-CAR_s15 NK cells had a therapeutic effect on human metastatic prostate cancer (PC) models, and there was no sign of systemic toxicity, which provided a strong theoretical basis for clinical development. In addition to the above antigens, MUC1, PD-1, folate receptor alpha (FRα), and death receptor 4 and 5 (DR4/5) have also been proven to be target antigens for CAR-NK cells.[ ] Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) can inhibit the function of NK cells. In order to overcome this negative effect, Lee et al[ ] chose an antifibrotic drug, nintedanib, and MSLN-CAR-NK cells for synergistic therapy. The results suggested that nintedanib could promote the infiltration of NK cells in vivo, and at the same time, it could reduce the secretion of IL-6 by CAF by blocking the signal pathway of platelet-derived growth factor receptor β (PDGFR β), which couold finally reduce the inhibition of CAF on NK cells and greatly improve the cytotoxicity of NK cells. This study provides a new potential combination therapy strategy for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients.

## Other solid tumors
We selected the above solid tumors and introduced the progression of CAR-NK cell therapy in recent years in detail. In addition, CAR-NK cell therapy has also shown good results in the treatment of other tumors. In OC, CAR-NK92 cells targeting mesenchymal stem protein (MSLN) showed effective scavenging effects on OVCAR-3 and SKOV3 cell lines and mouse subcutaneous and intraperitoneal OC models.[ ] Aiming at the same target, MSLN-CAR-NK cells could specifically kill MSLN-positive GC cells (n87, MKN-28, and AGS), secrete stronger cytokines, effectively eliminate GC cells in subcutaneous and peritoneal tumor models, and significantly prolong the survival time of intraperitoneal tumor-bearing mice. More importantly, in the treatment of patient-derived xenografts with MSLN-CAR-NK cells, effective antitumor effects and considerable NK cell infiltration were observed, which laid a solid foundation for the clinical application of MSLN-CAR-NK cells in the treatment of GC.[ ] With regard to liver cancer, Liu et al[ ] found that c-Met-CAR-NK cells showed more specific cytotoxicity to HepG2 cells with high c-Met expression, suggesting that c-Met might be a specific and effective target for CAR-NK immunotherapy in human liver cancer cells. Chen et al[ ] found that the high levels of soluble PD-L1 (sPD-L1) secreted by liver cancer patients could inhibit the function of CAR-NK cells targeting GPC3. As such, they managed to combine the high-affinity sPD-L1 variant (L3C7c-Fc) with GPC3-CAR-NK cells, which could enhance the lethality of CAR-NK cells.

## CAR-M against solid tumors

## HER2-CAR-M
Klichinsky et al[ ] modified human macrophages with CARs genetic engineering technology to allow them to have phagocytic activity against tumors. They generated a CAR-M targeting solid tumor antigen MSLN, or HER2, and proved the phagocytosis to antigenic positive target cells. The anti-HER2 CAR was transformed into Ad5f35 vector, and the constructed CAR-M could eradicate SKOV3 cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner. CAR-M had an anti-tumor effect on the two animal models constructed with SKOV3 cell lines. Klichinsky et al[ ] also found that CAR-M expressed pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines and transformed M2 macrophages from bystanders into M1 cells. At the same time, CAR-M upregulated the mechanism of antigen presentation, recruited and presented antigens to T cells, and resisted the effect of immunosuppressive cytokines. On December 9, 2020, Carisma Therapeutics Inc. began the first phase I clinical study of CAR-M (CT-0508, https://classic.clinicaltrials.gov/) against HER2+ breast cancer. However, more time is necessary to investigate the clinical efficacy of this CAR-M.

## CAR-147
The ECM is a physical barrier to various kinds of anticancer therapies. Its synthesis and degradation are mainly regulated by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Macrophages are an important source of MMPs.[ ] Zhang et al[ ] modified macrophages with a specially designed CAR (CAR-147). The receptor could be activated after recognizion of the tumor antigen HER2 to trigger the internal signal transduction of CD147 and increased the expression of MMP without affecting the other functions of macrophages (phagocytosis, ROS production, and inflammatory factor secretion). The results showed that intravenous injection of CAR-147 macrophages could significantly inhibit the tumor growth of 4T1 breast cancer in mice. CAR-147 macrophages can destroy the ECM of tumors, promote the infiltration of T cells into tumors, reduce the deposition of the ECM, and significantly increase the levels of IL-12 and interferon γ in tumor tissue so as to exert an anti-tumor effect.

## CAR-iMac
In recent years, researchers have reported that CAR-expressing T cells and NK cells differentiated from CAR-induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) have strong cytotoxic to tumor cells. These cells represent a new family of engineered stem cell-derived immune cells for CAR therapy. Myeloid cells, such as macrophages, have been used as effector cells to fight against cancer cells through their phagocytosis.[ , ] Zhang et al[ ] introduced the traditional CAR to iPSCs and created iPSC-induced macrophages (CAR-iMac) with strong antigen-dependent macrophage functions. According to the single-cell RNA-sequencing analysis data, they found that iPSCs expressing CAR could differentiate into macrophage-like cells. Furthermore, the results showed that in the presence of specific antigens, CAR-mediated signals promoted the phagocytosis of CAR-iMac and lead to the transition of CAR-iMac from M2 subtypes to inflammatory M1 subtypes. The CAR-iMac cells targeting MSLN have excellent phagocytic activity in OVCAR3/ASPC1 ovarian/pancreatic cancer cells expressing MSLN and performed well when used in an NOD-PrkdcscidIl2rgem1/Smoc (NSG) mice model injected with HO8910 OC cells. Excitingly, Zhang et al[ ] also examined cytokine gene expression and found an antigen-dependent increase in M1 proinflammatory cytokine expression. Taken together, for the first time, this technology platform provides an unlimited source of iPSC-derived engineered CAR macrophages that can be used to eliminate cancer cells.

## Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-CAR-M
The process of producing autologous CAR-T cells for each patient in vitro is complex, laborious, time-consuming, and expensive. As such, it poses a challenge to a wider range of clinical applications. A great deal of research has been done to overcome the challenges associated with CAR-T cell therapy. Unlike CAR-T cells, great hope was given to the use of CAR-M to treat solid tumors. Kang et al[ ] delivered genes encoding CAR and IFN-γ into macrophages in vivo using macrophage-targeting polymer nanocarriers for in situ programing to CAR-expressing M1 phenotype macrophages (CAR-M1). They used a non-viral porcine Bac transposable subsystem in order to ensure the continuous expression of CAR-IFN-γ transgene in target cells. CAR expression on macrophages eliminated cancer cells through the specific phagocytosis of cancer cells achieved by overcoming the inhibitory effect of CD47. T cells activated by CAR-M1 macrophages in tumor tissues could continuously provide M1 polarized stimulation (such as IFN-γ). In addition, pro-inflammatory chemokines produced in the pro-inflammatory TME might induce M1 macrophages to infiltrate into the tumor continuously. Kang et al[ ] used NB with ALK expression as a solid tumor model, which was a solid tumor that has not been successfully treated with CAR-T cells. This method of inducing CAR-M1 macrophages in vivo may promote the application of the CAR technique in the clinical treatment of solid tumors.

## Chemokine receptor 7(CCR7)-CAR-M
Niu et al[ ] designed a series of CAR-Ms, directed the macrophages to CCR7 positive cells, and showed that the cytoplasmic domain of Mer receptor tyrosine kinase (MerTK) triggered the cytotoxicity to tumor cells in CAR-Ms. In vivo, CAR-Ms targeting CCR7 induced systemic anti-tumor immunity by preventing metastasis and delaying the migration of lipid droplet high expressed (LDhi) CCR7hi immunosuppressive cells from tumor tissues to distal immune organs, thus inhibiting tumor growth and prolonging survival, indicating that CCR7 played an important role in immune tolerance induced by tumor cells.

## Aptamer-engineered M1 macrophages (ApEn-M1)
Qian et al[ ] proposed a non-genetic and simple macrophage engineering strategy for the treatment of solid tumors by glycan metabolic markers and click response: ApEn-M1. ApEn-M1s showed enhanced activity in targeting tumor cells in vitro and in vivo, resulting in significant cytotoxic effects, and showed excellent anti-tumor effects in breast cancer xenotransplantation mouse models and breast cancer lung metastasis mouse models. The results of mechanism studies suggested that ApEn-M1 could reprogram the immune microenvironment by increasing T cell infiltration and enhancing T cell activity in the tumor area. In addition, the administration of ApEn-M1 did not show significant systemic side effects. Through glycan metabolic labeling, macrophages could be effectively labeled with aptamers on the cell surface by click reaction without genetic changes or cell damage. Therefore, this study provides evidence for the concept of cell surface anchoring engineering and expands the scope of non-genetic macrophage engineering strategy.

## Anti-GD2 CAR-M
NB has a high degree of genetic heterogeneity and is the most common and difficult type of solid tumor to treat in children.[ ] Previous studies have shown that the microenvironment of NB is rich in macrophages, and macrophages mediate important anti-tumor responses in the treatment of anti-GD2 antibodies combined with anti-CD47 antibodies.[ ] Based on this, Zhang et al[ ] used the Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR)-Cas9 gene editing method to integrate anti-GD2 CAR into the adeno-associated virus site 1 (AAVS1) locus of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) to produce CAR-M cells through arterial endothelial-hematopoietic transformation (EHT). They developed an efficient serum-free and feeder-free macrophage generation system and established a scalable hPSC platform, which could repeatedly produce unified CAR-M with anti-GD2-dependent anti-tumor activity through arterial hemogenic endothelium (HE) and achieve stable expression of CAR in hPSC-derived macrophages. In vitro, CAR-M showed a good cytotoxic effect on NB and melanoma. In vivo, CAR-M significantly reduced the tumor load in the NB xenograft mouse model and delayed tumor growth. The data from the study of Zhang et al[ ] were not only the evidence of the anti-pediatric solid tumor activity of hPSC-derived CAR-Ms in vivo, but also provided evidence supporting the research and development of the next generation of CARs based on hPSC.

## Chinese contributions in the field of CAR-related immunotherapy against solid tumors
In recent years, scientists from China have made indelible contributions to the rise and rapid development of CAR technology.[ – ] In the field of solid tumors, Chinese researchers have carried out a number of high-quality clinical studies with the ample support of a large number of patients and related institutions. Professor Mao from the Shenzhen People's Hospital set out to verify the safety and anti-glioblastoma activity of the fourth-generation safety-designed CAR-T (4SCAR-T) cells targeting GD2. Eight patients with GBM were infused with GD2-4SCAR-T cells by intravenous injection or intravenous injection combined with intracavitary injection. The results showed that four patients had partial reactions within 3–24 months, three patients progressed within 6–23 months, and one patient was stable for 4 months after infusion. The median survival time of the patients was 10 months after infusion. This study proved that GD2-4SCAR-T cells were safe in the treatment of gliomas with no serious adverse events. Although antigen loss was found, the overall anti-tumor effect was good.[ ] In 2022, a team led by professor Shen of Peking University Cancer Hospital released the results of an ongoing, open-label, one-arm, phase 1 clinical trial of CLDN18.2-CAR-T cells (CT041) in CLDN18.2-positive digestive system cancer patients. A total of 37 patients were treated with three doses of CT041 (2.50/3.75/5.00 × 108 cells). All patients had grade 3 or higher hematological toxicity, and 94.6% of patients had grade 1 or 2 cytokine release syndrome (CRS). The overall response rate (ORR), disease control rate (DCR), and 6-month remission rate reached 48.6%, 73.0%, and 44.8%, respectively, of which GC patients experienced the best effect, with the three data of 57.1%, 75.0%, and 81.2%, respectively. The current preliminary results have confirmed that CT041 has better efficacy and safety in patients with CLDN18.2-positive digestive system cancer, and we believe that follow-up data will provide more gratifying results.[ ] CD133 is an attractive therapeutic target for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Dai et al[ ] recruited 21 patients with histologically confirmed and measurable advanced HCC and sufficient hematological, liver, and renal functions to receive CD133-directed CAR-T (CART-133) cell infusion. The results showed that the median OS of the patients was 12 months and the median progression free survival was 6.8 months. Fourteen patients were stable for 2.0–16.3 months, six patients progressed after infusion, and one patient showed partial reaction. The study also found that the survival rate of patients was related to the changes in vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), soluble VEGF receptor 2 (sVEGFR2), stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1, and IFN-γ after cell infusion. It was confirmed that the early changes of these circulating molecules could be used as potential biomarkers for predicting CART-133 response. More trials are needed to demonstrate the efficacy of CART-133 and the predictive value of these small molecules.
In addition to the above research, Chinese scholars have also designed CAR-T cells targeting other targets (MSLN, EGFR, and GPC3) and achieved excellent results in their clinical trials in solid tumors.[ – ] Although no clinical trial results on CAR-NK and CAR-M have been released by Chinese scientists at present, we hope that such results will be released in the future.

## Challenges in CAR-Immune Cells against Solid Tumors
Although some problems exist, there is no doubt that CAR-T cells are successful in hematological tumors, and seven new FDA-approved drugs have been put on the market.[ ] However, in the treatment of solid tumors, CAR-T cells still face many intractable challenges [Figure ]. To some extent, the emergence of CAR-NK cells and CAR-M partially makes up for the limitations of CAR-T cells in the treatment of solid tumors. Compared with CAR-T cells, one of the biggest advantages of CAR-NK cells is that the source of the NK cells is wide, and autologous NK cells are not necessary for production, which makes CAR-NK cells an "off-the-shelf" product. Although there are studies and clinical trials proving that other cell sources, such as allogenous T cells, could be used to prepare CAR-T cells for treating tumors, there is still a certain gap in efficacy and durability compared with autologous CAR-T.[ ] Second, CAR-NK cells releases different cytokine profiles compared to CAR-T cells, which greatly reduces the incidence of cytokine release syndrome (CRS) and neurotoxicity. Finally, NK cells have strong immune function independent of CAR and have more pathways to kill tumor cells. The present research on CAR-M is the scarcest among the three, but it shows greater potential than the former two in the treatment of solid tumors. CAR-M has two main advantages: (1) There are a large number of macrophages in tumor tissue, and cytokines such as CSF1/VEGF secreted by TME will also recruit macrophages; (2) Macrophages are less affected by microenvironment immunosuppression, M2 type macrophages are part of the immunosuppressive component of TME, and the reversal of M2-M1 is beneficial to the killing of tumors. Even though NK cells and macrophages have advantages over T cells in the treatment of solid tumors, obstacles and dilemmas with their usage still exist. In the Supplementary Material, http://links.lww.com/CM9/B679, we further systematically summarize the challenges they face in the treatment of solid tumors.
 

## Current Attempts to Overcome Challenges

## Optimizing target antigen selection
For solid tumors, researchers should strive to improve their target antigen selection strategy, give priority to antigens that are only expressed in tumor cells but rarely or not expressed in normal tissues, and look for novel target antigens [Figure A]. Pediatric cancer usually expresses proteins that are silent after birth, and these proteins can be used as immune targets. CAR-T cells targeting the fetal antigen glypican-2 (GPC2) expressed on NB and several other solid tumors can effectively and persistently eradicate NBs without toxicity, which proves that oncofetal antigen is a promising target for CAR-T cell therapy in the treatment of solid tumors.[ ] Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) was highly expressed in 90.8% (138/152) of thyroid papillary carcinoma and 89.2% (33/37) of follicular thyroid cancer. The results of a study showed that TSHR-targeted CAR-T cells had good anti-tumor effects on differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) in vivo and in vitro. It has been proven that TSHR is also an alternative target for thyroid cancer.[ ] Human leukocyte antigen G (HLA-G) is a newly expressed immune checkpoint protein in most tumor cells. As a way to evade immune attack, recent in vitro studies have proven that it is a useful target for CAR-T cells in the treatment of leukemia. Jan et al[ ] developed CAR-NK cells targeting HLA-G. The results showed that CAR-NK cells could effectively kill breast, brain, pancreas, and OC cells in vitro, reduce the growth of xenografts, prolong the median survival time of mice, and further lead to extensive tumor ablation in combination with low-dose chemotherapy.
 

## Overcoming antigen escape
Downregulation or loss of target antigen is one of the main reasons for the failure of solid tumor treatment, and it is very important to overcome this problem [Figure B]. A number of studies have shown that a promising strategy is to choose double targets instead of one single target. Yang et al[ ] developed a bispecific CAR that could target both EpCAM and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1). After testing a variety of solid tumors, the results showed that the therapeutic effect of bispecific CAR-T cells was better than that of CAR-T cells targeting a single major antigen. We also found that the activation of EpCAM by CAR-T cells led to the upregulation of ICAM-1, which made tumors more vulnerable to bispecific CART cells targeting ICAM-1. Hegde et al[ ] created a tandem CAR (TanCAR) targeting both HER2 and IL13Rα2. Compared with monospecific CAR-T cells, the activity of TanCAR-T cells was more sustained and not more exhaustible for longer periods of time. In a murine glioblastoma model, TanCAR-T cells reduced antigen escape, showed enhanced anti-tumor effect, and prolonged animal survival time.[ ] Subsequently, the team developed trivalent CAR T cells (UCAR-T cells) targeting HER2, IL13Rα2, and EphA2, which were more capable of killing tumors than monospecific and bispecific CAR T cells.[ ] Tian et al[ ] designed BiCisCAR-T cells that target GPC and B7-H3. Compared with ordinary CAR-T cells, BiCisCAR-T cells showed stronger persistence and resistance to exhaustion and could effectively eliminate tumor cells expressing GPC2 or CD276. In addition, a clinical trial of cholangiocarcinoma using CAR-T cocktail immunotherapy with both EGFR CAR-T and CD133 CAR-T cells resulted in partial remission, but the method needed further improving due to severe toxic reactions.[ ]
Because of the CAR-dependent, and CAR-independent dual anti-tumor activity of CAR-NK cells, antigen escape can have limited influence on CAR-NK cells. The research on CAR-M is not enough, and there are no good suggestions for overcoming antigen escape.

## Improving expansion and persistence
As described earlier, the persistence and proliferative activity of CAR-T cells were significantly improved after adding costimulatory domains (CD28, 4-1BB, OX40, and inducible co-stimulator [ICOS]). In the study of solid tumors, the application of HER2-CAR-T cells after lymphoid clearance could safely promote T cell proliferation and induce clinical response in patients with advanced sarcoma.[ ] CAR-T cells targeting MSLN have limited activity in patients. Targeting different MSLN epitopes, Tomar et al[ ] developed hYP218 (against membrane-proximal epitope) and SS1 (against membrane-distal epitope) CAR-T cells. HYP218 CAR-T cells showed high persistence and tumor invasion in the mouse model of pancreatic cancer. Chen et al[ ] developed a CAR-T cell secreting CD47 blocker signal regulatory protein α (SIRPα)-Fc fusion protein (Sirf CAR-T) to boost the therapeutic effect of CAR-T cells in solid tumor therapy. The results showed that Sirf CAR-T cells had stronger persistence in tumor tissue, reduced the expression of PD-1 on the surface of CAR-T cells, and increased M1 macrophages to regulate the TME.[ ]
Yang et al[ ] constructed a CAR-T (RB-340-1) that could both target HER2+ cancers and contain a CRISPR interference circuit that prevented PD-1 expression upon antigen encounter. The results showed that RB-340-1 exhibited higher cytokine production, better expansion abilities, longer persistence in vivo, and enhanced suppression effect on HER2+ oropharyngeal cancer cells compared to traditional CAR-T cells.
IL-15 seemed to be closely related to the persistence of CAR-NK cells [Figure C]. The transgenetic expression of CD123-CARs and sIL-15 enabled NK cells to be highly activated, proliferate under chronic antigen exposure and play a role in AML treatment, but it was related to systemic toxicity.[ ] NKG2D-CAR-NK cells expressing IL-15 improved the persistence of NK cells in vitro and in vivo and significantly prolonged the survival time of KG-1 AML model mice.[ ] However, there were no solid tumor studies to prove the effect of IL-15 on the persistence of CAR-NK cells.[ – ]

## Improving trafficking and infiltration
Numerous studies aimed at improving trafficking and infiltration are underway [Figure D]. Fibroblast activating protein (FAP) is a membrane protein highly expressed by CAFs. It can regulate TME by remodeling ECM. CAR-T cells targeting FAP can promote the infiltration of CAR-T cells into solid tumors, which is one of the research strategies for overcoming the challenge of immunosuppressive TME.[ ] CAFs induce the inhibition of CAR-T cells. Sakemura et al[ ] found that CAR-T cells targeting both multiple myeloma (MM) cells and CAFs could significantly improve its effector function, but so far, there are no reports involving solid tumors. Getting CAR-T cells to express chemokine receptors, which can help CAR-T cells redirect to tumors, is another strategy for improving trafficking. In vivo experiments showed that GD2-CAR-T cells expressing CCR2 had better killing activity.[ ] In mouse CAR-T cells, the expression of IL-7 and chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 19 (CCL19) has been shown to improve the invasion and survival of T cells in mouse tumors. Human CAR-T cells expressing IL-7 and CCL19 had enhanced expansion and migration ability in vitro and showed stronger anti-tumor ability than traditional CAR-T cells in xenografts of HCC cell lines, primary liver cancer tissue specimens, and pancreatic cancer (PC) cell lines.[ ] Some studies have shown that gene deletions in IFN-γ-receptor (IFNγR) signaling pathways (IFN-γ receptor 1 [IFNGR1], Janus kinase-1 or 2 [JAK1 or JAK2]) make glioblastoma and other solid tumors more difficult to be killed by CAR-T cells in vitro and in vivo. The further results showed that the upregulation of the cell adhesion pathway was lower in glioblastoma cells lacking IFNγR1 after exposure to CAR-T cells, indicating that interferon gamma R signal is necessary for the full adhesion of CAR cells. Therefore, it shows promise to maintain or even enhance IFNγR signal to enhance the interaction between CAR-T cells and tumor cells and make them function better.[ ] Li et al[ ] developed an antibody-engineered exosome from antigen-feeding DCs to surpass CAR-T therapy in solid tumors using in situ T cell activation and cancer cell targeting, showing great transportation abilities. They confirmed that tumor antigen-stimulated dendritic cell-derived exosomes (tDC-Exo) were the same as the CAR in CAR-T cells, acting as the necessary signals for T-cell activation. Furthermore, anti-CD3 and anti-EGFR were then engineered on tDC-Exo to promote the binding of T cells to cancer cells for precise therapy.[ ] Li et al[ ] used a porous microneedle patch that can accommodate CAR-T cells and allows in situ penetration of CAR-T lymphocyte-mediated inoculation when implanted into tumor beds or resection cavities after surgery. CAR-T cells loaded in the tip hole of the microneedle can easily be transported to the tumor in a uniform way without losing their activity, greatly enhancing the infiltration of CAR-T cells and immune stimulation. In addition, directly blocking tumor angiogenesis or blocking VEGF also seems to be an alternative way to promote the invasion of CAR-T cells.
When it comes to immune cell trafficking and infiltrating into solid tumors, CAR-Ms seem to have natural advantages over CAR-T cells and CAR-NK cells. There are a large number of macrophages in the solid TME. Although most of them are M2 type, today's CAR-M strategy can reverse the M2 type to the M1 type. At the same time, a HER2-targeting CAR-M can degrade ECM around solid tumors by upregulating the expression of MMPs so as to achieve better infiltration of CAR-M.[ ]

## Improving the efficiency of CAR-immune cells by targeting TME
We can reverse immunosuppressive TME in many ways [Figure E–H].

## Targeting immune checkpoints
Some suppressive immune checkpoints, such as PD-1 and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4), can inhibit the function of T cells.[ ] We can combine CAR-T/NK cells with PD-1, PD-L1, and CTLA-4 blockades, knock out the immune checkpoint gene, or transfer the scFv of the antibody gene against the immune checkpoint into CAR-T/NK cells to reduce the immunosuppression of TME. Some studies have shown that the combination of AC133-specific CAR-T cells, anti-PD-1 antibodies, and CD73 inhibitors can specifically eliminate chemo-resistant tumor stem cells, overcome SCLC-mediated T cell inhibition, and may induce long-term complete remission.[ ] Another study on CAR-NK cells showed that cabozantinib could reduce the expression of PD-L1 and enhance the killing ability of EGFR-targeted CAR-NK-92 cells in renal cancer cells in vivo and in vitro.[ ] Wang et al[ ] combined anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibodies and CAR-NK-92 cells in the treatment of castrated-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). The results suggested that anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibodies could directly act on PD-L1 expressed in CAR-NK-92 cells and enhance the killing activity of CAR-NK-92 cells against C4-2 and CRPC cells in vitro. Compared with CAR-NK-92 cells or combined with anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibodies, anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibodies can significantly enhance the anti-tumor effect of CAR-NK-92 cells against CRPC cells in vivo. Their studies have proven that the combination of CAR-NK-92 and anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibody can improve the anti-tumor efficacy of CRPC and has a very important conversion value in the clinical treatment of CRPC.

## Targeting cytokine receptors
The dysregulation of the cytokine receptor network plays an important role in immunosuppressive TME.[ ] CAR-T/NK cell therapy can inhibit the recruitment of inhibitory immune cells by blocking chemokines and chemokine receptors expressed by tumor cells and stromal cells at the same time. In addition, the expression of specific cytokine receptors in CAR-T/NK cells can enhance their transport to tumor cells. In a study of CAR-T targeting CEA in pancreatic cancer, the effect of CAR-T expressing IL-18 is stronger than that of ordinary CAR-T.[ ] The expression of human IL15/IL15R and α fusion protein (Ov-IL15C), combined with EGFR-targeted CAR-NK cells, synergistically inhibited the growth of multiple glioblastomas and significantly improved the survival rate.[ ]

## Targeting the physiological and biochemical environments
Physiological and biochemical environments in TME, such as hypoxia, low pH, and immunosuppressive metabolites, significantly inhibit the function of CAR-T cells. Newick et al[ ] developed a novel CAR-T cell targeting regulatory subunit I anchoring disruptor (RIAD). RIAD inhibited immunosuppressive metabolites prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and adenosine by interfering with the connection between protein kinase A (PKA) and Ezrin proteins. The results showed that RIAD CAR-T cells had a high infiltration rate and good immunogenicity.

## Targeting immunosuppressive cells
Immunosuppressive cells (mainly myeloid-derived suppressor cells [MDSC] and Tregs) in TME inhibit the anti-tumor activity of the immune system by secreting negative immunoregulatory cytokines (IL-10/TGF-β). Suppressing immunosuppressive cells or blocking the secretion of inhibitory cytokines is a feasible strategy for reversing immunosuppressive TME. Kloss et al[ ] co-expressed a dominant-negative TGF-βRII (dnTGF-βRII) in PSMA-targeted CAR-T cells and induced tumor eradication in a mouse model of invasive human prostate cancer. After that, the results of an in-human phase 1 trial of these CAR-T cells showed that the clinical application of TGF-β-resistant CAR-T cells was feasible and generally safe.[ ] Alishah et al[ ] used the CRISPR/Cas9 system to knock out the TGFβRII gene in MSLN or claudin 6-specific CAR-T cells and found enhanced killing capacities, which meant that the TGFβRII KO approach might yield brilliant results in the treatment of solid tumors. In a TNBC study, SD-208, an inhibitor of TGF-β receptor kinase, combined with ROR1 CAR-T cells, maintained strong anti-tumor activity in in vivo and in vitro experiments.[ ] CD25 is the hallmark of Tregs. A 2021 study successfully developed CAR-NK cells targeting CD25, which could produce a similar number of cytokines and had excellent cytotoxicity against tumor cells.[ ] Niu et al[ ] have developed CAR macrophages targeting CCR7 expressing immunosuppressive cells, which had killing effects both in vivo and in vitro. Tumor-associated microphages are one of the most abundant cell types in many solid tumors, which usually play a role in tumor promotion. Brown et al[ ] reported the development of a strategy for tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) implementation in mouse solid tumor models using CAR-T cells targeting the macro marker F4/80 CAR-T (F4.CAR-T) cells which effectively killed macrophages in vitro and in vivo and were non-toxic. These cells have anti-tumor effects in the mouse models of lung cancer in situ, OC, and pancreatic cancer. This study provides theoretical proof for supporting CAR-T cells targeting TAM as a means to enhance anti-tumor immunity.[ ]

## Special CAR structure
In order to solve the problems faced during the application of CAR in solid tumors, researchers creatively modified the CAR structure and generated "special CAR" which was different from the traditional structure. We summarized and listed several new types of CARs,including universal CARs, masked CARs, inhibitory CARs, STOP-CAR, SWIFF-CAR, logic-gated CAR-T cells, γδ CAR-T cells and synapse-tuned CARs, discussed their action mechanisms, and tried to analyze their advantages and disadvantages so as to provide available strategies for the application of CAR in solid tumors [Figure I, Supplementary Material, http://links.lww.com/CM9/B679].[ ]

## Conclusions
A number of CAR-T therapies have been approved for treating hematological tumors around the world, but the research on these therapies in solid tumors has been limited. How to use CAR technology to treat solid tumors has always been a pain point in the frontier of scientific research. Although many basic studies and clinical trials are underway, to date no drug exists that has received FDA approval for the treatment of solid tumors. CAR-NK cells and CAR-M contain a structure similar to that of CAR-T cells but are optimized according to their own characteristics, and each has its own unique mechanism. Objectively speaking, compared with CAR-T cells, CAR-NK cells and CAR-M have innate advantages in the treatment of solid tumors. CAR-NK cells have a wide range of sources and a strong ability to kill tumor cells independent of CAR. Moreover, they cause fewer side effects (CRS and neurotoxicity). In the case of CAR-M, a large number of macrophages exist in TME, which conveniently avoids the difficulty that CAR-T cells experience in infiltrating into solid tumors. Moreover, its polarization and plasticity endow it with strong anti-tumor effects. However, challenges remain. "On-target, off-tumor toxicity", antigen escape, immunosuppressive TME, inadequate expansion and activation, and difficulties in trafficking and infiltration limit their application in solid tumors. At present, efforts aimed at addressing these challenges are underway. Many difficulties are expected to be solved by finding novel target antigens, constructing double-target CAR, co-expressing chemokine receptors, targeting immune checkpoints, and reforming the structure of traditional CAR. Moreover, a small number of studies have shown the immense power of CAR-M might be the most promising potential therapy for solid tumors. Therefore, in future studies, it will be very important to focus on maintaining or even expanding the phagocytosis of CAR-M, enhancing its antigen presentation, better realizing the phenotypic transition from M2 to M1, and strengthening the promotion of other immune cells.

## Funding
This work was supported by grants from Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82270149), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Nos. 2022T150592, and 2021M692930), Young Postdoctoral Innovators in Henan Province (WL), and Henan Province Medical Science and Technology Research Project (Nos. SBGJ202102063, and LHGJ20220305).

## Conflicts of interest
None.

## Supplementary Material
 
Xudong Li and Wei Li contributed equally to this work.
How to cite this article: Li XD, Li W, Xu LP, Song YP. Chimeric antigen receptor-immune cells against solid tumors: Structures, mechanisms, recent advances, and future developments. Chin Med J 2024;137:1285–1302. doi: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000002818