pmcChem Biomed ImagingChem Biomed Imaging4647cbiimChemical & Biomedical Imaging2832-3637American Chemical SocietyPMC11504603PMC11504603.111504603115046033947414610.1021/cbmi.3c000931ReviewMolecular Eye: A System
for Precise Diagnosis and
Treatment of Major Clinical Diseases Based on Molecular Probe Technology
JiXin ChenXin LiKexin ZhangZhihao TangLijun LiTiannv https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7800-9852HanFeng https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9730-9367HongHao https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0920-0151ZhangTao aDepartment
of Radiopharmaceuticals, Nuclear Medicine Clinical Translation Center,
School of Pharmacy, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, ChinabDepartment
of Nuclear Medicine, the First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing 210029, ChinacState Key
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Chemistry and Biomedicine
Innovation Center (ChemBIC), Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Medical School of Nanjing University, 22 Hankou Road, Nanjing 210093, China*Tel: +86-13451926381; E-mail: haohong@nju.edu.cn*Tel: +86-18362932395; E-mail: zhangtaocjh@njmu.edu.cn; zhangtaocjh@sina.com151120232503202423473563168184310820232510202323102023151120232910202430102024© 2023 The Authors. Co-published by Nanjing University and American Chemical Society2023The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
With the flourishing development
of precision medicine,
theranostics,
generally recognized as the integration of diagnosis and treatment,
has emerged as a prominent trend in clinical research. However, theranostics
primarily emphasizes the end result of integration, without providing
sufficient details on how precise diagnosis and synergetic individualized
treatment could be achieved and what clinical challenges could be
effectively addressed in clinical practice. Molecular probe technology
provides a robust method to bridge the gap between theory and practice.
Through meticulous design of the chemical structure, imaging labels
or drugs were conjugated to tumor-targeting peptides, antibodies,
or inducers to form molecular probes, which allow a seamless switch
between targeted intervention and targeted imaging with consistency
in time, space, and biodistribution. Thus, this review proposes a
concept called “molecular eye”, which refers to a comprehensive
system for precise diagnosis and treatment of major clinical diseases
based on molecular probe technology. This medical system emphasizes
the chemical basis of probe development and optimization, which can
provide precise actionable information for clinical decision making,
allow molecular-targeted therapy, expand the indications of old therapy,
and accelerate the regulatory approval of molecular drugs. “Molecular
eye” resembles the piercing eye of the Monkey King, which can
detect previously “invisible” diseases and facilitate
disease diagnosis, treatment, real-time evaluation, and pathology
research, guiding drug development. The emergence of the “molecular
eyes” will provide opportunities and challenges in the fields
of clinical practice and medical research and propel the progression
of contemporary medicine toward precision medicine.

chemical entitiesmolecular basisprobe technologyradiopharmaceuticalsbiomarkermolecular
imagingtheranosticsprecision medicineNational Natural Science Foundation of China10.13039/50110000180912275135Jiangsu Province University Natural Science Research ProjectNA21KJB350015Nanjing Medical University10.13039/501100007289NMUR20210003pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9im3c00093document-id-new-14im3c00093ccc-price1

## Introduction
Modern medicine is undergoing
a tremendous transformation from
traditional medicine to precision medicine, and the integration of
diagnosis and treatment is becoming a major trend in clinical research.
The concept of theranostics, first proposed by John Funkhouser in
1998, was initially defined as “the ability to affect therapy
or treatment of a disease state”. It is now generally recognized that theranostics is a combination
of molecule-targeted imaging and treatment. , However,
the concept of theranostics is still broad and lacks detailed elaboration
of which method could be utilized for integration of diagnosis and
therapy, what clinical challenges could be effectively addressed,
and how individualized therapy could be achieved. Thus, further optimization
is needed to meet the clinical demand for precise disease diagnosis
and personalized treatment.
The flourishing development of precision
medicine has infused new
vitality and enriched the connotation of the theranostics. Precision
medicine, originating from personalized medicine, emerged from the
Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) launched in 2015. It emphasizes the application of advanced technologies
to accurately classify diseases and achieve individualized treatment.
The three key technologies supporting precision medicine are modern
genetic technology, bioinformatics, and molecular imaging technology. , Among them, molecular imaging technology has prominent advantages
in various aspects, which can comprehensively, completely, dynamically,
and noninvasively visualize the molecular/cellular information from
target tissues inside the body in a real-time manner. It helps in the early detection and dynamic monitoring
of pathological changes, without being limited by the repeated biopsy
sampling and the potential risk of metastasis due to invasive operation. Furthermore, it shows promising prospects in
elucidating disease molecular mechanisms and prognostic evaluation.
Molecular probes are the core component of molecular imaging technology.
By careful design of the chemical structure in the target-binding
region, these probes can bind specifically to disease targets. , Different cargos, such as radionuclides, imaging labels, and therapeutic
molecules, can be connected to the probe to achieve diagnostic or
therapeutic needs. , This allows the introduction
of contrast enhancement through target enrichment, thereby improving
the imaging and therapeutic capabilities. Molecular probe technology
enables the early diagnosis, dynamic monitoring, and precision treatment
of diseases at the cellular and molecular levels, guiding clinicians
in disease diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis assessment, thus promoting
integrated precision diagnosis and treatment. Molecular probe technology
serves as a bridge between molecular biology and clinical medicine,
greatly advancing the development of precision medicine. , 
With the continuous development of probe technology, the pace
of
precision medicine has also accelerated. Integrated precision diagnosis
and treatment systems based on probe technology have become a new
trend in clinical practice. This review briefly introduced representative
successful cases of theranostic probes in clinical and preclinical
settings, including various types of nuclear, optical, magnetic resonance
(MR), and ultrasonic probes. Additionally, the development and optimization
process, clinical effectiveness, and unique advantages of these probes
were discussed, along with integrated precision diagnosis and treatment
systems, aiming to provide guidance for the design and development
of novel theranostic probes.

2

## Nuclear Theranostic Probe
Nuclear probes
have shown superiority in precise diagnosis and
guiding treatment, which largely promote precision medicine. Based
on the property of emitting γ rays, nuclear imaging possesses
the advantages of unlimited tissue penetration depth, high intrinsic
sensitivity, and a broad selection of preclinical and clinical molecular
probes. And the picomolar sensitivity of nuclear imaging allows the
assessment of molecular and cellular events and detecting the homogeneous
or heterogeneous pathological changes of lesions in the context of
the whole body, which integrates the disease information from a micrological
level to a whole-body level, facilitating the clinicians to see the
“whole picture”. On the
other hand, some radionuclides (e.g., 177Lu, 90Y, 131I, etc.) could simultaneously emit β particles
and release a high proportion of their energy within several millimeters
around the target molecules. This allows for minimal irradiation of
the surrounding normal tissues while giving sufficient killing doses
to the lesion, thereby demonstrating promising therapeutic and theranostic
effects. , 
The nuclear theranostic probes are
mostly built from a nuclide-conjugated
vector structure. The vectors facilitate precise targeting, while
the theranostic properties of nuclides enable seamless switching
between target intervention and target imaging. To achieve adequate
efficacy and enable further clinical translation, a theranostic probe
needs to have high sensitivity, good specificity, strong target binding
affinity, and low toxicity. Thus, significant
efforts have been devoted to the design and optimization of probes.
First, the target of theranostic probes require high specificity,
abundance, and positivity rate to optimize the diagnostic capability
and minimize the risk of adverse events. Second, it is important to confirm the essential moiety of the vector
that binds to the target and improve its affinity and specificity.
Third, further modifications of physical size, hydrophobicity, and
charge at various parts of the peptide or molecule are needed to achieve
proper blood lifetime and barrier penetration ability. Also, various
chelators would be selected according to imaging modality and could
possibly affect the affinity and selectivity of the probe.
The
following section will introduce nuclear theranostics based
on several representative targets, namely, somatostatin receptors
(SSTRs), prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA), and fibroblast
activation protein (FAP) ( ).
 2.1

## SSTR2
Neuroendocrine
tumors (NETs)
are rare heterogeneous tumors with a relatively high mortality rate. , The atypical and complex clinical symptoms, as well as the distinctive
characteristics of NETs, often contribute to delayed diagnosis and
unfavorable prognosis. Therefore, an
early and accurate disease diagnosis is crucial for making clinical
decisions. Currently, conventional diagnostic methods such as computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can only provide
anatomical information and are insufficient for early tumor diagnosis
and functional imaging. In addition, NETs exhibit spatiotemporal heterogeneity;
the malignancy and biological behavior of the tumor change during
disease progression. Although pathological
biopsy is considered as the gold standard, it is limited by sampling
constraints and cannot reflect the tumor’s complete profile
and dynamic changes.
Functional imaging based on radionuclide
probes enables noninvasive, dynamic, rapid, and comprehensive visualization
of cellular and molecular activities in diseases. It effectively complements
the limitations of conventional diagnostic methods and provides possibilities
for integrated precision diagnosis and treatment. SSTRs are commonly
overexpressed in NETs, with SSTR2 being overexpressed in over 80%
of solid tumors such as midgut NETs, small-cell lung cancer, and so
on. In 2017, SNMMI proposed [68Ga]Ga-labeled somatostatin analogue (SSA) positron emission tomography
(PET)/CT imaging as the gold standard for clinical NET diagnosis,
which exhibited high sensitivity for detecting primary and metastatic
lesions. Tian et al. demonstrated that
[68Ga]Ga-DOTA-SSA imaging performed better than [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose ([18F]FDG) in lesion detection and
radiopharmaceutical uptake, especially in G3 NETs. SSTR2 holds immense potential in the early diagnosis, staging,
and prognostic evaluation of NETs.
Octreotide (D-Phe-cyclo(Cys-Tyr-D-Trp-Lys-Thr-Cys)Thr),
a somatostatin
analogue, is commonly used as a precursor drug to target SSTR, which
could specifically bind to SSTR2 with high affinity (half-maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50) 2.0 ± 0.7 nmol/L). Despite its nanomolar affinity, octreotide itself
has not become a widely used “cold drug” in cancer therapy
due to the limitations imposed by dose-dependent adverse reactions.
However the high affinity and specificity of octreotide for SSTR2
make it suitable for development as a diagnostic and therapeutic probe
for neuroendocrine tumors, which have attracted increasing attention
from radiopharmaceutical developers ( ). Weckbecker’s group linked 111In and octreotide using diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
(DTPA) and constructed the probe [111In]In-DTPA-octreotide. The probe had a relatively high renal clearance
rate and little intestinal accumulation, showing good imaging quality
in the abdomen region. However, it had certain limitations such as
low detection accuracy, with positive and negative predictive values
of 85% and 52%, respectively. Although
[111In]In-DTPA-octreotide can release Auger electrons and
internal conversion electrons to kill tumor cells, its limited tissue
penetration distance and low energy impede its further application
in clinical treatment.
 Since the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approval
of [111In]In-DTPA-octreotide, numerous studies have been
conducted
to optimize the probes. With approprioate isotope theranostic pairs,
[68Ga]Ga/[177Lu]Lu-1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic
acid (DOTA)-Tyr3-octreotide (DOTATOC) and [68Ga]Ga/[177Lu]Lu-DOTA-Tyr3-Thr8-octreotate (DOTATATE) showed promising
results in clinical trials. DOTATOC possessed reduced affinity for
SSTR3 by replacing the 3Phe of octreotide with 3Tyr, increasing both
the sensitivity and selectivity of the probe. Hofmann et al. confirmed
that [68Ga]Ga-DOTATOC had lower kidney uptake and higher
tumor-to-background ratios compared to 111In-DTPA-octreotide
in animal models, which facilitated the detection of small lesions. Clinical investigations also indicated a significant
improvement in the detection rate of [68Ga]Ga-DOTATOC in
patients with clinically suspected or unknown primary NETs. Furthermore, the chelator DOTA can provide 
stable binding to β-emitting radionuclides such as 90Y and 177Lu, thus enabling theranostic applications. Both
[90Y]Y/[177Lu]Lu-DOTATOC could be used for peptide
receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT), and clinical trials demonstrated
their good therapeutic efficacy. Baum
et al. conducted a retrospective analysis comparing 1048 patients
who received [177Lu]Lu-PRRT, [90Y]Y-PRRT, or
a combination of both. They found that
patients who received combination therapy had significantly longer
survival times with median progression-free survival (mPFS) of 24
months and median overall survival (mOS) of 64 months.
By oxidizing
the alcohol to the corresponding carboxylic acid at
the carbon end of octreotide (i.e., octreotide to octreotate), [68Ga]Ga-DOTATATE had better selectivity for the SSTR2. Clinical
studies confirmed that [68Ga]Ga-DOTATATE showed improved
sensitivity and specificity in tumor detection. In a meta-analysis
of 416 NET patients, [68Ga]Ga-DOTATOC and [68Ga]Ga-DOTATATE achieved a sensitivity of 93% and 96% and a specificity
of 85% and 100%, respectively. Currently,
DOTATATE PET/CT has become the preferred imaging modality for early
diagnosis of NETs, patient stratification for PRRT, and localization
of unknown primary tumors. However, due
to the short half-life of 68Ga and high background activity
in normal organs (especially the liver, kidneys, and spleen), poor
differentiated NETs and liver metastases sometimes could be neglected.
The half-life of 64Cu is approximately 12.7 h, which could
extend the PET/CT imaging time window to 3 h, compensating for the
short half-life of 68Ga. Johnbeck et al. found that the NET detection rate of [64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE
was higher than [68Ga]Ga-DOTATOC PET/CT, with 78.5% of
[68Ga]Ga-DOTATOC-negative patients could be detected using
[64Cu]Cu-DOTATATE.
DOTATATE has also shown good therapeutic
efficacy when combined
with therapeutic radionuclides, such as 177Lu. In a phase
III clinical randomized controlled trial for advanced midgut NETs,
[177Lu]Lu-DOTATATE therapy significantly improved the progression-free
survival (PFS) rate and treatment response rate when compared to high-dose
octreotide long-acting formulation. Compared
to [177Lu]Lu-DOTATOC, [177Lu]Lu-DOTATATE showed
significantly prolonged tumor residence time (2.1-fold). Although [177Lu]Lu-DOTATATE also
performed longer residence time in the kidney (1.4-fold), the mean
administration dose to the tumor under a fixed maximum kidney dose
was still better than DOTATOC. Thus, DOTATATE would be the better
choice when considering clinical treatment. Besides, [177Lu]Lu-DOTATATE can be combined with [68Ga]Ga-DOTATOC/[68Ga]Ga-DOTATATE as diagnostic and therapeutic partners. [68Ga]Ga-DOTATOC/[68Ga]Ga-DOTATATE facilitates patient
screening for PRRT, dynamic assessment of treatment efficacy, and
early prognostic prediction, contributing to precision diagnosis and
treatment. − 
Furthermore, continuous efforts have been devoted
in radiopharmaceuticals
optimization. For example, Jiang et al. introduced the concept of
“Evans blue (EB) optimization” to enhance the residence
time and uptake of [177Lu]Lu-DOTATATE in NETs. EB has a high affinity for plasma albumin in
the blood, significantly increasing the drug’s circulation
time in the blood. As a result, [177Lu]Lu-DOTA-EB-TATE
exhibited greatly improved accumulation in tumors, achieving the same
therapeutic effect with a lower radiation dose of 177Lu.
Clinical trials have also demonstrated the promising therapy efficacy
of [177Lu]Lu-DOTA-EB-TATE, with a disease control rate
of 33.3%, according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
(RECIST) criteria.
Moreover, SSTR antagonist, JR11 (Cpa-c[D-Cys-Aph(Hor)-D-Aph(Cbm)-Lys-Thr-Cys]-D-Tyr-NH2),
was found to have higher SSTR2 selectivity and affinity than SSTR
agonists. Several comprehensive studies
evaluated the pharmacokinetics of JR11 when it combined to various
chelators (e.g., DOTA, 1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1-glutaric acid-4,7-diacetic
acid (NODAGA)) and different radiometals (68Ga, 64Cu, 111In, 177Lu). The results suggested that
chelating status could affect the affinity and in vivo pharmacokinetics
of JR11 conjugates. − [68Ga]Ga-DOTA-JR11 performed a dramatically
lower affinity (about 150-fold) to SSTR2 than [68Ga]Ga-DOTATATE
but a higher tumor uptake (about 1.3-fold). And [68Ga]Ga-NODAGA-JR11
showed a 6-fold lower affinity than [68Ga]Ga-DOTATATE but
a 1.7-fold higher tumor uptake. Besides,
[177Lu]Lu-DOTA-JR11 performed higher tumor doses, metabolic
stability, and more DNA double-strand breaks than DOTATATE. Better efficacy was also proved in patients
with metastasis NET ( ). 
 
2.2

## PSMA
Prostate cancer (PCa) is a genitourinary
system tumor that ranks first in the incidence and second in mortality
rates in male malignancies. PCa at early
stage often lacks typical symptoms, which usually progressed to an
advanced stage by the time of first diagnosis. Therefore, early detection,
precise localization, and treatment of PCa are crucial for patient
management and recovery. Currently, the diagnosis of PCa is mainly
based on blood prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels, bone scans,
CT/MRI, and other diagnostic tools. However, these methods are insufficient
for accurate diagnosis and localization of the tumor in its early
stages. In regard of this, emerging studies
have focused on developing new targets to facilitate early diagnosis
and drug discovery. PSMA, a transmembrane protein, has been observed
to be overexpressed in prostate epithelial cells of PCa patients at
levels that are 100–1000 times higher than normal individuals. And its expression is directly correlated with
the invasiveness of prostate cancer. The high specificity and abundance
of PSMA in PCa, as well as its membrane localization, make it a promising
druggable target for both diagnosis and treatment of the PCa ( ).
 Several small molecular
inhibitors such as 2-PMPA
(2-(phosphono-methyl)pentanedioic
acid) and 2-MPPA (2-(3-mercaptopropyl) pentanedioic acid) have been
used as the ligand targeting PSMA. , But these
high-affinity ligands had high polarity and poor pharmacokinetic properties,
which limited the druggability and clinical translation. In 2012,
Eder et al. made a major breakthrough
in the development of PSMA molecular probes by constructing a [68Ga]Ga-labeled PSMA-targeted probe, known as [68Ga]Ga-PSMA-11, based on the Lys-urea-Glu structure. The probe exhibited
a strong affinity for PSMA, with an IC50 of (7.5 ±
2.2) nmol/L and a Ki of (12.0 ± 2.8)
nmol/L. Clinical trials have shown high diagnostic efficacy in patients
with low PSA expression levels, with a detection rate of up to 82.8%.
The FDA has approved [68Ga]Ga-PSMA-11 primarily for early
stage recurrent prostate cancer diagnosis, especially in tumor staging
and risk stratification. However, the chelating group of this probe
is not suitable for chelating therapeutic radiopharmaceuticals, and
its high renal uptake limits its clinical application in treatment.
In 2015, Benesova et al. developed the PSMA-617, a naphthalene-containing
DOTA-chelated PSMA inhibitor, which has shown potential for theranostic
applications through labeling with diagnostic and therapeutic radionuclides. [68Ga]Ga-PSMA-617 showed favorable
tumor-to-background ratios as well as high specificity and affinity
for PSMA. However, it exhibited reduced sensitivity and slow pharmacokinetics
compared to [68Ga]Ga-PSMA-11, resulting in prolonged image
acquisition times that impede its clinical application in diagnosis. Nevertheless, [177Lu]Lu-PSMA-617
performed excellent therapeutic efficacy in metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer (mCRPC) and received approval by the FDA as a breakthrough
therapy in 2021. Preclinical studies demonstrated that PSMA-617 exhibited
lower renal uptake when compare to PSMA-11, indicating lower nephrotoxicity
at the same therapeutic dose. Besides, its higher affinity for PSMA
allowed for efficient internalization and improved tumor targeting
and therapeutic efficacy. And a phase III clinical trial demonstrated
a significant improvement in overall survival and radiographic progression-free
survival in patients who received [177Lu]Lu-PSMA-617. This
treatment yielded a 38% reduction in the risk of death and a median
overall benefit of 4 months when used in conjunction with standard
treatment. Besides, Yang’s group
developed an oxalyldiaminopropionic acid-urea (ODAP-Urea) ligand-based
probe ([68Ga]Ga-P137), which demonstrated a higher tumor
uptake and lower bladder uptake than [68Ga]Ga-PSMA-617. 
In addition, linker DOTAGA has demonstrated
excellent biological
activity and allows for 177Lu and 68Ga chelation.
[68Ga]Ga-DOTAGA-(I-y)fk(Sub-KuE) ([68Ga]Ga-PSMA-I&T)
exhibited high detection rates of recurrent PCa that are comparable
to PSMA-11. , Moreover, [177Lu]Lu-PSMA-I&T
showed lower lacrimal gland uptake compared to [177Lu]Lu-PSMA-617
(3.7 vs 5.1 Gy/GBq), resulting in improved quality of life for patients. It has achieved good response rates in mCRPC
patients in East Asia, with reductions in PSA levels and tumor regression
(75% partial response or stable disease). The theranostic pair [68Ga]Ga/[177Lu]Lu-PSMA-I&T
has shown superiority in screening patients suitable for PSMA targeted
radionuclide therapy (PSMA-RLT) and dynamicly assessing the treatment
efficacy, realizing integrated precision diagnosis and treatment ( ). 
 Due to the favorable imaging properties (increased
positron yield
and shorter positron range) of 18F-labeled PSMA-targeted
PET imaging agents, there has been increasing interest in their clinical
use. [18F]DCFPyL and [18F]PSMA-1007 are already established in clinical practice.
[18F]DCFPyL was constructed based on the Lys-urea-Glu binding
motif, which performed a favorable detection rate of metastatic PCa
lesions with a positive predictive value of 86.9%. And in 2021, [18F]DCFPyL has been approved for detecting patients with suspected
metastases or recurrent disease with elevated PSA level. [18F]PSMA-1007 is a structural derivative
of PSMA-617, which showed a high lipophilicity. It exhibited significantly
reduced uptake in the kidneys, bladder, and lacrimal glands due to
nonurinary excretion. Clinical trials indicated that [18F]PSMA-1007 is beneficial for depicting local recurrence or pelvic
lymph node metastasis, offering higher sensitivity in detecting metastasis
in the urinary system and facilitating in screening patients who are
suitable for PSMA RLT therapy. Also Cui’s
group constructed a new probe called 8c by replacing the fluoropyridyl
group in [18F]DCFPyL with fluoroquinolinyl, which showed
increased lipophilicity and reduced bladder retention. Several [18F]AlF-labeled PSMA-targeted
tracers such as [18F]AlF-PSMA-BCH and [18F]AlF-PSMA-Q
have also shown favorable diagnostic capability in prostate cancer
patients. , Although the utilization of 18F-labeled PSMA probe as a therapeutic agent is limited due to the
physical properties of 18F, it could provide actionable
information for other treatments, such as external radiation and surgery,
which expand the application of conventional therapy.

2.3

## FAPI
The tumor microenvironment (TME),
consisting of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), immune cells,
and vascular components, plays a crucial role in the tumorigenesis,
progression, metastasis, and resistance to therapy. TME-targeted molecular imaging can help better understand
the functions of the TME in cancer biology, leading to early diagnosis
and treatment of cancer, proposing new diagnostic and therapeutic
methods, and laying the foundation for precision medicine. , FAP is an atypical type II transmembrane serine protease that exhibits
high expression in CAFs in over 90% of malignant epithelial cancers
and low expression in healthy tissues. − 
The overexpressed
FAP is associated with a higher risk of local infiltration, lymph
node metastasis, and reduced overall survival, making it an ideal
target for TME-targeted imaging and further facilitating precise diagnosis
and therapy. , Researchers have developed a
series of FAP inhibitors (FAPIs) for TME-targeted imaging. FAPI PET/CT can effectively complement FDG PET/CT
in the differential diagnosis of benign and malignant lesions, identification
of unknown primary tumors causing metastases, tumor staging and restaging,
and other aspects. Besides, the combination of therapeutic radioisotopes
such as 90Y and 225Ac allows for precise treatment.
Currently, most of the FAPIs under research are synthetic small molecules,
especially quinoline-based FAPIs, which are promising radiotracers
and have received widespread attention ( ).
Lindner et al. optimized the structure
of quinoline-based FAP inhibitor UAMC1110 and identified FAPI-04 as
the most promising candidate. The hydrophobicity of FAPI-04 was improved
through difluoride modification of the cyano-pyrrole group, further
improving inhibitory potency, ligand efficiency, the FAP to prolyl
oligopeptidase ratio, and selectivity for FAP. In addition, Giesel et al. also confirmed that [68Ga]Ga-FAPI-04 showed longer tumor
retention time in patients compared to its precursor FAPI-02.
 FAPI-04 has been validated in
clinical trials for
early diagnosis
and treatment monitoring of tumors, and it is expected to become an
important means of targeting the tumor microenvironment and achieving
integrated diagnosis and treatment. Kiatochwil’s group evaluated
the diagnostic performance of [68Ga]Ga-FAPI-04 in 28 solid
tumors, confirming its high uptake and favorable image contrast in
several high-incidence tumors, such as breast cancer, lung cancer,
esophageal cancer, liver cancer, colorectal cancer, and pancreatic
cancer ( ). , And in certain indications, [68Ga]Ga-FAPI-04 appears
to outperform [18F]FDG in detecting the primary and distant
metastatic lesions. − Lindner et al. further
demonstrated the theranostic properties of FAPI-04 in two patients
with metastatic breast cancer. The study showed that the pain symptoms
of patients were relived after treatment with a relatively low dose
of [90Y]Y-FAPI-04 with no significant side effects observed.
And [68Ga]Ga-FAPI-04 allowed noninvasive and dynamic evaluation
of the efficacy of [90Y]Y-FAPI-04. Hatazawa et al. also confirmed that [225Ac]Ac-FAPI-04
(34 kBq) significantly inhibited the growth of pancreatic cancer xenograft
in mice without affecting body weight, suggesting the possibility
of using [225Ac]Ac-FAPI-04 to treat FAP-positive pancreatic
cancer.
 To further improve the uptake
and retention of
FAPI in tumors,
Loktev et al. constructed FAPI-46 with
a methylamino alteration in the linker region, which extends the probe’s
retention time in tumor, resulting in higher tumor uptake and target-to-background
ratio. Additionally, the dimer and tetramer structures of FAPI-46
were constructed to improve tumor uptake and retention time, which
have shown favorable in vivo pharmacokinetics, FAP-binding affinity,
and specificity, suggesting great potential in theranostic application. , Moreover, FAPI-46 can be labeled with therapeutic radioisotopes
such as 177Lu, 153Sm, 90Y, and 225Ac using DOTA as a chelating agent, which enables integrated
nonivasive diagnosis and treatment. Liu
et al. used [177Lu]Lu-FAPI-46
and [225Ac]Ac-FAPI-46 for targeted therapy in pancreatic
cancer and [18F]FAPI-74 as the companion imaging agent,
and both RLT showed a favorable tumor-suppressive effect. Clinical
trials have demonstrated the feasibility and safety of [153Sm]Sm-FAPI-46 and [90Y]Y-FAPI-46 in patients with various
tumors, including sarcoma, pancreatic cancer, and other solid tumors,
and 38% of patients achieved disease control after RLT according to
the RECIST. , 
In addition to small-molecule
FAPI, Zboralski et al. developed the
FAP-2286 using cyclic peptide
to target FAP. Cyclic peptide is known to exhibit a higher binding
affinity and selectivity due to their conformational rigidity and
plasma stability. By linking to the DOTA chelator, FAP-2286 could
conjugate with radionuclides for a theranostic application. Clinical
trials demonstrated that [68Ga]Ga-FAP-2286 outperformed
[18F]FDG in detecting gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer,
and liver cancer. Besides, the tumor
uptake and lesion detection rates of [68Ga]Ga-FAP-2286
were comparable to those of [68Ga]Ga-FAPI-46. This indicated
that [68Ga]Ga-FAP-2286 was a promising FAP inhibitor derivative
that can be used for cancer diagnosis, staging, and repositioning.
As for therapeutic application, Kulkarni et al. first reported targeted radionuclide therapy using [177Lu]Lu-FAP-2286 in human. The study included 11 patients
with advanced adenocarcinoma (pancreatic cancer, breast cancer, ovarian
cancer, and rectal cancer) who had no treatment options available
to receive PRRT. The study indicated that patients who received an
average dose of 5.8 GBq of [177Lu]Lu-FAP-2286 exhibited
good tolerance, and no adverse symptoms were reported. Furthermore,
significant tumor uptake and long-term retention were observed in
both primary and metastatic tumor lesions. These findings confirm
the potential of FAP-2286 as a therapeutic option for various malignant
tumors, making it a highly promising ligand for achieving integrated
diagnosis and treatment.

3

## Other Theranostic Probes
With the continuous
progress of nanotechnology and other burgeoning
technologies, more and more theranostic probes such as optical probes,
MRI probes, and ultrasound probes have shown immense potential in
clinical application, including intraoperative imaging, medicine delivery,
disease diagnosis, and treatment. − 
3.1

## Optical
Probes
Optical probes are
a significant component of molecular probes, which are considered
as a representative method to visualize cellular pathology. Due to
low ionizing radiation exposure, high spatial resolution, and real-time
imaging, optical probes allow one to obtain the measurable details
of complex biological mechanisms from entire tissue in vivo. Raman probe, as an optical imaging (OI) technique,
has shown broad prospects in the theranostic process. − For example, Zhou et al. developed a theranostic Raman nanoprobe
called Au-Ur@DTTC NPs with a surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS)
effect based on an urchin-like nanogold preparation to address the
challenge of accurately resecting colon and ovarian tumors in clinical
practice. The surface of the probe is
conjugated to Raman reporter molecule, diethylthiatricarbocyanine
iodide (DTTC), using Au-S bonding. Under the stimulation of a near-infrared
laser, the nanoprobe generates a highly sensitive and strongly specific
Raman signal, enabling precise detection of small tumor loci, which
realizes the Raman-imaging-guided tumor resection. Additionally, the
nanoprobe has excellent photothermal conversion efficiency, generating
a photothermal therapy effect under the near-infrared laser stimulation,
which allows further elimination of residual micro tumor loci postoperatively. , These achievements reveal the potential applications of Raman imaging
in the field of biomedicine and provide new strategies for the diagnosis
and treatment of metastatic tumors.

3.2

## Magnetic
Resonance Probes
Applications
of magnetic resonance (MR) in molecular imaging are also well-established,
and the combination of contrast agent technology and nanotechnology
has paved the way for theranostic MR imaging. Zhang et al. used Fe3O4@ZnO core–shell
nanocomposites, modified the surface with transferrin receptor antibody,
and loaded the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin (DOX) to construct
an MR probe, Fe3O4@ZnO/DOX/TfR Ab. This probe enabled targeted drug delivery,
synchronous radiochemotherapy, and MRI monitoring. Making use of the
targeting ability of an antibody, the probe is able to deliver chemotherapeutic
drugs to the tumor and improve chemotherapy efficiency. Moreover,
the Fe3O4@ZnO nanocomposite has been reported
to possess exceptional radio-sensitizing properties. With the help of short-term and low-dose X-rays, it could
significantly inhibit the proliferation of tumors. After the treatment,
the therapeutic effect could be noninvasively monitored through MRI,
achieving integration of the precise diagnosis and treatment. Diverse
theranostic contrast nanoparticles which could respond to different
pathology-induced stimuli, such as low pH, − redox environment, , and overexpression of enzymes, , are also designed to improve both therapeutic effects and imaging
capabilities.

3.3

## Ultrasound Probes
Moreover, the development
of ultrasound contrast agents, which are the gas-filled microbubbles
with a shell composed of lipids, proteins, or polymers, largely expands
the application of ultrasound in functional imaging, clinical diagnosis,
and image-guided interventions. − Cardiovascular areas
were one of the most common areas for the ultrasound-based molecular
eye application. The gas core of microbubbles could induce cavitation,
which could provide shear stress for thrombus lysis and improve the
tissue blood flow. And the shells of the contrast agents oscillate
in response to ultrasound waves, visualizing the vasculature and perfusion
of the organ simultaneously. Clinical studies have also identified
that microbubble infusion could prevent microvascular obstruction
and improve heart function of acute myocardial infarction. Besides, ultrasound-based theranostic applications
in cancer are rapidly progressing. Wu’s group developed an
ultrasound imaging nanoprobe which encapsulates the self-assembled
nanogels with lactate oxidase and catalase to respond to a tumor microenvironment. The nanoprobe could subsequently accumulate
into microbubbles to provide enhanced ultrasound imaging, and it could
be applied in cancer therapy by integrating with doxorubicin. Furthermore,
molecular eyes based on ultrasound are capable of enhancing extravasation
and targeted drug delivery with the advancements in ultrasound and
probe technology. 

3.4

## Photoacoustic (PA) Probes
PA probe
has gradually emerged as a promising tool in disease diagnosis and
treatment. The PA signal changes with the distribution of biological
tissue due to the absorption of light, thus performing high-contrast
imaging. Besides, PA imaging agents retain high spatial resolution
and deep penetration due to negligible acoustic wave scattering.
Functional nanomaterials (such as gold nanoparticles) with near-infrared
(NIR) light absorption, long circulation time, and thermal expansion
properties have been applied in constructing PA probes. , These PA probes enable concurrent imaging and photothermal therapy
(PTT), offering dual functionality. Furthermore, nanoparticles could
be conjugated to anticancer drugs for combination therapy. Zhang et
al. constructed a Au nanoparticle-based PA probe (Au@PDA-ss-PEGm),
which could respond to the glutathione in the tumor cell and allow
PA imaging and plasmonic PTT of tumors in vivo. Small molecular dye-based nanoparticles have demonstrated
promising potential in photoacoustic (PA) imaging, exhibiting superior
performance in clinical translation, owing to their reduced toxicity
and enhanced near-infrared (NIR) absorption. Porphyrins are commonly
used small molecular dyes with high extinction coefficients and biocompatibility.
But its chromophores exhibit inadequate photostability and suboptimal
quality for PA imaging. Therefore, additional modifications are required
to address these limitations. Wu et al. conjugated 2 diketopyrrolopyrrole
(DPP) to the porphyrin for the preparation of a PA theranostic probe,
which could self-assemble into nanoparticles (Por-DPP NPs) without
surfactant. The probe exhibited a 4.3-fold
increase in tumor signal and elevated the tumor temperature from 31.2
to 60.8 °C after 6 min of irradiation, while Zhang et al. designed
a triporphyrin-based nanoprobe with the absorption up to 850 nm, which
could carry anticancer drugs like DOX to realize combined PTT and
chemotherapy. The development and optimization
of PA probes have received increasing attention. In this regard, factors
such as NIR peak absorption, extinction coefficient, photostability,
sensitivity, specificity, and biocompatibility should be considered. , 

3.5

## Multimodality Probes
With the development
of molecular probe technology and nanotechnology, multiple imaging
modalities are incorporated into one probe to overcome the shortcomings
of a single imaging technique and achieve the superiority of complementation. , And with the need for therapeutic effectiveness, a single theranostic
probe that incorporates several imaging and therapeutic modalities
has emerged, constructing a novel and efficient theranostic platform
for precision medicine. , For example, Gao et
al. constructed a multifunctional nanoprobe containing Fe3O4, perfluoropentane, and plaque-targeted peptides, which
was capable of treating atherosclerosis and performed US/MRI imaging
( A). And another study constructed a theranostic
polymer nanoparticle (DOX&IR-780@nanoparticles) for MRI/NIR imaging
and PTT enhanced chemotherapy ( B,C). Furthermore, Li
et al. designed a near-infrared fluorescence imaging nanoparticle,
which is conjugated to erlotinib, Survivin shRNA-expressing plasmid,
and photothermal agent in one platform (CE7Q/CQ/S), to achieve both
optical imaging and triple-combination therapy of EGFR-mutated nonsmall
cell lung cancer. 
 

4

## Probe Development and Optimization
Upon reviewing the developmental process of the aforementioned
nuclear theranostic probes and assessing their strengths and weaknesses
in addressing clinically significant issues, several key points can
be inferred for future probe design. The design of theranostic probe
involves multiple aspects, including target selection, vector screening,
affinity maturation, optimization of selectivity and blood lifetime,
chelator/linker selection, etc. ( ).
 The targets of theranostic
probes require high
disease-specificity,
disease abundance, and good selectivity. Also, the localization of
the target should be considered as it determines the accessibility
of the target. As for the vector, repeated screening is needed to
optimize the affinity and specificity of the probes. This can be accomplished
by utilizing biological and bioinformatic methods (e.g., phage display,
molecular docking, artificial intelligence) to create and screen libraries
based on potential targeting compounds. , Once the essential moiety of the vector that binds to the target
has been identified, further modifications are necessary. For example,
for peptide probes, substituting amino acids at nonessential residues
or capping the N-terminus could avoid degradation by enzymes and lengthen
circulation time. Besides, modification of physical size, hydrophobicity,
charge at various parts of the probe, and polymer coating can facilitate
improvement of blood lifetime and barrier penetration ability of the
probe. Sometimes probes with multiple
copies of a binding sequence are applied to increase affinity. 
For nuclear probes, the selection of isotopes
should be based on
their specific physical properties, including half-life time, energy
spectra, and imaging features. And the propensities for probe hydrophilicity
and lipophilicity, blood retention time, radiochemical stability,
and injection dosage are different according to their clinical purpose.
For therapeutic purposes, longer retention time and greater stability
are more suitable, whereas for diagnostic purposes, a shorter tissue
retention time and faster clearance rate are preferred in order to
reduce radiation exposure. For example, by conjugating to EB, [177Lu]Lu-EB-PSMA-617 prolonged circulation time and elevated
accumulation in the tumor, ultimately allowing for a reduction in
radiation dosage of [177Lu] while still achieving a comparable
therapeutic outcome. Others structural
changes like transforming a linear structure into a circular structure
could also increase plasma stability of the probe (e.g., FAP-2286).
In addition, the affinity and selectivity of the probe can be influenced
by different chelators, which should be chosen based on the chemical
properties of the probe and further modified to accommodate the specific
requirement.
As for other theranostic probes, the incorporation
of diagnostic
and therapeutic functionality is mostly achieved through the utilization
of nanoparticles or nanomaterials, which requires sophisticated molecular
design and modification. These probes usually contain an inorganic
core covered with bioinert capping ligands for improved biocompatibility.
Then the core was linked with targeting ligands that could seek and
bind to their corresponding receptors on the target. The imaging moieties
(e.g., chromophores) or drugs (e.g., DOX) could conjugate to the nanoparticle
through covalently binding to the bioinert coat or noncovalently binding
to drug-loading ligands. Biocompatibility
is one of the key components of nanoprobes. Poly(ethylene glycol)
(PEG) possesses hydrophilic properties, chemical inertness, and biocompatibility.
Thus it is commonly used to enhance the colloidal stability and immunological
stealth of nanoparticles in biological environments. , But the molecular weight and surface density of PEG need further
modification as excessive PEG could reduce cell uptake efficiency.
Moreover, the nanoparticle shape, size, and surface properties could
also affect the efficacy of the probe.
Well-designed theranostic
probes not only expand the applications
of traditional imaging techniques but also offer synergistic advantages
on early diagnosis and treatment of diseases. They provide real-time
feedback of drug distribution and patients’ response to the
therapy and give actionable information for new or more effective
therapies.

5

## The Conception of Molecular Eye
With
the continuous advancements of the precision medicine initiative
and the integration of various burgeoning technologies in the medical
fields, medicine has entered a period of rapid development. A simple
combination of diagnosis and treatment is far from meeting the needs
of clinical medicine nowadays. Further development of integrated diagnosis
and treatment relies on the construction of molecular probes with
high affinity, selectivity, and stability based on molecular probe
technology and nanotechnology.
Based on molecular probe technology,
imaging labels can conjugate
to tumor-targeting peptides, antibodies, or inducers to improve their
imaging and therapeutic capabilities by enriching in target sites
and introducing a contrast enhancement. It allows a seamless switch between targeted intervention and targeted
imaging with consistency in time, space, and biodistribution. Recent
studies have also designed various responsive probes that could undergo
chemical or structural changes under specific stimuli induced by pathological
lesions, reducing side effects and enhancing the theranostic efficacy.
It is important to note that probe technique and nanotechnology can
serve as bridges connecting various molecular imaging methods such
as PET, SPECT, OI, MRI, US to single or multiple therapeutic modalities
including radionuclide therapy, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, PTT, photodynamic
therapy (PDT), and immunotherapy to form an optimal theranostic platform
( ).
 Therefore, for the first time, we propose the concept
of the “molecular
eye” to describe a precise diagnostic and therapeutic system
based on molecular probe technology. This medical system resembles
the piercing eye of the Monkey King, which can detect previously “invisible”
diseases, enabling early detection, precise diagnosis, and personalized
treatment. Molecular imaging primarily focuses on radiographic diagnosis
with a limited incorporation of therapeutic elements, while the “molecular
eye” places greater emphasis on the chemical basis, that is,
the molecular probe technology, especially the design of theranostic
probe.
Similar to the human eye, which serves as the crucial
gateway for
information exchange between the internal and external worlds, the
“molecular eye” not only allows detection of molecular
information but also itself could serve as a therapeutic agent and
assist the diagnosis-therapy synergetic paradigm of major diseases
in clinical practice. Besides, it provides precise actionable information
for clinical decision making, allows molecular-targeted therapy, and
expands the indications of old and new therapies, such as nuclear
therapy, external-beam radiotherapy, surgery, medical therapy, or
cellular therapy. Furthermore, the advancements in probe technology
have facilitated the transition from their original focus on imaging
diagnostics to encompass therapeutic applications as well. And certain
previously undruggable sites have emerged as viable targets for novel
drug development, such as SSTR and PSMA.
In conclusion, the
focus of the “molecular eye” lies
in the utilization of chemical entities/molecular probes, with the
capability to achieve various functions (such as disease diagnosis,
treatment, real-time evaluation of therapeutic efficacy, pathology
research, and guiding new drug development). “Molecular eye”
serves as an essential tool in providing a comprehensive precise diagnosis
and individualized treatment for major clinical diseases, which holds
great potential in precision medicine.

6

## Further
Perspectives
The development
of integrated precision diagnosis and treatment
based on molecular probes is an important characteristic of modern
medicine. With the continuous advancement of molecular probes, the
integration of clinical multimodal imaging techniques and treatment
based on nuclides or nanomaterials further promotes the transformation
of clinical medicine to the paradigm of “molecular eye”.
Moreover, as breakthroughs in technology from macrological to micrological
scales continue to emerge, the translation of basic research findings
from the bench to the bedside is becoming increasingly mature.
However, the practical scenario of the “molecular eye”
poses technical and management challenges to hinder its clinical translation
and widespread promotion. Certain frequently used radioactive isotopes,
such as [11C] and [18F], have short half-lives,
posing issues in the preparation and storage of source materials.
Insufficient affinity and selectivity of molecular probes binding
to target sites can affect the detection sensitivity and specificity.
And the limited plasma clearance rate could weaken the signal-to-noise
ratio. Additionally, off-target accumulation of probes in metabolic
organs such as the kidneys and liver can obscure lesions in these
organ locations and result in unexpected toxic side effects such as
radiation damage. Also the biocompatibility of nanoprobes was still
a challenging problem in clinical translation. Despite the application
of bioinert coatings, the majority of nanoparticles was still identified
as “external intruders” by immune cells, resulting in
a significant reduction in the homing efficiency. However, the technology
of cell membrane cloaking may provide a promising method for further
enhancing the immunological stealth and tumor homing efficiency of
these probes. 
The future development
of molecular eye technology will focus on
addressing these challenges, including selecting appropriate disease-related
targets, optimizing the chemical structure of probe molecules (e.g.,
introducing different ligands, adjusting lipophilicity), enhancing
probe affinity, improving target tissue uptake, increasing plasma
clearance rate, optimizing target-to-background ratios, and enhancing
image quality and therapeutic efficacy. Furthermore, the selection
of suitable chelating agents is necessary to improve pharmacokinetic
properties, among other considerations.
“Molecular eye”
technology has broad development
prospects. Based on the continuous blooming of molecular probes, the
combination of multimodal imaging techniques and various treatment
methods enables precise targeted therapy under the guidance of targeting
imaging. The quantitative and location information on target molecules
that are visualized by imaging technology determines the clinical
decision-making, enhancing individualization and precision in diagnosis
and treatment. Besides, due to the consistency of time, space, and
biodistribution between targeted intervention and targeted imaging,
drug distribution and therapeutic efficacy could be observed. Thus,
the “molecular eye” enables the practice of “treating
according to what is observed and observing what is treated”.
In summary, the integration of precision diagnosis and treatment
utilizing the “molecular eye” approach has the capability
to precisely detect specific pathological processes, malignant cell
clusters or mutations, and cellular molecular events. It facilitates
the early diagnosis, treatment monitoring, prognosis evaluation of
major diseases, and guiding new drug development, thereby enabling
precise treatment of specific targets. “Molecular eye”
could broaden the use of molecular imaging and may accelerate the
regulatory approval of novel molecular drugs. The emergence of the
“molecular eye” will provide new opportunities and challenges
in the fields of clinical practice and medical research and propel
the progression of contemporary medicine toward precision medicine.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
This work
is financially supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (12275135), Jiangsu Province University
Natural Science Research Project (21KJB350015), and Nanjing Medical
University High Level Talent Introduction Research Initiation Fund
(NMUR20210003). And thanks to Le Le, Xurui Liang, and Pengyuan Su
for providing assistance and suggestions in material collection.

## Vocabulary Terms
Molecular eyeMolecular
eye refers to a precise diagnostic and therapeutic system based on
molecular probe technology. This medical system emphasizes on the
chemical basis of probe development and optimization, which facilitate
precise diagnosis, individualized treatment, real-time evaluation,
pathology research, and guiding new drug development.
Probe technologyProbe
technology is used to construct chemical entities targeting certain
molecules. Through carefully designing the chemical structure of the
target-binding region, these probes can bind specifically to disease
targets and carry different cargos to achieve diagnostic or therapeutic
needs.
Molecular imagingMolecular
imaging could comprehensively, completely, dynamically, and noninvasively
visualize the molecular/cellular information from target tissues inside
the body in a real-time manner.
TheranosticsTheranostics
is generally recognized as the integration of diagnosis and treatment,
has emerged as a prominent trend in clinical research. It primarily
emphasizes the end result of integration, without providing sufficient
details.
Precision medicinePrecision
medicine emphasizes the application of advanced technologies to accurately
classify diseases and achieve individualized treatment. It is the
ultimate objectives of integrated diagnosis and treatment.