---
id: DOC-FUSION-PARTIAL-COORDINATOR-REVIEW-20260905
title: Independent coordinator check of Lee partial benchmark extraction
kind: verification
status: live
date: 2026-09-05
last_verified: 2026-09-05
purpose: Record the actual source and arithmetic review supporting retention of the numerical checkpoint.
scope: S1 and S2 sequence tables, S5 and S6A RNA screens, methods sections 4 and 5, and descriptive calculations.
audience: [researchers, maintainers]
---

The coordinator inspected both complete sequence-table renders, the complete S5 page,
both S6 pages including the caption continuation, and both full coordinate overlays.
The checked source identities are Lee 2023, DOI 10.4143/crt.2022.910, retained under
inputs/. Methods sections 4 and 5 were read directly from the retained article XML.
This is a separate coordinator source check, not a blinded second digitization or
an independent ultra paper review.

The sequence tables identify sense and antisense 5-prime to 3-prime, all 15 B4N and
16 SS designs, and terminal lowercase tt. Methods identify dTdT overhangs, 50 nM,
72 hours, and triplicate assays. The SS cell-line spelling differs between methods
and figure captions; the worker preserves this discrepancy. Triplicate wording
does not establish whether replicates are biological or technical.

The S5 legend maps light blue to wild BRD4 and dark blue to BRD4-NUTM1; NC and PC
precede designs 1-15. S6A maps light green to wild SS18 and dark green to fusion;
NC precedes designs 1-16. The coordinator checked all design assignments and
mean/upper-error-cap markers visually, including the very low B4N #15 fusion,
the B4N #2/#4 wide parent error bars, and SS #4's light-green bar reaching the
2.0 plot ceiling. The ceiling is not a recoverable mean or SD. These panels
measure RNA; protein and growth panels on S6 are separate outcomes.

The S5 axis spans 0-1.6 and the S6A axis 0-2.0. Axis increments agree with retained
calibrations. All 61 recovered means were independently checked against colored
pixel edges near their retained coordinates. Independently implemented affine
conversion agrees with means and plotted SD arithmetic; scipy Spearman values
agree for all eight target/endpoint/descriptor combinations. Interval-overlap
counts and descriptor calculations also agree. The exact inputs and numerical
check scope are in coordinator-numeric-check.json and coordinator_verify.py.
Reading tolerances are image-reading tolerances, not biological uncertainty.

The source does not give an unambiguous Ct transformation for the S5 plotted
scale. Retaining its relative-expression axis and normalization caveat is
appropriate. No second-parent measurement is inferred from the presence of a
primer in a table. The two descriptor associations are descriptive results from
dependent tiled designs in one study, without fitted parameters or external
performance validation. The SS measured-parent association explicitly uses
15 recovered means and excludes the ceiling-censored design. A future declared
rank sensitivity can include that design as the largest value if the retained
lower bound exceeds every other upper bound; that would be an extension, not
an alteration of this frozen protocol or an imputed biological measurement.

No extraction defect requiring a change to the frozen numerical dataset was
identified. This checkpoint removes the quantitative-source-recovery gap for
these 31 designs. It does not establish cross-study prediction, both-parent
sparing, ASO transfer, or preprint readiness. The current trial-paper evaluation
remains the principal allocation; retain this reusable dataset and its limitations.
