822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC1171931511719315117193153969262110.1021/acs.chemrev.4c00570Covalent Proximity
Inducers
LondonNir †Department
of Chemical and Structural Biology, The
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel*Email: nir.london@weizmann.ac.il.
181220241251326326–3681112025© 2024 The Author. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Molecules that are
able to induce proximity between two proteins
are finding ever increasing applications in chemical biology and drug
discovery. The ability to introduce an electrophile and make such
proximity inducers covalent can offer improved properties such as
selectivity, potency, duration of action, and reduced molecular size.
This concept has been heavily explored in the context of targeted
degradation in particular for bivalent molecules, but recently, additional
applications are reported in other contexts, as well as for monovalent
molecular glues. This is a comprehensive review of reported covalent
proximity inducers, aiming to identify common trends and current gaps
in their discovery and application.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Jul 31; Accepted 2024 Nov 26; Revised 2024 Nov 21; Collection date 2025 Jan 8.

1.

## Introduction
Small molecule induced
protein proximity has come a long way from
the first accidental discoveries of natural products that glue various
proteins to rational design of bifunctional
proximity inducers that can accomplish a plethora of functions ranging
from targeted degradation, through stabilization, phosphorylation,
induced transcription and more culminating
in dozens of new clinical compounds that are developed for a variety
of indications. 
Inducing proximity
between a target protein and a recruited effector
protein has several unique advantages. The first and most obvious
is that one can significantly expand the functional outcome of biological
perturbation by small molecules. Whereas traditionally small molecules
were used almost exclusively as inhibitors or activators (mostly for
receptors), now they can be harnessed to induce the complete elimination
of the target, induce various PTMs, endow an enzyme with new substrates,
or induce alternative oligomeric states, to mention a few. Moreover,
previously non-functional 'silent' binders, can be used
for this purpose.
A second important advantage is their substoichiometric activity.
A single molecule of a proximity inducer can, for example, degrade
multiple copies of its target protein, thereby necessitating lower
concentrations to achieve a biological effect. Finally, protein proximity
inducers offer the possibility of addressing “undruggable”
targets. One prominent example includes cyclosporine and FK506 that were discovered over 40 years ago as inhibitors
of the phosphatase calcineurin, by “gluing” it to Cyclophilin
A (CypA) or FKBP12 respectively. These are still being used in the
clinic to date. Another example are Immunomodulatory imide drugs (IMiDs)
such as thalidomide and pomalidomide that induce the degradation of
the zinc-finger transcription factors Ikaros and Aiolos by gluing
them to the E3 ligase Cereblon. , Transcription factors
are notoriously difficult to inhibit, as they lack small molecules
binding sites, and it is only by the formation of a new molecular
surface that induces this neo-protein protein interaction that enables
perturbing their function. A recent similar example is the degradation
of the WIZ transcription factor to induce HbF. 
Another modality that gained prominence in the past decade
is targeted
covalent inhibition. − Covalency and in particular irreversible binding, carries its own
set of advantages and challenges. Compounds that are able to form
a covalent bond with their target typically display improved potency,
improved selectivity (there is a strict requirement for the targeted
nucleophilic residue), longer duration of action, and may confer resistance
to mutations. Another major advantage of irreversible probes is the
growing chemoproteomic capabilities to map out proteomic selectivity
for covalent binders. Platforms such as isoTOP-ABPP, isoDTB-ABPP, TMT-ABPP , now routinely allow the identification of molecular targets, whereas
similar approaches for noncovalent compounds such as CETSA are more challenging. In terms of challenges,
most electrophiles still target cysteine residues, which are relatively
rare in the proteome, thereby restricting their scope. Although more
and more electrophiles targeting additional residues are constantly
being reported , 
It therefore might not
come as a surprise that many current efforts
focus on the combination of these two modalities. Whether through
covalent binding to the target protein or the effector (in bifunctional
molecules), or by decorating known binders with electrophilic moieties
to convert them into glues, we witness many recent examples of covalent
proximity inducers.
This review is divided into two main categories,
the first describes
bifunctional covalent proximity inducers, the majority of which are
proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs), but not exclusively. These
are typically rationally designed in the sense that a covalent binder
is known or discovered for either the target protein, or the recruited
effector protein, and is linked to a second ligand. The second category
are covalent molecular glues (or monovalent proximity inducers), historically
discovered serendipitously, but recently also through rational design
and through carefully designed phenotypic screens ( ).
 
2.

## Bifunctional Covalent Proximity Inducers
By far the
most prevalent bifunctional proximity inducers are PROTACs,
and correspondingly, this is also the most populated class of covalent
bifunctionals. However, newer modalities such as covalent deubiquitination
targeting chimeras (DUBTACs) and phosphorylation inducing chimeras
(PHICs) were reported, and additional modalities are expected to take
advantage of covalent recruiters.
2.1.

## Covalent PROTACs
PROTACs are bifunctional,
modular, molecules that bind a target protein on the one hand, typically
through a target specific ligand, and a component of the ubiquitin
proteasome system (UPS) on the other hand. These have been extensively
reviewed. − 
As PROTACs need to bind their target protein,
and as some of the best binders for prototypical targets are covalent,
there are many reports of covalent PROTACs that bind their target
covalently. his is the focus of .
Historically, and still to date,
two E3 ligases have dominated
the field as mediating degradation by PROTACs: Cereblon (CRBN) and
von Hippel-Lindau protein (VHL). Covalent chemistry has significantly
expanded the repertoire of E3 ligases and additional components of
the UPS that can be recruited for targeted degradation. This is the
focus of .
Two important descriptors of the potency of PROTACs
would be used
throughout the review. DC50 is the concentration at which
half of the target is degraded, this is typically dependent on experimental
conditions such as incubation time and specific cell line. Dmax is the maximal degradation that a PROTAC
can incur, often referred to as the “depth” of degradation.
2.1.1.

## Covalent Binding to the Target Protein
A major advantage
of PROTACs is their substoichiometric degradation,
which can allow PROTACs to be extremely potent. This poses a concern for PROTACs based on irreversible
binding to the target protein, which can have only single turnover
degradation. Such PROTACs could not dissociate and regenerate following
the target degradation.
Several targets for which selective,
high-potency, covalent inhibitors were available served as model systems
for the development of covalent PROTACs. These include K-RasG12C, EGFR, BTK and more recently SARS-CoV-2 main protease (Mpro). In aggregate, these examples dispel the notion that irreversible
binding is not compatible with targeted degradation. However, in most
cases the direct involvement or effect of covalent binding was not
directly examined. The example of K-RasG12C in particular
demonstrates that covalent binding may enable degradation of targets
for which there are no available high-affinity noncovalent binders.
In the future, leveraging covalent binding for targets that lack classic
pockets, or high-affinity binders can significantly expand the scope
of targeted degradation to “undruggable” targets.
2.1.1.1.

## K-RasG12C
An early
attempt to develop covalent PROTACs against K-RasG12C was
based on one of the earliest K-RasG12C covalent engagers,
ARS1620. Using a high-throughput cell
sorting assay, relying on a GFP-K-Ras reporter construct, Zeng et
al. identified potent degraders of the
GFP fusion protein. However, these PROTACs failed to degrade endogenous
K-RasG12C. In an attempt to prevent such spurious degradation
events resulting from ubiquitination of the reporter, Lin et al. recently
developed a lysine-less HiBiT and NanoLuc systems that should enable better screening with fewer false positives.
Several groups have developed PROTACs for K-RasG12C based
on a variety of scaffolds such as sotorasib (AMG510) and adagrasib (MRTX849; a). In addition to
screening different positions and chemistries for the linkers, as
well as E3 ligase recruiters, the groups screened different electrophiles
such as the parent acrylamides, cyanoacrylamides and fumaramide ( ). The most potent
PROTAC, derived from sotorasib, was YN14 reported by Yang et al., demonstrating DC50 = 28–67
nM and Dmax = 95%. It showed EC50 = 45–90 nM in viability assays (compared to 12–18
nM for sotorasib). Interestingly, the authors showed the contribution
of degradation to the cell viability effects, a nondegrading analogue,
showed 6-fold lower EC50 compared to YN-14. YN-14 was also
active at 10 and 30 mg/kg in a mouse xenograft model, and showed K-Ras
degradation in harvested tumors.
 Other PROTACs exhibited lower
potencies, some in the μM range.
In some cases, low potency could be attributed to attenuated binding
to K-RasG12C, while in others it is most likely the result
of poor cell permeability or impaired ternary complex formation.
We should note that only recently a noncovalent PROTAC targeting
K-RasG12D was reported based
on MRTX1133 which showed rapid (<4
h) and potent (DC50 in different cell lines of 7–80
nM) degradation of K-RasG12D. This potent degradation could
in principle be attributed to its noncovalent nature, but it might
also derive from the exceeding potency (sub-nM by SPR ) of MRTX1133.

2.1.1.2.

## BTK
Several
potent noncovalent
PROTACs have been reported for Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) including some that have entered clinical trials. Some of these PROTACs allow to target cancer
resistance mutations such as C481S which is a common resistance mutation
to approved covalent BTK drugs. However, due to ample covalent targeted
inhibitors, BTK also served as a testbed for the development of several
types of covalent PROTACs.
Tinworth et al. directly compared acrylamide PROTACs for BTK (based on
ibrutinib) with their reduced (noncovalent) version. While the acrylamide
version of the PROTAC, supposedly binding irreversibly, showed no
degradation of BTK, the reduced noncovalent form exhibited potent
degradation (DC50 = 200 nM). Nevertheless, as reviewed
in this section, there are certainly examples of potent irreversible
covalent PROTACs both for BTK as well as for other targets ( A; B).
 Xue et al. reported
acrylamide-based
PROTACs such as 7 that degrade BTK (DC50 =
136 nM; Dmax = 88%) as well as the off-target
BLK (DC50 = 220 nM; Dmax =
75%). In this case the covalent PROTACs were equal or better degraders
compared to their noncovalent counterparts and engaged BTK covalently
in the cell.
Both our group and
the Wang group simultaneously attempted
to develop reversible
covalent PROTACs against BTK, using cyanoacrylamide electrophiles. , Guo et al. synthesized RC-1, a cyanoacrylamide
PROTAC based on ibrutinib that exhibited potent BTK degradation in
cell culture (DC50 = 6.6 nM) and in mice with favorable
pharmacological properties. When compared to its noncovalent and irreversible
covalent (acrylamide) analogues, RC-1 exhibited both more potent degradation
as well as higher selectivity. NanoBRET experiments to assess BTK and CRBN engagement in the cell suggested
that improved permeability contributed to RC-1 cellular potency. It
should be noted that RC-1 degraded the C481S BTK mutant with similar
potency to wild-type BTK and potently degraded CSK, a noncovalent
off-target of ibrutinib, which together may suggest that RC-1 degrades
BTK primarily via noncovalent binding. The authors also reported reversible
covalent PROTACs for the kinase FLT3.
In parallel, we reported noncovalent
(NC-1), cyanoacrylamide-based (RC-3), and acrylamide-based (IR-2)
PROTACs for BTK, all of which with DC50 < 10 nM and
similar cellular permeabilities. We noticed the acrylamide IR-2 inhibited
as well as degraded the mutant BTK C481S with similar potency to wild-type
BTK as well as demonstrated degradation of noncovalent off-targets
of BTK such as CSK and LYN, suggesting degradation is mediated primarily
through noncovalent binding of the PROTAC under cellular conditions.
Whereas, the cyanoacrylamide RC-3 displayed much higher potency toward
WT BTK than the cysteine mutant and showed selectivity over noncovalent
off-targets, suggesting it recruits BTK for degradation exclusively
through covalent binding. Together these examples highlight that understanding
how covalent binding affects degradation by each PROTAC requires careful
measurement of the rate of covalent bond formation and dissociation.
We should note that the covalent PROTACs reported by both Guo et al.
and our group had comparable nM potency to published highly potent
BTK PROTAC based on reversible binders. 
In another attempt to develop reversible covalent BTK PROTACs,
Yu et al. made cyanoacrylamide derivatives
of the BTK inhibitor poseltinib. These
resulted in a significant loss of activity toward BTK, but surprisingly,
one of them, PS-RC-1, showed very potent (10 nM) toxicity against
Mino cells. They found that it is a potent degrader of IKZF3 (DC50 = 44 nM) and to a lower degree IKZF1 (DC50 =
800 nM). Systematic truncation led to PS-2, which showed improved
IKZF1/3 degradation (DC50 = 28/3 nM respectively). Surprisingly,
it also degrades BTK and CSK despite lacking the electrophile.
A group from Pfizer, went to great lengths to show that the irreversibly
bound form of BTK could be degraded. They
used an irreversible (BCCov) and corresponding reduced version (BCNC)
BTK PROTACs, previously reported. They
set up a cellular system which lacks endogenous BTK and cIAP, and
followed the degradation of induced BTK after separate induction of
cIAP. Both PROTACs were potent against both WT and mutant BTK. They
demonstrated BCCov reached >90% irreversible labeling in cells
before
inducing cIAP1 expression, and could then still reach a Dmax of ∼70%. Similarly, they demonstrated that
purified BTK, irreversibly modified with the PROTAC, could be ubiquitinated in vitro and degraded in lysates. Finally, they were able
to determine the first crystal structure of a ternary complex between
a covalent PROTAC, its target and recruited ligase (PDB 8DSO; B).

2.1.1.3.

## EGFR
Many groups designed PROTACs
for EGFR based on existing covalent inhibitors such as afatinib, osimertinib, canertinib and dacomitinib, some reaching DC50 values in the nM range ( ; C). In many cases the contribution of the
covalent binding to the activity was not characterized. However, Zhao
et al. , prepared acrylamide PROTACs derived from
a noncovalent EGFR inhibitor that potently inhibited cell growth of
two EGFR mutant cell lines. The most potent PROTAC (CP17; ) demonstrated DC50 ∼ 1 nM in both cell lines with a Dmax of slightly over 80%. Reduction of the acrylamide
abrogated the activity only against the H1975 cell line, and the PROTAC
was inactive against cells harboring the C797S mutation, suggesting
a covalent mechanism. However, when they replaced the VHL recruiter
with its inactive enantiomer, the compounds were no longer able to
degrade EGFR, but maintained their cellular potency, suggesting that
in this case it was EGFR inhibition rather than degradation that drove
the cellular effect.
 
2.1.1.4.

## SARS-CoV-2 Mpro
Several
groups attempted to design PROTACs for SARS-CoV-2 Mpro derived
from various covalent inhibitors such as PF-073212332 and GC376 ( ; D). This is a more challenging system for
PROTACs compared to BTK, EGFR or K-Ras, since the expression of Mpro during viral infection is transient, and the PROTAC must
degrade the expressed Mpro rapidly to inhibit viral replication.
Mpro PROTACs are usually tested using cell lines that overexpress
tagged or untagged Mpro, in which the levels of Mpro are high and the kinetics of degradation may not be relevant for
antiviral activity. Accordingly, several PROTACs that degraded Mpro were either inactive in antiviral assays or showed no improvement
over the parent inhibitor. , 
 Sang et al. used a
nitrile based reversible
covalent inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 Mpro as the basis for
a PROTAC targeting Mpro. The resulting PROTAC, HP211206,
showed similar biochemical Mpro inhibition (IC50 = 181 nM compared to 151 nM for the parent inhibitor), and was able
to degrade Mpro in HEK293 cells transfected with an Mpro plasmid with DC50 = 620 nM (48 h). However,
no antiviral activity was reported for the PROTAC. Alugubelli et al. used a similar approach based on an aldehyde
peptidic reversible covalent inhibitor of Mpro, arriving
at the PROTAC MPD2. It maintained an IC50 = 41 nM in a
biochemical Mpro inhibition assay, and showed a DC50 = 296 nM (48 h) in 293T cells stably transfected with an
Mpro-GFP construct. MPD2 showed an EC50 = 496
nM in ACE2-A549 cells infected with SARS-CoV-2, and demonstrated Mpro degradation in the infected cells. It should be noted that
this EC50 is, however, slightly weaker than that reported
for the parent aldehyde. 
In one
notable example, Cheng et al. designed
a PROTAC (P2) based on GC376, which exhibited
comparable antiviral efficacy to the parent inhibitor
(EC50= 0.61/0.71 μM for GC376/P2 respectively) but
rather low potency degradation (DC50 = 1.5 μM), suggesting
that inhibition of Mpro is the major contribution to antiviral
efficacy. The authors did show ternary complex formation between Mpro, the PROTAC and VHL, and managed to crystallize Mpro with
the PROTAC (PDB 8YLS), but detected density only for GC376, indicating weak interactions
between the linker and the protein. Grifagni et al. were also able to determine a cocrystal structure of Mpro
in complex with PROTAC 1 ( ; PDB 8OKC) in which the covalent bond to the active site cysteine is observed,
but again, there is no density for the linker and CRBN recruiter.

2.1.1.5.

## HaloPROTACs
PROTACs that utilize
a chloroalkane moiety to recruit a HaloTagged target protein were
proven potent degraders and versatile chemical biology tools. Buckley
et al. reported HaloPROTAC 3 ( ) with DC50 = 19 nM and Dmax = 90% against stably
expressed GFP-HaloTag7, much better than previously reported Halo-hydrophobic
tagging degrader HyT36 (DC50 = 134 nM; Dmax = 56%). The degradation
kinetics of HaloPROTAC3 were fast with 50% degradation reached between
4 and 8 h. To demonstrate generality, they showed robust degradation
of HaloTag7-ERK1 and HaloTag7-MEK1. HaloPROTACs were successfully
used to investigate several proteins including YTHDC1, INTS11, OGT, β-catenin, and more.
 Tovelll et al. optimized
VHL HaloPROTACs
further to HaloPROTAC E ( ) and combined it with CRISPR/Cas9 endogenous protein
tagging of the HaloTag to degrade two endosomal proteins SGK3 and
VPS34, with DC50s = 3–10 nM. Its kinetics were rapid
with 50% degradation within 0.5 h while reaching Dmax ∼ 95% at 48 h.
Tomoshige et al. reported a similar
HaloPROTAC approach using cIAP1 recruiters. HaloPROTAC 1b ( ) was able to degrade
HaloTag-CREB1 in the nucleus at single digit μM concentration.
Ody et al. attempted to make CRBN recruiting
HaloPROTACs. They tested eight compounds against HEK293 cells transiently
transfected with EGFP-HaloTag2. 4b ( ) degraded more than 80% at 10 nM (estimated
DC50 < 1 nM) HaloPROTAC 3 in their hands showed DC50 = 3.4 nM. To show generality, they expressed Aurora B kinase,
either tagged with EGFP-HaloTag2 or just HaloTag2; 4b had a DC50 ∼ 10 nM for the former, and ∼100
nM for the latter.
HaloPROTACs were also used in the other direction,
to identify
E3 ligases that are suitable for targeted degradation but have no
known ligands. In this case the ligase is expressed with an HaloTag,
and the PROTAC is based on a binder to a known target. Ottis et al. tested HaloPROTAC 4 ( ) against six E3 ligase-HaloTag
constructs: CHIP, MARCH5, NEDD4L, parkin, SIAH1 and β-TrCP,
for degradation of GFP-FKBP. All ligases except CHIP were able to
induce degradation through the HaloPROTAC, but β-TrCP was especially
potent with full degradation at 10 nM and some degradation even at
1 nM. β-TrCP and parkin were also demonstrated to be able to
degrade endogenous kinases through appropriate HaloPROTACs.
TRAFTACs are a variation of HaloPROTACs,
in which the HaloTag is installed on dCas9, which through a chimeric
RNA/DNA oligonucleotide is in proximity to a target transcription
factor, a HaloPROTAC is then used to recruit VHL for the degradation
of the transcription target of interest. It is interesting to note
that the HaloPROTAC used for this approach had to be optimized such
that they would not induce the degradation of the tagged-dCas9, but
rather the TF. To do so, the linker lengths to the HaloTag binding
motif were significantly increased.

2.1.1.6.

## Covalent
Ligand Directed PROTACs
A relatively new way to induce targeted
degradation via covalent
recruiters is through the use of ligand directed chemistry. We developed
covalent ligand directed release chemistry − (CoLDR) that
allows the use of covalent ligands, such as ibrutinib, to irreversibly
install a tag on a target protein, while releasing its guiding ligand
in the process. We’ve used BTK as a model system to show that
we can decorate it covalently with a CRBN recruiter (1n; ), while releasing a guiding ibrutinib molecule in the process. This
resulted in potent PROTACs (DC50 ∼ 10 nM) however
with a modest Dmax ∼ 65% which
might be the result of the single turnover degradation by this irreversible
modality (interesting to note the Dmax is similar to the irreversible BTK cIAP1 based PROTACs described
above). The PROTAC was selective by global proteomics with CSK and
GSPT1 the only identified off-targets that were degraded to a much
lesser extent.
 Teng et al. used a
similar approach
based on ligand-directed N-acyl-N-alkylsulfonamide (NASA) chemistry. They
derivatized a CDK2 ligand with a NASA electrophile such that it will
install a CRBN recruiter on CDK2 (TMX3054; ). This resulted in selective functionalization
of Lys89 on CDK2. However, in this case it did not lead to degradation
of CDK2, due to a failure to form a productive CDK2:CRBN complex.
Zigang Li’s group used two different group transfer chemistries
to develop degraders in a ligand directed fashion. Luo et al. used this approach to target STING using sulfonyl
pyridone transfer chemistry. They based
their design on a reported STING inhibitor SN011 and a VHL binder. The resulting PROTAC SD02 ( ) labeled Tyr197 in trypsin
digestion followed by LC/MS/MS analysis. In THP1 cells it degraded
STING with DC50 = 0.53 μM; Dmax = 56%. The degradation was proteasome, neddylation and
VHL dependent. SD02 reduced the levels of pTBK1, pIRF3, and mRNA levels
of IFN-β downstream to STING, however, not as potently as SN011
alone.
Using sulfonium transfer chemistry, Wang et al. attempted to degrade EGFR. They designed PROTAC
1-X ( ) to transfer
a CRBN
binding ligand onto EGFR based on osimertinib as a covalent guiding
ligand. It demonstrated EGFR degradation in A549 cells with a DC50 ∼ 20 μM (24 h) and Dmax = 85%. The degradation was proteasome and neddylation dependent
as well as dependent on the presence of the sulfonium. The authors
applied similar chemistry for hydrophobic tagging of EGFR with an adamantane group which showed a DC50 = 26 μM and DCmax = 77%.
Though not
yet proven, a possible advantage of ligand directed
tagging for degradation is that it may render the target more amenable
for degradation. Ligand binding typically stabilizes proteins, with this approach, the ligand vacates the binding
site and the apo protein might be more prone to degradation.
Further investigation into this approach on additional targets, and
careful comparison of irreversible degraders in which the guiding
ligand remains in the pocket, to equivalents in which it leaves may
elucidate this point in the future.

2.1.1.7.

## Additional
Examples
There are
several additional examples of PROTACs degrading their target based
on covalent binding to said target, including the first reported proof-of-concept
PROTAC that utilized the covalent natural
product ovalicin to degrade MetAP-2 ( ).
 Lebraud et al. introduced
CLIPTACs,
PROTACs that spontaneously form in situ by copper
free cycloaddition of tetrazine-labeled thalidomide and a trans-cyclooctene
labeled target binder. One of their examples consisted of a covalent
ERK1/2 binder, ERK-CLIPTAC ( ). Treating A375 cells (1 μM; 4 h) followed by
administering the CRBN recruiter (1 μM; 18 h) led to sub-μM
ERK1/2 degradation. Interestingly, washing the cells after incubation
with the covalent binders partially reduced ERK1/2 degradation. Indicating,
degradation proceeded both through covalent and noncovalent binding
to ERK1/2.
de Wispelaere et al. developed reversible
covalent PROTACs for hepatitis C virus NS3/4A protease based on telaprevir,
and an optimized CRBN binder. DGY-08-097 ( ) shows a slightly weaker biochemical potency
than telaprevir (247 nM vs 34 nM respectively), but a DC50 = 50 nM in an NS3/4A reporter cell line. While it was still weaker
in cellular antiviral assays (EC50 = 750 nM vs 130 nM for
telaprevir) it showed better tolerance to mutations that resisted
telaprevir.
Peng et al. reported
a cyanoacrylamide
based PROTAC of ERRα, predicted by computational modeling to
form a covalent interaction with C325. Compound 6c ( ) showed a DC50 slightly higher than 10 nM and Dmax close to 100%. However, it did not degrade the ERRb and ERRg isoforms,
which contain the same conserved cysteine, thereby casting doubt on
the role of a covalent interaction in the degradation.
Liu et
al. set out to develop PROTACs
for STING. They based their design on a previously reported covalent
binder C-170. Out of 24 tested compounds,
SP23 ( ) was
the most potent with DC50 = 3.2 μM and Dmax ∼ 70%, and interestingly comprised an additional
fumaramide electrophile. The PROTAC was active in vivo, but no characterization of its covalent properties is described.
Zhu et al. used the Ugi reaction to
synthesize a small series of covalent PROTACs against GPX4, based
on the chloroacetamide ML-162. Of these,
PD-4 ( ) showed
DC50 = 130 nM and induced lipid peroxidation, but in cellular
viability assays was inferior to parent inhibitor ML-162.
To
summarize this section, PROTACs that form covalent bonds with
their degradation target can be potent (EGFR, K-RasG12C, HaloPROTACs), selective (BTK) and address otherwise challenging
targets (K-RasG12C).
Reversible covalent chemistry
may marry the potency and selectivity
of covalent binders with the catalytic advantages of reversible PROTACs,
and is relatively underexplored. As emerging and re-emerging electrophiles will be used for PROTAC design
perhaps targeting additional amino acids such as lysines with (reversible
covalent) salicylic aldehydes will become more prevalent. New ligand directed chemistries are also just
emerging in the field of targeted degradation and may allow to expand
the target scope.
With that, in developing covalent PROTACs
one should also be aware
of the challenges. Proteomic selectivity should be assessed for the
binder, as well as the degrader. Protein synthesis rate should be
taken into account, as irreversible binders would be less effective
against rapidly synthesized proteins. Lastly, it is always important
to characterize the contribution of the covalent bond to the degradation
(by mutation, or through a noncovalent analogue) as there are many
examples when in hindsight PROTACs that contain electrophiles actually
degrade noncovalently.

2.1.2.

## Covalent
Binding to the Recruited Effector
E3 ligases did not evolve
to bind small molecules, and therefore
they are challenging for small molecule binder discovery. The binders
that are in prevalent use are derivatives of E3 endogenous peptide
ligands (VHL) , or protein damage mimic (CRBN). 
Covalent binding was repeatedly proven
to enable targeting of challenging targets and therefore was heavily
used to discover new E3 ligase binders ( ). Phenotypic screening aided by chemoproteomics,
and direct targeted screening using electrophilic libraries were especially
prolific in the discovery of new covalent recruiters for targeted
degradation. In addition to facilitating discovery, mathematical modeling
suggests that irreversible binding to the UPS component will improve
the catalytic efficiency of degradation, due to faster formation of
ternary complex. Finally, such irreversible
binding will increase the lifetime of degradation and maintain it
following clearance of the PROTAC.
 2.1.2.1.

## Approaches
for Screening, Target Identification,
and Covalent Selectivity Assessment
Activity based protein
profiling (ABPP) pioneered by the Cravatt and Bogyo laboratories is
a powerful technique that leverages the covalent bond formed with
target proteins to elucidate molecular targets, selectivity profiles
and nucleophile reactivities. These have been excellently reviewed
elsewhere, − but since they are heavily used in the discovery and characterization
of covalent proximity inducers, I will provide a short introduction
to some of these methods.
Gel-Based ABPP: Herein typically used
as a method to identify covalent binders to a specific target in vitro. The target is incubated with potential covalent
binders followed by incubation with a fluorescent reactive electrophile
(typically iodoacetamide-rhodamine), and ran on a gel. Loss of fluorescent
signal in the gel indicates competition for the nucleophile, and covalent
binding by the query compound. The presence of multiple nucleophiles
(e.g., cysteines) on the target protein may complicate this assay.
isoTOP ABPP( ) (isotopic tandem orthogonal proteolysis, ABPP):
This proteomic method
allows to quantitatively assign a competition ratio (corresponding
to% occupancy of a given cysteine) for thousands of cysteines between
a query compound and a general iodoacetamide probe. An untreated cell
sample and a cell sample incubated with a query compound, are then
labeled with isotopically labeled iodoacetamide tags that contain
a TEV cleavage site and a biotin handle. After enrichment on avidin
beads, TEV is used to elute the labeled peptides that are then quantified.
isoDTB ABPP( ) (isotopically labeled desthiobiotin azide tags,
ABPP): This is a
variation on isoTOP-ABPP that does not require the TEV cleavage for
elution of the covalently labeled peptides after the enrichment step.
The isotopically labeled desthiobiotin tags, that have lower affinity
to the avidin beads than biotin, can be eluted by washing, circumventing
the enzymatic cleavage step and simplifying the tags synthesis and
size.
TMT ABPP( , ) (tandem mass
tag, ABPP): Another variation on the two previous methods, where now
multiple samples can be multiplexed using isotopic TMT tags, to reduce
overall run time.
IP-MS (immunoprecipitation followed
by mass spectrometry): While not strictly restricted to covalent binders,
this method proved useful in several cases to identify the targets
of proximity inducers. Genetically tagging one of the interaction
partners, allows following treatment, to specifically precipitate
this protein with any new protein interactors induced by the treatment.
Proteomics (in comparison to untreated IP) identifies potential new
protein partners.

2.1.2.2.

## DCAF16
Zhang et al. set out to discover
new effectors that can
induce degradation by linking promiscuous covalent fragments (dubbed:
“scout fragments” , ) with a potent
and selective ligand: SLF-targeting FKBP12. They tested only three covalent fragments in cells transfected with
either FLAG-tagged FKBP12 or a nuclear localized variant. While none
of the compounds affected cytosolic FKBP12, KB02-SLF ( ), promoted degradation of
nuclear FKBP12. This degradation was not observed in a nonreactive
propanamide analogue, suggesting it is dependent on covalent binding.
Washing of the compounds from cells did not affect the degradation
of nuclear FKBP12.
 KB02-SLF and analogues showed activity in the 0.5–5
μM
range. At higher concentrations they displayed cytotoxicity, perhaps
due the reactivity of the covalent scout. Both proteasome and neddylation
inhibitors rescued degradation by KB02-SLF, suggesting it engages
a Cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase (CRL).
To identify the ligase,
the authors attempted isoTOP-ABPP, however,
no cysteines on CRLs were detected
with >75% engagement. They thus turned to immunoprecipitation (IP)
followed by mass-spectrometry (MS) using FLAG pull-down to look for
CRLs that were enriched in the presence of KB02-SLF. This identified
two CRLs: DCAF16 and DTL, and more than 100 other proteins that were
enriched by more than 5-fold. shRNA knockdown (KD) of either ligase
showed that DCAF16 KD but not DTL rescued FKBP12 degradation by the
PROTAC. CRISPR knockout (KO) of DCAF16 also rescued the degradation.
Moreover, expression of DCAF16 in KO clones restored KB02-SLF-induced
FKBP12 degradation.
Trypsin digestion followed by LC/MS/MS analysis
of pulled-down
HA-tagged DCAF16 suggested the modified cysteine is likely C177, 178,
or 179. Mutagenesis studies showed that C58S-, C119S-, C173S-, and
C178S-DCAF16 mutants maintained KB02-SLF-induced degradation of FKBP12
making them unlikely candidate sites of engagement for KB02-SLF. Subsequent
structure determination of DCAF16 suggests
that C177 and C179 bind zinc and are crucial for the structural integrity
of DCAF16.
To demonstrate generality, the authors next tested
another PROTAC
based on KB02 and JQ1 to target BRD4. KB02-JQ1 degraded BRD4 at high
concentrations (DC50 ∼ 20 μM), and facilitated
pull-down of HA-DCAF16 by FLAG-BRD4. Degradation of BRD4 was largely
rescued in DCAF16 KO cells.
Competitive proteomics suggested
the DCAF16 peptide 168–184
only show 10% and 40% engagement with the SLF and JQ1 based PROTACs,
respectively. This data supports the notion that only fractional occupancy
of the ligase is sufficient to drive target degradation.
Pu
et al. used KB02 to make PROTACs
targeting PARP2. They used olaparib which binds both PARP1 and PARP2
and reasoned that PARP1 has a nearby C845, that would rapidly react
with the KB02 of the PROTAC, while PARP2 lacks it and will allow recruitment
of DCAF16. PROTAC C8 ( ) showed similar or better antiproliferative activity to olaparib
across several cancer cell lines. A PROTAC based on a noncovalent
version of KB02 showed 4–6 fold less activity in two cell lines
in which PROTAC C8 outperformed olaparib. PROTAC C8 showed degradation
of PARP2 with DC50 = 2 μM; Dmax ∼ 95% while indeed sparing PARP1 (though the selectivity
mechanism was not proven to be related to C845). Immunofluorescence
experiments showed the degradation of PARP2 was limited to the nucleus.
Impressively, the PROTAC outperformed olaparib in a mouse MDA-MB-231
tumor xenograft model, showing near complete tumor growth inhibition
at 25 mg/kg.

2.1.2.3.

## RNF114
Spradlin
et al. set out to identify the molecular
target of
nimbolide ( ), an electrophilic natural product with a cancer antiproliferative
phenotype. They used isoTOP-ABPP in to identify the E3 ligase RNF114
as its top target. siRNA KD of RNF114 phenocopied the antiproliferative
effects of nimbolide, and nimbolide’s effect was attenuated
in RNF114 KD cells.
 The nucleophilic site on RNF114 identified by the
isoTOP-ABPP experiment
was C8 which is predicted to be intrinsically disordered. An alkyne
analogue of nimbolide could label purified RNF114 by in-gel fluorescence,
and is competed by preincubation with nimbolide (100 μM; 30
min). Alkyne binding is also blocked by a C8A mutation. They were
also able to identify the mass adduct of nimbolide on the C8 containing
tryptic peptide by LC/MS/MS. Pull-down of nimbolide-alkyne labeled
proteins followed by western-blot for RNF114 showed robust enrichment
at 50 μM alkyne, but not at lower concentrations. Pull-down
proteomics under similar conditions identified RNF114 and 114 additional
proteins enriched by more than 10-fold compared to the nontreated
control.
The tumor suppressor p21 was a known substrate of RNF114.
The authors
showed nimbolide inhibits p21 ubiquitination by RNF114. Western blot
analysis and global proteomics showed p21 was stabilized by nimbolide
and this effect accounted for at least part of its antiproliferative
phenotype, as it could be partially rescued by knockdown of p21 and
p57, another protein found to be stabilized by the proteomics.
Next the authors used nimbolide to recruit RNF114 for targeted
degradation. They linked it to BRD4 ligand JQ1 resulting in XH2 ( ), which retained
binding to RNF114 (IC50 = 0.24 μM). XH2 showed BRD4
degradation at 10 and 100 nM but not at 1 μM which the authors
suggest is a result of the hook effect. The degradation was sensitive to E1 Ub activating enzyme and proteasome
inhibition and was rescued by RNF114 KO. Interestingly, XH2 maintained
p21 stabilization while degrading BRD4, potentially dealing the cells
with two orthogonal antiproliferative effects.
In follow-up
work, Tong et al. reported
a new extraction method that enables facile access to nimbolide from
cheap commercially available health supplements. They used these large
amounts of nimbolide to synthesize two PRTOACs targeting the BCR-ABL
oncogene. BT1 ( ) degraded BCR-ABL with DC50 ∼ 1 μM, and Dmax = 80%. c-ABL was also degraded, but with
a flat profile and Dmax ∼ 50%.
Neither nimbolide nor dasatinib themselves degraded BCR-ABL or c-ABL.
Similar to the BRD4-nimbolide PROTAC, BT1 also led to elevated levels
of p21 in K562 cells.
Looking for a more tractable synthetic
handle to recruit RNF114,
Lou et al. screened 318 electrophilic
fragments against RNF114 (in gel-based ABPP competition with iodoacetamide-rhodamine)
to identify EN219 ( ) with IC50 = 470 nM in the gel-based assay. EN219
inhibited RNF114 autoubiquitination and p21 ubiquitination in vitro (50 μM; 30 min). EN219 contains a stereocenter,
however the authors did not see stereospecific binding when testing
the separate stereoisomers (in more recent electrophilic ligand discovery
campaigns stereospecificity is considered a marker of recognition
driven binding − ). Trypsin digestion followed by LC/MS/MS
confirmed C8 as the only site of modification.
In isoTOP-ABPP,
RNF114 C8 showed a low competition ratio (∼2)
compared to nimbolide which in the previous study showed a ratio of
∼5. To further assess selectivity the authors synthesized an
alkyne analogue of EN219. While RNF114 was detected in a pull-down
WB with the alkyne (50 μM, 90 min), it was not detected in pull-down
proteomics. Competition of EN219 with the alkyne identified seven
targets. The alkyne itself had 10 additional targets enriched over
DMSO. Altogether these data suggest EN219 can engage RNF114 in the
cell but with a concerning selectivity profile.
The authors
tested three BRD4 PROTACs based on EN219. ML2–14
( ) worked
best with DC50 of 14/36nM for the short/long isoforms of
BRD4 respectively. ML2–14-mediated degradation was rescued
by proteasome inhibition and E1-activating enzyme inhibition. Further,
nimbolide pretreatment also rescued the degradation, suggesting it
is RNF114 mediated. RNF114 KO significantly attenuated the degradation
as well. Global proteomics showed, similar to the nimbolide PROTAC,
both selective degradation of BRD4 (and in this case also BRD3) as
well as stabilization of p21 and CTGF (also stabilized by nimbolide).
Finally, the authors show that EN219 can be harnessed to also degrade
BCR-ABL, by linking it to dasatinib, it showed proteasome dependent
degradation of BCL-ABL in the 0.1–5 μM range, with selectivity
over c-ABL.

2.1.2.4.

## RNF4
Ward
et al. screened 141 acrylamide and chloroacetamide
fragments (50 μM) against RNF4. Of five potential hits, the
authors focused on chloroacetamide hit TRH1–23 ( ).
 Trypsin digest LC/MS/MS studies
showed that TRH1–23 (50
μM, 30 min, RT) can label two zinc coordinating cysteines C132
and C135 in RNF4, despite mutations to these cysteines previously
reported to interfere with RNF4 activity, TRH1-23 treatment did not
inhibit RNF4 autoubiquitination in an in vitro reconstituted
assay. Testing 16 close analogues, identified CCW16 ( ), with a lower IC50 value (IC50 = 1.8 μM). This improved binding might
be due to increased reactivity which is common for choloacetamides
that are based on secondary amines. 
The authors synthesized CCW-28-3 ( ) a bifunctional linking JQ1 to CCW16. CCW
28-3 showed improved binding to RNF4 (IC50 = 0.54 μM).
It also showed time and dose dependent degradation of BRD4 with DC50 ∼ 100 nM for the long isoform of BRD4. CCW28-3 mediated
degradation was abrogated by pretreatment with JQ1, proteasome inhibition
or E1 inhibition.
Global proteomics after CCW-28–3 treatment
(1 μM,
3 h) identified BRD4 as one of the primary targets in addition to
several other targets. Notably no BRD2/3 degradation was observed.
Nor was RNF4 detected in the proteomics, perhaps indicating relatively
low expression levels. Treatment (10 μM, 1.5 h) of cells transfected
with FLAG-RNF4, showed ∼30% engagement of the protein with
CCW-28–3.
To assess selectivity the authors performed
an isoTOP-ABPP experiment
that quantified 1114 cysteine sites, seven of which with competition
ratios >4 (corresponding to >75% engagement) yet RNF4 itself
was not
detected. In competitive pull-down proteomics in which pretreatment
with CCW16 competed with enrichment by an alkyne derivative, again
seven off-targets were identified, and again RNF4 could not be detected.
To validate on-target mechanism, the authors knocked out RNF4 from
HeLa cells which significantly (though not completely) attenuated
BRD4 degradation by CCW-28-3.

2.1.2.5.

## Keap1
Tong et al. set out to recruit Keap1
as an E3 ligase for
targeted degradation. To do so, they utilized the natural product
bardoxolone ( ) which is a reversible covalent binder of Keap1. They linked bardoxolone
and JQ1 (CDDO-JQ1; ) and observed BRD4 degradation with a DC50 of
∼50 nM (12 h) with a potential hook-effect starting at 5 μM.
At concentrations of 1 and 5 μM Keap1 levels itself were decreased
by 50%.
 PROTAC mediated degradation was abrogated by proteasome,
E1 and
neddylation inhibition. To rule out degradation due to hydrophobic
tagging the authors generated three control PROTACs, two that should
no longer react covalently, as well as the irreversible covalent version
of bardoxolone (lacking the α-cyano group) all three control
PROTACs lost their ability to degrade BRD4.
No selectivity assessments
were presented neither for the effector
mediating the BRD4 degradation, nor for potentially additional off-targets
that might be degraded. The former as the authors note cannot be ruled
out as bardoxolone is known to be promiscuous.
Relatedly, noncovalent
ligands targeting the Keltch domain of Keap1
(and not the BTB domain which bardoxolone binds) were used for PROTACs. Du et al. showed
that they are able to recruit Keap1 to degrade BRD4 and the kinase
FAK but concluded that the target scope addressable by Keap1 recruiters
is rather narrow, as “easily degradable” targets for
CRBN resisted degradation by Keap1 PROTACs. Moreover, when linking
the Keap1 binder to CRBN binders it was Keap1 that was degraded and
not CRBN. Previously, Lu et al. reported
a PROTAC for Tau using a peptide derived from Nrf2 to recruit Keap1.
Pei et al. recruited Keap1 through
a second electrophilic natural product, piperlongumine (PL; ). Competitive-ABPP
identified ∼300 targets for piperlongumine including nine E3
ligases. To assess its degradation capacity the authors linked it
to a CDK9 inhibitor SNS-032. PROTAC
955 ( ) showed
DC50 = 9 nM for CDK9. The degradation was robust across
three cell lines, and neither PL, SNS-032 nor their nonlinked combination
showed degradation. Proteasome, E1, and neddylation inhibitors but
not autophagy inhibitors rescued the degradation. A reduced version
(of both Michael acceptors) of PL was inactive. The authors used a
TurboID-CDK9 construct to identify six
E3 CRLs, the only one of which that overlapped with the ABPP was Keap1.
bardoxolone and dimethylfumarate could block 955-mediated degradation,
as well as Keap1 KD (siRNA) or KO (CRISPR). Re-expression of Keap1
restored degradation. Finally, a nanoBRET assay in cells, showed 955
(but not its reduced counterpart) can mediate ternary complex formation
at <1 μM. Global proteomics showed selectivity for CDK9 with
CDK10 also being potently degraded. To demonstrate generality, the
authors showed the PL linked to the ALK inhibitor ceritinib is able to degrade the fusion protein EML4-ALK
at 1 μM.

2.1.2.6.

## DCAF11
Based
on their previous
success with attaching scout fragments
to SLF (FKBP12 ligand), Zhang et al. generated 21 chloroacetamide fragments (via the Ugi reaction , ) connected to SLF via a PEG linker. These were screened (8 h; 2
μM) against four cancer cell lines that stably express cytosolic
or nuclear FKBP12 fused to luciferase.
Several of the electrophilic
bifunctionals exhibited activity. Interestingly it appears like the
22Rv1 cell line was more prone to induced degradation, in which 14/21
induced at least 30% nuclear degradation, compared to H2122 in which
no compound but the positive control induced any type of degradation.
The authors focused on 21-SLF ( ). Its degradation was blocked by free SLF,
proteasome and neddylation inhibition. 21-SLF also induced the polyubiquitination
of cytosolic and nuclear FKBP12. The 21-SLF propanamide analogue lacking
the electrophilic moiety could not induce degradation, suggesting
covalent binding is necessary for activity.
 To identify the potential proteins
mediating the degradation the
authors used co-IP of FLAG-tagged FKBP12 in cells treated with 21-SLF
(10 μM, 2 h). DCAF11 was among the top enriched hits. 21-SLF
degraded FKBP12 in DCAF11-WT, but not in DCAF11-KO cells. Expression
of HA-tagged DCAF11 in the KO cells restored 21-SLF mediated FKBP12
degradation, and HA-tagged DCAF11 coimmunoprecipitated with FLAG-FKBP12
in the presence of 21-SLF. Global proteomics indicated selective degradation
of endogenous FKBP12 in WT but not DCAF11-KO cells. The only off-target
detected was GSTO1 that degraded regardless of DCAF11 expression.
GSTO1 is well precedented to react with chloroacetamides , and the authors hypothesize 21-SLF labels it and potentially destabilizes
it, leading to DCAF11 independent degradation.
Having identified
DCAF11 as the ligase mediating 21-SLF activity,
the authors rescreened five other SLF-bifunctionals in DCAF11-WT and
KO cells. Except KB02-SLF which maintained its activity in the DCAF11-KO
cells, one other compound also maintained FKBP12 degradation in the
KO cells, suggesting it might be engaging an alternative ligase.
To identify the cysteine target of 21-SLF, the authors expressed
cysteine to alanine mutations of DCAF11 together with Luc-FKBP12 and
monitored degradation by 21-SLF. only a triple C443A/C460A/C485A mutant
rescued degradation completely. The DCAF11 triple mutant also failed
to form a complex with FKBP12 in 21-SLF treated cells.
An isoDTB-ABPP experiment with 21-SLF
(10 μM, 2 h) in HA-DCAF11-transfected cells showed limited engagement
with C460 in DCAF11 and only six additional significant off-targets,
including C32 of GSTO1, out of more than 12,000 identified cysteines.
Finally, to demonstrate generality of DCAF11 recruitment, the authors
synthesized electrophilic PROTACs bearing the chloroacetamide moiety
of 21 linked through a PEG linker to an androgen receptor (AR) ligand.
It degraded AR in WT cells in a concentration dependent manner, but
not in DCAF11-KO 22Rv1 cells. At 10 μM, it led to 90% depletion
of AR.
The authors noted that 21-SLF only showed activity in
22Rv1 cells
out of the panel of four cell lines. While DCAF11 is expressed in
all four lines, it has higher expression in 22Rv1, potentially suggesting
a minimum expression level of ligase expression is required for effective
degradation. The authors also wonder if C460, being highly conserved
across DCAF11 orthologues, might represent a functional site for DCAF11
in recognizing endogenous electrophiles, in response to, for instance,
oxidative stress in cells.
Two additional groups identified
DCAF11 as an effector that could
drive targeted degradation, both arriving at it, at about the same
time, by examining a natural product that was reported to induce lysosomal
degradation.
Xue et al. set out
to explore lysosomal
degradation of PDEδ. To that end they used their previously
developed PDEδ binders , and GW5074 ( ) that had been
identified as an LC3B binder. Compound 5 ( ) showed PDEδ degradation in three different cell lines, with
about 75% degradation at 10 μM.
Autophagy inhibitors Chloroquine
(CQ), NH4Cl or Bafilomycin
A1 (Baf A1) could not rescue PDEδ degradation by 5, nor could LC3B knockout, suggesting the degradation is not mediated
by autophagy. In contrast proteasome inhibitors, abrogated PDEδ
degradation by 5 as did neddylation inhibition, suggesting
degradation by a CRL. To explore the generality of the recruiter the
authors made a series of bifunctionals linking JQ1 with the arylidene-indolinone
through different linkers. All bifunctional probes induced degradation
of BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 at 3 μM. Compound 9 ( ) induced degradation
of BRD2 with a DC50 = 255 nM and Dmax = 84%. Interestingly, up to 50 μM concentration,
almost no hook effect was observed for BRD2 and BRD4, but at 10 μM,
a strong hook effect was observed for BRD3. Autophagy inhibitors did
not rescue BRD2 degradation but proteasome inhibitors did. The authors
made another bifunctional based on ibrutinib which showed degradation
of BLK and BTK respectively in ramos cells, that was abolished by
proteasome or neddylation inhibition but not by CQ.
To identify
the ligase responsible for the inhibition the authors
performed a CRISPR/Cas9 screen in a BRD4 reporter cell line transduced
with a CRL-focused sgRNA library targeting 495 genes. DCAF11 was identified
as the most significant CRL substrate receptor. To validate DCAF11
as the recruited ligase the authors used siRNA knockdown that rescued
BRD2 degradation induced by 9. Additionally, they generated
stable cell lines with CRISPR knockout of DCAF11 in which, BRD2 degradation
by the compounds was abolished, as well as BRD3/4 and PDEδ degradation
by 5. To confirm direct target engagement the authors
expressed FLAG-tagged BRD2 and HA-tagged DCAF11 in Hep G2 cells. Co-immunoprecipitation
of FLAG-BRD2 enriched DCAF11 only in the presence of compound 9. To test if the indolinone moiety alone bound DCAF11 in
cells, the authors made a biotinylated probe of it. The probe was
able to pull down DCAF11, and was partially competed by the nonbiotinylated
indolinone. No selectivity results were reported as to what else the
indolinone might be binding in the cell.
α,β-Unsaturated
indolinones contain a potential electrophilic
Michael acceptor, and since DCAF11 was already demonstrated to be
covalently ligandable, the authors wanted to assess covalent binding
of 9 to DCAF11. First, they synthesized the reduced version,
that did not induce degradation of BRD2. Then, they followed with
a washout experiment. Three hours post washout of MZ1, a noncovalent
BET proteins degrader BRD2 levels increased, whereas with compound 9, BRD2 remained at low levels up to 24 h after washing. Moreover,
blocking cysteines C443, C460 and C485 by treatment with the recruiter
reported by Zhang et al., attenuated
the degradation of BRD2 by compound 9, implying they
engage a same cysteine target. Reconstitution of a triple C443A, C460A,
and C485A mutant to DCAF11 KO cells did not restore BRD2 degradation
by compound 9, whereas reconstitution of the WT did restore
degradation, further supporting one of these as the target cysteine.
The authors explored the SAR of 29 arylidene-indolinone analogues
for rescuing BRD2 degradation in a competitive in-cell western assay
system. Indeed, JQ1 or PDEδ ligand
linked bifunctionals based on these improved binders, led to improved
degradation in cells.
An indirect way to assess proteomic selectivity
is to evaluate
the compounds’ effect on viability. The monovalent DCAF11 ligand 2 ( ), which contains the electrophilic moiety, showed GI50 > 30 μM in Jurkat- and Hep G2 cells, compared to the chloroacetamide
DCAF11 ligand reported by Zhang et al. that showed GI50 = 1.7–6.5 μM. The indolinone-JQ1
based degraders displayed GI50 = 90–200 nM in Jurkat
cells, 6- to 10-fold more potent than nonelectrophilic counterparts.
As noted, a second group, Wang et al. were also inspired by the reported lysosomal degraders to make JQ1-linked bifunctional molecules.
Their best compound, HL435 ( ) showed marked cellular viability effects with EC50 = 0.38 and 0.21 μM against MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 respectively.
HL435 had a DC50= 12–22 nM in the two cell lines
(12 h) with rapid kinetics (half-life of ∼1.3 h at 0.5 μM
compound). To validate the degradation mechanism the authors attempted
to rescue degradation by autophagy inhibitors bafilomycin and CQ,
neither were able to stabilize BRD4 in the presence of HL435, nor
did knockout of ATG5 or ATG4B suggesting the degradation is not lysosomal.
E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme inhibitor or proteasome inhibitors
did rescue compound mediated degradation, as did neddylation inhibition.
To identify the effector, the authors performed a pooled CRISPR
interference screen, in a BRD4BD1 reporter cell line, comprising
sgRNAs against 993 genes from the proteasome pathway. Components of
the CRL4DCAF11 complex, including CUL4B, RBX1, DDB1, and
DCAF11, were among the top positive hits. Individual knockout of these
genes using two separate sgRNA blocked the BD1 reporter degradation
upon HL435 treatment, as well as endogenous BRD4. Pull-down of HA-tagged
DCAF11, identified FLAG-tagged BRD4BD1 only in the presence
of HL435, suggesting ternary complex formation.
The authors
demonstrated potent toxicity of HL435 in cancer cell
lines, most notably a prostate cancer cell line 22RV1, with LD50 = 8.7 nM (compared to 157 nM for JQ1) and showed the compound
blocks the cell cycle and induces apoptosis to a higher level than
JQ1. They proceeded to evaluate HL435 in a mouse xenograft tumor model
using MDA-MB-231 cells. Mice were treated daily with HL435 (20 mg/kg)
6 days per week. After 27 days, the treatment group showed tumor growth
reduction and tumor weight reduction of ∼50% compared to the
vehicle, with no effect on the mice body weight, or any obvious toxicity.

2.1.2.7.

## FEM1B
To identify a covalent
FEM1B binder, henning et al. screened
a library of 566 covalent ligands at 100 μM in a competitive
fluorescence polarization (FP) assay against a TAMRA-conjugated FEM1B
substrate degron: FNIP1562–591 binding to recombinant
mouse FEM1B. Six compounds showed >50% inhibition, of which EN106
( ) showed
the most prominent inhibition with IC50 = 2.2 μM
in the FP assay. LC/MS/MS analysis of FEM1B tryptic digest revealed
an EN106 adduct only on C186. This cysteine was previously shown to
be critical for FEM1B substrate recognition via a zinc mediated interaction. , A noncovalent analogue of EN106 lost the ability to inhibit the
FNIP degron binding.
 To assess cellular engagement the authors synthesized
an alkyne-functionalized
derivative of EN106. The alkyne probe improved potency of FNIP binding
inhibition (IC50 = 0.67 μM). The alkyne was able
to pull-down FEM1B from cells. While iso-TOP ABPP with EN106 failed
to identify a FEM1B derived peptide, quantitative proteomics of the
alkyne pull-down identified FEM1B as one of the top-enriched proteins.
As an orthogonal measure of cellular engagement, the authors assessed
degradation of GFP linked to an FNIP1 degron. EN106 significantly
stabilized FNIP1 degron-GFP levels in FEM1B- overexpressing cells.
In cells with endogenous FEM1B levels, EN106 increased FNIP1 reporter
levels only in the 20 μM dose. Stabilization of mitochondrial
FNIP1 impairs mitochondrial activity, as measured by oxygen consumption
rate. In accordance with stabilizing FNIP1, EN106 significantly reduced
mitochondrial oxygen consumption.
To attempt targeted FEM1B
mediated degradation, the authors linked
EN106 to JQ1, via six different linkers. These bifunctional compounds
all displayed some extent of BRD4 degradation. NJH-1-106 ( ) showed the best
activity with a DC50 of 250 nM and Dmax = 94% for BRD4. NJH-1-106 maintained competitive binding
to FEM1B with IC50 = 1.5 μM in a competitive FP against
the FNIP1 degron. Its BRD4 degradation was time-dependent and it displayed
activity in three different cell lines.
A noncovalent version
of NJH-1-106, did not inhibit FEM1B binding
to FNIP1 degron and did not degrade BRD4. Degradation could also be
rescued by proteasome and neddylation inhibition, as well as by preincubation
with EN106 or JQ1. FEM1B knockout attenuated but did not completely
rescue BRD4 degradation by the PROTAC, a fact the authors attribute
to residual wild-type cells in the nonclonal FEM1B KO population or
to other potential off-target E3 ligases. Global proteomics profiling
of NJH-1-106 (1 μM; 12 h) identified only BRD4 and one additional
off-target as down-regulated, however BRD4 was depleted by <50%.
Finally, to demonstrate generality beyond BRD4, the authors linked
EN106 to dasatinib, and demonstrated degradation of BCR-ABL and c-ABL
in K562 cells.

2.1.2.8.

## DCAF1
Tao
et al. profiled four azetidine-acrylamide
stereoprobes
(all four possible diastereomers) using cysteine-directed MS-ABPP , , in primary human T-cells. Altogether
>10,000 cysteines were quantified, of which they focused on C1113
of the E3 ligase adaptor DCAF1. This cysteine was engaged stereoselectively
by probe MY-1B (>90%; ). Other quantified cysteines in DCAF1 were unaffected
by
MY-1B. An alkyne derivative of MY-1B (but not of MY-1A; ) was able to label
WT-DCAF1 at concentrations as low as 12.5 μM (1 h), but not
a C1113A mutant, when these recombinant proteins were spiked into
HEK293T lysates. MY-1B pretreatment (2 h; but not MY-1A) was able
to block the alkyne engagement at concentrations of 25 μM and
above.
 Based on these results the authors continued to
functionalize
MY-1B
into a PROTAC by linking it to SLF (YT47R; ). They also generated the corresponding
negative control based on the inactive enantiomer (YT47S; ). This bifunctional
molecule (but not the negative control) was able to block MY-1B binding
to recombinant DCAF1, and was also able to cause a dose-dependent
shift in the protein band as assessed by coomassie staining, likely
due to their >1000 Da MW. To assess their degradation activity,
the
authors cotransfected HEK293T cells with FLAG-tagged DCAF1 and HA-tagged
FKBP12, followed by 24 h compound treatment.
Degradation of
HA-FKBP12 was observed for the PROTAC in cotransfected
cells but not in cells transfected only with HA-FKBP12, suggesting
endogenous DCAF1 levels may not suffice to support degradation. The
enantiomeric control did not degrade FKBP12, nor was it degraded with
the PROTAC in cells transfected with a DCAF1 C1113A mutant. YT47R-mediated
degradation of HA-FKBP12 was blocked by pretreatment with proteasome
or neddylation inhibitor as well as by SLF or MY-1B. Global proteomics
in cotransfected cells after treatment with YT47R showed FKBP12 as
one of the most statistically significant degraded proteins, although
the degradation magnitude was modest.
To assess ternary complex
formation, cotransfected cells were treated
with YT47R (or the control enantiomer YT47S) in the presence of MG132.
Immunoprecipitation of the HA-tagged FKBP12 showed DCAF1 only in the
PROTAC treated cells but not with the control enantiomer or cells
transfected with C1113A DCAF1. Interestingly, increased polyubiquitination
and ternary complex formation for YT47R over YT47S were also observed
in cells only transfected with HA-FKBP12, mediated by endogenous DCAF1.
While insufficient to induce degradation, the authors speculated that
better engagers might be able to support degradation, and point to
the fact that YT47R only engaged ∼20% of C1113 (at 5 μM).
To demonstrate generality the authors synthesized two bifunctional
probes connecting MY-1B or the control MY-1A to JQ1 through a PEG3
linker. In-gel competition with the alkyne probe, showed the active
PROTAC retained binding to DCAF1 and degraded BRD4 with DC50 ∼ 200 nM in cells transfected with FLAG-DCAF1, in a stereoselective
and C1113 dependent manner. Degradation, again required exogenous
expression of DCAF1.

2.1.2.9.

## UBE2D
Based
on their previously
discovered phenotypic hit EN450 ( A; see ) which targets UBE2D C111, Forte et al. made a bifunctional molecule linking EN450
to JQ1. This PROTAC was able to show ∼70% degradation of the
short isoform of BRD4 at concentrations of 0.1–10 μM,
with no effect on the long isoform.
 To find an improved recruiter, the authors screened
569 covalent
fragments by gel-based fluorescence competition with an iodoacetamide
probe. The top hit EN67 ( A) was able to completely outcompete the IA probe at
10 μM. Through in vitro ubiquitination assays,
the authors showed that EN67 does not block the intrinsic activity
of UBE2D, furthermore, tryptic digestion followed by LC/MS/MS demonstrated
selective targeting of C111 without binding to the catalytic C85.
To assess target engagement the authors synthesized an alkyne derivative
of EN67; a pull-down Western blot using this alkyne (50 μM,
24 h) showed engagement with UBE2D. A competitive iso-DTB experiment
against EN67 (50 μM, 4 h) identified ∼3800 cysteine sites,
with UBE2D showing a modest competition ratio of ∼1.3 (corresponding
to ∼25% occupancy). Numerous other peptides showed higher competition
ratios but with lower significance values.
To attempt to recruit
UBE2D for targeted degradation the authors
synthesized five bifunctionals linking EN67 to JQ1. Of the five, only
one linker (NF90; A) enabled degradation of the short isoform of BRD4 (with
no effect on the long isoform). NF90 was not only selective for the
short isoform of BRD4 but also did not degrade BRD2/3. NF90 mediated
degradation could be rescued with proteasome and neddylation inhibitors,
which suggests that UBE2D is not sufficient to drive degradation of
targeted proteins alone. Knockdown of the four UBE2D isoforms attenuated
the degradation (however, such knockdown may affect many effectors
of proteasomal degradation). Surprisingly, a nonreactive reduced version
of NF90, was still able to compete with IA for binding to UBE2D and
to induce BRD4 short isoform degradation (10 μM; 24 h) perhaps
suggesting strong reversible recognition of the target (although that
might not explain the competition results with IA).
To demonstrate
generality, The authors linked EN67 to the AR-targeting
ligand from the PROTAC ARV-110. NF500C
( A) showed
near complete depletion of AR at 1 μM (24 h). Global proteomic
profiling of NF500C (10 μM; 24 h) showed marked selectivity
for AR. A nonreactive analogue of NF500C, with the acrylamide reduced,
still degraded AR to an equivalent degree as NF500C (10 μM,
24 h).

2.1.2.10.

## DDB1
Meyers
et al. screened 185 covalent fragments
(50 μM,
30 min) by Gel-based ABPP, against the DDB1 core adaptor protein of
CRLs. Their top hit was previously identified as a hit against RNF114 therefore they tested five chloroacetamide
pyrazoline analogues and identified MM-02-57 ( B) which was able to label DDB1 but not
RNF114.
An alkyne derivative of MM-02-57 maintained similar
binding to purified DDB1. Trypsin digest LC/MS/MS analysis identified
C173 as the target site on DDB1. MM-02-57 (50 μM, 30 min) did
not inhibit Thalidomide induced ubiquitination in an in vitro assay, suggesting it may be suitable as a handle for targeted degradation.
A pull-down WB using the alkyne probe showed it is able to pull-down
DDB1 from cells (although only partially) and this pull-down can be
competed by MM-02-57, suggesting target engagement in cells.
In an isoDTB-ABPP experiment to assess the proteomic selectivity
of MM-02–57, out of 8974 cysteines quantified, 24 targets showed
competition ratios >8 including DDB1 C173 that showed a ratio of
8.4,
indicating 88% engagement of DDB1. Numerous additional cysteines showed
competition ratios >4. The more prominent off-targets included
the
E3 ligases KEAP1 and ZNRF2.
The authors made six PROTACs linking
MM-02-57 onto JQ1. While all
versions degraded BRD4 (to different extent) they all only degraded
the short isoform with no effect on the long isoform. The most potent
degrader was MM-02-08 ( B) with DC50 ∼ 10 nM. MM-02-08 did
not impair cell viability after 24 h of treatment. BRD4 Degradation
was rescued by pretreatment with proteasome or neddylation inhibitors,
as well as by DDB1 knockdown. When tested in a different cell line
(MDA-MB-231) both short and long isoforms of BRD4 were degraded, perhaps
indicating a sort of isoform regulation rather than degradation selectivity.
In an in vitro reconstituted system consisting of
UBE1, UBE2, CRL4, NEDD8, RBX1, and FLAG-BRD4 monoubiquitination could
be detected, adding MM-02–57 showed a trace of poly ubiquitination
and adding DDB1 increased the signal of the polyubiquitination.
The noncovalent analogue of MM-02-08 did not show DDB1 binding,
nor BRD4 degradation. Whereas swapping the chloroacetamide electrophile
for an acrylamide, maintained binding to DDB1 and degradation of BRD4
albeit weaker than MM-02-08.
To demonstrate generality the authors
linked MM-02-57 to an AR-targeting
moiety borrowed from the clinical AR PROTAC ARV-110. One PROTAC reached more than 50% degradation of AR in LNCaP
cells (∼1 μM; 24 h).

2.1.2.11.

## SKP1
Hong et al. aimed to
identify a recruiter for SKP1. They
screened 1284 covalent fragments (50 μM; 1 h; RT) via gel-based
ABPP, against pure SKP1-FBXO7-CUL1-RBX1 complex. EN884 ( C), the top hit,
showed dose–response displacement of IA-rhodamine (EC50 ∼ 10 μM).
LC/MS/MS analysis identified one modified
site by EN884, C160 on SKP1. This cysteine resides at the C-terminus
of SKP1 in a region predicted as intrinsically disordered. onsistent
with the prediction, EN884 did not bind monomeric SKP1 alone, suggesting
an additional component of the complex was required to template binding.
The authors made an alkyne derivative of EN884, that was able to
pull down SKP1 from HEK293 cells. An isoDTB-ABPP experiment identified
only 7% occupancy of C160 of SKP1 for EN884. A pull-down proteomics
experiment with the alkyne derivative enriched SKP1, but also 414
other proteins were enriched, suggesting very poor selectivity.
Nevertheless, the authors synthesized four PROTACs linking JQ1
to a derivative of EN884. The most robust of which, SJH1–51B
( C), showed
a DC50 ∼ 1 μM for only the short isoform of
BRD4. In MDA-MB-231 cells both short and long isoforms were degraded,
global proteomics showed moderate selectivity toward BRD4. The degradation
was sensitive to proteasome and neddylation inhibition and to SKP1
knockdown.
Surprisingly, the reduced, noncovalent version of
SJH1-51B, was
still able to degrade BRD4 short isoform, albeit slower, and to displace
iodoacetamide in the in-gel ABPP assay from SKP1, only in the context
of the complex. This is particularly surprising due to the fragment-sized
recognition element, that is unlikely to potently bind the complex
reversibly.
To show generality, the authors synthesized four
PROTACs incorporating
an AR tarageing ligand. All four showed some level of degradation,
with one of them in particular showing sub-μM AR degradation,
with some selectivity toward AR in global proteomics. Here too, noncovalent
analogues showed equipotent AR degradation, further suggesting that
covalency is not driving degraders based on this recruiter.

2.1.2.12.

## CRBN
Cruite et al. installed sulfur(VI) electrophiles on the 5
and 6 positions of the CRBN binder EM12 ( A) in an attempt to turn it into a covalent
binder. To assess cellular engagement, they used a NanoBRET assay
that quantifies BRET signal following displacement of a fluorescent
CRBN tracer from NanoLuc-tagged CRBN. A sulfonyl-fluoride at the 5 position (EM12-SO2F; A) was extremely
potent in this assay (IC50 = 0.88 nM) but also unstable
(T1/2 = 7 min in human plasma). A sulfonyl
fluoride at the 6 position was 80-fold less active, indicating exact
placement of the electrophile contributed to potency. A fluorosulfate
at the 5 position (EM12-FS; A) gave a good balance of potency and stability with
IC50 = 256 nM, Human plasma T1/2 = 196 min; HLM T1/2 > 145 min and
human
hepatocyte T1/2 > 217 min. It is interesting
to note that a fluorosulfate at the 4 position, resulted in similar
potency (IC50 = 310 nM). EM12-SO2F and EM12-FS
were shown to irreversibly label CRBN by LC/MS exclusively at His353
(1:1 ratio, 4 h for SO2F, 24 h for FS; RT). In terms of
neo-substrate degradation, EM12-SO2F did not show degradation
of any neo-substrates by proteomics and in fact was able to block
IKZF1 degradation by Lenalidomide. Supposedly due to imposing a new
conformation on His353. EM12-FS, also did not degrade IKZF, but acquired
a new neo-substrate NTAQ1 which was robustly and selectively degraded.
 In a follow-up study Nowak et
al. attempted to convert this covalent
CRBN binder into a PROTAC. They installed
the fluorosulfate at the corresponding position of AVR-825, a JQ1/CRBN
based degrader of BRD4 resulting in
FS-ARV-825 ( A). It showed 50% labeling of CRBN in vitro (1:1
ratio; 24 h; RT). In the NanoBRET assay the parent ARV-825 showed
an IC50 = 57 nM while FS-ARV-825 was 15-fold less potent
with IC50 = 850 nM. In terms of degradation FS-ARV-825
showed a DC50 ∼ 30 nM (compared to ∼10 nM
for the noncovalent version in this system) but retained the same
DC50 (at 24 h) after preincubation with a potent (reversible)
CRBN binder, whereas the noncovalent PROTAC activity diminished significantly
with such competition. Also, as expected from an irreversible PROTAC,
it was resistant to washout of the cells. In terms of selectivity,
FS-ARV-825 clearly degraded BRD2/3/4 as well as downregulated other
BRD4 downstream targets such as MYC, but had relatively many off-targets.
While not detected in the proteomics, GSPT1 and IKZF1 were also degraded
with DC50s of ∼500 nM (5 h) and 200 nM (24 h) respectively.

2.1.2.13.

## VHL
In a similar vein, Shah
et al. attempted to design a covalent
VHL binder. They aimed to replace the canonical hydroxyproline motif
in VHL binders (making a hydrogen bond to Ser110 in VHL), with a sulfonyl
fluoride group that could irreversibly bind the same serine. In two
iterations they arrived at VHL-SF2 ( B) which showed an apparent IC50 = 35 μM in an FP competition assay, intact protein LC/MS showed
a modest 65% labeling (100 μM; 24 h) of VHL, and a biotinylated
version showed 44% binding in cells overexpressing VCB.
Based
on this binder, the authors made BRD-SF2 ( B) a PROTAC targeting BRD4. In a HiBit assay,
the PROTAC induced BRD4 degradation with DC50 = 17.2 μM; Dmax = 60% (18 h). The PROTAC showed similar
degradation of endogenous levels of the long isoform of BRD4. To prove
a covalent mechanism in the cell, the author showed that degradation
by BRD-SF2, though weak, is much more resistant to washout and competition
by non-PROTAC VHL binders, compared to reversible PROTAC MZ1. To show generality, the authors made two AR
targeting PROTACs. Both PROTACs showed degradation in a HiBit assay
with DC50 in the 200–500 nM range but Dmax ∼ 55%.

2.1.2.14.

## FBXO22
A series of recent publications,
reported almost simultaneously the discovery of FBXO22 as the effector
ligase mediating degradation by electrophilic compounds.
Hanley
et al. had previously discovered UNC8153
( ), an alkylamine
degrader of NSD2, a histone methyltransferase. In subsequent work they optimized the alkylamine linker to arrive
at UNC8732 ( ) with improved degradation properties (DC50 = 60 nM; Dmax = 97%) which was extremely selective proteomically.
 The authors hypothesized that the amine might be
metabolized and
is not the active species itself. They performed a metabolite identification
study in cells treated with these amines and identified their aldehyde
derivatives. The original compounds were depleted within 6 h.
The aldehyde was formed when UNC8732 was incubated in media containing
10% FBS even in absence of cells, but not in media lacking FBS. Aminoguanidine,
a pan amino oxidase inhibitor, blocked the metabolism in the presence
of FBS, suggesting that amine oxidases in the FBS metabolized the
compound. In the absence of FBS in the media, no NSD2 degradation
was observed, strongly suggesting the aldehyde is in fact the active
species.
The authors made UNC10088 ( ) a protected aldehyde bisulfite prodrug, this hydrolyses to the aldehyde in aqueous
media fast and irrespective of FBS. In cells it degraded NSD2 irrespective
of FBS and with comparable or better degradation parameters as the
parent UNC8732, further underscoring the aldehyde version is the active
degrader.
To identify the potential E3 ligase mediating the
degradation they
utilized the BioID approach. FBXO22
was among the few proteins enriched in the presence of UNC8732 (and
a proteasome inhibitor). siRNA KD of FBXO22 rescued the degradation
and NanoBret experiments validated UNC8732 induced proximity between
FBXO22 and NSD2. The authors were also able to show compound mediated
proximity and ubiquitination in an in vitro system
(only for the aldehyde compound). A truncated molecule just containing
the alkylamine moiety can compete for FBXO22 and reduce NSD2 degradation
in response to UNC8732. They also showed that UNC10088 can dose-dependently
stabilize recombinant FBXO22.
Using hydrogen–deuterium
exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS)
the authors localized compound binding to the region around cysteine
326. Indeed, a C326A mutant abolished the stabilization by UNC10088
(but did not affect protein stability in and of itself). The mutant
also blocked compound induced in vitro proximity
and ubiquitination. Using a washout experiment, where the protein
thermal stability was measured in the presence or after washing out
of the compound they showed the covalent interaction with the cysteine
is reversible.
Finally, they showed that the recently reported
XIAP alkylamine
degrader likely operates through the
same mechanism. XIAP degradation was sensitive to the presence of
FBS as well as to amine oxidase inhibitors. Furthermore, addition
of the NSD2 degraders could protect degradation of XIAP (presumably
by competing for FBXO22). Finally, KD of FBXO22 also rescued XIAP
degradation.
Kagiou et al. noticed
that a series
of SLF-alkylamine intermediates, exemplified by SP3N ( ), that were prepared toward
making a FKBP12 PROTAC library, were able in and of themselves to
degrade FKBP12. The degradation could be rescued by competition with
SLF, or by acylation of the free amine. Global proteomics showed exquisite
selectivity of SP3N for FKBP12 degradation.
A CRISPR/Cas9 screen
in an FKBP12 reporter cell line identified
KO of the substrate receptor FBXO22 in cells that were resistant to
SP3N degradation. Validation experiments showed that FBXO22 KO in
another cell line also rescued degradation, moreover, re-expression
of FBXO22 in the KO cell line restored degradation by SP3N. Co-IP
experiments of HA-tagged FBXO22 and Flag-tagged FKBP12, showed a dose-dependent
interaction between the two proteins, exclusively with SP3N treatment.
Similar to Nie et al. the authors
showed that degradation only occurred in media with 10% FCS, suggesting
a similar oxidation of SP3N to the active aldehyde species. In the
presence of FCS the authors were able to detect the aldehyde SP3CHO
( ) after
6 h by UPLC-MS/MS. Direct synthesis of SP3CHO showed improved degradation
in cells independent of FCS. Using the NanoBit assay, SP3CHO induced
ternary complex irrespective of FCS, whereas SP3N required FCS to
do so. The same trend repeated in an in vitro ubiquitination
assay with recombinant FBXO22.
Intact mass spectrometry of FBXO22
with SP3CHO identified the expected
covalent adduct. Interestingly, conversion of the electrophile to
a chloroacetamide (see below), or acrylamide, did not result in FKBP12
degradation.
Out of five cysteine mutants, only C326A rescued
degradation. NanoBit
confirmed no ternary complex is formed with the C326A mutant, nor
was it able to ubiquitinate FKBP12 in vitro, or form
an adduct with SP3CHO by MS. Proteome wide TMT-ABPP was able to identify 30% modification of FBXO22 C326 (in
lysates spiked with recombinant SKP1-FBXO22) with relatively few significant
off-targets.
The authors reproduced the FBXO22 dependent degradation
of NSD2 and XIAP alkyl
amine degraders. Interestingly JQ1 alkylamine derivatives failed to
degrade BRD4, suggesting optimization is still required for its recruitment.
Basu et al. developed a CRISPR/Cas9
activator screening platform, to enable identification of E3 ligases
that can mediate degradation but their discovery is mitigated by low
expression. They generated FKBP12 reporter cell lines with either
high or low expression, and identified a PROTAC, 22-SLF ( ), with no effect
in the high-expression cell line, and a mild effect (∼30% degradation)
in the low-expression cell line. They used the CRISPR activation screen
to look for sgRNAs that enhance the activity of the PROTAC. The screen
enriched two distinct sgRNAs, both activating FBXO22.
To validate
FBXO22, they stably expressed FLAG-tagged FKBP12 and
HA-tagged FBXO22 in HEK293T cells. 22-SLF was only able to degrade
FLAG-FKBP12 in the presence of HA-FBXO22. The degradation was sensitive
to preincubation with a proteasome inhibitor, neddylation inhibitor
and SLF. 22-SLF showed a DC50 = 500 nM, Dmax = 89% and rapid degradation of FKBP12 within 2 h.
In three different cell-lines 22-SLF was able to degrade endogenous
FKBP12 (after 24 h), which was abrogated on FBXO22 KO.
To assess
the engagement of the electrophilic moiety, the authors
synthesized 22-Biotin, and were able to enrich with it FBXO22 from
cells expressing HA-tagged FBXO22, as well as endogenous FBXO22 that
was competed by 22-SLF.
Using isoDTB ABPP, the authors identified
four cysteines in FBXO22, one of which, C228 showed ∼20% occupancy
for 22-SLF (among quite a few other cysteines interacting with the
molecule). The low engagement was not due to low permeability but
probably rather due to low affinity to FBXO22. Overexpressing a C228A
FBXO22 mutant, rescued 22-SLF mediated degradation partially, the
author noticed a second proximal cysteine 227 in the protein. C227A
also partially mitigated degradation, and the double mutant C227A/C228A
completely abolished it. Co-IP experiments showed that 22-SLF induced
a ternary complex between WT FBXO22 and FKPB12, but not with the double
cysteine mutant FBXO22. Three other mutations predicted by modeling
to block compound binding had no effect on degradation, suggesting
that the binding is mainly driven by reactivity of the electrophile.
To demonstrate generality the authors synthesized 22-JQ1 targeting
BRD4 and 22-TEA, based on a specific ligand for the ALK kinase. Both PROTACs showed degradation of their targets
at 2 μM that was abolished in FBXO22 KO cells. Finally, the
authors show that switching the electrophile of 22-SLF into the less
reactive acrylamide, can also facilitate FKBP12 degradation (even
slightly better) which is surprising, but perhaps points to way to
future optimization of a more selective recruiter.

2.2.

## Covalent DUBTACs
The Nomura group
introduced the concept of deubiquitinase targeting chimeras (DUBTACs)
as a new modality for protein stabilization. Analysis of hundreds of chemoproteomics experiments led them to
focus on the DUB OTUB1. They screened 702 covalent ligands against
recombinant OTUB1. The top hit EN523 ( ) was shown by LC-MS/MS to bind C23 (and
not the catalytic C91). In vitro deubiquitination
assays showed EN523 did not affect DUB activity. SAR showed the acrylamide
was crucial for binding, and identified the furan ring as an exit
vector for a linker. An alkyne derivative retained in vitro binding and was able to pull-down endogenous OTUB1 from cells.
 As a target, the authors chose ΔF508-CFTR.
This frameshift
mutation in CFTR, is the most common mutation leading to the cystic
fibrosis phenotype, causing protein destabilization, and proteasomal
degradation before trafficking of the channel from the ER to the cell
surface. Lumacaftor, is a small molecule chaperone that stabilizes
ΔF508-CFTR and increases its trafficking to the membrane. The
authors linked EN523 and lumacaftor resulting in NJH-2-057 ( ) which maintained
binding to OTUB1 in vitro. They tested its effect
in ΔF508-CFTR expressing human bronchial epithelial cells. While
lumacaftor, or EN523 had no effect, NJH-2-057 showed significant increase
in CFTR protein levels. Another SAR library exploring various linkers
was able to find both linkers that abolished the effect on CFTR as
well as linkers that greatly improved it. The reduced version of NJH-2-057,
was incapable of stabilizing CFTR, underscoring the importance of
the covalent binding to OTUB1.
Global proteomic analysis validated
that CFTR was stabilized by
almost 8-fold compared to DMSO treatment, in a relatively selective
fashion. An isoTOP-ABPP experiment did not identify many off-targets
for NJH-2-057, but also showed a very low competition ratio for OTUB1
C23 (1.6) which may indicate low occupancy of OTUB1 is sufficient
to drive the phenotype.
In vitro native-MS
experiments showed evidence
of the complex of OTUB1 and the relevant ΔF508-CFTR domain,
only in the presence of NJH-2-057 but not for DMSO or EN523. Further,
CFTR stabilization in cells was reduced by preincubation with either
EN523 or lumacaftor, as well as by KD of OTUB1. Finally, to show that
CFTR stabilization translates to improved function, the authors measured
transepithelial conductance in primary human cystic fibrosis donor
cells, following treatment with DMSO, lumacaftor or the DUBTAC. The
latter showed significantly improved conductance over both DMSO and
lumacaftor.
To show generalization, the authors synthesized
four DUBTACs targeting
Wee1 kinase using various linkers. Two of the four showed significant
stabilization (1 μM; 24 h) that was of a similar magnitude to
that seen with bortezomib treatment, whereas the Wee1 binder alone,
or EN523, had almost no effect.
EN523 was further used to demonstrate
stabilization of transcription
factors (TF) by so-called TF-DUBTACs. EN523 was linked by copper free click-chemistry to an azide functionalized DNA hairpin encoding TF binding
sites. For example, FOXO–DUBTAC #6 was able to stabilize FOXO3A
(but not FOXO1, presumably due to a different ternary complex or site
of ubiquitination). This resulted in elevated expression of target
genes such as p27 and BIM. These effects were not seen in OTUB1 KO
cells. Similar (though to a lower extent) effect was seen with TF-DUBTACs
targeting p53 and IRF3.

2.3.

## Covalent PHICs
Siriwardena et al. introduced the concept
of phosphorylation inducing
chimeras (PHICs) through bifunctional molecules that induce proximity
between a kinase and a neo-substrate. To do so, they linked allosteric
kinase binders on the one hand with target binding ligands on the
other. The number of allosteric kinase binders is limited, whereas
there are many more available kinase inhibitors, however in order
to induce phosphorylation the kinase active site must not be inhibited.
To overcome this obstacle. Pergu et al. employed the CoLDR chemistry we developed to install a target recruiting ligand onto BTK while releasing the
BTK guiding inhibitor. They tested two CoLDR-PHICs based on BTK covalent
inhibitors (17, 19, ), using (S)-JQ1 as the target recruiter,
or (R)-JQ1 as a negative control. In cells overexpressing BTK and
BRD4 they could detect pTyr on HA-tagged BRD4 after immunoprecipitation,
only for the (S)-JQ1 compounds. They were also able to show co-IP
of BTK-FLAG with HA-BRD4 only upon treatment of the (S)-PHICs.
 Next, they used a similar chemistry
to install an ABL recruiter
onto BTK, surprisingly, this PHIC, 21 ( ), in cells transfected with
both kinases, resulted in increased phosphorylation of BTK with no
change in the phosphorylation levels of ABL.

3.

## Covalent Molecular Glues
Monovalent
proximity inducers (or
molecular glues) are another
class of protein proximity inducers with their own set of advantages
and challenges as compared to bifunctionals such as described above.
Their small size makes them more desirable from a physicochemical
properties’ perspective and much more amenable for translational
applications. They may target traditionally “unligandable”
proteins by stabilizing low-affinity endogenous, or new nonendogenous
interactions. Such gluing events may result in surprising perturbations
of function. On the other hand, molecular glues lack the intrinsic
modularity of chimeric molecules and until recently were mostly discovered
serendipitously. Recently, elegant phenotypic screening design accelerates
rational molecular glue discovery. The introduction of electrophilic
centers into glues can assist both the probability of binding to either
or both interaction partners as well as help elucidate the mechanism
of action of phenotypically discovered glues.
3.1.

## 14–3–3
Peptide Interactions
14–3–3 proteins are a
family of seven conserved isoforms
that act as key modulators of the function of numerous other proteins. To do this, they form protein–protein
interactions with phosphorylated peptides in their client proteins.
Such binding events direct and modulate many cellular processes. Hundreds
of 14–3–3 clients have been identified so far. Therefore,
the ability to pharmacologically control such interactions is alluring. 
Fusicoccin A (FC-A) is a fungal metabolite
that stabilizes the interactions between 14 and 3–3 protein
and phosphorylated client proteins. Therefore,
acting as a molecular glue. The ability to glue peptide clients to
14–3–3 proteins offers a route to tackle very challenging
targets and inspired wide interest in the design and discovery of
such molecular glues. Nucleophilic residues near the peptide binding
site offer the opportunity for covalent molecular glues.
3.1.1.

## Useful Definitions for Evaluating 14–3–3
Glues
CC50: half-maximum ternary complex formation.
When the protein and peptide are kept at a fixed concentration and
the glue is titrated at increasing concentrations the CC50 is the concentration at which 50% of the effect is observed.
The stabilization factor SF or SF100 (for
100 μM compound) is defined as the apparent KD for the peptide/14–3–3 interaction in
DMSO/KD,app in the presence of compound.
α, the cooperativity factor, defined
as the stabilization
factor at saturating concentration of compound (or maximal SF).

3.1.2.

## Imine Based 14–3–3
Glues
Wolter et al. reported
the first
imine-based screen to identify reversible covalent molecular glues
between 14 and 3–3 proteins and their client peptides. They
identified Lys122 as a favorable target. It is located in a hydrophobic
region of the peptide binding groove, as part of the binding pocket
of FC-A. Moreover, computational analysis predicted it to have one
of the lowest pKa values (∼10)
of the 18 lysine residues in 14–3–3σ. As a client
peptide they chose one derived from the p65 subunit of NF-κB.
A pilot crystallography soaking screen of 10 aldehyde fragments
into crystals of the p65/14–3–3σ complex, observed
density for three fragments bound to Lys122. Replacing the aldehyde
of TCF521 ( A,B) with an acid, alcohol, amine, ketone or methyl resulted in loss
of density in the crystal, suggesting imine formation was a key binding
determinant.
 They proceeded to screen 34 benzaldehyde
analogues by crystallography.
Only fragments with an electron withdrawing group, activating the
aldehyde, resulted in electron density, but specifically bound to
Lys122. Extending compound TCF521 into TCF521–123 or TCF521–129
( A), resulted
in improved binders that also showed imine formation by crystallography
and by intact protein LC/MS (following reduction of the imine). Interestingly,
although chemically similar the two sulfonamides adopted opposite
conformations in the crystal ( C,D).
The compounds induced stabilization of
the complex of 14–3–3
with p65 as assessed by FP. Compared to the DMSO control (KD = 8.6 μM), at 1 mM compound TCF521–123
showed 3-fold stabilization and TCF521–129 showed 8-fold stabilization.
Combined with the structures suggesting that TCF521–129 makes
more extensive interactions with the p65 peptide, whereas TCF521–123
engages more with 14–3–3 the authors hypothesize, that
increased contact with the client contributes more to the stabilization
and provides the best starting points for molecular glues.
In
terms of selectivity, these aldehydes were not able to stabilize
interactions with TAZ, ERα, or p53 peptides. The latter two,
the authors suggest, are incompatible due to polar interactions between
the client and Lys122.
Cossar et al. followed up with a
similar approach now targeting the 14–3–3/Pin1 interaction.
They identified the relevant Pin1 phosphopeptide, and showed by crystallography
it adopts a binding mode that allows small molecule binding to Lys122.
They screened a library of 42 aldehyde fragments against this interaction
via FA.
Eleven compounds were found to stabilize the complex.
Co-crystallography
elucidated the binding mode of two similar fragments L2, L3 ( A,B). The fragment
binding to the lysine induced a rotamer flip to a nearby Trp residue
that now formed stacking interactions with the fragments.
 Two rounds of optimization led to compound 13 ( A,C) with CC50 = 101; KD,app = 2.16 μM
and SF100 = 10.8. Interestingly, it elicited improved stabilization
of the ternary complex formation relative to the analogous 2-OH derivative
(KD,app = 3.92 μM, SF100 = 4.9), despite the latter having a 5-fold lower CC50.
A final library of phenyl substitutions yielded the best
stabilizers
with compounds 23, 27, and 28 ( A,D),
eliciting CC50 values of 24, 118, and 79 μM, respectively.
These showed a significant shift in apparent KD ranging from low to submicromolar activity (1.15–0.27
μM) and SF100s ranging from 13- to 97-fold stabilization.
In DSF as an orthogonal assay, five equivalents of the Pin1 peptide
did not elicit thermal stabilization, nor did compounds 27 or 28 by themselves. However, in the presence of both
peptide and compounds a 1 and 2 °C shift was observed, respectively.
In terms of cooperativity (α, or maximal stabilization) while 13, 23, and 27 showed α ∼
60, 28 showed α = 270. Interestingly, FC-A reaches
saturation of stabilization already at the lowest concentration tested
of 8 μM, but only elicits a modest stabilization of 10-fold.
To assess selectivity, the authors tested stabilization of 13 different
14–3–3 client peptides, differing in the +1 amino acid
(Trp in Pin1). The fragments showed no stabilization of peptides with
polar +1 residues, but 28 did elicit 10–15 fold stabilization
toward Raptor (Tyr), CFTR (Val) and Abl1 (Leu). The fragments did
not compete for binding with these peptides, suggesting very low intrinsic
affinity for the 14–3–3 on its own.
In follow-up
work Verhoef et al. characterized
the kinetics of stabilization of the Pin1/14–3–3 interaction
by fragment 28. They showed by time-dependent FA, that
the binary complex is formed in under 10 min and is stable over time.
The same goes for FC-A which shows rapid 10-fold stabilization that
is stable over time. In contrast, 28 shows some stabilization
at the first time point (∼6 fold), but then takes 2–3
h to reach full stabilization (∼20-fold).
The authors
attributed this time dependency to the formation of
the imine bond. To test that, they repeated the assay under different
pH. The binary and FC-A complexes were indifferent to pH, whereas 28 displayed increased stabilization with higher pH (up to
48-fold stabilization at pH 8), consistent with imine bond formation
behavior. Similar results were obtained an aldehyde fragment stabilizing
the 14–3–3/p65 interaction.
Kinetic native mass
spec measurements suggested that the Pin1 peptide
first binds to the 14–3–3 followed by binding of the
aldehyde. Combined with the time-dependent FP data, the authors suggest
a model where the aldehyde first binds noncovalently and provides
a certain amount of stabilization, which is then increased as the
imine bond is formed over time.

3.1.3.

## Disulfide
Based 14–3–3 Glues
Disulfide tethering has
a long history in site-specific fragment-based
discovery. − Sijbesma et al. used it to identify disulfide molecular glues for the 14–3–3/ERα
interaction. They targeted the FC-A binding site at the interface
of 14–3–3σ and the client phosphopeptide derived
from ERα. 14–3–3σ is the only isoform that
contains a native cysteine (C38) near the peptide binding site. In
addition to this, they made two additional screening constructs in
which they mutated out C38 and introduced a non-native cysteine at
positions 42 or 45. All three constructs were screened by LC/MS in
the absence of peptide or in a complex with a 15-mer ERα phosphopeptide,
against a 1600-member disulfide fragment library under mild reducing
conditions (100 μM βME).
Hits were annotated as
competitive if they only hit in the absence of peptide, as cooperative
if they showed preferential labeling to the protein-peptide complex,
or neutral if they hit both. The three sites produced different ranges
of potency (% labeling) and cooperativity with C38 showing the lowest
potencies (maximal labeling <55%) but high fraction of cooperative
hits, and C45 showing many hits with >75% labeling against both
bound
and apo. C42, yielded intermediate results.
For C42, the most cooperative fragment was C42–1 ( A,B); demonstrating
a 2.3-fold increase from 26% (apo) to 60% (bound).
Several hits were confirmed in LC/MS dose–response experiments.
Both C42–1 and C42–2 ( A) showed strong binding preference to the
complex over the 14–3–3σ alone. Labeling by C42–2
was improved ∼300-fold, to EC50 = 3 μM for
the complex. Fragment C42–1, retained >80% labeling to the
complex even at 100 nM fragment and 1 mM βME. Cooperative binding
was less pronounced for the other primary screening hits.
 By FP, in the absence of fragment KD,app was 1.3 μM. This decreased to 32
nM in the presence of C42–1
(100 μM), 92 nM in the presence of C42–2, and 4.2 nM
for the positive control FC-A, representing 40- and 14-fold stabilization
by the disulfide fragments.
Crystal structures of C42–1
and C42–2 soaked into
the complex, suggested that noncovalent interactions drove the binding
event ( B).
This was further supported by NMR observed binding experiment of the
noncovalent fragment.
In terms of client selectivity, peptides
from ExoS, TAZ and TASK3
were evaluated. Fragment C42–2 labeling of 14–3–3σ(C42)
was enhanced in the presence of TASK3 to a similar degree as by ERα
(7 μM and 3 μM respectively). Peptides derived from ExoS
or TAZ however, predicted to clash with fragment binding based on
the peptide binding mode, indeed inhibited binding of C42–2,
compared to the apo protein labeling, FP showed similar
results, altogether suggesting the potential for client selectivity
(albeit in this non-natural introduced cysteine system).
In
subsequent work Sijbesma et al. further
characterized three of the hits against the engineered C45.
One of which showed increased binding to 14–3–3σ(C45)
in the presence of the ERα peptide (from ∼50% labeling
of apo to ∼90% labeling of the peptide-bound).
The other fragments bound the protein both in the presence or absence
of peptide. While crystal structures validated the fragments binding
in the vicinity of the peptide, neither fragment showed peptide binding
stabilization, especially peculiar for the fragment that showed increased
binding in the presence of the peptide.
Kenanova et al. followed up with
more systematic disulfide screens for five additional targets, now
only going after the native C38 in 14–3–3σ. The
targets represent different interaction modes with 14–3–3
“truncated” (ERα), “turned” (FOXO1),
or “linear” (C-RAF, USP8, SOS1).
The peptides
were screened at 2× their reported KD values with fixed (100 nM) concentration of 14–3–3σ.
The complexes were incubated with 200 μM fragments. Hits were
defined as showing % labeling higher than three standard deviations
over the average library labeling rate. Between 8 and 23 hits were
found for all five proteins.
Hit compounds were further profiled
via: (1) DR50 -
Dose response of labeling via intact protein LC/MS (fixed protein
and peptide concentration), (2) EC50, Dose response of
peptide binding via FP (fixed protein and peptide concentration),
and (3) Kd,app, with fixed concentration
of compound (1 mM) and peptide, and varying concentrations of 14–3–3.
Compound C38–1 ( A) was identified as top hit for ERα, C-RAF,
and USP8. In all three assays it showed a marked preference for C-RAF,
followed by ERα and USP8, and had no activity with FOXO1 or
SOS1. C38–1 showed DR50 values of 7 nM, 24 nM and
18.1 μM for C-RAF, USP8 and ERα respectively. EC50 values were similar for the three proteins (ranging from 0.9 to
3.4 μM). In terms of stabilization (at 1 mM) C38–1 stabilized
peptide binding by 81-fold, 19-fold and 4-fold for C-RAF, ERα,
and USP8 respectively. Co-crystal structures of C38–1 in complex
with all three peptides were determined and showed that for ERα
it occupied a similar binding mode as the previously discovered stabilizer
for the N42C mutation, where the longer linker to the disulfide now
allowed reaching to C38 ( C,D).
Eight of the FOXO1 screening hits were
validated by MS dose response.
Compound FOXO1–2 ( A) showed a DR50 = 360 nM, with >2 mM
DR50 to the apo protein. However, compared to these dramatic
selectivity to the peptide bound complex, it showed only mild 5-fold
stabilization, possibly due to the already high-affinity of the phosphopeptide
(KD = 50 nM) which nears the assay detection
limit. Co-crystal structures of FOXO1–2 with the complex, showed
a Trp residue at position +1 flipped to form a hydrogen-bond with
the amide carbonyl ( E). Smaller residues could not reach the fragment perhaps
explaining its marked selectivity.
From the C-RAF screen, 11
compounds showed a similar scaffold,
which was also analogous to the FOXO1 stabilizer scaffold although
with a different linker. Nine of the 16 selective compounds were validated
by MS, four of which showed activity by FA, with DR50 in
the range of 0.6–12.2 μM, EC50s of 0.2–13.5
μM and stabilization of 77–426-fold (at 1 mM compound).
Compound CRAF-5 ( A) for example showed a 246-fold stabilization (KD = 23 μm to 92 nM). Structures of these selective
C-RAF stabilizers ( D,F) showed differences in conformation of the peptide/compound
interactions, highlighting the flexibility of the peptide.

3.1.4.

## Dual Covalent 14–3–3 Glues
Somsen et
al. combined a fragment
that forms a disulfide bond with C180 of the ERRγ phospho-peptide
with a fragment that forms an imine with Lys122 of 14–3–3σ.
They evaluated the stabilization of the ERRγ/14–3–3γ
complex by the dual covalent glues (termed “molecular locks”)
by FP in the absence or presence of 100 μM compound (24 h incubation).
The fragment containing only the disulfide (1; A) demonstrated a 4.6-fold stabilization,
whereas the fragment containing the aldehyde alone showed none. Dual-covalents
showed 7–37-fold stabilization.
 They further characterized the complexes by differential
scanning
fluorimetry (DSF). The compounds that showed the highest stabilization
in the FP assay, 5 and 10 ( A) also increased the 14–3–3γ
melting temperature by 4.7 and 6.0 °C, respectively. The disulfide
parent 1 ( A) decreased the melting temperature by 2.6 °C.
Intact protein LC/MS (following reduction of the imine) and cocrystal
structures confirmed both covalent bonds were formed ( B,C).
To explore the
role of the disulfide bond formation in stabilization,
the authors showed that high concentration TCEP (reducing the disulfide
bond) abolished both the peptide binding stabilization as measured
by FP as well as the thermal stabilization. Similar results were obtained
for a ERRγ C180S mutant, abrogating disulfide bond formation.
To assess the role of the imine bond formation, they analyzed the
effect of pH on peptide KD. The peptide KD in the absence of a molecule or in the presence
of just the disulfide compound 1 were unaffected by pH.
Compounds 5 and 10, however, demonstrated
worse apparent KD as the pH decreased,
until at pH 6.5, they converged to the stabilization of disulfide 1. This suggests the imine formation is also an important
factor in the stabilization.
In terms of selectivity, when tested
against eight additional 14–3–3
binding peptides, compounds 5 and 10 proved
highly selective for ERRγ with 5 showing minor
stabilization of SOS1 and Pin1 derived peptides, and 10 also showing 8-fold stabilization of RND3 derived peptide. The latter
contains a cysteine residue at the corresponding position to the ERRγ
peptide. Indeed, the authors were able to determine a cocrystal structure
showing 10 adopts an identical pose in complex with 14–3–3
and RND3 derived peptide, but only forms the disulfide bond and the
major species in the crystal contains the unbonded aldehyde. It is
also interesting to note that a peptide derived from PKR also contains
a cysteine at the same position but did not elicit stabilization by
either compound. The structure of 14–3–3σ with
the PKR peptide, shows the terminal carboxylate salt bridges with
Lys122 which may preclude imine formation.
To simulate the competitive
cellular environment the author evaluated
the effect of coincubation of 14–3–3 with eight client
peptides in addition to ERRγ derived peptide, and measured tricomplex
formation by LC/MS following reduction of the imine. After 7 h the
mixture only inhibited the complex formation by 2-fold (from 70% to
35%). In addition, they evaluated the effect of HEK293 cell lysate
on the preformed 14–3–3γ/ERRγ in absence
or presence of compound 5. The latter could withstand
up to 2 mg/mL–1 cell lysate.

3.1.5.

## Irreversible 14–3–3 Glues
Konstantinidou
et al. aimed to improve
the potency and selectivity of their previously discovered nonselective
disulfide hit C38–1 ( A). To do so, they started with replacement of the
disulfide tether with different electrophiles, connected through various
linkers. While acrylamides and epoxides did not work, Chloroacetamides
were able to both bind and stabilize client peptides.
A thorough
structure-based medicinal chemistry campaign ( A) ultimately led them to compound 181. This compound showed a marked SF100 = 116
stabilization of the ERα phosphopeptide (From 2 μM to
18 nM), with EC50 = 1 μM for stabilization. It could
fully label 14–3–3σ within 1 h at low concentration,
and showed robust selectivity against seven alternative client peptides
including C-RAF which the parent compound C38–1 preferentially
stabilized. 181 was comparable or better than FC-A in almost all stabilization
parameters.
 Shao et al. reported
another attempt
at irreversible stabilizers. They screened 875 irreversible fragments
(125 μM) against the native Cys 38 in 14–3–3σ
in an FP assay assessing the stabilization of binding of a phosphorylated
ERα peptide substrate. They identified one acrylamide hit, EN171
( B), that
stabilized the interaction to a similar degree as FC-A. At 1 h incubation,
EN171 showed an EC50 = 9 μM for stabilization of
the ERα peptide. Out of 10 alternative client peptides, EN171
stabilized the binding of YAP, TAZ, CDC25B, and MYC with EC50 of 45–253 μM.
LC/MS/MS analysis revealed that
EN171 binds C96 in addition to
the predicted C38. Mutational studies showed that elimination of either
cysteine alone did not prevent compound binding to the protein (at
50 μM) and both single mutants showed reduction of peptide binding
stabilization.
To evaluate cellular engagement with 14–3–3σ
the authors performed ABPP experiments that showed low competition
ratios for both cysteines corresponding to 12–17% engagement,
while 46 other cysteines showed more significant engagement. Competition
proteomics experiments with an alkynylated version of EN171 in a lysate
spiked with 14–3–3σ showed similar results, engagement
with 14–3–3σ but modest selectivity.
Luciferase
reporter assays for transcription of the ERα and
Hippo pathways, indicated EN171 inhibited these activities with EC50s slightly above 10 μM. Knockdown of 14–3–3σ
rescued this effect, suggesting on-target activity.
The authors
then utilized the fact that 14–3–3 proteins
are restricted to the cytoplasm. By making a bifunctional molecule
QS57 ( B),
that would bind 14–3–3 on the one hand (through EN171)
and BRD4 on the other (through JQ1) they sought to sequester BRD4
from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. This is a novel concept for covalent
bifunctionals, with some precedents with noncovalent bifunctionals. − They were able to show such translocation to the cytoplasm at very
high concentration (100 μM) of their bifunctional molecule,
which was attenuated by knockdown of 14–3–3.
It
is evident that the majority of covalent 14–3–3
targeting glues relies on reversible covalent chemistry (aldehydes,
disulfides; ) and these have yet to translated to cellular activity. Whereas
one report on irreversible glues already shows modest cellular activity.
The utility gluing 14–3–3 client peptides for chemical
biology and translational applications will depend on the ability
to progress these to cellular activity.
 

3.2.

## CypA-K-RasG12C
Zhang and
Shokat reported covalent bifunctional
molecules that are able to bring into proximity K-Ras mutants with
cyclophilin A (CypA) and FKBP12. They first made a series of compounds
based on ARS-1620 targeting K-RasG12C linked by various linkers to either SLF, FK506 or cyclosporin
A (See for example compound 5 in A). Not surprisingly these compounds maintained
binding to FKBP12 and CypA (KD < 200
nM). What was a little unexpected was that, while the compounds were
able to covalently label K-RasG12C on their own, the labeling
rate was enhanced in the presence of the cognate binding partner.
For example, compound 5 labeled ∼4× more
efficiently in the presence of 10 μM FKBP12, another compound
labeled ∼2× more efficiently in the presence of CypA.
This may suggest some intrinsic affinity between K-Ras and FKBP12/CypA.
It is also interesting to note that unmodified ARS-1620 labeled better
than any of the bifunctional derivatives regardless of the presence
of a binding protein.
 The authors note that compounds with long linkers
(in this
case
1,6-diaminohexyl) labeled K-Ras the slowest, perhaps due to the entropic
cost this adds another incentive to
aim for shorter linkers for bifunctionals in addition to better permeability
and opportunities for cooperative binding. 
To validate the formation of ternary complex formation, the
authors
used size exclusion chromatography in vitro. In cells
they were able to show partial engagement by pull downs of FKBP12/CypA
followed by WB for K-Ras, that was, however, insufficient to block
downstream MAPK signaling.
ARS-1620 preferentially binds to
the inactive GDP-bound K-RasG12C. To assess the effects
of ternary complex formation on
the GTP-bound K-Ras, two additional bifunctional ligands were designed,
targeting the non-naturally occurring K-Ras mutation M72C. Similar to the G12C targeting compounds, these
ligands also showed accelerated labeling of K-RasM72C in
the presence of their cognate protein binders. That said, the overall
labeling rates were still relatively slow and did not reach 50% labeling
after 48 h. Still, in a TR-FRET assay to measure Ras/Raf complex formation,
the ternary complex blocked association with full-length B-Raf (but
not with just the Raf1 Ras binding domain).
More recently, a
team from Revolution Medicines reported a covalent
glue between CypA and K-RasG12C. They started out with a minimal CypA-binding moiety derived from
the natural product sanglifehrin A. and
a promiscuous disulfide warhead ( B; compound 1). Counterintuitively,
this compound, with no specific K-Ras recognition incorporated into
it, was sufficient to glue the two proteins, as demonstrated by a
cocrystal structure ( D). Based on this structure, they ended up cyclizing the glue
to fix its confirmation and build out additional molecular interactions
with K-Ras.
The noncovalent compound 2 ( C) formed ternary complexes between CypA
and K-Ras (GMPPNP bound) with an EC50 of 510 nM for the
WT and 180 nM for the G12C mutant.
The covalent (acrylamide
based) version of the same compound retained
the same EC50 for K-RasWT, but improved toward
G12C to EC50 = 52 nM. Transition to an ynamide warhead
improved its potency further EC50 = 28 nM, and its selectivity
(39-fold more selective over WT). Optimizing the linker conformation
(RMC-4998; C) further improved the maximal rate resulting in kinact/KI = 272,000 M–1 s–1. This represents a significant improvement
over Sotorasib and Adagrasib. , It is interesting to
note that RMC-4998 bound to CypA reversibly with a relatively low-affinity KD= 1.09 μM.
Neither RMC-4998 nor
CypA were able to bind to K-RasG12C alone. The compounds
were also quite selective, both to the nucleotide
bound state, (no complex formed with GDP-loaded K-RasG12C), as well as against wild-type K-Ras, N-Ras, or H-Ras.
With
regards to blocking Ras effectors, the tricomplex mediated
by RMC-4998 dissociated the Ras interaction domains of B-Raf and RALGDS
in a biochemical assay with single digit nM potency. In a live-cell
kinetic assay, treatment with RMC-4998 led to rapid (minutes) association
of K-RasG12C with CypA on the one hand and dissociation
of full-length C-RAF on the other hand. This translated to potent
inhibition of ERK signaling in cells with IC50 in the 1–10
nM range. Full labeling of K-RasG12C in cells occurred
within 5 min, much faster than Sotorasib and Adagrasib, probably reflecting
the fact that RMC-4998 binds the GTP bound form and does not need
to “wait” for hydrolysis of the GTP.
Further optimization
of RMC-4998 led to RMC-6291 that showed improved
efficacy in cellular models and broad activity in vivo against a panel of PDX models. It is currently evaluated in the
clinic. 

3.3.

## DCAF16-BRD4
GNE011 ( A) is an alkynilated derivative
of JQ1. It was reported to be able to monovalently degrade BRD4. Li et al. attempted
to decipher its mechanism of action.
 Using a reporter cell line, they showed that it
induces selective
degradation of the second bromodomain of BRD4 (BRD4BD2)
with Dmax = 50%. Through further analogueing,
the authors identified TMX1 ( A), an acrylaldehyde derivative that improved Dmax to 80%. The degradation was proteasome,
and neddylation dependent.
To identify the underpining effector,
the authors performed a CRISPR
screen in the BRD4BD2 reporter cell line, using a library
composed of components of the UPS. DCAF16 was unambiguously identified
as required for degradation. It was corroborated through a KO cell
line in which the compounds were no longer able to degrade BRD4 and
through a viability resistance screen that also identified DCAF16
as the top hit. Moreover, IP-MS with BRD4BD2 as bait confirmed
compound dependent direct interaction between BRD4BD2 and
DCAF16. This direct interaction was corroborated by a TR-FRET experiment
with fully recombinant proteins. The TR-FRET experiments also indicated
that the interaction diminished at concentrations higher than 5 μM.
Such a “hook effect” pattern is uncharacteristic for
monovalent degraders, which suggested to the authors perhaps this
is a result of a covalent interaction.
Upon incubation of DCAF16-DDB1
with TMX1, only 8% labeling was
identified by intact protein MS, while adding BRD4BD2 increased
the labeling to 50%. This result suggested that TMX1 binding to BRD4BD2 facilitated binding to DCAF16, in a fashion that positioned
it to form a covalent bond with DCAF16. The authors named this: “template-assisted
covalent modification” ( B). GNE11 showed a similar pattern albeit
with lower labeling. The bifunctional KB02-JQ1 that was previously
reported to bind DCAF16, bound regardless of the presence of BRD4BD2.
It should be noted that around the same time a second
group also
discovered DCAF16 as the ligase responsible for the degradation by
GNE-011 as well as a third group that
showed DCAF16 mediates the degradation of BRD4 by another noncovalent
bifunctional JQ1 derivative, that acts as a glue. 
The authors theorized that optimizing the electrophile
might lead
to improved complex formation and degradation. They discovered an
acrylamide, MMH1, and a vinylsulfoneamide MMH2 ( A) that showed improved Dmax = 95% and DC50 ∼ 1 nM.
Moreover, in washout experiments these were superior to noncovalent
degraders of BRD4. Reduced (nonreactive) versions of MMH1 and MMH2
showed negligible activity, further highlighting the necessity of
covalent bond formation.
A cryo-EM structure of DDB1/DCAF16/MMH2/BRD4BD2 elucidated
the template assisted covalent bond formation ( D). DCAF16 and BRD4BD2 display
an interface of 560 Å2. MMH2 binds at the interface
in the JQ1 binding site, and shows continuous density with C58 on
DCAF16, suggestive of covalent bond formation. Alanine scanning of
DCAF16 corroborated C58 as the covalent site required for the covalent
glue degraders (but not KB02-JQ1) and intact protein LC/MS showed
that the C58S mutant completely eliminated DCAF16-TMX1 covalent interaction.
In an accompanying manuscript Hassan et al. describe a wider series of covalent JQ1 analogues that
was characterized for BRD4BD2 degradation, complex formation
with DCAF16 and reactivity ( A). All compounds showed similar binding affinity to
BRD4BD2 (as well as BRDBD1) as measured by competitive
AlphaLisa.
TMX458, MMH269 and MMH271 were inactive, while all
aniline based
electrophiles were active with MMH1/2 significantly more so than chloroacetamide
MMH249. Degradation was completely dependent on covalent bond formation,
all noncovalent analogues lost this activity. TR-FRET measurements
showed that only MMH1, MMH2 and TMX1 robustly formed a ternary complex,
and to a lesser extent MMH249 and TMX4128. Nevertheless, compounds
that did not show complex formation in this assay were still able
to induce some degradation (such as GNE011 and MMH287).
As part
of a separate campaign Sarott et al. made STT-03–053–1 ( C), a JQ1 based bifunctional targeting viral
RNA replication that contains an acrylamide as part of the target
binding moiety, connected to JQ1 through a different vector from the
aforementioned glues. Surprisingly, it induced BRD4 degradation. In
Jurkat BRD4-HiBiT cells it displayed DC50 = 2.4 μM
and Dmax = 74%. Reducing the acrylamide
abolished the degradation. A CRISPR screen in K652 cells again identified
DCAF16 as the responsible ligase for this activity. DCAF16 KO in Jurkat
cells also abolished degradation and corroborated it as the responsible
ligase. To assess if the activity is again based on monovalent gluing
of BRD4 to DCAF16, the authors made RCS-03-017 ( C) with a minimal acrylamide
moiety, and showed it retained similar degradation properties and
maintained its dependency on DCAF16.
The complex structure with
MMH2 ( D)
indicated electrophiles off-of the JQ1
amide position might engage with Cys 173 or 178 in DCAF16 (although
C173 is on a flexible loop and is not modeled in the structure). To
identify the target cysteine the authors re-expressed various DCAF16
mutants in DCAF16 KO cells. WT and C58S restored degradation with
STT-03–053–1 while C173S failed to restore it, suggesting
that it may be the target covalent bond site.
The authors then
tested a small SAR collection of electrophile
positioning for HiBiT-BRD4 degradation at 5 h, a condition in which
STT-03–053–1 is still active (DC50 = 2.6
μM; Dmax = 30%) but RCS-03–017
is no longer active. Of the four electrophiles RCS-03–104–1–4
( C), only
the cyanoacrylamide showed degradation with DC50 = 80 nM
and Dmax = 70%. Varying the linker length
between JQ1 and the cyanoacrylamide electrophile did not have large
effects on degradation activity (DC50 ranged 53–95
nM and Dmax 36–72%). Compounds
with a rigid piperazine linker did not induce degradation suggesting
that linker flexibility is required for BRD4 degradation by these
compounds.
Proteomic experiments showed that BRD4 is still the
main target
for RCS-03–104–4. However, when tested in DCAF16 KO
cells, it maintained its activity, suggesting it utilizes an alternative
mechanism to mediate degradation. A CRISPR screen identified DCAF11
as the likely new ligase. Western blotting corroberated DCAF11 knockout
prevented RCS-03–104–4-induced BRD4 degradation. The
more sensitive HiBiT-BRD4 degradation assay showed that RCS-03–104–4
retained modest BRD4 degradation activity (Dmax = 28%) likely through DCAF16. The authors used a BRET assay
to show RCS-03–104–4 induces proximity between DCAF11
and BRD4. JQ1 was able to abolish this proximity, and none of the
nondegrading RCS-03–104 series was able to show a similar proximity,
further strengthening DCAF11 as the potential mediator of degradation.
Relatedly, Tin et al. synthesized
a small collection of JQ1 linked to a cyanoacrylamide to explore BRD4
degradation. Compound 8b ( C) showed robust degradation of BRD4 (DC50 = 305 nM; Dmax ∼ 75%)
and BRD3. Notably, analogues bearing the corresponding acrylamide
or noncovalent propanamide were inactive.
CRISPR screening in
a BRD4 reporter cell line identified among
the top hits members of the CRL4-DCAF11 complex. DCAF11 KO in KBM7
cells rescued 8b mediated BRD4 degradation. Reconstitution
of WT DCAF11 could reinstate degradation, but not the triple mutant
C443A/C460A/C485A , suggesting 8b binds
similarly to previously reported DCAF11 PROTACs. The latter DCAF16/11
recruiters might be considered bifunctionals rather than glues, but
presenting them here might put them in the broader context of DCAF16
mediated degradation of BRD4.
Lim et al. also tried to decorate
JQ1 with various electrophiles. They synthesized 18 electrophilic
JQ1 derivatives, and tested them for BRD4 degradation. Only one compound
ML-1–50 ( C) showed degradation (DC50 ∼ 10 nM). The
degradation was sensitive to proteasome and neddylation inhibition,
and relatively selective as assessed by global proteomics.
To
identify the ligase mediating this degradation, the authors
synthesized a minimal alkyne derivative of the eletrophile, and performed
a competitive pull-down proteomics experiment in which excess ML-1–50
(200 μM) competed over a 100 of the alkyne’s proteomic
targets, only one of which was an E3 ligase, DCAF16.
An ABPP
experiment, also identified C119 of DCAF16, but with a
low competition ratio of 1.4, and numerous off-targets. LC/MS/MS of
tryptic digested DCAF16 supported C119 as the site of modification.
BRD4 degradation by ML-1–50 was strongly reduced in DCAF16
KO cells. Re-expression of FLAG-DCAF16 WT restored the degradation,
as did expression of DCAF16-C58S. However, re-expression of DCAF16-C119S
did not restore degradation, further supporting yet another target
cysteine site on DCAF16. The authors showed that their previously
reported BRD4 degrader with a fumarate
decoration (see below) is not mitigated by DCAF16 knockout, but is attenuated
by RNF126 knockout, whereas ML-1–50 mediated BRD4 degradation
is not affected by RNF126 KO.
To assess the scope of the vinyl
sulfonamide piperazine ability
to recruit DCAF16, the authors transplanted it onto various ligands.
Installing it on ribociclib resulted
in CDK4 degradation in the 5–10 μM range, which was mitigated
in DCAF16 KO cells. The degradation was relatively selective with
a handful of off-targets. Installing the vinyl sulfonamide on a SMARCA2/4
binder resulted in strong degradation in MV-4–11 cells, and
weaker in HEK293, the latter was abolished on DCAF16 KO. Similar results
were obtained with binders of AR, BCR-ABL and BTK, for the latter
two degradation was demonstrated to diminish on DCAF16 KO of KD.

3.4.

## RNF126
Toriki et al. were looking for small chemical modifications
that might convert a small molecule binder into a degrader. As a model
system they used the CDK4/6 inhibitor ribociclib. They synthesized
nine analogues of ribociclib, one of which, EST1027 ( ), showed >50% degradation
of CDK4 but not CDK6. Proteomics identified 100 additional targets
down regulated along with CDK4 (but these may be downstream effects).
The reduced version of EST1027 could not degrade CDK4, suggesting
a requirement for covalent binding.
 Transferring the cinnamamide
moiety to another CDK4/6 inhibitor,
palbociclib, did not result in degradation. The authors turned to
optimize the degradation handle and made seven additional electrophilic
analogues. One analogue EST1060 ( ), was able to degrade CDK4 based on palbociclib
as well (although still no CDK6 degradation).
isoDTB-ABPP experiments
with EST1027 identified ∼50 proteins
with competition ratios >2. Of these, the authors focused on C32
of
RNF126 (the only UPS related target). This cysteine is one of four
cysteines in a zinc coordinating site.
RNF126 knockdown, abrogated
EST1027-mediated CDK4 degradation further
suggesting this is the ligase recruited for degradation. EST1027 treatment
also resulted in some degradation of RNF126 itself. LC/MS/MS analysis
of tryptic digests following treatment with EST1027 or EST1060 also
pointed to C32 as the site of modification.
To find the minimal
pharmacophore required to covalently interact
with RNF126 the authors assessed covalent binding (by in-gel ABPP
competition) of various truncations of EST1027 and EST1060 that all
contain the electrophile. This revealed the piperazine derivative
JP-2–196 ( ), drives most of the binding. A pull-down proteomics experiment
with an alkyne derivative of this minimal recruiter identified RNF126
among 110 other targets including five other E3 RING ligases.
Transplanting the p-Methoxy-fumarate motif onto ligands that already
contain piperazines or morpholines showed the resulting covalent derivatives
are able to degrade the targets: BCR-ABL, PDE5, SMARCA2/4 and LRRK2
in the 1–10 μM range. They were also able to install
this moiety on ligands not originally containing a piperazine such
as ligands for BRD4, BTK, HDAC1/3, and an AR-V7 ligand. These led
to μM potency degraders for all (except for BRD4 that showed
nM potency).

3.5.

## UBE2D-NFκB
King et al. set out to discover covalent
molecular glues.
They screened a library of 750 cysteine-reactive covalent ligands
for antiproliferative effects in HAP1 cells. This resulted in three
reproducible hits reducing proliferation by >90%. To assess if
these
mediate their effect through a Cullin E3 ubiquitin ligase they tested
the hits, as well as positive control dCeMM1 in a UBE2M KD cell line (lacking neddylation). This knockdown, as
well as neddylation and proteasome inhibitors showed a mild rescue
of the effects by EN450 ( A) and dCeMM1.
An isoTOP-ABPP experiment with
EN450 found 81 targets with a competition ratio of >1.3. This is
a
very low threshold corresponding to low occupancy, but the authors
reasoned that if the binding is to a component of the UPS, partial
occupancy should suffice to mediate function. The only UPS component
identified was C111 of the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2D (UBE2D).
This is not the catalytic cysteine of this enzyme (which is C85).
An alkyne derivative of EN450, still had antiproliferative effects
that were sensitive to neddylation inhibition. The alkyne was able
to label UBE2D C85A, and to a lesser extent C111A, suggesting at least
some of its labeling was mediated by C111.
There are four isoforms
of UBE2D (1–4) that could not be
distinguished by proteomics. KD of UBE2D1, UBE2D4, or all four isoforms
diminished a little the antiproliferative effects, while KD of UBE2D2
or UBE2D3 sensitized the cells even more to EN450.
To identify
the potential degradation target, the authors used
global proteomics comparing treatment with EN450 (50 μM; 24
h) with DMSO and found a single target that was downregulated by more
than 4-fold, the p105 subunit of NFκB1. This was confirmed by
WB. The reduced (noncovalent) version of EN450 did not affect NFκB1
levels.
In vitro experiments with purified
UBE2D1 and
GST-NFκB1 showed that EN450 induces a stronger interaction between
the two proteins in a pull-down experiment and induces more ubiquitination
of NFκB1 in a ubiquitination assay. To try and link NFκB
to the antiproliferation phenotype, the authors overexpressed it and
showed it slightly defends against the compound in two cell lines.
This study has clear limitations in terms of the potency and selectivity
of EN450, as well as the magnitude of the phenotypes (as acknowledged
by the authors) and follow up optimization should clarify the mechanism
and its contribution to the antiproliferative effects.

3.6.

## UBR7-p53
Isobe et al. investigated the poly electrophilic natural
product asukamycin ( A) in the context of triple negative breast cancer. They showed
it has low-μM antiproliferative activity in 231MFP cells. Using
isoTOP-ABPP they identified C374 of the E3 ligase UBR7 as the top
target for this compound. Knockdown of UBR7 in these cells did not
affect proliferation, but conferred resistance to asukamycin, suggesting
asukamycin does not inhibit the protein’s function. Re-expression
of WT UBR7 in KD cells resensitized them to asukamycin, but not re-expression
of a C374A mutant.
 To identify potential new interaction partners
mediated by
asukamycin
binding, the authors performed FLAG pulldowns on FLAG–UBR7-expressing
cells. This resulted in eight UBR7 and compound specific enriched
proteins. The authors focused on two targets: p53 and PRKDC (DNA protein
kinase). These targets were validated by pulldown-WB experiments,
which also identified a higher molecular mass band that may correspond
to the tranary UBR7-asukamycin-p53 complex. The band was treatment
specific and was attenuated on UBR7 knockdown.
Knockdown of
p53, (but not of PRKDC) rescued the cells from asukamycin
antiproliferative effects. To try and further understand the mechanism,
the authors show that asukamycin leads to thermal stabilization of
p53 in cell lysates, and increased p53 binding to its consensus DNA
when p53 was added to lysates. Consistent with these observations
asukamycin increased the expression of several p53 target genes and
a p53 reporter, which were all reduced following UBR7 knockdown. All
of these, suggesting that the ternary complex activates p53 to lead
to the antiproliferative effects.
A close analogue of asukamycin,
manumycin A, showed similar effects
(formation of high-molecular weight band, increasing p53 activity,
pull-down of p53 by FLAG–UBR7), but upon reducing its epoxide
moiety, it lost all of these activities.
While several questions
remain open following this study (such
as where does UBR7 bind on p53 and how does that stabilize/activate
it) it does demonstrate the gluing capacity of poly electrophilc natural
products, and suggests that in the future we might be able to design
synthetic bielectrophilic covalent glues.
In this regard it
is worth mentioning a recent study from the Gray
group where they installed two electrophiles
on kinase inhibitors, as a strategy to avoid sensitivity to resistance
mutations in the nucleophilic residue (often witnessed in oncology
for targeted covalent inhibitors). While not a molecular glue, it
shows synthetic bidentate electrophiles can be designed to target
pairs of nucleophiles and in the future this might be applied to protein–protein
interfaces.

3.7.

## ZPF91-E2F2
Liu
et al. characterized the natural product
bufalin ( B). After demonstrating
its viability effect in HepG2 cells, they synthesized a biotinylated
derivative to facilitate its target discovery. With this probe they
screened a human proteome microarray, to find the transcription factor
E2F2 as the top hit. The binding was validated by a pull-down assay
and microscale thermophoresis (MST; KD = 3.15 μM). Truncation studies mapped the interaction to the
DNA binding and dimerization domains of E2F2. WB analysis showed that
E2F2 levels are depleted following treatment with bufalin (DC50 < 400 nM). The degradation was proteasome dependent and
bufalin induced ubiquitination of E2F2. To identify the potential
effector, the authors used Co-IP/MS. Out of hundreds of enriched partners,
only two were E3 ligases, of which ZPF91 was validated by WB. KD of
ZPF91 reduced bufalin mediated degradation and ubiquitination. MST
showed bufalin bound ZPF91 (KD = 462 nM)
and biotin-bufalin could pull it down from cells. LC/MS/MS analysis
suggested C349 as a possible modification target on ZPF91, and a C349A
mutant showed much weaker pull-down than WT. The α-pyrone group
alone was able to bind ZPF91 by MST. Pull-downs with biotin–bufalin
showed the α-pyrone blocked pull-down of ZPF91 and androsterone
blocked pull-down of E2F2. Both substructures suppressed E2F2 degradation.
Supporting this ability to bind both partners separately, E2F2 degradation
with bufalin showed a hook effect at higher concentrations. In this
regard bufalin acts like a bifunctional degrader (with a minimal/no
linker).

3.8.

## FOX1A-DNA
In a recent preprint the Cravatt group reports a new type of covalent
glue that mediates protein–DNA interaction. Using isoDTB-ABPP
in 22Rv1 cells they profiled four tryptoline acrylamide stereoprobes
and identified stereoselective and proteomically selective binding
of WX-02–23 ( C) to C258 of the transcription factor FOXA1. A stereopair
of alkyne analogues validated this result in complementary competitive
pull-down experiments. Both the stereoselectivity, as well as SAR
around a couple of close analogues suggested binding is driven by
specific molecular recognition. Homology modeling suggested that C258
is located on a dynamic loop located near the protein–DNA interface.
The authors expressed an MBP-FOXA1 fusion that maintained stereoselective
binding to their alkyne entantiopair, in a C258 selective manner in
HEK293 cells. The purified construct, however, lost the stereoselective
binding. Adding the purified protein to nuclear lysate restored its
stereoselective binding, while treatment with the nuclease Benzonase
abolished it, altogether suggesting the stereoselective binding might
be DNA dependent. Indeed, addition of a 31 base pair DNA duplex with
FOXA1 canonical binding sequence to the purified protein restored
stereoselective and site-specific binding of the alkyne probe. Pretreatment
with WX-02–23 stereoselectively blocked alkyne binding (in
the presence of DNA) with IC50 = 8 μM.
The
authors used two approaches to show the compound induces FOXA1
DNA binding in lysates. One based on luciferase-tagged FOXA1 binding
to DNA fixed onto streptavidin coated plates, and another using NanoBRET
between NanoLuc tagged FOXA1 and a TAMRA-tagged DNA. Both methods
significantly showed about a 2-fold increase of DNA binding, in a
stereoselective manner that is dependent on C258. The EC50 for increasing DNA binding for FOXA1 was 2 μM. In further
DNA binding studies, the authors show that compound binding increased
affinity for noncanonical sequences in a specific 3-base-pair region
outside the canonical binding motif, therefore relaxing the overall
binding preferences of FOXA1.
ChIP-Seq experiments following
treatment with either of the stereoprobes
did not show a change in the overall magnitude of FOXA1 binding to
the genome, but rather, the active probe caused a redistribution of
FOXA1 binding sites across the chromatin, both losing binding sites
that were detected in DMSO treatment as well as gaining new binding
sites. Further experiments showed that this redistribution of binding
sites led to changes in chromatin accessibility.
To summarize
this section, there are now examples for covalent
molecular glues that bind one interaction partner covalently, create
a new interface and stabilize the binding of the second interaction
partner (14–3–3, NFκB). In other cases, the noncovalent
binding is to one interaction partner, followed by covalent bond formation
with the second protein after the noncovalent ternary complex is formed
(K-RasG12C, DCAF16) and yet in a third class the interaction
of the glue with both partners is covalent (p53-UBR7).
Covalent
glues can endow increased potency. For example, covalent
14–3–3 glues are superior compared to noncovalent, RMC-6291
is more potent than approved irreversible K-RasG12C drugs
and MMH1/2 are very potent as monovalent BRD4 degraders. Covalent
glues can also (like noncovalent glues) unlock challenging targets
such as p53.
A recurring motif for the discovery of covalent
glues is the installation
of electrophilic moieties on known protein binders ( ) as we see for DCAF16, in more
than one case, DCAF11, RNF126 and even in the case of the CypA/KRasG12C interaction. This trend will likely increase in the near
future as it has been very productive so far.
 

4.

## Summary and Outlook
The literature
on covalent proximity inducers is prolific (I apologize
for any missing report), and while reviewing it, several themes emerge
repeatedly. First, are the routes of discovery of new covalent proximity
inducers ( ; , ). The most straightforward strategy is to start
with a known covalent binder for the target ( ; ; A) which proved a productive strategy even in the absence
of catalytic turnover. Next, decorating a known target binder, or
effector binder with a covalent handle, with or without a linker,
led to the discovery of several effectors through both bivalent and
monovalent compounds ( B,E). This strategy typically necessitates identification
of the covalent protein target through various methods. Direct screening
of covalent binders against recombinant proteins ( C) was very productive, but
typically requires extensive medicinal chemistry optimization of the
discovered binders, otherwise the recruiters might be of lower quality
(see below). Finally, chemoproteomic characterization of electrophilic
natural products, or synthetic compounds that demonstrated direct
cellular engagement with effector proteins unlocked several new effectors
that could be recruited ( D). The two latter approaches also require optimization
of the exit vector and linker length to the target ligand, but in
the reviewed work typically less than five linkers were evaluated.
 Another theme that repeats often is evidence of
activity despite
partial, and at times very low, occupancy of the effector protein
in cells. Examples include 10% and 40% engagement with SLF and JQ1
DCAF16 PROTACs, 30% engagement of RNF4
with CCW-28–3, limited engagement
of 21-SLF with DCAF11, 20% engagement
of YT47R with DCAF1, 25% occupancy of
EN67 with UBE2D, 7% occupancy of SKP1
for EN884, 30% and 20% modification
of FBXO22 by SP3CHO and 22-SLF, respectively, and very low ABPP competition
ratios for DUBTACs against OTUB1 and
ML-1–50 against DCAF16. 
While reports are accumulating on new E3-ligases being successfully
recruited covalently for PROTACs, it is sobering to see there are
now more effectors that were covalently recruited for degradation
(13) than targets demonstrated to be degraded (11; ) with BRD4 and FKBP12
dominating as model systems. More effort should be invested in demonstrating
the generality of such recruiters, and therefore their utility. The
reported covalent recruiters themselves are often promiscuous binders
(sometimes by design) and require additional optimization that is
rarely reported.
In this context of targeted degradation, the
E3 ligases DCAF16,
DCAF11, and recently FBXO22 were repeatedly discovered as mediators
of degradation by electrophilic compounds in unbiased campaigns. Leading
authors to hypothesize electrophilic quality control might be their
endogenous role. In particular, the recent discovery of the intrinsic
affinity of BRD4 to DCAF16 , makes it an immediate
suspect for any JQ1-based electrophilic PROTACs. Counter-screening
in DCAF16 and DCAF11 (and perhaps FBXO22) knockout cells should now
become a standard control in covalent degrader reports. This should
add to additional best practices for the development and characterization
of covalent probes and PROTACs. , The sensitivity
to electrophiles of DCAF16/11 also suggests a lower reactivity, selective
covalent recruiter might be developed to harness them for targeted
degradation.
Another point worth considering in this regard
is how subtle SAR
around the electrophile, or in the placement of the electrophile can
lead to completely different target engagement. For example compare
RCS-03–017 targeting DCAF16 with RCS-03–104–4
and 8b targeting DCAF11, or compare SP3CHO with 22-SLF, both targeting
FBXO22, but through different cysteine residues, or ML-1–50
and MMH2 both targeting DCAF16, but again through different cysteine
residues. This begs extra scrutiny in the characterization of new
covalent degraders.
From a chemical perspective, despite several
recent attempts to
target additional nucleophilic amino acids (lysine in 14–3–3,
histidine and serine in CRBN and VHL, respectively) the overwhelming
majority of covalent proximity inducers still target cysteine residues
( , ). It would seem this is an untapped opportunity
for future proximity inducers discovery. Incorporating electrophiles
against a wider scope of residues may expand the scope of effectors
that can be recruited.
Several related topics were left out
of the scope of this review,
including peptide/protein based proximity inducers and covalent peptide/protein reagents as a whole, − that may serve as a future avenue for innovation in the field.
Compared to the explosion in (noncovalent) PROTACs reported in
the medicinal chemistry and chemical biology field, most of the covalent
proximity inducers were discovered by a small number of groups, representing
an opportunity for more research. One of the earliest papers reporting
covalent PROTACs foreshadowed the future,
noting that more than 562 cysteines on 211 E3 ligases have been detected
in various ABPP experiments, and predicted: “The extent to
which E3 ligase cysteines can be engaged by heterobifunctional, or
even molecular glue, compounds to promote ligand-induced protein degradation
should represent a fertile area of future investigation”. This
prediction has certainly held true as evident by this review, and
could now be extended beyond degradation to additional classes of
covalent proximity inducers, a very fertile ground for future investigation.

## Acknowledgments
I thank Drs. Ronen Gabizon, Ella Livnah,
Adi Rogel,
Harish Battu, and Dattatraya Rawale for critical reading of this manuscript.
This work was co-funded by the European Union (ERC, CovProximity,
101125683). Nir London is also supported by the Honey and Dr. Barry
Sherman Lab, Dr. Barry Sherman Institute for Medicinal Chemistry,
Abisch-Frenkel RNA Therapeutics Center, Moross Integrated Cancer Center,
Goldhirsh-Yellin Foundation, and Celia Zwillenberg-Fridman.

## Biography
Nir London completed his Ph.D.
in computational structural biology
at the Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel, in 2012, under the supervision
of Prof. Ora Schueler-Furman. He then pursued a postdoctoral fellowship
with Prof. Brian Shoichet at UCSF. In 2015, he joined the Weizmann
Institute of Science, where he is currently an associate professor
in the Department of Chemical and Structural Biology. Prof. London’s
lab is focused on covalent chemical biology and is developing new
technologies to discover and functionalize covalently acting compounds.

The author declares
the
following competing financial interest(s): N.L. serves on the SAB
of Larkspur Biosciences, Tesseract Medicines and Eindura Therapeutics.

## Special Issue
Published
as part of Chemical Reviewsspecial issue “Drugging the Undruggable”.

## References