822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC1285775612857756128577564160958810.1021/acs.chemrev.4c00687Synthetic Biology
of Plants and Microbes for Agriculture,
Environment, and Future Applications
ClauerPhillip NouAngelina X TothTyler YuQiguo ChemlaYonatan BooAlice YoonKwan VoigtChristopher 
1
Synthetic
Biology Center, Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139, United States
*Email: cavoigt@gmail.com
28120261262895895–11092622026© 2026 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0

## Abstract
Agriculture is under pressure to
provide food for a growing
population
and the feedstock required to drive the bioeconomy. Methods to breed
and genetically modify plants are inadequate to keep pace. When engineering
crops, traits are painstakingly introduced into plants one-at-a-time,
combine unpredictably, and are continuously expressed. Synthetic biology
is changing these paradigms with new genome construction tools, computer
aided design (CAD), and artificial intelligence (AI). “Smart
plants” contain circuits that respond to environmental change,
alter morphology, or respond to threats. Further, the plant and associated
microbes (fungi, bacteria, archaea) are now being viewed by genetic
engineers as a holistic system. Historically, plant health has been
enhanced by many natural and laboratory-evolved soil microbes marketed
to enhance growth or provide nutrients, or pest/stress resistance.
Synthetic biology has expanded the number of species that can be engineered,
increased the complexity of engineered functions, controlled environmental
release, and can assemble stable consortia. New CAD tools will manage
genetic engineering projects spanning multiple plant genomes (nucleus,
chloroplast, mitochondrion) and the thousands of genomes of associated
bacteria/fungi. This review covers advanced genetic engineering techniques
to drive the next agricultural revolution, as well as push plant engineering
into new realms for manufacturing, infrastructure, sensing, and remediation.

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Sep 8; Accepted 2025 Jul 29; Revised 2025 Jul 10; Collection date 2026 Jan 28.

1.

## Introduction
Traditional plant breeding
and precision farming are not keeping
pace with the demands of global population growth. In addition to food, the growing bio-economy places increased
pressure on agricultural products as feedstock for energy, chemicals,
materials, and medicines that were previously derived from nonrenewable
sources. As of 2018, engineered plants
were grown on 500 million acres (1.9 million km2), benefiting
about 2 billion people. Higher yields
need to be obtained from less land, without destroying the environment.
The United Nations projects that by 2050, crop yields must increase
by 50% compared to 2013, but the reality is that productivity is stagnating.
,
 Over the last 30 years, genetic engineering has improved yields
while lowering carbon emissions and has reduced the impact of uncertainties
such as pests and weather. However, combining these functions in a
single plant (“trait stacking”) has been difficult and
it remains a guessing game as to which combination of seeds and traits
should be planted each year. In many cases, the widespread use of
engineered crops and microbes has been slowed by costly regulatory
hurdles, international disparity in rules, and the lack of public
acceptance. As a result, the ancient blights
of agriculture remain; 60% of the yield losses in major crops are
due to abiotic stress (drought, heat, salt, etc.) and 30% are due
to pathogens and pests.
,
 Moreover, it is estimated that
climate change could reduce yields by 10% or more by the 2050s.

Synthetic Biology encompasses tools for
the design and genetic
construction of living organisms. While
developed with model species, such as E. coli and S. cerevisiae, the technologies are now being applied to
species of agricultural relevance, from plants and soil microbes to
insects, animals, and viruses.
−

 Crop genomes are more easily
designed to carry multi-gene traits at precise locations in their
chromosomes, thus simplifying trait stacking. Synthetic regulatory
networks (“genetic circuits”) reduce the load of traits
on cells by turning them on only when needed, for instance, responding
to a pest attack by releasing a pulse of insecticide. Plants grow
slowly, making it difficult to build and evaluate complex designs.
This challenge could be addressed by advances in computer aided design
(CAD) to improve the likelihood of success and automated prototyping
pipelines that could evaluate thousands of designs in parallel using
cell-free or protoplast systems. Machine learning (ML), combined with
-omics and rapid prototyping, enables the mapping of these results
to performance in a crop plant in the field. This review looks at
the emerging application of these concepts to crop plants and soil
microbes. These advances extrapolate to a future where agricultural
solutions involve interlocked consortia encompassing engineered plants,
microbes, and insects, all working in concert to maximize yields and
fend off threats ( ).
 This review covers the application
of the principles
of Synthetic
Biology to agriculture and paints a picture as to where the technologies
are headed in the near and far future. The first section describes
the impact of genome editing, early collections of genetic parts and
the construction of the first genetic sensors and circuits toward
the creation of “smart plants” that can respond to their
environment. Then, the engineering of other species of relevance are
described, from soil bacteria to phage and fungi and how these could
be connected into integrated systems. Throughout, we cover the advances
from other areas that are not yet being applied to plant synthetic
biology, but likely will be soon, from whole chromosome synthesis
and replacement to opportunities for advanced computer aided design
(CAD) and artificial intelligence (AI). We also lay out grand challenges,
where we relax the constraints of current technical feasibility, to
envision the impact of a future of highly engineered agricultural
systems. Even these visions are timid compared to what will be possible
when we have full design control over the 100 gigabases of DNA
,
 encoding the complete agricultural system, not just the genome of
the crop, but all the bacteria and fungi and supporting insects, all
of which could be encoded in a single treated seed. Finally, we discuss
the remaining challenges, technology gaps, and promising future directions
of genetic engineering applied to agriculture.

2.

## Plant Design and Construction
2.1.

## Engineering
Plant Genomes
Precision
genome editing is a needle-in-the-haystack problem, requiring the
targeting of cleavage to a specific basepair in a large genome. This
remarkable feat is now possible using DNA-binding domains where the
targeted sequence can be programmed. Many variants of these methods
can knockout genes, make specific base pair changes, or drop payloads
of synthetic DNA into the genome. These payloads can be delivered
by plant viruses or Agrobacterium, either as a laboratory
technique or to edit plants in the field. Instead of simply editing
a natural genome, it has been a dream to build a complete genome from
scratch using only chemistry. While not yet applied to plants, entire
eukaryote chromosomes have been built using de novo DNA synthesis and assembly, which can be used to radically reorganize
native genetics or make systematic changes throughout the chromosomes.
2.1.1.

## Editing Chromosomes
Genome editing
tools delete, modify, or insert DNA at a precise location in the genome.
,
 DNA recognition and cleavage can be performed by meganucleases,
zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs), transcription activator-like effector
nucleases (TALENs), or CRISPR/Cas systems, all of which have been
shown to work in plants.
−

 Meganucleases, ZFNs, and TALENs have domains that
can be reprogrammed to theoretically target any desired DNA sequence.
In practice, they all have limitations. Meganucleases and ZFNs are
particularly difficult to design, with only a handful of examples
of their use in crop plants.
,,−

 TALENs are more easily designed by combining domains, each of which
contributes modularly to the DNA sequence that is recognized.
,
 CRISPR/Cas9, however, relies on an easily programmed guide RNA (gRNA)
to target a desired DNA sequence; thus, it has rapidly become the
method of choice for engineering plants.
,,
 In a survey of genome edited crops to 2020,
161 traits have been introduced using Cas9 and 20 using TALENs.

Despite its success and widespread use,
Cas9 is still limited by its large size, off-target effects, and the
requirement of a protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) next to the target
site.
,
 In eukaryotes, editing efficiency is dependent
on chromosome access and remodeling, and
it has been observed in plants that gRNA can lead to inhibition even
in the absence of Cas9. Using engineered
or alternative CRISPR variants can address some of these limitations.
For example, CRISPR/Cas12a (Cpf1) has lower off-target activity than
Cas9.
,
 CRISPR/Cas12a was used to edit the promoters
of two csLOB1 genes in Duncan grapefruit to increase
its resistance to citrus canker, a feat not possible with CRISPR/Cas9
due to its limited specificity. CRISPR
systems with relaxed or alternative PAM requirements have been developed
through rational engineering or directed evolution, thus allowing
for more positions in the genome to be targeted.
−

 For example,
the engineered variant Cas9-NG is active at NGN PAM sites and has
been used in Arabidopsis, tobacco, rice, Brassica, and tomatoes.
−

 The PAM-independent SpRY variant showed activity
at nearly all sequences tested in rice protoplasts, although at varying
efficiencies. The “miniature”
Cas12f and CasΦ are less than half the size of Cas9, thus simplifying
delivery into the cell. Two versions of CasΦ function in plants.
−

Following a nuclease-mediated double-stranded break (DSB),
a DNA
repair template can introduce specific mutations or payloads to the
genome through homologous recombination (HR). However, the rate of
homologous recombination in plants is low and so cleaved DNA is primarily
repaired through nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ). This results in small insertion or deletions (indels) of
nucleotides at the site of cleavage, often disabling the targeted
gene. There are many examples of crops being improved using gene knockouts
performed through gene editing. Prior to genome editing technology,
screening campaigns identified many such examples, but the techniques
required time and labor-intensive mutagenesis or the insertion of
recombinant genes onto the genome.
These crops have been treated
by the USDA as GMOs, which increases
development cost and time. For example, the Flavr Savr tomato achieved
extended storage life through the suppression of the polygalacturonase
(PG) gene by RNAi. The
same modification can be recapitulated by CRISPR/Cas to generate a
tomato PG mutant. Genome
editing techniques that leave no foreign DNA behind simplify the process
of obtaining regulatory approval. The
first genome-edited crop to enter the US food supply was a high-oleic
soy with improved oil stability, developed by knocking out two fatty
acid desaturase genes (FAD2-1A and FAD2-1B) with TALENs ( A). This crop
entered the market in 2019 after the USDA decided not to regulate
it and other crops that do not contain foreign DNA.
,
 In 2016, the first CRISPR-edited food product to gain this status
was an anti-browning white mushroom made by knocking out polyphenol
oxidase (PPO). This
crop was followed by a waxy corn, high-oil-content camelina, and drought
tolerant soybean. Recently, the first
CRISPR-edited aminobutyric acid (GABA)-rich tomato entered the market
in Japan.
,

 2.1.1.1.

## Multiplexed Genome Editing
Multiple
genome sites can be simultaneously targeted for editing using multiplexed
methods. In a remarkable example of parallel editing, 107 of the 109
members of the caffeic acid O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene family were mutated using TALENs in sugarcane
to improve bioethanol production from lignocellulosic biomass. The simplicity of CRISPR/Cas targeting makes
it possible to affect many genes at once by simultaneously expressing
multiple gRNAs. These approaches include expressing gRNAs as individual
transcripts from nonrepetitive RNA polymerase III promoters and terminators
(e.g., the U6 promoter)
,
 or as a single polycistronic transcript processed into separate
gRNAs using the intrinsic RNA processing machinery from CRISPR endonucleases
(Cpf1), CRISPR-derived ribonucleases
(Csy4), self-cleaving ribozymes, or endogenous tRNA-processing systems.

Multiplexed gRNAs have been used to improve
lycopene content in tomato fruits (6 gRNAs), decrease the glycoalkaloids in potato tubers (9 gRNAs) and eliminate the glycan in tobacco (14 gRNAs). In the genus Solanum, which
contains eggplant, tomato, and ornamental roses, up to 5 gRNAs were
targeted to the cytokinin biosynthesis gene prickleless (PL) to generate plants lacking thorny projections called prickles ( B). In addition to making null mutations to genes responsible
for specific traits, gene editing can be used to generate genetic
diversity in regions that contribute to complex quantitative traits
(yield, fruit size, plant architecture, etc.). In tomato, variation
in fruit size was obtained by targeting 8 gRNAs to the noncoding region
upstream of CLAVATA3, which is involved in the feedback
circuit controlling meristem proliferation and seed number.

Multiplexed CRISPR/Cas methods can simultaneously
target many genes
implicated in separate traits to accelerate crop improvement. In tomato,
multiple genes were targeted that are involved in synchronized fruit
ripening, day-length insensitivity, fruit size, and vitamin C content
( C). In rice, multiple genes were simultaneously
targeted to control rice yield, architecture, fragrance, and photoperiod
( D). In poplar, combinations of 21 lignin biosynthetic
genes predicted by a metabolic model were targeted to improve wood
pulp characteristics. In maize, this
approach was scaled up to individually target 743 genes associated
with agronomy and nutrition. Of these, 118 genes led to observable
phenotypic changes including changes in plant size and morphology,
flowering time, response to day length, and susceptibility to disease.

A common barrier to genome editing in
plants is the presence of
unexpected paralogs which are functionally redundant to the target.
This can prevent phenotype improvements since paralogs can compensate
for the altered function of the edited gene. Single gRNAs can be designed
to simultaneously target multiple paralogs within a gene family. For
example, a library of 5,635 individual gRNAs, each targeting between
2-10 Arabidopsis transporter genes, was used to generate Arabidopsis lines. This led
to the discovery of a family of tonoplast hormone transporters, which
only became detectable by an altered phenotype when both paralogs
were mutated simultaneously. In bread wheat, α-gliadins are
a component of gluten and are encoded by a gene family of roughly
100 members; up to 35 genes were simultaneously edited by targeting
conserved regions of α-gliadins with two sgRNAs, which reduced
the gluten composition in the edited wheat grain.

2.1.1.2.

## Base Editors
Genome editing tools
can also make single nucleotide replacements in the genome. Oligonucleotide-directed
mutagenesis, an early technique used to make herbicide resistant crops,
relied on double stranded DNA:RNA oligos containing the desired nucleotide
change within the target sequence. This
approach suffered from low efficiency.
Base-editors make single
targeted replacements by use of a nuclease-deactivated Cas9 (dCas9)
to position an enzyme capable of C-to-T (cytosine base editor) or
A-to-G (adenine base editor) mutations. Various dual base editors function in plants that can introduce
both C-to-T and A-to-G substitutions by fusing cytidine and adenosine
deaminases to a Cas protein. Herbicide
resistant rice, wheat, maize, cassava, and watermelon have been created
by making mutants of the enzymes targeted by the herbicides.
−

 In strawberries, base editors were targeted to a regulatory region
upstream of a transcription factor (TF) that controls sugar metabolism
to increase the sugar content in fruit. Base-editing has also been used to substitute a single base pair
in the ALC gene to create a nonsynonymous amino acid
change that increased the shelf life of tomato.

Prime editors can generate all 12 types of base conversions
without
the need for double-strand breaks or donor DNA templates. They consist of a prime editor (a fusion protein
between Cas9 nickase and reverse transcriptase) and the prime-editing
guide RNA (pegRNA). The pegRNA contains the primer binding site and
the reverse transcriptase template. The desired edits in the reverse
transcriptase template can be reverse transcribed and inserted into
the target site. Herbicide resistant rice, wheat, maize, tomato, and Arabidopsis have also been made using prime editing ( E).
,−

 Note that prime editing has been found to be much less efficient
in dicots.

2.1.1.3.

## Targeted
Random Mutagenesis
Directed
evolution is a powerful tool to optimize biological systems, including
individual proteins, pathways, and entire microbial genomes.
−

 Rounds of diversity creation (e.g., mutagenesis)
are followed by screening to iteratively improve a property-of-interest.
The plant genome can be mutagenized using CRISPR machinery through
imprecise double strand break repair. In rice, it has been applied
to target a gene that confers resistance to the herbicide herboxidiene. Mutations were made to the entire length of
the gene by tiling 119 gRNAs, followed by screening 15,000 transformed
calli (undifferentiated masses of plant cells) on media containing
herboxidiene to identify insensitive mutations.
Base editors
can be used to perform targeted saturation mutagenesis. For this purpose, a base editor was developed
to simultaneously perform C-to-T and A-to-G conversions by fusing
a cytidine deaminase, adenosine deaminase, Cas9 nickase, and uracil
DNA glycosylase inhibitor.
,
 The tool, called STEMEs,
performed saturation mutagenesis of a rice gene to obtain herbicide
resistance.

2.1.1.4.

## Computer Aided Design
(CAD) of Genome
Editing
Software for genome editing aids the design of proteins
(TALEs, ZFPs) or sgRNA (Cas9) to target specific chromosomal sites.
TALEN Targetter 2.0 provides a web-based interface that identifies
potential TALENs target sites within a user-provided DNA sequence
and outputs the corresponding TALENs amino acid sequence.
,
 TALEN Targeter 2.0 can design TALENs for use in any organism with
a published genome sequence and has been applied to crops, including
rice, corn, and wheat. Custom TALENs designed
to mutagenize fatty acid desaturase 2 (FAD2) in peanuts using TALEN
Targeter (TALE-NT) led to a 2-fold increase in the oleic acid. Beyond genome editing, TALE-NT 2.0 has been
used to predict the binding of TALE effectors from Xanthomonas
oryzae in rice to explain the effect of sequence polymorphisms
in resistance genes. ZZiFiT is an online
tool that designs an amino acid sequence for a chimeric ZNF-N to target
a user-specified DNA sequence.
CRISPR/Cas gRNA design software
packages are available to design optimal gRNAs and predict on-target
activity and avoid off-target events. Many popular gRNA design tools,
such as CRISPOR, Cas-Designer, CRISPR-P,
,
 and PE-Designer have been applied to plant genomes.
,,
 To introduce quantitative trait
variation, the web-tool CRISPR-P was used to design an array of nine
gRNAs that simultaneously targeted the promoter region of two maize
CLE genes, which are associated with increase in kernel and ear size. The tools differ in their evaluation of gRNA
efficiency and specificity, selection of reference genomes and CRISPR
endonucleases, and ability to predict genome-wide off-target events.
The accuracy of these tools have been validated for plant genome editing.
,

2.1.2.

## Chromosomal Insertion of Synthetic DNA
DNA payloads can be inserted into the genome; for example, to introduce
a trait involving a recombinant enzyme or pathway. Previous methods
inserted the payload at multiple random locations and the resulting
plants would be screened for those with the desired phenotype and
no discernable defects.
−

 This process complicates trait stacking
because genes must be added serially and screened afresh leading to
different insertion locations than the plants originally screened
for individual traits. Due to this limitation, to our knowledge, the
most traits put into a single commercial crop was seven in maize (one
herbicide tolerance and six insect resistances).

In contrast, providing a repair template along with
the site-specific nucleases, payloads can be inserted at a specific
location using NHEJ and HR. These insertions have been used to change
the regulatory control of a gene; for example, maize drought tolerance
was improved by replacing a native promoter with a stronger one to
increase the expression of a negative regulator of ethylene responses.

There are technical limitations on the
size of a DNA payload that
can be delivered to a plant cell. There have been examples of the
delivery of large DNA sequences, for example, rice has been engineered
to produce anthocyanin and astaxanthin by introducing ten (31 kb total)
and four (15 kb) recombinant genes, respectively ( ).
,
 Wheat resistant to a fungal
pathogen was generated by introducing a 37 kb construct encoding five
resistance genes into a single locus and two pathogen resistance gene clusters (20 kb) from Arabidopsis were introduced into soybean. The
largest DNA fragment delivered into a plant nucleus using Agrobacterium-mediated transformation is 150 kb (a piece
of human genomic DNA).

 A challenge with making large insertions is obtaining
sufficient
concentrations of template DNA inside the plant cell to trigger NHEJ
or HR. This has been addressed by using the geminivirus replicon to
amplify the template DNA within a cell, which increases HR efficiency
in potato, tomato, wheat, and rice.
−

 Alternatively, chemically-modified
double-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides can be used to facilitate HR.
These nucleotides have been used to insert a 60 bp translation enhancer
and a 2 kb promoter in rice and this approach could theoretically
insert complete protein-coding genes.
,−

2.1.2.1.

## Site-Specific Transposons
Some
applications of gene editing in plants, such as insertion of a payload
into a landing pad or an enhancer into a plant promoter ( ), require delivering a large genetic payload to a specific genomic
site. Homologous recombination is often used to deliver DNA to bacterial,
yeast, and mammalian genomes, but the efficiency of HR in plants is
very low. DNA repair-based insertion
methods can also be prone to small unwanted insertions or deletions. One alternative is to use site-specific transposase
systems, which use a site-specific endonuclease and a high-efficiency
transposase to specifically and efficiently deliver a DNA payload
to a target genomic site. Most commonly, these systems use natural
CRISPR-associated transposases from prokaryotes and to guide the DNA
to a user-specified in bacterial or mammalian (including human) cells.
−

 However, these bacteria-derived programmable transposases have not
been shown to be functional in plants.
Transposase-assisted
target-site integration (TATSI) site-specifically inserts a DNA payload
into the plant genome, demonstrated for Arabidopsis and soybean. A programmable RNA-guided endonuclease (Cas9 or Cas12)
is co-expressed with hyperactive mutants of the rice Pong transposase ( A). A DNA payload is originally inserted
within the Pong transposable element, which is then
excised by the transposase. The DSB generated by the endonuclease
at the target site is then used for integration. When Arabidopsis plants were transformed with vectors containing the TATSI system,
> 35% of the progeny had site-specific insertions.
 
2.1.2.2.

## Genomic Landing Pads
The insertion
of a large DNA construct into the genome can disrupt native genes
either directly or in noncoding regions by interfering with neighboring
regulatory sequences. Another problem is that the function carried
by the payload will be sensitive to the local chromosomal environment
and background transcription. The insertion of “landing pads”
into the chromosome first, into which the payload is later added,
is one way to improve the reliability of the encoded function. Sometimes,
insertion sites are included within the landing pad that are specific
to the payload delivery method (phage integrase or transposase sites). Landing pads have been used for bacteria, yeast,
and mammalian cells.
−

 In the maize genome, sets of landing pads were introduced into four
regions of low gene density and high recombination frequency. Integration was performed using FLP recombinase
and the associated lox recognition sequence in the
landing pad. Integration into these sites was highly efficient. To
speed up the development of multi-trait hybrids, landing pads were
inserted at adjacent sites in different maize lines. When separate
traits were individually integrated onto these landing pads, they
could be stacked through chromosome crossover and genetic recombination
after crossing the maize lines.
The first step of landing pad
design is to identify a chromosomal location that can lead to high
expression. Ideally, there is also limited
variability due to environmental changes or tissue context. In other
eukaryotes and bacteria, landing pad sites have been identified empirically
using random transposon insertion to scan the genome with a reporter
,
 or using RNA-seq and machine learning (ML) to predict appropriate
sites. These techniques would be difficult
to use as-is in plants. However, an alternative method to find high-expression
genomic regions is ATAC-seq (Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin
with high-throughput sequencing), which has been used in plants.
−

 This technique probes genome-wide DNA accessibility to identify
highly-transcribed regions for recombinant gene insertion. Once a
site is identified, it must be tested to ensure that the associated
DNA does not affect host gene expression. This screen can be performed
by measuring phenotypic or growth changes or, more thoroughly, by
using RNA-seq in different tissue types, developmental stages, and
environmental conditions to ensure that host gene expression is not
impacted.
,,,

Insulators can further
isolate a landing pad from the genome ( ). Various
approaches to insulation have been taken, including flanking it with
terminators to block transcription into or out of the landing pad,
factors to open up the chromatin, and insulators to protect against
nucleosome changes. New classes of insulators
are needed for plants to decouple expression from neighboring enhancer
sequences and block expansion of DNA silencing from neighboring regions.

2.1.2.3.

## Artificial Chromosomes
Artificial
chromosomes offer another means to isolate recombinant genes. In other
eukaryotes, stable artificial chromosomes have been made by reintroducing
centromere DNA to DNA containing genes or pathways-of-interest.
−

 This approach does not work in plants because their centromeres
are based on epigenetic features and contain large arrays of repeats,
sometimes as large as a megabase. As a result, placement of centromere
sequences on an artificial chromosome does not necessarily generate
the kinetochore required for spindle fibers attachment during cell
division.
,

An alternative approach
is to build plant artificial minichromosomes through telomere-mediated
truncation strategies originally developed in yeast. Minichromosomes are constructed by introducing arrays of
telomeric sequences into the plant chromosomes ( A). Some of these integrations result in truncations at the
site of the telomere insertion, presumably through the stabilization
of one end of the T-DNA by the telomeric proteins. Originally performed
in maize, stable artificial chromosomes have since been introduced
to rice, barley, wheat, Arabidopsis, and Brassica.
−

 A preferred target for the creation of minichromosomes are B chromosomes,
which are nonessential, small chromosomes found in maize and other
plant species. Minichromosomes can also
be generated from essential chromosomes in tetraploid plants, such
as wheat, where the extra copy of the chromosome provides redundancy
for any essential genes deleted by the truncation. In diploid plants
such as maize, minichromosomes can be derived from essential A chromosomes
by selecting for spontaneous polyploid events. A challenge to using
minichromosomes is their failure to properly segregate during meiosis,
resulting in erratic copy numbers during spore formation and low rates
of transmission.
,
 Various pollen selection methods
that require maintenance of minichromosomes for viability have been
proposed.
,,
 Artificial chromosomes can be detrimental to plant growth and their
transfer between species is not always reliable.

 Artificial minichromosomes possess
desirable properties
for crop
engineering. They could simplify the delivery and insertion of transgenes
as well as provide integration sites insulated from the genetic context
of an endogenous chromosome. For example, the Cre/lox recombination
system was used to transfer a genetic payload from a minichromosome
to an endogenous chromosome in both maize and Brassica ( B).
,
 Selection markers have also been excised from maize minichromosomes
by crossing the engineered plants with Cre-recombinase expressing
lines. The copy number of minichromosomes
can also be altered by introducing a trans-acting
region from native B chromosomes involved in causing nondisjunction
(failure of chromosomes to separate properly during cell division),
which could provide a means to vary the expression of recombinant
genes they carry.

2.1.3.

## Gene Editing and Recombinant DNA Delivery
to Mature Plants
Transformation methods have been developed
that can engineer plant cells after the plant has grown. These methods
are typically used as a research tool or to test a genetic system
without having to stably engineer the germline. There are some situations
where one might want to deliver genetic material to a crop after it
has been planted. For example, genes conferring resistance to an insect
pest could be delivered to the plant as the problem emerges. In the
field, plant transformation could be performed by viruses or Agrobacterium. The plant genome could be permanently modified
or genetic circuits used to eliminate the recombinant DNA after a
proscribed period of time.
2.1.3.1.

## Viral Delivery
DNA and RNA viruses
have been engineered for the delivery of gene-editing reagents to
plant cells.
,
 Geminiviridae is the largest
known family of circular single-stranded DNA viruses in plants. Their genomes feature long and short intergenic
regions that separate the regions required for replication machinery
and systemic infection. Several viruses from this family were used
to build geminiviral replicons (GVR) by maintaining the essential
replication components and replacing the transmission components with
the DNA cargo to be delivered. GVR vectors
are commonly delivered into the plant cell with donor template molecules
and used for gene editing through homology-directed repair. These
vectors increased integration frequency up to 100-fold compared to
Agrobacterium due to stronger expression of the site-specific nuclease
and higher copy number of the donor template.
,
 They were used to make specific changes into the target sites in
the genome across species, including tobacco, tomato, potato, cassava,
wheat and rice.
,,
 For example, WDV (Wheat Dwarf Virus) replicons were used to knock-in
reporter genes in wheat and rice using Cas9.
,

RNA viruses are usually smaller, with few genes required for
the replication, movement, and regulation. Their best-known application
is viral-induced gene silencing, an important reverse genetics tool
to study gene function.
,
 Other applications
of plant RNA viral vectors include the control of recombinant protein
expression and the induction of RNAi to kill insects upon feeding.
,
 They are notable for their potential to facilitate gene editing
in plants. Specifically, RNA viral vectors spread throughout the plant,
including to germ cells.
,
 Edits performed in
germ line cells can be transmitted directly to progeny of the infected
plants, thereby eliminating the need for laborious tissue culture
protocols to isolate and regenerate edited cells. Additionally, plants
generally prevent viruses from being sexually transmitted, meaning
the transgenic gene editing machinery would be absent in the progeny. However, RNA viral vectors are generally too
small to deliver Cas9 to perform CRISPR-mediated edits.
First
attempts to perform heritable gene edits using RNA viral
vectors circumvented their size limitation by creating transgenic
plants to express the Cas protein and using the viral vector to only
express the gRNA. To this end, the Foxtail
Mosaic Virus (FoMV)-derived vector was used to express the gRNA to
edit plants engineered to express Cas9. Genes that were targeted encoded
phytoene desaturase in tobacco, the carbonic anhydrase 2 in a grass,
and a potassium transporter in maize. This strategy is limited by the inheritance of Cas9 by the editing
progeny, which may later need to be removed. To overcome this limitation,
the ultracompact RNA-guided TnpB nuclease (ISYmu1) was co-delivered
with its guide RNA (ωRNA) to Arabidopsis using
a single tobacco rattle virus (TRV) transcript ( B). Delivery of the TRV vector
by Agrobacterium led to ISYmu1 targeting AtPDS3 throughout the plant, including meristem and germline
cells. Of 2318 seeds germinated from the TRV-infected plants, 41 seedlings
contained biallelic mutations at AtPDS3 and no seedlings
tested had detectable TRV transcripts.
Another strategy is to use negative-sense RNA viruses,
which possess
a carrying capacity for larger DNA. A Barley Yellow Striate Mosaic
Virus (BYSMV) vector can simultaneously deliver both gRNA and Cas9
into tobacco leaves via agroinfection. To increase the frequencies of heritable gene editing with RNA viral
vectors, the Flowering Locus sequence or tRNA-like motif were added
into the 3′ end of the gRNA. The
motifs increase the RNA cell-to-cell mobility and therefore facilitate
the modification of the germline chromosome to create heritable changes. This method was used to induce efficient multiplex
heritable editing and base-editing in Arabidopsis expressing Cas9 or a dCas9-cytidine deaminase base editor.
,

2.1.3.2.

## Agrobacterium Delivery

Agrobacterium-mediated transformation harnesses the natural Agrobacterium infection machinery to deliver a ssDNA cargo
(T-DNA) for random integration onto the plant nuclear genome. Agrobacterium is advantageous for its ease of engineering,
high efficiency, broad host range, and ability to integrate very large
cargos of >150 kb.
Agrobacterium transformation efficiency and host range has been improved by introducing
mutations to vir genes responsible for coordinating
transformation, genes that break down negative inhibitors of Agrobacterium-plant interactions, or expressing effectors
that suppress host immunity.
−

 Directed evolution of the transformation vector improved transformation
through increasing plasmid copy number. To reduce concerns over the unwanted spread of recombinant DNA in
the field, auxotrophy or counter selection markers have been introduced
into Agrobacterium vectors.
−

 A cumic acid-inducible promoter was used to control Agrobacterium transformation by using it to express VirE2. Other species of non-pathogenic rhizobia are also capable
of plant transformation, including Sinorhizobium meliloti,
Rhizobium etli,
Ensifer adhaerens, and Ochrobactrum haywardense.

High expression levels of recombinant
proteins are achievable using transient Agrobacterium transformation following a protocol of “magnifection”.
,
 It involves the delivery of T-DNA encoding an RNA viral vector carrying
the gene-of-interest. After expression from the nuclear genome, viral
proteins facilitate the amplification and cell-to-cell spread of the
RNA replicon, leading to higher levels of the mRNA encoding the gene. These vectors can lead to yields exceeding
50% of total soluble protein. In the laboratory, there are several
examples where Agrobacterium was used to deliver
traits to a mature plant. In a drought-sensitive tomato line, a gene
in the abscisic acid biosynthetic pathway was delivered by spraying Agrobacterium on leaves to transiently improve drought tolerance. Transforming orthologs of a regulator involved
in flowering control using Agrobacterium also promoted
or repressed flowering in tomato, peppers, and wheat. It has been proposed to spray Agrobacterium onto crops from airplanes, although doing so would invoke a high
regulatory hurdle.

2.1.4.

## Editing the Plastid and Mitochondrial Genomes
Mitochondria
and plastids are prokaryotic in origin and share similar
genome organization and expression machinery with bacteria. As such,
they have potential for expressing bacterial pathways that would be
incompatible with nuclear expression due to differences in genetic
organization and regulation. They also
have enzyme co-factors, such as metal clusters, that are not present
elsewhere in the cell; contain higher concentrations of some core
metabolites; and have high (chloroplast) or low (mitochondria) oxygen
tensions, which are desirable for the activities of some recombinant
enzymes.

2.1.4.1.

## Plastid
Genome Engineering
Plant
leaves can have up to 100 chloroplasts per cell, each containing 50
copies of the plastid genome. The genome
is relatively small, encoding about 100 genes, and can range from
19 to 217 kb across species, implying that it can carry more genes
without over-burdening the cell. Very
high levels of recombinant gene expression, more than 70% of the plant’s
total soluble protein, can be achieved when it is expressed from the
plastid genome. An additional benefit
it that the maternal inheritance of the plastid genome mitigates environmental
dispersion of recombinant genes through pollen. The plastid also lacks
RNAi machinery, making it possible to express double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA), which has been used to confer insect resistance. Non-green plastids, such as carotenoid-rich
chromoplasts and starch-accumulating amyloplasts, do not perform photosynthesis
and are less sensitive to recombinant protein accumulation, and thus
may be more suitable for metabolic engineering.

Despite their advantages, the difficulty of engineering
plastids currently limits the scope of their manipulation for agriculture. Plastid genome engineering has only been successful
in a limited number of agriculturally-relevant crops: tobacco, potato,
tomato, lettuce, soybean, rapeseed, carrot, cabbage, sugar cane, sugar
beet, eggplant, and cauliflower.
−

 A major bottleneck is the need to reach homoplasy, in which all
plastids, and all genomes within each plastid, contain the recombinant
gene. Getting to this point requires
continuously propagating transplastomic lines under selection pressure
using laborious and time-consuming tissue culture, selection, and
regeneration procedures. Not all lines within a crop species may be
amenable to this process. For example, plastid engineering in Arabidopsis can only be performed in transformation-competent
lines deficient in a nuclear-encoded fatty acid biosynthesis enzyme,
which sensitizes Arabidopsis to the selection agent
spectinomycin by making cell proliferation dependent on translation
of the plastid-encoded accD gene.
,
 Transplastomic rice has been reported, but the plants were not homoplasmic.
,

Major cereal/monocot crops are recalcitrant to plastid transformation
primarily due to the lack of sensitivity to the selection agent spectinomycin. In crops amenable to plastid transformation,
spectinomycin naturally inhibits translation in the plastid, resulting
in bleaching during tissue regeneration and arresting cellular growth.
In these plants, selection is achieved through the recombinant expression
of the bacterial spectinomycin resistance aminoglycoside 3′-adenyl
transferase (aadA) gene. Another problem is that recombinant gene expression in the chloroplast
often imparts a negative impact on plants by interfering with photosynthesis.
,
 Non-green plastids, such as chromoplasts in tomato fruits and amyloplasts
in potato tubers, provide a less-explored location for carrying a
recombinant function as expression in these organelles does not impact
photosynthesis.
Chloroplast genome editing is possible through
homologous recombination,
as used in bacterial engineering, where sequence overlap between the
payload and plastid directs integration to a specific site. While
any genome position can be edited using homologous recombination,
a common set of integration sites have been chosen for their high
expression and limited impact on endogenous gene expression. CRISPR/Cas9 has been used for gene insertion
in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii plastid genomes. However,
there are not similar capabilities in higher plants, where the transcription
and processing of gRNAs has proven difficult.

To edit native genes and avoid the introduction of
foreign selection
markers, base editors have been developed to target the chloroplast
genome. A cytidine deaminase domain (DddA) was fused to a TALE DNA-binding
domain to carry out C-to-T conversions in the plastids of rice, Arabidopsis, lettuce, and rapeseed.
−

 Fusion of the DddA with the TadA deoxyadenosine deaminase derived
from Escherichia coli induced targeted A-to-G editing
in human mitochondria and Arabidopsis plastids.
,
 Homoplasmic base editing was accomplished by applying a selection
pressure for specific mutations, such as for edits that confer resistance
to a chemical-based selection. The strong
expression of base editors during early embryonic growth in Arabidopsis led to near-homoplasmic editing (>99%) at
certain
nucleotide positions.

Recombinant
genes carried on episomally-replicating plasmids or
minicircular chromosomes offer an alternative to genome editing that
leaves the native plastid genome untouched. Circular vectors containing
a short sequence called the tobacco native extrachromosomal element
(NICE1) can be maintained extrachromosomally even
without a chloroplast origin of replication.
−

 Another approach is to use the replication origin from marine dinoflagellate
chloroplast genomes, which are composed of multiple small minicircles
with reduced size (2-3 kb).
,
 Transformation of
these mini-synplastomes into potato plastids demonstrated they could
persist across multiple generations without antibiotic selection. Finally, ssDNA (single-stranded DNA) geminiviruses
replicate by rolling circle amplification using host replication machinery,
but require a replication initiation protein (Rep) to initiate replication
at a viral origin of replication (VOR) ( C). DNA vectors containing VOR elements from
beet curly top geminivirus (BCTV) were replicated as minichromosomes
in tobacco chloroplasts when the Rep protein was either expressed
in the nucleus and targeted to the chloroplast or expressed from the
chloroplast genome. However, the maintenance
of self-replicating plasmids when growing plants in the soil without
antibiotic selection and their inheritance by the next generation
via seeds remain challenging.

2.1.4.2.

## Mitochondrial
Genome Engineering
Mitochondria, the “powerhouse of
the cell,” also contain
independent genomes that evolved from prokaryotes. While mitochondria
have been genetically engineered in other eukaryotes (yeast, algae,
and mammalian cells
−

), plant mitochondria have only been transformed after isolation.
,
 Their small size and lack of selectable marker genes have been obstacles
for the transformation of plant mitochondria. Instead of directly
transforming mitochondria, gene editing nucleases can be expressed
from the nuclear genome and directed into the mitochondria with signaling
peptides.
,
 Nucleus-encoded TALENs fused
to these mitochondrial signaling peptides have been used to knock
out mitochondrial genes in rice and Brassica to cure
cytoplasmic male sterility. With the
same approach, atp6-1 and atp6-2, encoding ATP synthase subunit 6 was also deleted in the Arabidopsis mitochondrial genome. In addition, the DddA-derived cytosine base editor has been targeted
into the mitochondria of lettuce and rapeseed through protoplast transformation
to edit mitochondrial genes. Pairs of
TALENs were targeted to the tobacco mitochondrion to mutate a non-essential
gene and homochondriomic mutants resulting from TALEN activity were
isolated.

2.1.5.

## Toward De Novo Synthesis of Complete Plant
Genomes
Entire genomes have been constructed using chemical
DNA synthesis and used to replace the native genome in living cells.
The sizes and complexities of the synthesized genomes have been growing:
5.4 kb phage (2003), 1.1 Mb bacteria
(2010), and 12 Mb chromosomes of yeast
(2022).
,
 Mammalian chromosomes are likely next and
it seems inevitable that plant genomes will follow, possibly starting
with whole plastid synthesis and simpler artificial chromosomes. Complete genome synthesis, where every base
pair is specified and built using chemistry and molecular biology,
offers the ability to radically redesign the genome. For example,
genes can be reorganized to simplify engineering efforts, non-essential
genes and regions can be removed (retroviruses, transposons, insertion
elements), and proteins can be recoded to repurpose certain codons
to incorporate non-natural amino acids or to prevent gene transfer
and viral infection.
−

 These changes would simplify future modeling and engineering efforts.
Plastid genomes are relatively small, approximately 100 kb, making
them approachable targets for de novo synthesis. Successful transformation of a synthetic plastid
has only been achieved in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a single cell alga with a single chloroplast, with the intent of
making multiple alterations to its photosynthetic apparatus. The entire 203 kb plastid genome, which includes
several photosynthetic genes from red algae, was cloned, assembled
in yeast, and transformed into the C. reinhardtii chloroplast, where it recombined with the native plastid genome.
A tobacco minimal plastid genome, with all photosynthesis-related
and other non-essential genes removed, has been designed, but not
yet built or transformed. The mouse
mitochondrion genome has been synthesized, but one from plants has
not, and its replacement remains technically very challenging.

Minimal plant genomes could be built
through the iterative deletion
of nonessential genes. This capability would aid the functional analysis
of gene clusters and noncoding genetic elements and generate new agronomic
traits through deletion of unwanted loci. The first minimal cell,
the bacterium Mycoplasma mycoides JCVI-Syn3.0, has
a 531 kb genome containing only 438 protein-coding genes and 35 RNA-coding
genes was created by deleting about half of the parental genome.
,
 Viable minimal Escherichia coli and Bacillus
subtilis strains have been constructed by removing about
a third of their genomes ( ).
−

 One method to delete
large regions of the chromosomes uses two pairs of nucleases (ZFNs,
TALENs, or Cas9) to generate two double strand breaks that are then
ligated via repair pathways. This method removed up to a Mb from the
genomes of prokaryotes and mammalian cells (up to 65 Mb from neuroblastoma
cell lines). This strategy was applied
to rice by deleting two nonessential 170 and 245 kb regions that encode
genes involved in diterpenoid synthesis. Another method is based on the repurposing of a prime editor to
delete large chromosomal regions, by combining a pair of pegRNAs and
the Cas9 nickase or nuclease. This method
can precisely delete up to 10 kb in mammalian cell lines but have
not yet been applied to plants.
Synthesizing complete plant
chromosomes and replacing the native
genomes of cells will be difficult due to their size and complex organization.
Even in simpler model eukaryotes, the synthesis of entire chromosomes
has taken years and a large multi-institutional international collaboration.
The Synthetic Yeast Genome Project (Sc2.0) is an ongoing project to
completely synthesize and assemble 16 yeast (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae) chromosomes (12 Mb).
,
 While they have been synthesized individually, only 6.5 have been
consolidated into a single strain to date. The assembly strategy involved the iterative replacement of 30-60
kb fragments assigned with one of two auxotrophic markers. Sc2.0’s
genome is 8% smaller, does not contain retrotransposons, repeated
sequences, redundant and nonessential genes, or many introns (pre-mRNA
introns and all tRNA introns). Further,
the tRNA genes were relocated to a specialized new chromosome encoding
only tRNA. In a particularly radical
re-engineering project, all Saccharomyces cerevisae chromosomes were fused to create a single 11.8 Mb chromosome, which
surprisingly resulted in viable cells. When whole genome construction and simplification is possible in
plants, the impact would be large. One can imagine massive genome
reorganization to facilitate the insertion of large multi-gene designs,
as well as improved designability, evolutionary stability, and viral
resistance through genome-scale modifications (e.g., changing codon usage across all genes).
,,

2.2.

## Plant
Genetic System Design
Abstraction
is a core principle of synthetic biology intended to aid complex design
projects. Following this paradigm, genetic
parts are the most basic units of DNA; they encompass a minimal function,
such as a promoter. Large libraries of reliable genetic parts aid
in precisely tuning expression levels, for example to balance flux
through a metabolic pathway or facilitate the construction of large
designs. Genetic devices are assemblies of parts that collectively
perform a function, such as a sensor or metabolic pathway. Devices
are assembled into a system, which encompasses the complete recombinant
design introduced to the cell. Plant genetic engineering projects
have not necessitated these abstractions as they have been relatively
simple, with few parts and random integration, but as they get more
complex and reliable over time, this principle will become more important
in organizing designs.
This section describes libraries of genetic
parts for plants. The parts are organized into those involved in transcriptional
and translational processes, including insulators that isolate a synthetic
construct from genetic context. In the simplest form, they can be
used to maximize the expression of a protein in a plant; up to 5 g/kg
biomass has been reported. These genetic
engineering projects are simple enough where they can be organized
“by hand.” However, more complex metabolic engineering
and regulatory control requires combining many parts. As projects
get larger, it will become more important to use CAD software, which
has already become routine for simpler organisms. Computational tools
for plant genetic part design are described in . It is expected that
these tools will be needed as plant engineering efforts get more complex
and require the balancing of many design constraints.
2.2.1.

## Plant Genetic Parts
Compared to
simpler organisms, defining a genetic part for a plant can be more
complex. A part should be discrete, meaning it has a clear nucleotide
beginning and end, and ideally has a single function, irrespective
of genetic context. These are often not the case for natural regulatory
parts in plants; for example, promoters can have enhancers many kilobases
upstream, functions can overlap, and chromosomal effects and silencing
are often position-dependent. Most of plant genetics will not conform
to this idealized abstraction, but that is okay: the point of the
exercise is to simplify and collate synthetic genetics to facilitate
engineering and not to be descriptive of natural genetics. Further,
part classes can be engineered to be modular and tunable by insulating
against complicating phenomena that occur during transcription and
translation.
−

 As such, it is valuable to build part libraries,
develop methods to minimize context effects, and maintain them in
public databases to facilitate widespread use. A notable example of
this ongoing effort for plant engineering is OpenPlant (https://www.openplant.org/). GenoCAD and the GoldenBraid webdesign
tool (GB3.0) manage the process of part selection, storage of characterization
data, and the implement of assembly rules in creating plant expression
cassettes.
,

One reason that plant
part libraries have been slow to develop compared to other organisms
is due to the historical limitations of genome modifications. Because
of the random nature of genome insertions, a single gene with one
promoter and terminator could be transformed and it would insert into
many chromosomal locations. These different locations and copy numbers
lead to different levels of expression. The after-the-fact selection
of a plant that has the desired phenotype is effectively a directed
evolution experiment.
,
 However, genome editing facilitates
single, defined integrations and landing pads improve reliability;
albeit, not yet in most agriculturally-relevant crops. Replacing this
process can actually be problematic, where the earlier random approach
allowed for one to test many expression levels with one part (e.g., a promoter) whereas a defined insertion site means
that different parts must be screened. To this end, libraries of genetic
parts can be collated by using bioinformatics to scan databases for
lists of natural sequences (“part mining”), computational
design, or randomizing a DNA scaffold and screening.
,−

Part characterization is also harder
in plants because high-throughput
experiments are difficult, there is variability in expression due
to cell and tissue type, and chlorophyll interferes with the fluorescent
signal from common reporters of expression.
,
 Part characterization has relied heavily on Agroinfiltration methods,
where constructs are delivered by Agrobacterium and
expressed transiently at high-copy number in the leaves of tobacco
or other plants ( ). Agroinfiltration is preferred for being fast and
scalable and it is feasible to characterize thousands of parts on
the order of days. Multiple constructs can also be co-infiltrated,
which enables the combinatorial characterization of parts such as
promoters and transcription factors (TFs). Nevertheless, agroinfiltration has limitations, including heterogeneous
results arising from inconsistent infiltration efficiency, variability
in gene delivery, and expression requiring careful normalization,
and potential gene silencing mechanisms in the plant. It also does
not permit testing in the tissue of interest (e.g., roots) or the plant species of interest. To reduce variability
when evaluating the transcriptional activity of plant parts, a ratiometric
dual lux system was developed that uses a second
constitutive luciferase gene as an internal reference for normalization.

The cost and time required to genetically
engineer plants make
it difficult to build hundreds of plant lines just to characterize
a library of parts (e.g., a set of constitutive promoters
of different strengths). The slow throughput is in contrast to bacteria
and yeasts, especially model species. For example, large part libraries
have been screened using multiplexed DNA construction and high-throughput
characterization strategies. An example is flow-seq, where a cell
sorter is used to isolate parts from a large library by their activity,
followed by deep sequencing to determine the parts.
,
 This approach was used to characterize over 12,000 Escherichia
coli promoters and ribosome binding sites (RBSs) in a single
experiment.
While these methods are not suitable for screening
whole plants,
protoplasts provide a promising way to scale-up the throughput and
have been used to characterize over 100 synthetic promoters in Arabidopsis and sorghum. Protoplasts
are individualized plant cells lacking a cell wall that are generated
from a variety of plant tissues through enzymatic or mechanical means. Once isolated, protoplasts can be transformed
by electroporation or PEG-mediated techniques and assayed either as
individual protoplasts or undergo regeneration into entire plants.
Protoplasts can also be sorted using fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS), although to our knowledge, this has not yet been applied to in planta part discovery.
,
 An alternative
to protoplasts is cell culture suspensions, such as the tobacco BY-2
cell line, which are fast growing and easy to transform. A plate-based
fluorescence screen of 19 plant promoters and 20 promoter-terminator
combinations was performed using Tobacco BY-2 cell suspensions co-pelleted
with Agrobacterium cultures.

2.2.1.1.

## Transcriptional Parts
In plants,
transcription is regulated by many proteins that alter chromatin accessibility
to recruit RNA polymerase II (RNAPII), control its production of a
transcript, and determine when it dissociates from the DNA ( A). It is desirable to make
the DNA sequences controlling these processes as modular as possible
so that they can be easily combined in new ways. A complication is
that natural eukaryotic transcription, including in plants, often
is controlled by large and complex DNA regions that contain many poorly-defined
motifs. This organization has made it historically difficult to make
even simple parts; for example, a “constitutive” native
promoter can change expression based on the tissue type and developmental
stage. It also makes it more difficult to be quantitative in combining
parts to achieve a precise level of expression. In bacteria, promoter
strength has been defined as the RNAP flux emanating from it, which
has enabled model-guided genetic circuit design. Using this paradigm to characterize a eukaryotic promoter
is more complicated because of the impact of chromosome accessibility,
promoter-terminator looping, pervasive transcription, and interactions
with the nuclear pore complex. There
are also many additional steps after mRNA transcription that can alter
expression levels and complicate the assignment of a single strength
to a promoter (5′-capping, export, splicing, 3′-polyadenylation,
etc.). This section outlines the definition
of transcription control motifs as modular parts that can be used
to control transcription.
 2.2.1.1.1.

## Plant Promoters
This section
describes design of promoters for the production of
coding mRNA to express proteins in plants. The minimal core promoter
is the DNA sequence that lies directly upstream of the transcription
start site (TSS) to which the pre-initiation complex, including RNAPII,
binds. The core promoter typically contains
sequence motifs that bind to different parts of the complex. Upstream
of the core promoter, cis-regulatory elements (CREs)
bind to TFs ( B) (TFs). CREs can make a promoter
responsive to additional signals, including tissue-specific TFs ( .a) or those
involved in environmental stress ( ). Enhancers even further upstream alter
the chromatin structure to change the probability that a promoter
is on without increasing the expression level. Plant promoters can be large when the CRE and enhancer
sequences are considered; rescuing knockouts can require the inclusion
of 4-10 kb of promoter DNA. The binding
of TFs to the CREs and enhancer region leads to looping and protein-protein
interactions with the RNAPII complex ( B).

Natural
promoters sometimes appear modular, where the various motifs can be
mixed-and-matched and sometimes they exhibit non-modularity. Deep
learning algorithms have implied that the entire sequence of the promoter,
and even the full transcription unit, is required to predict expression. However, promoters with very different arrangements
of motifs can yield the same expression patterns, indicating a degree
of modularity. This modularity can be
used to design synthetic promoters ( ).
Natural plant promoters
are often used for genetic engineering
projects. The PlantProm database contains 576 native plant promoters
with experimentally-verified TSSs across 86 species including rice,
maize, soybean, grape, Medicago, and Arabidopsis. The largest collection of experimentally-validated
natural plant promoters is Plant Proteome DataBase (ppdb) with promoter
positioning for over 27,000 genes (as of 2021) for Arabidopsis, as well as rice, Physcomitrella patens, and poplar. Computational tools, such as TSSPlant, can
be used to predict novel plant promoters using data from these large
datasets.

Natural plant promoters
can be identified using microarrays or
RNA-seq.
,
 Depending on how the data are
processed, promoters can be identified that are constitutive, tissue-specific,
or inducible. Using this approach, a library of 15 natural promoters
was identified that spanned a 100-fold dynamic range. The strongest promoters in this library were
similar in strength to commonly-used viral promoters (CaMV35S, see
below). They showed the same rank order of activity when experimentally
validated with a reporter in Nicotiana benthamiana (tobacco) and Lactuca sativa (lettuce). Other libraries
of constitutive promoters have also be identified and characterized
in tobacco, producing over a 300-fold range in expression.

Most plant engineering projects on a
few constitutive promoters
to obtain high levels of expression. Because plant promoters are so
large and complex with unknown regulatory inputs, these promoters
tend to be sourced from viruses or bacteria (e.g., Agrobacterium). As part of their
virulence programs, they insert DNA into the plant genome containing
a promoter controlling a gene encoding a virulence factor.
A
notable example is the 343 bp Cauliflower Mosaic Virus 35S promoter
(referred to as CaMV35S or 35S). Due to the fact that the 35S promoter
provides high expression and has a very wide host range, it has become
the de facto standard to which other plant promoters
are compared. The 46bp CaMV35S minimal
promoter and its variations can be found in over 60% of all transgenic
crops grown worldwide. While the 35S
promoter is considered constitutive, its activity has been shown to
be dependent on tissue type and the plant’s physiological state.
In Arabidopsis, CaMV35S-driven expression was up
to 18-fold higher in root tissue than in stem tissue and up to 14-fold
higher following heat stress.
,
 Interpreting results
from the literature based on this promoter can be challenging as there
is no standard and the same promoter name can be used to describe
different DNA sequences.
Hybrid promoters have been built that
vary the sequence of CaMV35S
and related viral promoters. When then have about the same activity,
they could be used together in a construct to avoid homologous recombination
and silencing. Stronger promoters have also been identified, producing
up to 5-fold increased expression over the already-strong CaMV35S.
−

Other commonly-used promoters have been derived from plants
or
viruses that infect plants and can be tissue-specific (below) or stress-inducible
( ). A few of these promoters are as strong as the
CaMV35S promoter. They had similar strengths when tested in Brassica rapa and Nicotiana benthamiana, indicating that at least a subset of plant genetic parts can be
reliably used across species. However,
there is ample evidence that promoters do not generate the same expression
levels in different species. After comparing the strengths of 46 promoters
across tobacco leaves, Medicago truncatula roots, Lotus japonicus, and barley, a core set of only seven was
identified that showed functionality across the species and tissues
tested ( C). Note that in genetic engineering, this core
set could then be the focus and the misbehaving species-specific promoters
removed from the design set. A high-throughput analysis of 8,000 Arabidopsis, 34,000 maize and 27,000 sorghum core promoters
was performed by measuring transcript abundance in pooled libraries. The promoter strengths were only weakly correlated
when expressed in tobacco leaves compared to maize protoplasts. The
species variability of promoters has been reduced using principles
from control theory, such as feedforward loops, but this strategy
has not yet been applied to part design for plants.
,

2.2.1.1.2.

## Synthetic Promoter Design Principles
Synthetic promoters have been built from the ground-up using only
well-defined sequence motifs. They have a number of advantages over
using a natural promoter in a project. First, they are more specific
because they only recruit the defined TFs and do not have unknown
regulatory factors that are usually present in natural promoters. Thus, they generate less leaky expression from
uncharacterized native TF binding. It
also reduces their crosstalk with endogenous regulatory networks and
synthetic genetic circuits consisting of multiple TFs. They also do not have unnecessary negative
feedback and less metabolic/energy burden. In this section, the rules for building a core promoter are described,
with the addition of upstream CREs in . Distal promoter regions containing
enhancers are typically not part of synthetic promoters, but they
may be used as insulators ( ).
The core promoter is defined
as a region that has to be placed about ±50 bp around the TSS
for transcription to initiate.
,
 More generally, the
region from about -250 to the TSS has a strong effect on transcriptional
activity ( E).
,
 Within this region, there are motifs that interact directly with
the RNAPII and associated proteins (the transcription complex). In
addition, the nucleotide composition impact activity. This effect is plant specific, with AT-rich
promoters in tobacco leading to 4-fold higher activity whereas there
was no impact on maize promoters. Note that the list below provides
the approximate sequences and locations of these motifs; differences
have been observed between species and across monocots and dicots.

TSS.
,
 There is
usually a single C or T upstream of the TSS and a single A or G downstream.

TATA box (TATAWAW) with
a consensus
of TATAAA). This is the most important
motif required for high expression. It
interacts directly with the RNAPII transcriptional complex and is
usually positioned 30 – 40 bp upstream of the TSS.
,
 The precise flexibility in the location of the TATA box is variable
across plant species. For example, in
Arabidopsis there is a single peak at about -30 whereas in maize,
there is a second peak that also occurs at -50. Replacement of any
of the A/T’s in the TATA box with a G results in sharply decreased
activity.

Downstream promoter element (DPE) (RGWCGTG). Promoters that do not have TATA boxes can have
a DPE instead. It has a similar function as the TATA box in recruiting
RNAPII. They are typically located +30 from the TSS.

Inr (initiation) element (PTCANTPP
where the A is the +1 first bp transcribed).
,,
 RNAPII cooperatively binds to
the Inr and either the DPE or TATA box.

Y patch (CYTCYYCCYC).
,,,
 It is variable in its position from about -150 to -1. It is a common motif that is unique to plants:
18% of Arabidopsis and 50% of rice promoters contain Y patches.
,,
 Promoters with Y patches are
15% stronger.

GC box (GRGCGS). It recruits TFs and typically is found about 100-300 bp
upstream, but can occur much further away from the core. Multiple
GC boxes often occur in a promoter.

CCAAT box.
,
 It interacts with the RNAPII
machinery by recruiting the nuclear
TF-Y. Its binding to this position causes
changes to the histones that can enhance or suppress expression. It
is positioned -120 to -40 in dicots and -460 to -140 bp in monocots.

These sequence
motifs have been observed in the core,
but they
are not all required for activity. In fact, some natural promoters
do not have any of them and yet transcription occurs. But adding more motifs increases the promoter
strength. This effect was apparent when
analyzing completely random nucleotide sequences that do not act as
plant promoters. Placing motifs into these otherwise inert sequences
was sufficient to turn them into promoters. The TATA box was the most
important, followed by the Y patch, and then the Inr sequence. This
effect has been shown in Arabidopsis, maize, and sorghum. Obtaining
synergy between motifs requires their proper spacing as they can also
interfere with each other.
,
 Promoter activity
exhibits a sharp decrease if there is more than 50 bp between the
first upstream motif and the TATA box.

Promoter design would benefit from mathematical models with
interpretable
biophysical contributions of each motif and TF to the promoter activity.
The closest to this ideal has been the application of ML to large
datasets of natural transcriptomic data to extract the contributions
of sequences to promoter activity. ML
results can be difficult to interpret and thus make informed choices
regarding the rules underlying promoter activity. However, it is still
possible to apply these models to design improved promoters through
a process of computational mutations and evaluation. By screening different upstream CREs and downstream minimal
plant promoters, libraries consisting of hundreds to thousands of
unique constitutive synthetic promoters with varying strengths have
been created for Arabidopsis.
,,
 Using these data, novel synthetic
promoters were computationally designed, and their strength was predicted
by comparing their sequences to an experimentally-characterized set
of promoters.

Libraries of promoters
that produce different levels of gene expression
are very useful for different applications of genetic engineering.
Metabolic flux could be controlled through a pathway by systematically
varying the expression levels of enzymes. Not allowing a toxic intermediate to accumulate in the cell reduces
the growth impact. Even promoters of the same strength, but different
sequences, can be helpful by allowing traits to be expressed consisting
of multiple genes. The sequence variability avoids problems due to
homologous recombination
,,
 and silencing. These problems can
be addressed by using promoters that have the same strength, but vary
in sequence composition. One approach is to vary the sequences of
the motifs or regions between them or sourcing different organisms,
including from outside plants (e.g., yeast). Constitutive promoters also provide the backbones
for inserting CREs that allow for inducible- or condition-specific
promoters to be built.

2.2.1.1.3.

## Adding Cis-Regulatory
Elements (CREs)
to Control Expression
Conditions
Regulatory inputs can be added to a promoter by
including upstream
CREs. Natural plant CREs are associated with heat shock, light, development,
wounding, pathogen attack, sugar sensing, reactive oxygen species,
and cold stress and combinations of them can be seen upstream of the
TSS ( ).
−

 Adding CREs to a synthetic promoter can be used to create a sensor
or inducible system (Section 2.3.4). Regulatable promoters can be
specific to a particular cell type, under a defined set of conditions,
or to keep the expression of a toxic protein off until an appropriate
growth stage is reached.
 CREs responsive to specific stimuli can be found
in databases of
published sequences, such as PLACE, TRANSFAC, or PlantCARE. Their activities are modular and the incorporation of these CREs
into a synthetic promoter makes it responsive to different stimuli. However, some caution needs to be taken as
CREs can have differently, sometimes opposite, functions in different
species. For example, a motif was observed
to be root-specific in tobacco but then was green tissue specific
in rice.
 provides examples of promoters whose CREs
allow them to only turn on in a particular tissue type. In , provides promoters whose cis-motifs
cause them to respond to stresses.
 Motifs can also be
identified by screening random
sequence libraries
or searching databases with bioinformatic tools. Identifying CREs in these datasets is like finding a needle-in-a-haystack
because the motifs are only 4-10 bp and occur in a region that is
500-5000 bp upstream of the TSS. Plant
CREs that respond to pathogens were found by combining approaches. First, putative CREs were found by searching
the PathoPlant database (microarray data) for Arabidopsis genes up-regulated by pathogen-related stimuli. This search led
to 79 putative CREs, each of which was used to build a promoter by
placing four copies upstream of a minimal CaMV35S promoter. After
screening, 25 were found to be active in parsley protoplasts and tobacco.
Increasingly, annotating and characterizing CREs in genomic data is
accomplished using machine learning ( ). For example, sequences surrounding the TSS were used as
inputs to train a classification model to predict the level of gene
expression in transcriptional data.
 There are rules for adding CREs
to a core promoter
scaffold. Often,
CREs that bind to different TFs function independently and the spacing
relative to the core does not matter.
,
 Even moving
the motif one base pair at a time, thereby altering the rotation of
the bound TF around the DNA relative to the bound RNAPII machinery,
usually does not have an effect. To avoid steric clashing, CREs should
be spaced between 15-20 bp apart from each other (the center of their
sequences by about 50 bp). CREs have
a bell-shaped distribution in the promoter region and are enriched
between -500 and -250 ( D).

Changing the number
of CREs can modulate the activity of a synthetic
promoter. Concatenating the number of
CREs linearly increases that amount of expression from a promoter
up to a point, after which it starts to decline. This effect could be due to the depletion of the TF pool.
,
 This has been observed in synthetic genetic circuits, where the
increase in TF binding sites can act as a “sponge” that
alters the activation threshold.
,
 The sharing
of a resource leads to “retroactivity,” which has been
studied computationally and experimentally in bacteria and yeast.
,
 One of the consequences of retroactivity is that promoters can impact
each other indirectly by influencing the availability of the pools
of cellular proteins involved in their activity. Combining multiple
CREs that bind to different TFs upstream of the TATA box, rather than
repeating the same CRE, has been observed to lead to higher expression.

Increasing the number of CREs also increases
basal activity when
used for inducible or environment-specific control. This effect may have different consequences depending on
the application. For example, in some
cases the maximum inducibility is required and no background is tolerated;
for instance, when expressing toxic proteins. In other cases, the
background may not matter, but the highest possible expression needs
to be achieved when induced.
The ability to insert multiple
CREs into a synthetic promoter enables
the implementation of logic operations that integrate many environmental
and cellular signals. For example, the
insertion of CREs that respond to salicylic acid, jasmonic acid, and
ethylene created a promoter that responds to different combinations
of these signals. Natural plant regulatory
networks have interconnected webs of TFs that combinatorically impact
different promoters, thereby implementing logical operations to enable
the cells to perform computation for pathogen defense, metabolic needs,
and development. This type of signal
integration upstream region of a promoter has been more thoroughly
studied for bacterial and yeast promoters.

Note that using only a sequence motif to direct TF binding
to promoter
DNA is a simplification. In reality, it is also affected by the local
region, DNA shape, and context of other binding events and it must
scan a region of about 90-150 bp when finding the target. ML and protein-folding
models (e.g., AlphaFold) help to identify these factors
and incorporate them into mathematical models of binding. More comprehensive models will aid the combination
of CREs to integrate signals at longer synthetic promoters.

2.2.1.1.4.

## Differences between Monocot and Dicot
Promoters
In the literature, it is often noted that an important
consideration
for selecting a promoter is whether it was sourced from a monocot
or dicot. Plants separated into monocots and dicots about 150 million
years ago and have different genome organizations and promoter architectures.
It has been observed that some promoters work in one branch but not
the other, or they work in both but have very different levels of
activity.
,−

Simple core promoters tend to work in both but can exhibit
variable activity. Core promoter motifs such as CCAAT, Y-patch, TATA-box,
and TSS/Inr are shared between both branches, but their relative abundances
differ.
,,
 The sequence
motifs around the TSS also differ ( G). Viral promoters
tend to function similarly in monocots and dicots. For instance, the
CaMV35S promoter, the SCBV promoter, and the Milk vetch dwarf virus
promoter have proven versatile across monocots (rice, wheat, etc.)
and dicots (tobacco, Arabidopsis, etc.).
−

 However, they can also show differences in expression levels between
plant species and within a species across tissues.
,,,
 Deletion analysis of the sugarcane bacilliform virus promoter revealed
nuances in activity levels when used in different plant species. Note that these studies use natural promoters,
which can be sensitive to TFs present in one branch and not the other.
They also measure “promoter activity” using methods
that group it with mRNA transport degradation and protein translation,
which differ between monocots and dicots. Therefore, the degree to which a well-annotated constitutive core
promoter generates different RNAPII fluxes between monocots and dicots
remains unknown and it could be less variable than what is assumed.
Differences between CREs are an important design consideration
between monocot and dicot promoters.
,,−

 CREs are frequently active in
both, but enhance activity more strongly in one over the other. For
example, some CREs (G-box, ABRE, STRE) are more abundant in the promoters
of highly expressed genes in dicots, while others (Skn-1, GCN4, CAAT-box)
are more frequent in monocots. Some
are able to lead to high levels of expression in both; notably, the
AG-box motif.

A better understanding
of these effects, shared motifs, and perhaps
the integration of feedforward/feedback loops could lead to “universal” promoters that
produce the same levels of activity across monocots and dicots. Toward
this goal, promoter libraries have been built and tested in both branches.
High levels of expression in both can be obtained by using strong
enhancers (e.g., the murine Emu) with efficient leaders
(TMV omega prime). These promoters have
been used for recombinant expression in dicots (tobacco, Arabidopsis)
and monocots (rice, wheat, maize). Libraries of promoters have been
tested across both branches: 6 promoters (rice, tobacco), 8 promoters (wheat, Guinea grass, wild carrot
protoplasts) and a large set of 18,329 Arabidopsis/34,415 maize/27,094 sorghum promoters (maize
and tobacco protoplasts).

2.2.1.1.5.

## Bidirectional Promoters
Bidirectional
promoters contain two opposing core promoter sequences
and simultaneously transcribe two genes oriented in opposite directions.
Endogenous bidirectional promoters can be identified in genomes by
looking for diverging gene pairs with correlated expression levels.
−

 They are prevalent in plants and libraries of putative bidirectional
promoters have been collated in Arabidopsis, rice,
and poplar. Synthetic bidirectional
promoters have been constructed by fusing a CaMV35S promoter to viral
and native plant promoters in an opposite orientation. In maize, a synthetic bidirectional promoter
was used to stack four recombinant genes (two translationally-fused
insect resistance genes in one direction and a fused antibiotic resistance
gene with herbicide tolerance gene in the other). The use of the bidirectional promoter had reduced silencing
compared to when each of the four genes was place under its own independent
promoter. In rice, a native bidirectional promoter was used to co-express
Cas9 and an sgRNA to improve editing efficiency.

2.2.1.1.6.

## RNAPIII Promoters
for Noncoding RNA
Importantly, the transcription of non-coding
RNA (siRNA, miRNA,
gRNA, etc.) in plants requires different promoters than those described
in .
,
 While technically possible,
promoters that use RNAPIII are usually capped, polyadenylated, and
the transcript ends can vary. Plants naturally use RNAPIII based promoters
when transcribing RNA products that are not translated, such as tRNAs.
Because these RNAs are not capped, they tend to be restricted to staying
in the nucleus. For Cas9 gRNA, the natural U3 and U6 promoters are
most commonly used. The U3 promoter control of gRNA was first demonstrated
with Arabidopsis. The U6 promoter was
used for Sorghum biocolor and has been extended to
other plants, including cereals.

RNAPIII promoters tend to be simpler than RNAPII promoters, with
some shared and some different sequence motifs. The transcription
initiation site nucleotide can vary. The TATA box is the same, located
approximately 25-30 bp upstream of the TSS, and in vitro experiments suggest that this may be all the information needed
for RNAPIII initiation. There is an
upstream sequence element (USE) that is required for RNAPIII initiation. The USE is typically 50-70 bp upstream of the
TSS and the consensus sequence is RTCCCACATCG. Monocots require an additional monocot-specific promoter
element (MSP) upstream of the USE. When
present, there are 1-3 MSPs with a consensus sequence of RGCCCR. Additional upstream enhancers can increase
the strength of some promoters. Minimal
RNAPII promoters, containing only the most well-defined promoter motifs,
can be as small as 170 bp. These promoters have been shown to function
in rice. These promoters are constitutive
and expressed at in all tissues at all times.
,,

Their size, simplicity, and shared
sequence motifs simplify the
use of promoters across species. Therefore, the creation of libraries
of promoters with defined strengths are more likely to perform as
expected in a new species context. Libraries
of RNAPIII promoters have been built where variants have different
strengths. The wild-type U3 and U6 promoters were gleaned from a variety
of plants (rice, grapes, soybean, etc.), mutated, and evaluated for
activity.
−

 Across these efforts, 44 promoters have been characterized with
a range of strengths. To date, the application
of these promoters has been to optimize gRNA transcription for Cas9
in various plant species. The most common promoters used for this
purpose are U3/U6 from Arabidopsis (dicot) and rice (monocot). When transcribing multiple gRNAs, placing each
one under a different promoter avoids hairpin structure formation.

2.2.1.1.7.

## High-Throughput Promoter
Evaluation
Using Protoplasts
Protoplasts can be sorted using FACS to
characterize synthetic
TFs and genetic part libraries ( ). This
approach will be valuable for characterizing libraries of genetic
parts and synthetic regulation, where it is hard to evaluate every
member independently in a full plant. For example, to vary the expression
level of a recombinant gene, a set of promoters, 5′-UTRs, and
3′-UTRs were combinatorically assembled into 91 expression
cassettes and transformed into tobacco leaves ( ). The leaves were then harvested
to generate protoplasts and obtain single-cell fluorescence measurements
that showed a 200-fold range in expression between constructs. Combinations
of promoters (CaMV35S, maize Adh1, and sugarcane Ubi1), introns (from
maize Adh1 and sugarcane Ubi1), and enhancer elements (from CaMV35S
and maize Adh1) were fused to the GUS reporter and introduced into
protoplasts from sugarcane (monocot) and carrot (dicot). While certain
promoter-intron-enhancer combinations were effective in both sugarcane
and carrot protoplasts, others showed distinct preferences for one
plant type over the other.

 
2.2.1.1.8.

## Toward Standardized Part Measurements
The use of parts in quantitative design algorithms requires that
they be characterized in a way where the numbers are meaningful when
shared between labs. “Arbitrary units” is the scourge
of biology, where the numbers reported in one lab are not meaningful
in another lab. This makes it impossible to combine lists of genetic
parts from different sources without remeasuring them and design algorithms
cannot select previously-characterized parts based on quantitative
needs. This problem was first addressed in bacteria by defining a “reference
promoter” to which the activity of other promoters can be compared. The promoter activities can then be reported
in RPUs (relative promoter units).
,,
 In E. coli, single molecule experiments
were used to convert RPUs to absolute units of RNAP/s, but this conversion remains uncommon because
of the technical difficulty.
In plants, the CaMV35S promoter
is often the de facto standard to which other promoters
are compared. This got more formally standardized as a specific 200
bp variant of the promoter that showed the highest activity. Carried on a plasmid, this promoter was defined
as 1 RPU for plant genetic circuit design ( ). It will be difficult to use this reference
between labs for stable plant line development until it becomes simpler
to insert it into a defined location in the chromosome. The naming
of CaMV35S promoters is also variable and the ideal length for a reference
promoter is as short as possible, without being so short that it is
influenced by the upstream genetic context.
Characterization
of genetic parts is difficult in plants, making
the precise definition of a reference promoter and its strength difficult.
The measured fluorescence of a genetic part ignores sources of variability,
such as the location or number of genomic integrations. To address
this problem, a dual-luciferase system was developed to enable the
measurement of the activity of a genetic part. The assay involves the expression of Renilla luciferase from a previously characterized promoter (a dexamethasone-inducible
or 4-hydroxytamoxifen-promoter) and firefly luciferase from a synthetic
promoter. The ratio of Renilla luciferase to firefly
luciferase luminescence allows for comparisons of promoter activity
between samples and experiments. Similar approaches have been taken
for other combinations of two reporters.

In addition to the promoter sequence and the reporter, a reference
standard is also defined by the specific conditions under which activity
is measured. To this end, the first standards for the measurement
of promoter activity in plants have been proposed. The SE_001 standard is based on the Luc/Ren reporter system.
It also defines the experiment in tobacco leaves. It also specifies
that the transformation is performed by Agrobacterium-mediated transient
expression and defines that number of integrations that must be achieved,
as measured by a separate reporter. An internal reference promoter
is defined and the standard specifies that it must be measured in
the same experiment. However, unlike above, it defines the reference
promoter as a weak natural promoter of the nopaline synthase gene
and defines the activity of this reference as 1 RPU. Ultimately, it
would require an effort in the scientific community to define the
reference parts and conditions for their measurement.

2.2.1.1.9.

## Plant 3′-Untranslated Regions
(3′-UTRs)
In plants, transcript stability is strongly
affected by the 3′-UTR. The 3′-UTR
of the transcript is essential
for its stability and export out of the nucleus so that the gene can
be expressed. The region between the
end of the open reading frame and the start of this tail is also important.
The sequence in this region can stabilize the mRNA, enhance translation,
and increase gene silencing. It can
function independently of the promoter and 5′-UTR sequence.
Adenine rich elements (AREs) often occur in this region and recruit
proteins that degrade the transcript. The 3′-UTR region is also a target of miRNAs that can implement
additional regulatory control by affecting transcript stability. ML
can predict cleavage and polyadenylation sites in Arabidopsis 3′-UTRs mRNAs.

2.2.1.1.10.

## Plant Terminators
Terminators
interact with RNAPII to stop progression and adds termination
signals to the mRNA that lead to its release. The transcript ends at a conserved AAUAAA (or similar)
site. At this position, endonucleases cut the transcript. Then, a
protein adds a poly(A) tail of 100-250 adenosines; longer tails provide
more protection against degradation. It also facilitates the export
of the transcript from the nucleus, and recruitment of ribosomes,
so that the gene can be expressed. Note that RNAPIII promoters use
different termination signals; typically, a poly-T sequence.

In bacteria, terminator strengths are
quantified as the fraction of RNAP that are blocked from progressing
through the terminator sequence.
,
 Despite their
importance, very few terminator libraries have been characterized
for plants and there has not been work to design synthetic terminators.
A library of 13 natural terminators was characterized in tobacco and
shown to change expression by a few fold, but the underlying mechanism
was unclear.

In eukaryotes, the
role of terminators is more complex, and their
strength can be promoter-dependent.
,,
 This effect could be due to gene looping, where DNA-binding
proteins bend the DNA so that the promoter and terminator physically
interact.
−

 Gene looping affects the variation of expression
from a promoter through the reinitiation of transcription, where the
RNAPII continues from the terminator to the promoter without dissociating
from the DNA, as well as other mechanisms.
−

 High-resolution methods to probe chromatin organization and gene
looping have been applied to Arabidopsis,
,,
 maize,
−

 rice,
,,
 cotton, and sorghum. The
control of looping can lead to different expression levels. For example,
regulators of gene looping control flowering in Arabidopsis by modulating FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) and fine-tune
the expression of UNBRANCHED3 (UB3), which influences
kernel row number in maize.
,

Terminators
differ in their ability to stabilize transcripts, an
example being the HSP terminator which provides 3-fold increase in
mRNA levels compared to the NOS terminator. In addition, strong terminators avoid the production of aberrant
transcripts without polyadenylation and sRNAs, leading to gene silencing. The strength of terminators can be host-dependent. As a result, viral- or pathogen-derived terminators,
such as the Agrobacterium-derived NOS and OSC terminators,
are commonly used because they are highly efficient and have a broad
host range.
,
 However, even for these terminators,
there can be wide variation in expression levels across species. Ten
terminators screened in Medicago truncatula and barley
had no correlation in terminator strengths between the two species
highlighting the importance of identifying appropriate terminators
for optimal recombinant gene expression ( H).

2.2.1.2.

## Translational Parts
To produce
protein, an mRNA transcript must be exported from the nucleus. The
sequence and chemical form of the mRNA dictates the level of expression
( A). The 5′-UTR cap is usually required for translation
in eukaryotes ( ). In addition, the region upstream of the translational
start codon and 3′-UTR ( ) both play important roles regulating
translation efficiency. Finally, the
poly(A) tail at the 3′- end of the transcript recruits the
protein complex that unfolds mRNA secondary structure and facilitates
ribosomal assembly. Secondary structures
throughout the mRNA can also block the progression of the ribosome. Binding sites for RNA-binding proteins (RBPs)
and small RNAs can also modulate translation.
,

 2.2.1.2.1.

## Plant 5′-Untranslated
Regions
(5′-UTRs)
The 5′-UTR comes after the TSS and
is transcribed as part
of the mRNA containing the gene-of-interest. It is important in regulating
prokaryotic expression, where it impacts the stability of the transcript
and can block or expose the ribosome binding site (RBS) and ATG. In
plants, the 5′-UTR also plays an important role in the expression
of genes via a suite of mechanisms, including its processing into
multiple isoforms.
,
 One role of the 5′-UTR
is to be “capped,” where a 7-methylguanosine (m7G) is
added when the nascent mRNA is only about 20–30 nucleotides
long. The cap is a signal that protects against degradation, facilitates
nuclear export, and recruits ribosomes for translation. It also participates
in nonsense-mediated decay, where transcripts with premature stop
codons are degraded to avoid expressing potentially harmful truncated
proteins.

The 5′-UTR also
affects gene expression either by encoding sequence motifs that interact
with RNAPII downstream of the TSS or through internal sequences that
recruit or block ribosome binding. Some plants and plant viruses have
translational enhancers encoded at the 5′-end of the transcript.
−

 The 5′- and 3′-UTR regions have not yet been fully
exploited in controlling expression in plant engineering, but work
with machine learning has begun to illuminate the importance of these
regions.

Plant 5′-UTRs
can contain a small upstream open reading
frame (uORF) before the main gene. The
ribosome can start to translate the short uORF and then reinitiate
translation of the main open reading frame through a process known
as “leaky scanning”.
,
 The distance
of the uORF to the main open reading frame and the sequence and length
of the uORF all dictate the impact on expression. These sequences can be identified by computational analysis
and mutated to remove them. This can be desirable in plant engineering
because introns are usually used to increase expression, but the uORF
could have the opposite effect. As a
design strategy, uORFs can be placed in a transcript to modulate the
translation of the downstream gene. uORFs
could potentially also be used for other purposes. In E. coli, they were used to obtain a more reliable RBS strength. It was observed that their presence made the
RBS controlling the main open reading frame less dependent on genetic
context, making their pre-measured strengths more reliable.
A synthetic 5′-UTR for plants (78 bp) was constructed by
fusing motifs. The downstream 5 bp from the TSS of the CaMV35S promoter
was fused to a CT-rich region (an octamer combined with nine CAA repeats). The resulting 5′-UTR was found to be
about 10-fold stronger than a commonly used one from an expression
vector. Rational design and machine learning has also been applied
to created libraries of 5′-UTRs that yield different strengths
through the combination of motifs.
,

Translational
enhancers can be derived from many plant RNA viruses
and are useful for obtaining high protein expression. Some that are
commonly used, such as the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) Ω enhancer,
have been shown to recruit ribosomes without requiring a properly-capped
and polyadenylated transcript.
,
 A 28 nt synthetic
5′-UTR containing repeats of sequence motifs present in the
Ω enhancer was used to enhance gene expression in tobacco and
cotton to higher levels than the native Ω enhancer, but it varied
depending on the plant tissue ( B). As a rule,
the strengths of viral enhancers are variable across plant species
and match the host range of the source virus.
,

Including an intron in the 5′-UTR has been found to
improve
recombinant gene expression in plants. The mechanism is unknown with hypotheses that encompass increased
rates of transcription, pre-mRNA processing, mRNA export, mRNA stability,
and translation.
,
 Some design rules have been
discovered, such as the placement of the introns in the correct orientation
within the transcribed sequence and close to the TSS. A few dozen introns have been used to modulate
expression or restrict it to specific tissues. However, due to the lack of mechanistic understanding,
the use of introns to quantitatively tune gene expression is difficult.
The effect of an intron on expression also varies across plant species.

Interactions between intronic sequences
and proteins involved in
transcription and mRNA processing differ between monocots and dicots. For example, an intron from the rice cytosolic
superoxide dismutase gene (sodCc2) enhances gene
expression in rice, wheat, and maize. However, it does not enhance
expression in dicots, such as Arabidopsis and tobacco. Intron-mediated
enhancement (IME) is hypothesized to be due to conserved motifs, which
are required for efficient splicing and gene expression in monocots
but not in dicots. The monocot (maize)
pre-mRNAs were processed less efficiently compared to the dicot (pea)
pre-mRNAs in the tobacco host. IME can
increase mRNA accumulation by 10-fold, but it must be in the correct
orientation and within 1 kb of the ATG of the gene. An algorithm was developed to predict whether an intron
is likely to exhibit IME and several have been characterized as parts.
−

The use of introns needs to be done with caution because they
can
lead to the silencing of recombinant genes. Hairpin structures within the intron are known to correlate with
silencing. Before using an intron, it
should be examined for such structures. In addition, the removal of
sequences that could be splice sites has been shown to increases expression.

2.2.1.2.2.

## Internal Ribosome Entry Sites (IRESs)
Native plant genes are most often expressed alone as monocistrons.
That being said, ribosomes can also be recruited to an internal site
in the transcript using an IRES. The
use of IRESs allows multiple genes to be encoded as a polycistronic
operon. This organization could aid the introduction of traits into
the plant that require multiple genes without requiring a promoter
being used for each gene. It also couples the genes transcriptionally
and translationally, potentially allowing for the ratio between the
proteins to be kept constant, which is sometimes important.
The use of an IRES also bypasses the need to cap the mRNA, thus enabling
polycistronic expression in plants. Many
plant RNA viruses naturally rely on IRESs to recruit ribosomes without
the standard protein translation initiation machinery. The IRES from Tobacco mosaic virus promotes the translation of a second cistron to 30% the levels of
the first cistron in tobacco ( C). Several other IRES’s
from plant viruses have been shown to function in plants.

2.2.1.3.

## Insulators
Advanced genetic design
requires that parts perform reliably when used in different contexts.
The central assumption made when defining a DNA sequence as a “genetic
part” is that its function is only determined by its sequence
and not the neighboring sequences or genetic context (i.e., different locations in the genome). However, this assumption is
clearly not true for any cells, much less the complex genetics of
plants. To this end, new classes of insulator parts have been developed
with the intent of reducing context effects to increase part reliability.
,,,,

2.2.1.3.1.

## Control of Chromosome Remodeling and
Gene Silencing
Plant chromosomes have complex tertiary structure
with protein
factors and DNA modifications that control access of a gene to transcriptional
machinery. As a result, there are regions of the chromosome that are
associated with high or low expression of a recombinant gene. Several
approaches have been taken to reduce these effects so that expression
is dependent only on the construct being inserted and not local context
effects. High-throughput open chromatin mapping (Hi-C and related
techniques) can aid in identifying boundary elements.
,
 The native function of these sequences is to interact with DNA-binding
proteins to insulate genes from heterochromatic silencing. The use
of Hi-C to identify boundary elements has been used in Arabidopsis, rice, cotton, and maize.
,,

Boundary elements are believed to act in two ways. First,
they could interfere with unwanted enhancer activity by physically
separating enhancer binding sites from the core promoter. Second,
they could protect a recombinant gene from position-dependent silencing
by heterochromatin histone modifying enzymes that create binding sites
for silencing factors. Matrix or scaffold
attachment regions (MARs/SARs) are a well-studied class of boundary
elements composed of A/T-rich sequences that facilitate nuclear matrix
binding, resulting in the structural organization of the chromatin.
MARs from tobacco, petunia, and Arabidopsis, as well
as chicken, have been used to insulate recombinant genes in plants. In Arabidopsis, flanking a
gene by MARs (e.g., AtS and MAR10) increased its
expression and reduced the expression level variation between transgenic
lines ( I). By combining nuclear matrix protein binding
sites and other MAR sequence motifs, small synthetic MARs were constructed
that were functional in both Arabidopsis and rice. Databases of MARs/SARs binding sites are available.

Genetic parts, including promoters and
terminators, derived from
viruses or pathogens can also lead to gene silencing. Gene silencing mediated by small RNAs (sRNAs)
regulate gene expression in plants. They
can result from double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) degradation by enzymes
like DICER and the resulting sRNAs complex with ARGONAUTE proteins
to repress target gene expression, including through mRNA degradation. Genetic parts can be included in the mRNA that
are less susceptible or resist silencing. For example, strong terminators
induce polyadenylation of transgene transcripts, which decreases silencing
by preventing RNA-dependent RNA polymerases from producing siRNAs.
,
 Intron splicing blocks the silencing of highly expressed endogenous
genes. Including Rubisco-derived intron sequences improves transgene
expression by suppressing RNA silencing.
,
 However, endogenous introns differ in their capacity to increase
gene expression, potentially due to differences in intron splicing
efficiency. Another approach to suppress
silencing is to express the P19 protein from Cymbidium ringspot
virus to sequester sRNAs.

2.2.1.3.2.

## Blocking Ribosomal Read-through
Synthetic systems often differ from natural genetics due to how
close multiple genes are encoded in a design. Even when each gene
has its own promoter and terminator, they are inevitably imperfect
and RNAPII from an upstream promoter will readthrough and synthesize
transcripts with multiple genes. Bacterial ribozyme insulators (e.g., RiboJ) were developed to decouple promoter strength
from the 5′-UTR of the mRNA.
,
 These ribozymes
have been moved to yeast to eliminate the translation of undesired
upstream elements due to transcriptional read-through between neighboring
cistrons. They could perform a similar
function if used in plants.

2.2.1.4.

## RNA
Interference, Post-transcriptional
Gene Silencing, and CRISPR-Mediated RNA Editing
Plants possess
post-transcriptional gene silencing mechanisms that regulate or suppress
gene expression. Genes are sequence-specifically targeted by sRNAs,
including small interfering RNA (siRNA) and microRNA (miRNA), which
are processed by and loaded onto protein complexes to coordinate mRNA
degradation or translation repression. Many crop traits have been
improved by introducing or manipulating sRNAs, including enhancement
of plant disease and pest resistance, alternation of plant architecture,
and removal of toxic compounds.
,−

 The first GMO plant approved in the U.S. for human consumption was
the “Flavr Savr” tomato, which was based on the expression
of a siRNA that knocked down polygalacturonase, an enzyme that degrades
pectin in the fruit wall making it more likely to be damaged during
transport. Since then, many trait improvements
derived from siRNA and miRNA have been applied to problems across
agriculture.
RNA interference (RNAi) is a method to knockdown
genes by specifically targeting their mRNA for degradation. The mechanism
is derived from native defense pathways that target invasive nucleic
acids, such as viruses and mobile genetic elements. RNAi is initiated
by the transcription of a long double stranded RNA (dsRNA) or hairpin
RNA (hpRNA), which are processed into many siRNAs comprised of 21
to 24-nucleotide duplexes by the enzyme Dicer. An RNA-inducing silencing complex (RISC) complex is formed
by binding of the siRNA to the ARGONAUTE proteins, which complex with
the complimentary mRNA to cause its cleavage and degradation. In some cases, RNAi can result in epigenetic
modifications, such as DNA methylation, that further contribute to
gene silencing.

The programmability
of RNAi makes it an effective means to disrupt
native gene expression. Artificial siRNAs are generated in plants
using a 100-800 bp inverted repeat of the target sequence to form
a hpRNA. The cassette is often placed
under the control of the strong CaMV35S promoter and the inclusion
of an intron sequence can improve the knockdown of the target gene.
An alternative RNAi strategy is virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS),
which utilizes plant RNA viruses, such as tobacco mosaic virus (TMV)
and potato virus X (PVX), that produce dsRNA during their life cycle. Delivery of the viral genome containing the
300-500 bp of the intended target transcript leads to the efficient
knockdown of the target gene. The viral genome is typically delivered
by Agrobacterium transformation.
RNAi has been
used to control diverse phenotypes in crop plants,
from improving crop traits (improved nutrition, seedless fruits, plant
biomass regulation, flower coloration and scent, shelf-life enhancement,
abiotic stress tolerance, etc.) to protecting against diseases (fungi,
nematodes, pathogens, etc.).
−

 In one example, gentian flower color has
also been modified with hairpin RNA that knocks down enzymes in anthocyanin
and flavonoid pathways ( A). To make alfalfa more digestible to livestock, it was engineered
to constitutively transcribe siRNA to knockdown a lignin biosynthesis
enzyme in vascular tissue.
−

 Transgenic peanut plants expressing
siRNAs that target a potent food allergen were found to be less likely
to cause immune activation in peanut allergy patients ( B).

 miRNAs also play a
role in targeted gene silencing
by repressing
translation and inducing mRNA degradation, although the details of
their synthesis and function differ from siRNAs in RNAi. Notably,
while the role of siRNAs is generally to cause the near-total suppression
of virus or transposon-derived genes, miRNAs precisely fine-tune the
expression of endogenous genes. Before interacting with DICER, AGO,
and RISC proteins, miRNAs are synthesized from long precursor primary
RNAs (pri-miRNA) that form hairpin-like structures required for their
processing, which complicates the design of artificial miRNAs. Therefore, artificial miRNAs incorporate a
target sequence within an existing endogenous miRNA such that the
hairpin-like structure, as well as structural features such as bulges
or mismatches, are maintained. Several software tools, including Web
MicroRNA Designer, have been built to facilitate plant-specific miRNA
design.
−

 The Arabidopsis-derived MIR390a is a common miRNA precursor used to express artificial
miRNAs in many plant species.

Applications of miRNA-based gene silencing resemble those using
siRNA or RNAi and include increasing disease resistance by targeting
virus suppressor genes. The degree of
gene silencing caused by artificial miRNA can be quantitatively tuned
by varying miRNA-target complementarity. miRNAs are less prone to off-target effects as they can be designed
to avoid sequence similarity with nontarget genes and avoid the generation
of secondary sRNAs.
,
 miRNAs are also less likely
than siRNAs to spread systemically, making them the preferred route
to perform tissue-specific gene silencing.

CRISPR/Cas13 targets and cleaves ssRNA analogously to how
CRISPR/Cas9
targets DNA ( ). As a post-transcriptional gene silencing method, CRISPR/Cas13
enables programmable gene expression control and viral suppression. Expression control was demonstrated in cotton
by varying Cas13 activity or the crRNA sequence for a target gene. Virus-resistant Tobacco and Arabidopsis plants were made by expressing Cas13 and CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) targeting
the RNA genome of Turnip mosaic virus.
,
 Analogous
to PAM sites in Cas9 systems, Cas13 variants have different preferences
for the sequence of the binding site (protospacer flanking sites),
thus increasing the targeting flexibility.
,
 Methods for targeting multiple RNAs and the use of Cas13 to base
edit mRNA have been developed in mammalian cells,
−

 but not yet applied to plants. Note that sometimes crRNAs can also
trigger post-transcriptional gene silencing in the absence of Cas13
by triggering endogenous RNAi machinery.

2.2.1.5.

## Protein Tags
Peptide tags or
small protein domains can be fused to a protein to direct it to a
destination in the cell, make its function dependent on other factors,
or alter stability. Ideally, these tags act modularly, imparting their
effect on whatever protein to which they have been attached. Tags
can also be added to convert a DNA-binding protein to a regulator
or sensor ( and .b).
2.2.1.5.1.

## Protein Localization
Peptide
tags are used like “zip codes” to localize
proteins to subcellular compartments, including the nucleus, chloroplast,
or mitochondrion, or to target them for secretion and glycolsylation.
,
 Subcellular localization can be required for the proper activity
of foreign proteins. For example, proteins that interact with genomic
DNA, such as nucleases or TFs, need to localize to the nucleus and
some metabolic enzymes require substrates only found in organelles
(e.g., the chloroplast or mitochondrion).
Targeting
recombinant proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) may be required
to ensure proper folding. Proteins encoding
a signal peptide, composed of a positively charged N-terminal region,
central hydrophobic core, and a peptidase cleavage site, are co-translationally
translocated into the ER.
,
 A tetrapeptide H/KDEL
(histidine/lysine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, leucine) motif in
the C-terminus is used to retain proteins in the ER, which is a strategy
for increasing their accumulation and avoid glycosylation.
,
 Plants target proteins to vacuoles using sequence-specific and structural-dependent
vacuolar sorting determinants (VSDs), this includes the NPIXL/NPIR
sequence found at the N-terminus. In
the absence of an ER retention or other localization signal, proteins
in the ER are secreted into the apoplast (extracellular space).

The nuclear import of proteins is required
for gene regulation
and the import mechanisms are often highjacked by pathogenetic viruses
and bacteria. Proteins-of-interest can be localized to the nucleus
using nuclear localization signals (NLSs) from these sources, such
as the Simian Virus 40 (SV40). These
NLSs have to be attached to any proteins that are expressed outside
of the nucleus so that they can be imported and bind to DNA to impart
their effect. Such factors include repressors/activators as part of
genetic circuits or Cas9 and related genome editing machinery.
Proteins are targeted to chloroplasts by N-terminal transit peptides
that commonly contain hydroxylated amino acids (Ser and Thr) and lack
acidic ones (Asp and Glu), resulting in a net positive charge. For example, the Rubisco small subunit N-terminal
peptide and N-terminal peptide of the F1-ATPase β
subunit are used to transport proteins to the chloroplast or mitochondrion,
respectively.
−

 While transit peptides lack strict sequence motifs, specific amino
acids residues within the N-terminus have been shown determine specificity
between the chloroplast and mitochondrion.

Mitochondria-targeting signals also have common structural
features,
notably a positively-charged amphiphilic α-helix, that can be
used to design new targeting signals.
,
 To target
the mitochondrion, peptides gleaned from S. cerevisiae CoxIV and Arabidopsis F1-ATPase pFAγ have
been shown to function in a transient tobacco leaf assay and Arabidopsis protoplasts.
,

Proteins
can be targeted for secretion from plant cells. This pathway
begins by translation into the ER and onto the Golgi complex, before
proteins are secreted into the extracellular space, apoplast, or vacuole. Proteins are co-translationally directed into
the ER by an N-terminal signal sequence: a variable 12-30 residue
motif containing a short positively charged N-terminus, hydrophobic
core, and polar C-terminus. The tag
is proteolytically cleaved upon import. Once targeted to the endomembrane system, proteins will be secreted
extracellularly and glycosylated by N-linked oligosaccharides.

2.2.1.5.2.

## Protease Sites
It can be hard
to control the ratios between proteins in a plant
cell due to the noise of transcription and translation.
,
 Alternatively, multiple proteins can be fused to create a single
large protein that is transcribed as a gene. The proteins are separated
by cleavable peptide sequences. Therefore, after being cleaved, the
proteins will be at a fixed stoichiometry in the cell. For example,
placing the self-cleaving 2A peptide from the foot-and-mouth disease
virus between two proteins led to a constant expression ratio between
them.

A similar approach is to
use site-specific proteases to release individual components from
a large polyprotein. Potyviruses, including Tobacco Etch Potyvirus
(TEV), are the largest group of plant-infecting RNA viruses and are
abundant in proteases that function in plants. While these proteases
are widely used for engineering other organisms,
,
 they have not seen similar adoption for plant engineering. It was
shown in Escherichia coli that 18 nitrogen fixation
proteins from Klebsiella oxytoca can be compressed
into 5 polyproteins separated by TEV protease cleavage sites.

Fusing proteins into a single open reading
frame also reduces silencing
because only a single promoter and terminator are necessary to express
multiple proteins. This effect was shown in the construction of New
Golden Rice, where two carotenoid biosynthetic proteins were placed
under the control of a single rice globulin promoter, which led to
less silencing.

2.2.1.6.

## Plastid/Mitochondrial Genetic Parts
Plastids are of
prokaryotic origin and share similar machinery
for transcription and translation. Thus, many genetic parts designed
for bacteria, including Escherichia coli, will function
in the plastid. Because of these similarities, Escherichia
coli has sometimes been used to prototype genetic parts before
using them in a plastid. However, there are also many differences,
such as sensitivity to supercoiling, different mRNA processing enzymes,
and Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequences.
−

 These differences complicate the use of
a surrogate bacterial host to quantify how parts will perform in the
plastid.
Chloroplast transformation protocols require time and
labor-intensive tissue culture methods to regenerate transformants
under antibiotic selection. There are also currently no transient
plastid expression assays that can be used to screen synthetic constructs
without regenerating full plants. This limitation makes it more difficult
to build large part libraries in the context they would be used. Thus,
there have been efforts to characterize part libraries using alternative
systems that are compatible with high-throughput characterization.
Protoplasts could be used for plastid/mitochondria part characterization.
Polyethylene glycol (PEG) treatment of protoplasts can introduce DNA
into chloroplasts. Part activity can
be measured using a GUS reporter. Cell-free
protein synthesis (CFPS) is another approach, where DNA containing
the parts is added to lysed isolated chloroplasts ( ). Part strength is characterized by measuring transcript
or protein levels. CFPS and related systems have been widely applied
to study the natural mechanisms of chloroplast transcription and translation.
−

 They have also been used to characterize small libraries of genetic
parts, albeit described in the literature as being done for the purpose
of understanding chloroplast biology as opposed to genetic engineering.
Another problem in designing large, multi-gene systems for plastids
is that the repeated use of the same part leads to homologous recombination,
which deletes regions of the DNA.
,
 Recombination
frequency is a function of the length of the repeated sequences. For bacteria, the size of the repeat where
deletion occurs with high probability is between 20 and 30 bp, but
can be as short as 14 bp.
,
 In plastids, the precise
number is not known, but repeated sequences of 100 bp have been observed
to lead to excision.
,
 Therefore, avoiding recombination
requires part libraries of sufficient size such that there are variants
of sufficient sequence diversity to avoid homologous recombination,
even if the part functions are themselves identical.
,,

2.2.1.6.1.

## Transcriptional Parts
There
are two RNAPs that drive transcription: 1. a prokaryotic-like
plastid-encoded RNAP (PEP) that is directed to promoters with a σ
factor or 2. a phage RNAP-like nuclear-encoded polymerase (NEP) that
is expressed from the nucleus and localized to the plastid. NEP is largely responsible for transcribing
chloroplast housekeeping and replication genes, including the expression
of the rpoB operon encoding PEP. PEP has a wider
range of gene targets, is responsible for expressing photosynthetic
genes and those controlled by light, and interacts with a number of
regulators, including those imported from the genome. Sometimes promoters
respond to both RNAPs. For example, PatpB contains motifs
recognized and either can be deleted to create a promoter that only
responds to one.

PEP promoters
share similar -10 and -35 consensus sequences with “housekeeping” E. coli σ70 promoters. Escherichia coli constitutive promoters often have an additional TG upstream of the
canonical -10 sequence (an “extended -10 motif”). PEP-based
plastid promoters also use this motif to obtain high transcription
levels or a high background, such as the often-used strong psbA promoter. The strongest
promoters are derived from the rrn operon (PpsbA and PrbcL). While PpsbA is de facto used as a constitutive promoter, it also is light
sensitive due to sequence motifs upstream of the -35 motif. They can
be removed to make the promoter more constitutive, but this results
in a decrease in transcription by 30-fold.

NEP is related to phage RNAPs, and uses similar short promoters. The tobacco plastid accD and rpoB genes are both exclusively transcribed by NEP. The
minimal length of PrpoB is a short 15 bp. Within NEP-dependent promoters, there is a short 3 bp consensus
sequence: (T or C)AT.
In plastids, there has not been much work
to create part libraries
for genetic engineering. However, it has been a common exercise to
make variants of native promoters to study chloroplast transcription,
which effectively leads to small promoter libraries that can be exploited
by engineers. These libraries can be
generated by mutation, truncation, or deletion and usually contain
about a dozen variants. Libraries of the following promoters have
been made: Prrn,
,
 PaccD, PtrnM,
,
 PatpB, PpsbA, PpsbD, and PrpoB. Fusions
between PtrnM, PrbcL, PatpB, and
PpsbA have also been measured. Other less characterized promoters, such as PatpI, PatpH, and PpsbB can also be used to obtain different
levels of gene transcription.
,

In non-green
plastids, the expression of most plastid genes, especially
photosynthesis-related genes, is downregulated at both the transcriptional
and translational level.
,
 Two exceptions are accD, involved in lipid metabolism, and clpP, involved in the protein turnover pathway, which are both highly
expressed. Transgene expression in amyloplasts was achieved using
the maize PclpP promoter and tobacco PaccD promoters,
although transcription levels were lower than the tobacco ribosomal
RNA operon promoter Prrn.
−

 Amyloplasts are responsible
for the synthesis and storage of starch granules, typically found
in roots and tubers.

2.2.1.6.2.

## Orthogonal Transcriptional
Regulation
Phage polymerases and prokaryotic σ factors
can be expressed
from the plastid genome or from the nucleus and targeted to the plastid.
−

 RNAP derived from T7 phage has been targeted to the chloroplast,
where it transcribes T7 RNAP promoters. In the nucleus, it has been put under the control of promoters that
are constitutive, light-regulated, or salicylic acid-inducible.
,
 Libraries of T7 RNAP promoters whose strength has been measured
in Escherichia coli are available to control gene
expression across orders-of-magnitude.
,

The
multi-subunit PEP interacts with σ factors, like its bacterial
counterpart. It will also interact with some σ factors from
bacteria that direct it to new promoter sequences. A chimeric σ
factor comprising the C-terminal DNA-recognition domain of the Escherichia coli heat-shock σ factor and the N-terminal domain of a plastid σ factor SIG1
was expressed in tobacco chloroplasts. The chimera activated the Escherichia coli PgroE, which shares no sequence identity with a chloroplast
PEP promoter.

2.2.1.6.3.

## Translational Parts
Translation
has been hypothesized to play a larger role in plastid
gene expression than transcription. While
translation in plastids is similar to prokaryotes, there are important
differences. In E. coli, nearly all mRNAs have an
RBS containing a Shine-Delgarno (SD) sequence 4-9 nucleotides upstream
of the translational start codon to recruit the ribosome.
,
 However, in plastids, the location of the SD sequence is more variable,
ranging from the 2-29 nucleotides upstream of the start codon.
,−

 Additionally, almost half of the protein-coding
genes in tobacco plastids do not harbor a SD or SD-like sequence,
but instead require the absence of secondary structure around the
start codon or a nucleus-encoded trans-acting factor
to initiate translation.
,−

 Bacteria are sometimes used as surrogates to screen RBSs, but this
is imperfect and leads to quantitative differences. Eukaryotic algae, such as Chlamydamonas, have very different RBS sequences than both plants and bacteria
and therefore are not suitable hosts for the characterization of translation
parts.

The 5′-UTR derived
from a phage T7 gene (T7g10), which contains a strong
RBS, is the most commonly-used means to obtain high expression in
the plastid. Coupling it with a strong
promoter can lead to 23% of total cellular protein in tobacco. This strength can be tuned 100-fold by varying
the sequence of the 5′-UTR.
,,−

 A plastid CFPS was used to measure a library of 23 5′-UTRs
from different plant species, Escherichia coli phage
T7, and synthetic RBSs and a library
of 104 designed RBS variants that spanned a 1300-fold range of expression.

There are a number of caveats in using
these references to glean
genetic parts for engineering. Other proteins encoded in the nucleus
and transported to the chloroplast also regulate the maturation of
plastid transcripts through post-transcriptional RNA processing, intron
splicing, editing, and turnover.
,
 These factors
may be dependent on various plant conditions, including the day-night
cycle, season, or biotic/abiotic stresses. Also, while there are ranked
lists of RBSs within each study, there has not been systematic comparison
of their activities under identical conditions. Many of the studies
were performed in vitro with reconstituted cell-free
systems and the ranking may change in vivo or under different growth
or environmental conditions. Finally, the use of some of these 5′-UTRs,
not necessarily the strongest ones, have been observed to lead to
growth defects or other undesired phenotypes, possibly due to the
sequestration of native proteins.
,

2.2.1.6.4.

## mRNA Processing and Stability
When an operon is transcribed
in bacteria, all of the encoded genes
can be translated from the transcript. While this is possible in a
chloroplast as well, it is more common that the operon is first cleaved
into a set of mRNAs that each encode one gene. This processing has
been observed to be important for obtaining high levels of expression.
,−

 However, this effect has not been found to be important all of the
time. For example, the maize psb operon can be translated
from both polycistronic and processed mRNA.
,
 GFP has been expressed from the second position of an operon without
transcript processing. Its expression
level was found to be a function of the RBS strength controlling the
first gene, as is the case for bacteria.
To divide engineered
operons in plastids, the 50 nt intercistronic expression element (IEE)
has been used. Adding IEEs in front of each gene in an operon is proposed
to mediate its processing into stable and translatable monocistronic
mRNAs.
,
 The most frequently-used IEE is a 50-bp
minimal sequence from the psbB operon in tobacco. IEEs have been used to express multiple genes
involved in different pathways, including to vitamin E, artemisinic acid, and to build multi-subunit structures, such as Rubisco and the carboxysome.

Compared to the 5′-UTRs, the 3′-UTRs are thought
to play more minor roles in regulating translation efficiency within
plastids. The E. coli rrnB operon 3′-UTR confers
a 4-fold higher abundance of gfp transcripts than rbcL and rpoA 3′-UTRs, but results
in similar amounts of GFP accumulation. Exchange of the 3′-UTR of psbA and rbcL with that from rpl32 increased the
mRNA levels only 3-fold but did not increase translation efficiency.

2.2.1.6.5.

## Mitochondrial Genetic
Parts
The inability to engineer plant mitochondrial DNA has
negated the
development of genetic part libraries. However, some information can
be gleaned from the understanding of their genetics that could aid
part design in the future. The mitochondrial genome does not encode
any endogenous RNAP. Rather, its transcription relies on one or more
nucleus-encoded phage-type RNAPs.
−

 Promoters that respond
to the plastid NEP and mitochondrial RNAP have similar sizes, sequences,
and core motif. Additionally, mRNAs
from algae mitochondria usually have no 5′-UTRs and short 3′-UTRs
−

 and mRNAs from plant and yeast mitochondria have long 5′-and
3′-UTRs but lack SD-like sequences to recruit the ribosome. Mitochondrial mRNA undergoes a wide array of
post-transcriptional processing steps to form mature mRNA, such as
intercistronic RNA processing, intron splicing, and RNA editing. This
process requires the coordination of many nuclear proteins.
,
 These factors serve as the bottleneck to developing genetic parts
to regulate transgene expression.
Mitochondrial transformation
is only possible in two unicellular organisms, the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, and green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Much less progress has been made toward characterizing genetic
parts to regulate gene expression within the mitochondria. Only two
recombinant genes, an antibiotic-resistance gene and gfp, have been integrated into the algae mitochondrial genome.
,
 Their transcription was controlled by a native upstream bidirectional
promoter.
More genetic parts have been used to regulate recombinant
protein
expression in yeast mitochondria. The RBS derived from the mitochondrial COX2 gene was used to control the expression of the Barstar selectable marker gene or reporters (gfp or nanoluciferase). The mitochondrial COB RBS was used to control the
expression of a reporter.
,
 To relocate a nuclear-encoded
respiratory complex III subunit to yeast mitochondria, the COX1 RBS was used.

2.2.2.

## Plant Metabolic Engineering
Plants
shuttle the carbon obtained from CO2 into many primary
and secondary metabolite pathways. Using genetic engineering, their
metabolism can be redirected to a metabolite that is either itself
a desired chemical product or is a precursor to a recombinant pathway.
Metabolic enzymes in plants are distributed across the cytosol and
organelles, including mitochondria and chloroplasts. Some metabolic
reactions are only performed in a specific location, such as glycolysis
in the cytosol and the TCA cycle in mitochondria. Metabolic enzymes
also differ in their requirements for ATP, reducing power, oxygen
tension, and co-factors, thus requiring that they be localized to
an appropriate place in the cell.
Plant metabolic engineering
has improved the agronomic traits of crop plants, for example through
improvements to growth by increasing CO2 fixation, nutritional
content, or pest resistance. Beyond food, plants can be engineered
to produce other commercial compounds, including pharmaceuticals,
biologics, nutritional supplements, fragrances, materials, and dyes.
−

 Entire books have been written about plant metabolic engineering; here, we focus on the more complex designs
that combine techniques from Synthetic Biology.
2.2.2.1.

## Increasing
Production by Deducing Natural
Networks
Manipulating a metabolic pathway requires first
mapping out the participating enzymes. Plant metabolic pathways are
large, highly interconnected, and compartmentalized across organelles.
The enzyme genes are often distributed across chromosomes, as well
as the plastid and mitochondrial genome, and can be difficult to find
using simple bioinformatics annotation tools. Further, genes are not
always turned on, rather they are regulated based on developmental
stage, cell and tissue type, and environmental conditions.
Omics-
tools can aid the mapping of plant metabolic networks. Missing enzymes
within a biosynthetic pathway can be identified by clustering genes
with similar RNA-seq expression profiles.
−

 This approach was used to deduce the pathways to the high-value
anti-cancer drugs etoposide (in mayapple) and vinblastine/vincristine
(in Catharanthus roseus).
,
 This approach will not work if only bulk samples are evaluated and
the genes for a pathway are only transcribed in specialized tissues.
Single-cell transcriptomics was performed on the needle cells that
produce taxol in English yew in order to identify missing components
of a 17-gene pathway to the precursor baccatin III.

When the pathway is involved in a stress response,
it can be discovered
by stressing the plants and measuring gene expression using RNA-seq
and metabolomics. For example, the complete pathway for the Arabidopsis defense molecule 4-hydroxyindole-3-carbonyl
nitrile was uncovered by profiling the responses to different pathogens. Similarly, the pathway to falcarindiol was
deduced by challenging tomato leaves with immune elicitors. A 16-gene pathway converting tyrosine and phenylalanine
to N-formyldemecolcine, a precursor for the anti-inflammatory
drug colchicine, was identified from spatially and temporally resolved
metabolomics and transcriptomics data from autumn crocus and flame
lilies and expressed transiently in Nicotiana benthamiana. To identify the pathway responsible for biosynthesizing the potent
vaccine adjuvant QS-21 derived from the bark of Chilean soapbark tree Quillaja saponaria, transcriptomics data was used to identify
genes that were both highly expressed in primordia tissue and coexpressed
with the enzyme for the first committed step of the 20-step pathway. Once the full pathway was elucidated, it was
transferred to tobacco via transient transformation to produce QS-21.
ML can predict metabolic pathways. PlantiSMASH and PhytoClust use hidden
Markov models of plant enzyme families to annotate plant biosynthetic
gene clusters using genomic and, optionally, transcriptional co-expression
data. The plant-specific tool mApLe uses a ML model trained on protein
amino acid composition and physicochemical properties to predict pathways
and differentiate those in primary or secondary metabolism. A ML model was also used to predict whether Arabidopsis thaliana enzymes were involved in primary or
secondary metabolism with 90% accuracy.

When the pathway to a product can be deduced, there are several
strategies to increase the titer. If the plant contains the enzymes
to produce a molecule-of-interest, but they are not highly expressed
under normal growth conditions, then natural regulators can be overexpressed.
Alternatively, a gene that is not active can be copied to another
location in the genome and placed under the control of synthetic genetic
parts. Some metabolite precursors could be bottlenecks and their pool
increased by overexpressing rate-limiting enzymes. This strategy was
taken to optimize the mevalonate pathway in rice to overproduce carotenoid
precursors to increase nutrient content.

Genes can also be knocked down or knocked out to reduce the
loss
of carbon flux into competing pathways. To direct flax (Linum
usitatissimum) to produce desirable antioxidants and polyunsaturated
fatty acids, a native enzyme was repressed to redirect flux in the
shikimic acid pathway away from flavonoids to these products. Enzymes can be knocked out using genome editing
( ).
The first commercialized genome-edited plant were soybeans with increased
oleic oil content, marketed as Calyno. TALENs were used to disrupt two fatty acid desaturase genes that
reduced the content of linoleic acid, which is not shelf-stable and
degrades quickly in a fryer. Similarly, opium poppies were modified
with Cas9 to reduce the production of benzylisoquinoline alkaloids,
including morphine and codeine, and reroute flux to a novel alkaloid. The medicinal plant Atropa belladonna produces the anticholinergic drug hyoscyamine, as well as two bio-active
derivatives, anisodamine and scopolamine. To increase hyoscyamine
production and remove potentially unwanted side-products, the enzyme
responsible for modifying hyoscyamine was knocked out in A.
belladonna ( A). Deletion of betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase in rice led to an increase
of the desirable aromatic molecule 2-acetyl-1-pyrroline and development
of fragrance in grains.

 
2.2.2.2.

## Building Pathways to
New Molecules
Plants can make new compounds by introducing
enzymes from different
organisms, either individually or assembling them into a synthetic
pathway. These enzymes could modify
a molecule naturally made by the plant to alter its function. For
example, brassinin is an antifungal compound produced in many cruciferous
crops. By expressing cytochrome P450 enzymes from different species,
non-natural brassinin derivatives were produced that exhibited greater
potency against pathogens-of-interest.

Halogenation can increase the potency of some molecules and
can be used as a reactive group for downstream chemical reactions. In tobacco, the antifungal potency of brassinin
derivatives was increased through fluorination. Other examples are novel vibrant dyes (5-, 6-, and 7-chloro-indicans)
that have been produced in tobacco by combining bacterial halogenases
with a synthetic pathway comprising a bacterial tryptophanase, a human
P450 mutated to tolerate halogenated substrates, and an endogenous
glucosyltransferase ( B). A pathway to unnatural halogenated
auxin indole acetic acid derivatives was assembled in Nicotiana
benthamiana using bacterial halogenases, an Arabidopsis
thaliana aminotransferase, and a Pisum sativa monooxygenase.

When designing
a pathway to a new-to-nature compound, the artificial
combination of enzymes from different sources often requires that
they be promiscuous to new substrates. The more promiscuous they are,
the more likely they can be “mixed-and-matched” to create
large libraries of compounds. Terpenes are a great example of this
capability. It is the largest class of natural products, many of which
are produced by plants that have applications ranging from fragrances,
fuels, pest repellants, and pharmaceuticals.
−

 Plants make high titers due to high concentrations of the precursor
metabolites.
,
 Diterpene scaffolds are made
from the isoprene precursor by a pair of synthases. By combinatorically
expressing 40 diterpene synthases sourced from ten plant species,
41 diterpenes were produced in tobacco that have not been observed
in nature. Additional chemical diversity
is generated by the action of different modifying enzymes on the terpene
scaffolds. By introducing combinations of five cytochrome P450s from
different plant species into tobacco, over 40 oxygenated triterpenes,
including several novel products, were produced ( C).

Enzymes that are too specific to be used in an artificial
pathway
can be mutated to increase their substrate promiscuity. This approach
improved the activities of enzymes on halogenated natural products.
If halogenation occurs at an early pathway step, native enzymes may
no longer work because their active site cannot accept the larger
halogenated substrate. This problem occurred when halogenases were
introduced into a medicinal plant (Catharanthus roseus) that produces monoterpene indole alkaloids, including the anticancer
agents vinblastine and vincristine.
,
 A mutant
had to be made to the downstream enzyme strictosidine synthase to
accommodate halogenated substrates.
Sometimes the expression
of heterologous enzymes leads to the modification
of off-target metabolites, resulting in unexpected byproducts. Such byproducts were observed when the marine
bacterial β-carotene ketolase CrtW was expressed in rice and
tobacco to produce the high-value carotenoid xanthin. In addition
to the intended product, other carotenoids were formed because of
the activity of CrtW on precursors outside of the xanthin biosynthetic
pathway.
,

2.2.2.3.

## Interfacing
with Chloroplast and Mitochondrial
Metabolism
Chloroplasts and mitochondria are the “powerhouses”
of the cell due to their role in generation of the energy carrier
ATP. They are also central to the plant’s metabolism. Some
metabolites are only produced in the chloroplast or accumulate there
during photosynthesis, including some carbohydrates, essential amino
acids, and lipids.
,
 In metabolic engineering projects,
recombinant enzymes sometimes need to be targeted to chloroplasts
to take advantage of their ATP and reducing power or if the precursor
metabolite is only present there. Mitochondria operate the tricarboxylic
acid (TCA) cycle and generate ATP through oxidative respiration. Chloroplasts
have high O2 concentrations during the day when it is generated
through photosynthesis, whereas mitochondria have a lower concentration
where it is being consumed. This difference can be important to consider
when expressing recombinant O2-sensitive enzymes. Finally,
each organelle produces a suite of different co-factors, including
metal clusters, that may be required by a recombinant enzyme.
2.2.2.3.1.

## Chloroplast Metabolic Engineering
Because of their
prokaryotic origin, it is potentially simpler
to transfer operons or biosynthetic gene clusters from bacteria to
plastids, as compared to the difficulty of moving multi-gene systems
to the nuclear chromosomes. To make plants that produce light, the
six-gene lux operon from Photobacterium leiognathi was expressed from the plastid genome. Terpenoids can be produced using methyl-erythritol phosphate (MEP)
precursors produced in the plastid. The availability of MEP motivated the movement of entire prokaryotic
biosynthetic gene clusters into the plastid genome to produce vitamin
E, astaxanthin, artemisinic acid, and polyester polyhydroxybutyric
acid ( A,B).
,,,,−

 Terpenoid titers increased when the MEP rate-limiting enzymes were
overexpressed.
,−

 In addition, the 6-gene cytosolic MEV pathway has been transferred
to the tobacco plastid genome to increase terpene production. Enzymes can be also expressed in the nuclear
chromosomes and directed to the chloroplast by fusing them to transit
peptides ( ). This fusion directed enzymes for the production of patchoulol,
amorphadiene, and limonene from MEP in the chloroplast.

 Many natural product pathways
require enzymes whose
redox chemistry
needs a cellular source of electrons. Cytochrome P450 oxidases are
examples, where electrons are obtained from a partner reductase that,
in turn, usually obtains them from NADH or NADPH. They use this reducing
power to introduce chemical moieties, such as hydroxyl groups, into
the natural product. Plastids can redirect electrons from the photosynthetic
electron transport chain to power recombinant enzymes, including cytochrome
P450 oxidases. This electron source powered the synthesis of dhurrin,
an insect repellent native to sorghum, that requires two cytochrome
P450 oxidases and a UDP-glucosyltransferase ( C).
,
 In sorghum, the electrons
are obtained from NADPH-dependent cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase,
but this can be replaced by ferredoxin, an electron carrier in the
photosynthetic electron transport chain. The cytochrome P450 oxidases in the dhurrin pathway can be fused
to ferredoxin and a tag that directs them to insert into the chloroplast
thylakoid membrane.
,

Terpene pharmaceuticals
are often produced naturally by plants;
however, either the titer is too low to be economical or the plant
is not one compatible with agriculture. Therefore, these pathways
have been moved into plants where metabolic engineering can be applied
to increase titers. For example, the potent anti-cancer compound paclitaxel
(Taxol) is naturally synthesized by Pacific yew tree (Taxus
brevifolia) in the bark and needles, but is only produced
in small quantities and puts pressure on a scarce natural resource.
Therefore, the pathway was moved so that it can be produced by a crop
plant or yeast.
,
 Its biosynthetic pathway is
large, with at least 19 steps from the isoprenoid derivative GGPP,
including nine cytochrome P450-catalyzed reactions.
,
 Due to the number of cytochrome P450 enzymes, it has been proposed
that the chloroplast is the ideal compartment for synthesis. To date, the most successful attempt to produce
paclitaxel in a heterologous plant has involved targeting the enzymes
that catalyze the first two reactions (taxadiene synthase and taxadiene-5α-hydroxylase)
to the chloroplast and overexpressing DXS and GGPPS to overcome rate-limiting
steps in precursor formation.

2.2.2.3.2.

## Nongreen Chloroplast Metabolic Engineering
Recombinant gene expression in chloroplasts can lead to impaired
photosynthetic activity and stunted growth due to resource competition.
,,
 These problems could be avoided
by limiting expression to only occur in non-green chloroplasts.
,
 These differentiated organelles have natural roles in metabolite
production, including the sequestration of intermediate metabolites
to avoid potential toxicity. For example, vanillin is produced in
phenyloplasts where it is stored as a highly concentrated solid in
vanilla pods.
−

 Amyloplasts occur in roots and store carotenoids
and starch.

Chromoplasts are differentiated
chloroplasts that store high levels of carotenoids and this has been
exploited in engineering projects. Enzymes can be targeted to the
chromoplast by fusion with a transit peptide, as was done with phytoene
synthase (CrtB) in tomato fruits to increase phytoene, lycopene, β-carotene
and lutein production. Transplastomic
expression of a daffodil lycopene β-cyclase was used to increase
lycopene conversion to β-carotene in tomato fruits, driven by
a strong chromoplast promoter ( D). Further,
methods to increase differentiation of chromoplasts have been developed.
In some non-photosynthetic tissues (tomato fruit, potato tubers, etc.),
overexpression of the cauliflower OR gene leads to
greater production of chromoplasts.
−

 Chloroplast-to-chromoplast
differentiation can be induced in leaf tissues with a burst of phytoene
production (e.g., through the expression of recombinant
CrtB).

2.2.2.3.3.

## Mitochondrial Metabolic Engineering
Mitochondria also have
capabilities useful for metabolic engineering,
including the sequestration of diverse metabolites, high reducing
redox potential, and ATP availability. It remains intractable to transform
plant mitochondria, but it is possible to direct enzymes there using
transit tags ( ) or to edit the mitochondrial genome using base editors ( ). Here,
we review some of the work in engineering yeast mitochondria for metabolic
engineering projects that is likely to be transferrable to plants.
To utilize the yeast mitochondrial acetyl-CoA pool as a substrate
to make different terpenes, enzymes from the MVA pathway and related
terpene synthases, cyclases, and oxidases normally expressed in the
cytoplasm were targeted to mitochondria.
,
 By increasing local enzyme concentration and limiting the loss of
intermediates to competing pathways common to the cytoplasm, compartmentalization
of the Ehrlich pathway into the yeast mitochondria increased isobutanol
synthesis. Overexpression of a bacterial
lipoamidase in yeast mitochondria enabled R-lipic
acid production by exploiting its pool of lipoate.

Due to oxidative respiration, the oxygen concentration
of the mitochondrion
is low. This feature can be exploited to host enzymes that are oxygen
sensitive. One example is nitrogenase, the enzyme responsible for
converting atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia, which is very sensitive
to oxygen. For this reason, nitrogenase
proteins synthesized in the nucleus have been targeted to the mitochondrion
of yeast using transport tags ( ).

2.2.2.4.

## Synthetic
Compartmentalization
Hijacking natural organelles, such as
the plastid, for engineering
purposes could impact the functions they need to perform for the plant.
Further, they have complex structures and molecular compositions that
are not fully characterized. Simpler synthetic compartments can be
built inside the cell by expressing proteins or biosynthesizing lipids
that self-assemble into a three-dimensional structure. Some of these
approaches allow for the targeting of metabolites or proteins to the
inside of the compartment. This approach can increase the concentration
of a substrate, sequester toxic intermediates, or protect enzymes
from inhibitors or non-optimal conditions, such as oxidative stress
and pH fluctuations.
Some metabolic pathways in bacteria are
compartmentalized in proteinaceous bacterial microcompartments that
have pores through which substrate enter and products exit.
−

 The localization of enzymes to the compartment interior increases
the concentration of the substrates and sequesters toxic intermediates. Encapsulins are 25 - 40 nm microcompartments
whose synthesis requires only one self-assembling capsid protein that
has been moved from prokaryotes to yeast.
,
 They can increase enzyme stability by protecting cargo proteins
from proteases in the cell. Enzymes have been assembled into large
and porous aggregates by fusing them to protein-protein interaction
domains.
,
 Doing so has the effect of
increasing the local concentration of intermediates. This approach
has been applied to increase the CO2 concentration for
Rubisco (Section 2.2.3.b.).
Synthetic
compartments have been used in plants to increase the
titer of a metabolic product. Lipid droplets are subcellular compartments
used to store lipids and other nonpolar molecules in plant cells and
their formation is induced by membrane-bound proteins, such as oleosin. Targeting an oleosin hydrophobic domain to
tobacco chloroplasts resulted in the assembly of synthetic lipid droplets
that accumulated biosynthesized terpenes. When co-expressed with chloroplast-targeted squalene biosynthetic
enzymes, the synthetic lipid droplets improved squalene titers by
shielding the product from downstream pathways, preventing feedback
inhibition of biosynthesis enzymes, and limiting toxicity. Essentially,
this system performs an organic extraction inside of the plant.

2.2.2.5.

## Directed Evolution
Directed evolution
is a powerful means to alter properties-of-interest. Iterative rounds of diversity creation and
screening improve desired properties over generations. Directed evolution
has been used to improve proteins, pathways, or even entire genomes
( ).
,,
 Books have been written about
the techniques and applications of directed evolution and here we
just focus on some notable applications in plants.
,,

Directed evolution can
be applied to improve the activity of a plant enzyme. For example,
diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 from oilseed rape was evolved for
improved activity using mutagenesis and screening for triacylglycerol
production. Transient expression of
the evolved gene in tobacco leaves led to elevated levels of triacylglycerol
compared to leaves transformed with the native gene. Plant herbicide
resistance can also be evolved using random mutagenesis and screening
of individual genes, typically performed in yeast. Examples include
the following: 1. durum wheat and barley glutathione transferases
for butachlor resistance, 2. maize glutathione transferases for fluorodifen
resistance, 3. rice and maize 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenases
for pyrazoles resistance, and 4. glyphosate-resistance enzymes in
maize and Brassica.
−

When microbial enzymes or pathways are transferred to a plant,
it can often require directed evolution to make them compatible. One
example is the replacement of thiazole synthase because the plant
version degrades following a single reaction cycle. In contrast, some
microbial thiazole synthases can be recycled, but require the high
substrate concentrations present in the microbe. To address this problem,
a thiazole synthase from the anaerobic bacterium Mucinivorans
hirudinis was evolved for aerobic activity and physiologically-relevant
sulfide concentrations in yeast. A
second example is a bioluminescence pathway from the fungus Neonothopanus nambi, which was transferred to six different
plants, including Arabidopsis, tobacco, poplar, Petunia hybrida, and Chrysanthemum morifolium ( ). The native Neonothopanus nambi luciferase and hispidin-3-hydroxylase
had low activity outside of their native host. Thus, they were evolved
using random mutagenesis to increase their stability and brightness.
The evolved pathway produced visible luminescence in plants and is
now commercially available as ornamental petunias.
 Selections connect improved mutants to the survival
of the host
and can increase the number of mutants screened by orders of magnitude.
Sometimes, the product of an enzymatic reaction is not easily connected
to a screen or selection. Genetically-encoded sensors ( ) can be
used to respond to the product and turn on a reporter or a gene required
for survival.
−

 Continuous directed evolution strategies
simultaneously perform diversification, selection, and amplification
to increase throughput further. Phage-assisted
continuous evolution (PACE) inserts the gene-to-be mutated into a
bacteriophage genome lacking an essential replication gene. A genetically-encoded sensor for the product
can then be connected to replication.
Insecticide resistance
has been improved using continuous evolution
to increase potency or specificity for specific species.
,
 For example, Bt toxins with improved potency were evolved using
PACE by making the expression of the gIII bacteriophage gene dependent
upon the binding of Bt toxins to insect cadherin-like receptors (the
insect target of Bt toxin).

Performing
directed evolution in planta is good
for screening for trait improvements that cannot be replicated in vitro, such as grain yield. In planta directed evolution has been carried out by targeting mutagenesis
to a specific gene using CRISPR machinery ( ). To evolve herboxidiene-resistant spliceosome
protein variants in rice, SF3B1 was mutagenized by
transforming a library of 119 sgRNAs that target all internal PAM
sites to generate in-frame deletions or mutations. The library was transformed into embryonic calli and resistant
transformants were selected through the addition of herboxidiene to
the regeneration media. Multiplexed orthogonal base editor (MoBE)
employs an sgRNA fused to a combination of RNA aptamers that recruit
dual base editor proteins to perform site-specific base conversions
on the plant genome. This strategy
was used to generate up to 27,294 combinations of edits in the rice
acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase gene to evolve haloxyfop resistance
in transformed calli.

2.2.2.6.

## Optimizing Photosynthetic
Efficiency
The photosynthetic efficiency of a plant is calculated
as the percent
of light energy that is converted to chemical energy (glucose). The
measured photosynthetic efficiency of crops is surprisingly low (1-3%). Enhancing photosynthetic efficiency to increase
agricultural productivity has been a longstanding goal of genetic
engineering. There are different strategies
for how it could be achieved, from optimizing the components of native
photosynthetic systems to constructing synthetic photorespiration
bypass routes or entirely new carbon fixation processes that do not
exist in nature.
−

 The maximum efficiency that could be achieved by a plant has been
estimated to be 12%. However, even
a small change could have a big effect; it has been estimated that
only a 0.1-fold increase in photosynthetic efficiency would increase
crop yields by 50%.

2.2.2.6.1.

## Conversion of a C3 to a C4 Plant
C3 and C4 plants are
named according to the number of carbons contained
in the first metabolic product after the fixation of CO2 by the enzyme Rubisco. In a C3 plant, Rubisco catalyzes the condensation
of CO2 and ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP) to produce
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. Major C3 crops include tobacco, soybeans,
and rice. The metabolic pathway for C4 plants (the Hatch-Slack pathway)
is much more complicated. First, in mesophyll cells, CO2 is fixed by PEP carboxylase with phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to produce
the 4-carbon oxaloacetic acid (OAA). These are metabolized to intermediates,
which are imported into bundle sheath cells and decarboxylate to create
high CO2 concentration around Rubisco. Rubisco produces
phosphoglycerate (PGA), which diffuses back to the mesophyll cells.
It is then reduced and diffuses back to the to the bundle sheath cells.
Major C4 crops include corn, sugarcane, and switchgrass. The C3 plants
are more ancient than C4 plants and tend to grow in cooler and wetter
climates with moderate sunlight. C4 plants have a higher photosynthetic
efficiency; while only 5% of global biomass, they fix 23% of the carbon.
−

 C4 plants are also more efficient at nitrogen utilization, water
requirements, and are more productive at high temperature. Thus, the
conversion of a C3 plant to a C4 plant has been a longstanding goal
of plant genetic engineering, but it poses challenges due to the metabolic
complexity and multiple compartments required for the latter.
,−

A characteristic feature of C4 photosynthesis is the physical
separation of carbon fixation and photosynthesis in mesophyll cells
and bundle sheath cells, respectively ( A). This is achieved
by cell type-specific expression of many enzymes, such as PEP carboxylase
in mesophyll cells and Rubisco in bundle sheath cells, as well as
morphological organization of these cells to facilitate carbon exchange
referred to as the “Kranz anatomy”. Achieving cell type-specific expression in C3 plants has
been difficult. C4 photosynthesis genes experience complex regulation
at the transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and translational levels
and transferring their promoters into C3 plants usually results in
loss of their cell-specific phenotype.
,
 Notable counter examples include mesophyll-specific expression of
the maize PEP carboxylase promoter in rice and bundle sheath-specific
expression of the Flaveria glycine decarboxylase
complex P-subunit (GLDP) promoter in Arabidopsis.
,
 Five C4 metabolism genes from maize, encoding the minimal set of
enzymes required for a complete C4 cycle, were transferred to rice
under control of four PEP carboxylase promoters from grass and the Flaveria (perennial herb) GLDP promoter ( B). The enzymes were enriched in the anticipated cell types but displayed
low levels of CO2 incorporation into C4 acids and no evidence
of C4 decarboxylation, likely because they were shuttled to the citric
acid cycle. A 276 bp CRE from Arabidopsis was shown
to control bundle sheath cell expression and could be engineered for
tunable expression.

 Another bottleneck is the relative lack of chloroplasts
in C3 bundle
sheath cells, which increase in quantity and size in C4 bundle sheath
cells. Expressing the maize plastid biogenesis TF ZmGLK1 from either
constitutive or cell type-specific promoters led to an increase in
size and number of chloroplasts and mitochondria in rice bundle sheath
cells. Rare examples of single-cell
C4 metabolism exist in nature that involve complex organization of
organelles and metabolism that will likely be difficult to recapitulate
in crops.

2.2.2.6.2.

## Rubisco Engineering
Rubisco
is the rate limiting step of photosynthesis because it
has a slow turnover rate and can catalyze a reaction between RuBP
and O2 instead of CO2, which leads to the release
of three previously-fixed CO2’s, a process known
as “photorespiration”. A challenge with increasing its rate is that doing so often makes
the enzyme more promiscuous, thereby reducing its efficiency because
the increase also leads to more photorespiration.
Rubisco is
composed of eight copies of the large subunit (RbcL) encoded in the
plastid genome and eight copies of the small subunit (RbcS) encoded
in the nuclear genome. Introduction of the RbcS from the C4 plant
sorghum into rice increased the Rubisco catalytic turnover rate.
,

Directed evolution could be used to improve the catalytic
rate
or selectivity against O2. Such experiments were performed
using bacterial and algal Rubiscos. In Escherichia coli, a selection coupled Rubisco activity to cellular growth by engineering Escherichia coli to produce the substrate RuBP.
−

 In the absence of RuBisCO activity, toxic concentrations of RuBP
accumulate and retard growth. Rubisco mutants were found with a 5-fold
increase in specific activity compared to the wild-type enzyme. A version of this selection assay was used
to assay >99% of the single-amino acid mutants of Rubisco from Rhodospirillum rubrum, from which rare mutations were identified
that improve CO2 affinity. Another selection for Rubisco activity in Escherichia coli is based on deleting an enzyme required for glycolysis (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase), which is rescued by active Rubisco.
,
 This selection was used to find Synechococcus Rubisco
mutants with improved stability. Directed
evolution of archaeal Rubisco, which serves a non-photosynthetic role
in archaea, increased its catalytic rate and CO2 specificity. It supported photoautotrophic growth in tobacco
at elevated CO2 concentration. A historical challenge with
evolving plant Rubiscos has been the inability to functionally express
them in a recombinant model organism. This issue was overcome in Escherichia coli by co-expressing five chaperones with Arabidopsis Rubisco, but this has not yet been applied to
evolve higher activity.
,

The overexpression
or transfer of proteins that aid Rubisco activation
or assembly can also increase the photosynthetic rate of plants. Rubisco
activase (Rca) is a chaperone that works by removing chemical moieties
that block its active site. Replacement
of Arabidopsis Rubisco activase (Rca) with a thermostable
version enhanced the photosynthetic rate at higher temperatures. Rubisco accumulation factor 1 (RAF1) is present
across photosynthetic microbes and plants and aids RbcL assembly. Co-expression of Arabidopsis RbcL with RAF1 in tobacco leads to a 2-fold increase in photosynthetic
CO2 assimilation rate and plant growth. The abundance of Rubisco was also increased in maize by
overexpressing its subunits and RAF1 in the nucleus and targeting
them to the chloroplast, leading to a 15% increase in CO2 assimilation. The proteins were expressed
in the nucleus due to the inability to manipulate the maize chloroplast
genome ( ).

2.2.2.6.3.

## Increasing CO2 Concentration
One way that C4 plants improve the photosynthetic rate is by increasing
the concentration of CO2 around Rubisco, which also improves
selectivity against O2. In C4 plants, the biology is complicated,
so other mechanisms have been moved from non-plants to plants. Cyanobacteria
use carboxysomes, 100-400 nm protein microcompartments, to increase
the concentration of CO2 around an encapsulated Rubisco.
Carboxysomes resist CO2 efflux and carry the enzyme carbonic
anhydrase, which can rapidly convert aqueous bicarbonate (HCO3
–) into CO2, leading to a buildup
of internal CO2. Expressing cyanobacterial Rubisco and
an internal carboxysomal protein in tobacco plastids led to the formation
of protein complexes capable of carbon fixation and mimicked early
intermediates of carboxysome assembly. Only two shell proteins were required to be expressed in tobacco
to self-assemble and encapsulate cyanobacterial Rubisco. The transfer of nine carboxysome genes from Halothiobacillus neapolitanus, including shell proteins,
Rubisco, and carbonic anhydrase, led to functional carboxysomes in
tobacco plastids ( C). However, the engineered
plants required elevated CO2 levels for photoautotrophic
growth. To assemble fully functional carboxysomes in C3 plants, additional
shell proteins, chaperons, bicarbonate transporters, will be necessary.
Eukaryotic algae use a pyrenoid organelle containing a transporter
of HCO3–/CO2/CO3
2– to increase the concentration of CO2 around Rubisco.
−

 The pyrenoid has an intricate internal structure that forms due
to phase separation of a liquid-like condensate. This structure allows
a rich concentration of Rubisco, which moves dynamically within the
pyrenoid. It serves to concentrate CO2 around the structure,
which is further trapped by a thick starch sheath. It has been postulated
that their transfer into land plants could increase photosynthetic
efficiency. To this end, the protein responsible for the condensate
from algae (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) was moved
with a plant-algal hybrid Rubisco into Arabidopsis chloroplasts, where
is formed an organelle with similar properties. Membranes span the internal structure of the pyrenoid that
are important for its activity. Two algal proteins have been expressed
in Arabidopsis and shown to form similar membrane structures. These advances are key steps toward moving
the entire functional pyrenoid to crops to improve photosynthetic
efficiency.

2.2.2.6.4.

## Metabolic Engineering
The CO2 fixation rate can also be improved by rebuilding
photosynthetic carbon metabolism. The
natural photorespiration pathway recycles the Rubisco toxic byproduct
glycolate back to the Calvin cycle, but at the expense of energy dissipation
and net loss of fixed carbon and nitrogen in mitochondria. Shunt pathways
that completely restrict glycolate oxidation in the plastid can increase
the CO2 concentration around the Rubisco enzyme and thus
enhance photosynthetic efficiency.
,
 Three alternative
photorespiratory pathways composed of ten nucleus-encoded enzymes
from Escherichia coli, plants, and green algae were
directed to the tobacco plastid ( D). This
feat required balancing gene expression by selecting different promoters
and the use of RNAi to downregulate the native glycolate exporter
to limit flux into the native photorespiration recycling pathway.
It led to a 20% increase in biomass in field trials. In rice, three
nuclear-encoded rice enzymes (glycolate oxidase, oxalate oxidase,
and catalase) were redirected to the chloroplast using a transit peptide
to completely oxidize glycolate within the chloroplast. This led to an increase in the photosynthesis
efficiency as well as biomass and grain yield in the field.
Artificial CO2 fixation routes can be constructed by combining
enzymes sourced from different organisms. More than twenty theoretically-feasible
synthetic CO2 fixation routes have been proposed. One route, referred to as the CETCH (crotonyl–coenzyme
A (CoA)/ethylmalonyl-CoA/hydroxybutyryl-CoA) cycle was built by combining
the enzymes in vitro. The pathway encompassed 17 enzymes originating from nine organisms. It included an enoyl-CoA carboxylases/reductase
(ECR) with the highest carboxylase activity measured (37-fold higher
than Rubisco). The CETCH cycle enzymes,
along with an additional E. coli glyoxylate/hydroxypyruvate
reductase and spinach thylakoid membranes, were encapsulated in a
water-in-oil droplet. The resulting
system can use light energy to convert CO2 to glycolate.
The malonyl-CoA-Oxaloacetate-Glyoxylate (MOG) cycle mimics many of
the steps naturally found in the C4 cycle and could require as few
as four enzymes to implement. However,
it produces glyoxylate as a terminal product, which would need to
be integrated into metabolism.

2.2.2.7.

## Toward
Hybrid Vigor: Engineering Apomixis
“Hybrid vigor”
is when the offspring of genetically
distinct parents can exhibit superior traits, such as improved yields
or stress resistance, as compared to either parent. The challenge
is that the beneficial traits seen in the initial hybrid generation
are often lost in later generations due to genetic segregation. Therefore,
the parents must be crossed each time to make new seed because the
seed of the offspring will not have the desired traits. One strategy
around this costly and time-intensive process is to harness apomixis,
which is a form of asexual reproduction where seeds are produced clonally
without fertilization. This mechanism results in genetically identical
offspring with the parents. Several plant species naturally exhibit
apomixis, notably grasses and fruit trees. If apomixis could be introduced
into hybrid crops, it would allow for the indefinite propagation of
hybrid seeds. Synthetic apomixis strategies mimic the process of natural
apomixis and involve three discrete developmental steps: bypassing
meiosis (MiMe), generating an embryo from the unfertilized
egg cell (parthenogenesis), and autonomously developing an endosperm.

To avoid genetic recombination and chromosome
reduction, female reproductive cells can be reprogrammed to undergo Mitosis instead of Meiosis (MiMe). MiMe clonally generates diploid gametes genetically
identical to their mother cells rather than genetically diverse haploid
gametes. To achieve MiMe, proteins responsible for coordinating three
critical steps in meiosis were inactivated. First, chromosome recombination
was prevented by inactivating a member of the recombination initiation
complex (SPO1-1, PRD, or PAIR1).
,
 Next, a meiosis-specific cohesion subunit protein (REC8) involved in sister chromatid migration was disabled, leading to
mitosis-like chromatid separation. Finally,
a positive regulator of the second meiotic cell division (OSD1, TAM, or TDM1) was knocked out.

The diploid female gametophyte from the MiMe process
must be “activated” to form a functional embryo. In
most plants, this is mediated by proteins found exclusively in pollen-derived
sperm cells. During synthetic apomixis,
the MiME female gamete must either fuse with a sperm
cell and eliminate the unwanted male chromosomes or “activate”
itself in the absence of a sperm cell through the process of parthenogenesis.
Pollen produced by plants expressing an engineered variant of the
centromere protein (CENH3) or possessing an inactivated
phospholipase gene (MTL/PLA1/NLD) produce zygotes
without a paternal genome.
−

 However, these plants generally suffer from
low fertility. Instead, through parthenogenesis, the unfertilized
egg cell can develop directly into a multicellular embryo by expressing
proteins that regulate embryo formation. Parthenogenesis was obtained
by expressing the parthenogenetic trigger protein BABYBOOM1 (BBM1) or the dandelion
parthenogenetic PAR gene from egg cell-specific promoters.
,
 Finally, embryos require an endosperm for nutrients, which is normally
formed after a sperm cell fertilizes a maternal diploid central cell.
Many naturally apomictic plants still require fertilization of the
central cell, which is undesirable to produce clonal seeds. In Arabidopsis, mutating
epigenetic regulators of auxin biosynthesis (FIS-PRC2) leads initiation, but not completion, of autonomous endosperm development.

Currently, synthetic apomixis has only
been demonstrated in Arabidopsis
 and rice.
,,,,
 Crossing Arabidopsis plants carrying MiMe mutations with plants expressing CENH3 variants
produced >34% clonal seeds. In rice,
synthetic apomixis was achieved using
a single construct, which simultaneously inactivated three MiMe genes (PAIR1, REC8, and OSD1) using CRISPR/Cas9 and expressed BBM1 from an egg cell-specific promoter. After three generations, >95% of seeds were clonal progeny.

2.3.

## Genetic Control of Pests
Pests remain
a blight to agriculture, resulting in large losses.
,
 Weeds can reduce yields 50-90% in the U.S. without the use of herbicides
and 5-10% with them. The most common trait added to crops is herbicide
resistance. It allows the herbicide to be sprayed to kill weeds without
the crop; most famously, a trait protects against glyphosate (Roundup)
allowing it to be used without killing the crop. However, weed herbicide
resistance is rapidly spreading. Insects are another blight that accounts
for 10-25% of global losses annually. The fall armyworm alone is responsible
for over $13 billion in destroyed crops (maize, rice, sorghum, wheat,
and sugarcane), can migrate up to 500 km a night, and is rapidly evolving
resistance against pesticides. Vertebrate pests are also a major problem;
rodents can lead up to 20% of losses of stored grain. Chemical treatments of plant, insect, and
vertebrate pests are losing efficacy, while also contributing to animal/human
health problems and ecological damage.
Genetic controls offer
an alternate management strategy for pests over chemical or mechanical
approaches. The pest, or microbes inhabiting it, are genetically engineered
and released into the wild to induce a change in the population. It
could be to cause a decline, pushing the pest to extinction, or to
introduce a new function to sensitize it to traditional controls (e.g., agrochemicals) or remove genes encoding human allergens.
Enclosed laboratory experiments suggest that the concept can work,
driving a trait through a population. However, the release of organisms
into the open ecosystem will face regulatory and social hurdles. They
also can take a long time to take effect – even decades –
and the pests can evolve in the field and break the genetic control.
2.3.1.

## Manipulating Insects through Their Microbiomes
Insect
behavior and biology can be controlled by altering the microbes
that inhibit them.
−

 Genetically tractable microbes stably colonize all insects, including
those of agricultural importance, including bees, tsetse flies, leafhoppers,
aphids, and western flower thrips. The microbial genomes can be modified
to contain recombinant genes that are expressed in the context of
the insect. For example, it could encode a dsRNA that enters the insect
and knocks down insect genes through RNA interference (RNAi). Microbes
producing dsRNA can be used to kill pests. For example, to kill western
flower thrips (a crop pest), bacteria were isolated from the insect
and engineered to constitutively express dsRNA targeting the insects’
alpha-tubulin, which kills the larvae.
,
 The engineered bacteria can be formulated as a spray. Aphids are
a major burden to agriculture and a bacterium in its microbiome was
engineered to include an inducible system for recombinant gene expression.

This approach can also be used to save
beneficial insects that are facing population declines. Bees essential for pollination of crops are
suffering from colony collapse disorder. One cause is the Varroa mite,
which feeds on bee “blood” and transmits damaging viruses.
To address this blight, the honey bee gut symbiote Snodgrassella
alvi was engineered to induce an RNAi response by targeting
genes in the bee host, as well as sequences from a honey bee virus
and the Varroa mite ( A).
,−

 Bees inoculated with Snodgrassella
alvi expressing dsRNA targeting the insulin receptor InR1
experienced increased feeding behavior and physiological changes to
sugar metabolism. The engineered symbiotes were also able to improve
bee mortality when expressing dsRNA targeting genes specific to the
Deformed Wing Virus or Varroa mite.
 Bacteria expressing dsRNA can also be used to improve
the resilience
of native strains against bio-control treatments. For example, western
corn rootworms can decimate corn fields and one way to treat this
is through the use of insect-killing nematodes. However, nematode
treatment can lead to rootworms accumulating and processing plant
benzoxazinoids, leading to the suppression of the beneficial symbiont Photorhabdus spp. To overcome this problem, symbiotic Photorhabdus strains were evolved to have increased resistance
against benzoxazinoid-defense systems.

2.3.2.

## Genetic Control of Insects
The
most common genetic approach to insect control is to release an engineered
version of a particular sex that causes non-viable offspring when
they mate with wild members of the opposite sex. The first approach
was to induce sterility by irradiating the insects, most commonly
males.
,
 The males are released and
mate with wild females, leading to sterile offspring. This approach
was first used in the 1950s in the United States to eradicate the
screwworm fly. Subsequently, it has been used globally to suppress
outbreaks of agricultural pests. It is expensive and requires infrastructure
for the continuous release of irradiated insects and reinvasion from
untreated areas is a problem. In addition, the random effects of irradiation
are not predictable and can lead to males with lower fitness in the
wild.
Several targeted genetic approaches have been taken to
have the same effect, but in a more controlled way. Insects can be
genetically modified to carry a “self-limiting” gene
that causes offspring to die. Often, this trait is carried by males
that, upon release, mate with wild females and the gene kills the
female offspring. This approach was taken to suppress the Mediterranean
fruit fly (Ceratitis capitata), which causes substantial
global crop damage, affecting over 300 types of fruits, vegetables
and nuts. Female-specific mRNA splicing was used to disrupt a transcript
encoding a recombinant activator (TetR) in males, but not females. When expressed in females, the activator can
turn on genes that lead to lethality. TetR is inactivated by tetracycline
and when this molecule was present in the diet, both males and females
survive. A similar system was developed for the Diamondback Moth (Plutella xylostella) and Pink Bollworms (Pectinophora
gossypiella) ( B). Oxitec has been
working to bring these engineered insects to market and has demonstrated
effectiveness in closed settings and have entered field trials.
−

2.3.3.

## Synthetic Gene Drives
Classic or
“Mendelian” genetics is taught in elementary school
biology, where the offspring have a 50% chance of getting a trait
from either parent. However, there are also natural selfish elements
whose biochemistry drives them to be acquired by the offspring with
higher probabilities.
−

 These systems have studied
as natural phenomena and have been harnessed in synthetic systems. Harnessing them to drive an arbitrary gene
or mutation through a population has proven difficult because their
biochemistry and complex regulatory pathways are difficult to control.
Synthetic gene drives fast forward the movement of a gene through
a population as compared to what could occur due to natural evolution. The rise of genome editing tools ( ) has made
it easier to target specific alleles in the chromosome. The first
synthetic gene drive was based on a homing endonuclease that induced
a double strand break at a specific location in a chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster and then DNA repair via HDR catalyzed
the transfer of the target gene to the site.
,
 The gene drive works by having the nuclease encoded with an attached
gene in a chromosome that is inherited by the offspring. During reproduction,
the gene is inherited as in Mendelian genetics, but then the nuclease
inserts the gene into the other chromosome. Thus, its inheritance
in the next generation is assured. The limiting problem was that meganucleases
are difficult to reprogram to target arbitrary sites in the genome.
The ability to target specific alleles was enabled by TALENs and Cas9.
The resulting gene drives radically improved in effectiveness and
flexibility.
,
 Since the original homing-based
gene drive was developed, other designs have been developed to be
spatially limiting or only progress for a defined period of time.

Gene drives that are based on targeted
nucleases require that the
gene is copied to the new site via HDR. The nuclease, usually Cas9,
creates the double strand break at the target site. If HDR is available,
the cell repairs the break using the gene drive cassette as a template.
HDR is usually prevalent in germline cells during meiosis. HDR repairs
the break using the gene drive DNA cassette as the template, leading
to its copying onto both chromosomes and super-Medelian inheritance.
However, if the DNA repair occurs by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ),
then mutations are introduced (insertions or deletions) that can make
the allele resistant to cleavage, preventing the further spread of
the gene drive.

2.3.3.1.

## Insect
Gene Drives
The majority
of animal gene drives are “homing-based drives” that
have been shown to function in insects, including those of agricultural
importance ( C). The gene drive DNA consists of
the gene-of-interest that confers the function that should be driven
through the population. It also contains the gene for Cas9 and the
gRNA to target it to the allele on the other chromosome. Instead of
normal repair, the cell uses HDR to insert the gene drive into the
new chromosome, including the Cas9 and gRNA genes. While this basic
structure is usually adopted, there is variability in the gene (and
function) that is targeted and spatial/temporal control over the expression
of Cas9 (e.g., limiting it to a sex or tissue type).
The gene drive can be quite large, transferring >15kb of DNA.
The first insect homing-based drive using Cas9 was demonstrated in Drosophila melanogaster. Subsequently,
gene drives have been developed for agriculturally-relevant insects.
Spotted Wing Drosophila (Drosophila suzukii) is an
invasive pest that consumes cherries, berries, and grapes. A gene
drive has been developed that targets a gene crucial for female development,
thus rendering them sterile in a population ( D).
,
 Gene drives have
also been developed for diamondback moths. A homing-based gene drive was developed for the Mediterranean fruit
fly that converts females to males, rather than killing them.

2.3.3.2.

## Rodent Gene Drives
Mammalian
invasive pests primarily comprise house mice (Mus musculus) and various species of rats. They lead to 5-15% annual losses in
agricultural yield; in South Asia alone, the losses could feed 180
million people a year. Means of managing
rodents include pelleted poisons, which can have ecological effects
by impacting unintended species that either consume the pellets or
the poisoned animals. They can also be toxic to humans.
Gene
drives have begun to be explored for rodents, but it is much more
challenging in mammals than insects. The difficulty lies in the reliance
of gene drives on HDR, whereas in mammals, NHEJ is dominant. Female
embryonic stem cells and oocytes have higher HDR activity due to differences
in cell cycle regulation compared to male-derived cells. Male spermatogonia
continuously undergo mitosis to make new spermocytes; thus, NHEJ is
the dominant DNA repair mechanism. Indeed, it was found that the components
of a gene drive in Mus musculus only functioned properly
when Cas9 expression was restricted to the female germline. This design used a similar strategy as for
insects except that the sgRNA targeting the gene to be copied was
transcribed in one mouse, and Cas9 expressed constitutively (testing
different tissue types and developmental timing), which were then
crossed. This design led to super-mendelian inheritance with measured
frequencies of up to 70%.

2.3.3.3.

## Weed
Control by Gene Drives
Invasive
weeds could be controlled by gene drives.
,
 They could be used to drive a population to extinction. Alternatively,
they could be applied to spread a gene that makes weeds susceptible
to an herbicide or removes an herbicide resistance gene. There are
limitations on using gene drives in plants. The NHEJ pathway is the
preferred mode of DNA repair, requiring similar solutions to gene
drives in mammals, and resistance is more likely to occur. In addition, the gene drives to date work
through the spread of pollen between members, but many weeds are self-pollinating. Farmers would also have to add seeds at the
beginning of a treatment, increasing the weed burden initially, and
it could take decades to have an effect. There are also significant regulatory and societal challenges in
the release of self-propagating engineered functions into the wild,
particularly if they have the potential of driving a species to extinction
(e.g., a weed in one context may be a food source
in another).

Plant populations
cannot be easily controlled by homing-based gene drives because they
preferentially use repair pathways that lead to resistance. Toxin-antidote gene drives are used instead
( E). These
drives consist of a toxin that kills the cell. Cas9 can serve as a
toxin by designing gRNAs to target an essential gene. Multiple gRNAs
were used to increase the knockdown of the gene and reduce the probability
of resistance arising through mutation. The drive also had an antidote
that negates the effect of the toxin. When Cas9 is used, the antidote
is just a second copy of the essential gene that is mutated at the
sgRNA binding sites. The gene drive was placed under the control of
a promoter that only turns on in the sexual organs in order to avoid
unnecessary fitness burden.
Unlike homing-based drives, toxin-antidote
based drives follow
Mendelian inheritance where 50% of the gametes inherit the gene drive.
However, while the toxin gene is not present in the offspring, they
still suffer the consequences of the toxin. The Cas9 targeting the
essential gene is still present as mRNA or protein in the ovule before
fertilization. This causes the seeds without the gene drive to fail
to germinate. Further, by having the drive target a sex-specific essential
gene, either male or female seeds can be killed thereby driving the
population to one sex, ultimately leading to extinction.
Two
toxin-antidote gene drives have been developed for plants and
demonstrated using Arabidopsis thaliana, which is
a weed, albeit not an agricultural pest. They have similar basic structures.
In one, NPG1 is targeted by Cas9. This gene is required for pollen (male) development, but
is not expressed in ovules (female). Therefore, only when pollen is
carrying the gene drive does it develop properly, causing all the
fertilized seeds to carry it. In contrast, the second toxin-antidote
gene drive uses a killing mechanism that targets early embryo development
rather than pollen germination ( F). Cas9
was designed to target YKT61, which is recessive
lethal due to its involvement in vesicle membrane fusion. Its effects
occur after fertilization.
Both approaches generate seeds where
up to 99% contain the gene
drive and were shown to be stable for generations. The first approach
targeting pollen is theoretically better at driving a gene through
the population, whereas the second approach is more powerful for controlling
invasive weeds. Modeling indicates that the gene drive can spread
through a population in as little as 10-30 generations, requiring
10-20 years to wipe out a local population.

2.4.

## Programming Plants to Respond
to Their Environment
Plants continually survey their environment
and turn genes on and
off to respond to shifting conditions or as a defense against threats. Growth and development also require changing
the pattern of gene expression at different times for cells to differentiate,
spurring the plant to sprout, grow new leaves, control root morphology,
and flower. Chemical communication
signals are transmitted between organelles within plant cells, between
cells and tissues, and exogenously with colonizing bacteria and mycorrhizal
fungi as well as between entire plants.
,
 This language
is coordinated by a large regulatory network involving thousands of
biochemical interactions that sense changes, process this information,
and calculate the correct pattern of gene expression.
The regulatory
networks of plants respond to changes over wide time scales. Within
minutes, it reacts to microbial infections or tissue damage done by
insects or animals.
,
 Within hours, it responds to
shifts in soil conditions, such as nutrient availability, salinity,
water content, and microbial signals, to shift carbon storage or remodel
root morphology.
,
 Changes in temperature, humidity,
and length-of-day lead to seasonal changes in gene expression.

This dynamic control of gene expression
is in stark contrast to
the synthetic regulatory control typically implemented in plant genetic
engineering projects. Most often, recombinant genes are designed to
be always on (constitutively expressed) or use natural tissue-specific
or stress-responsive promoters ( and ).
,
 In many cases, it would be better to produce some traits only when
they are needed, for example, turning on a cold resistance trait when
the temperature is low. This can be
done by building synthetic sensors, encoded in the genome, that respond
to environmental stimuli by turning a promoter on or off. The output
of a sensor can be used to control a gene, or it can be connected
to a synthetic genetic circuit to integrate signals or implement dynamic
gene expression.
−

 The circuit output can be connected to the control of recombinant
or native genes. Many such sensors and circuits have been developed
in bacteria, yeast, and mammalian cells, but have been slower to be
adopted in plants.
,,
 One can imagine a future where plants are programmed to continuously
survey their environment, process the information to determine which
traits need to be activated, and implement the dynamics of a response.
2.4.1.

## Mapping and Manipulating Natural Regulatory
Networks
Natural plant regulatory networks are large and
complex and are only beginning to be understood as a system. For example, in Arabidopsis there are >1,700 TFs that collectively have 1.6 million interactions
with genes, 14 enhancers that impact chromosome accessibility, 20
MAPKs, 100 miRNAs, and 1,000 peptides that target 600 receptors.
−

 These regulators have an enormous impact on native gene expression;
for example, the central glucose regulator KIN11 affects over 1,000
genes.
,,
 Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (CHIP-seq) was used to
identify 2 million binding sites for 104 maize leaf TFs, showing an
incredible median of 16,000 binding sites per TF. DNA affinity purification sequencing (DAP-seq) also provides
information regarding how TF binding to DNA is impacted by epigenetic
modifications (e.g., methylation), which affected
76% of TFs in Arabidopsis.
,
 Yeast one-hybrid screens can screen many proteins by fusing them
to an activator peptide (VP16) ( ) and then building a “bait”
promoter upstream of a reporter gene. They have been used to identify
the TFs that bind to a promoter to map plant regulatory networks involved
with cell wall differentiation, defense response, and cell reprograming.
−

Computational approaches accelerate the mapping of natural
regulatory networks. Bioinformatic methods have identified over 400
sequence motifs conserved in genes that are up- or down-regulated
by pathogens in parsley and Nicotiana benthamiana. Using 63 plant species, regulatory
networks have been mapped between 20,000 TFs and 20 million TF binding
sites. These networks can be further
refined by inferring new regulatory interactions based on co-expression
data.

2.4.2.

## Perturbing
Native TF Expression
A map of the regulatory network is a
useful guide to design genetic
changes to improve a trait-of-interest. Within native regulatory networks,
there are motifs that perform signal processing, including logic operations,
feedback loops, filtering, and memory.
,
 While these motifs encode functions that are similar to electronic
circuits, their high interconnectedness with native regulation and
non-modularity makes it difficult to harness them in engineering projects.
Due to this complexity, currently most successful projects involve
only simple up- or down- regulation of a small number of TFs. While
experiments that worked are described in this section, targeted manipulations
to even well-characterized pathways often lead to unexpected results.

For metabolic engineering applications,
natural TFs can be overexpressed to turn on silent biosynthetic pathways
or to increase product titers. For example, tomatoes were made purple
by expressing natural TFs (Del and Ros1) from the fruit-specific E8 promoter leading to high levels of anthocyanins. Taste and aroma are the result of secondary
metabolites that can be altered by changing the expression of native
TFs. As a means to control apricot flavor, RNA-seq data from ripening
was used to find sixteen TFs.

The control of native TFs can also change plant morphology. Overexpressing
TFs has led to roots that grow deeper and produce more hairs, thereby
improving nutrient uptake and drought resistance in rice, plumb, and Arabidopsis.
,
 The reproductive
stages of pears were controlled through two natural TFs (via targeted
RNA silencing) to create an early flowering line for breeding. In rice, controlling the expression of a TF
(IPA1) allowed the balancing of yield and disease resistance.
,

Plant TFs can be mutated or modified to achieve a desired
effect.
The yield of rice increased from the mutation of a repressor to be
phytohormone-insensitive to divert resources from biomass to grain.
,
 Tomato shelf life was improved by removing the activator domain
from the NOR gene, while maintaining its ability
to bind to DNA, so that it could prevent other TFs from activating
ripening genes. Rice with reduced lignin
content and improved digestibility was achieved by fusing repressor
domains to the OsSWN2S TF involved in promoting cell wall thickening
and xylose generation.

2.4.3.

## Synthetic Regulatory Proteins
One
can use synthetic TFs when gene expression needs to be controlled
without interference from the complexity of native regulatory networks.
They have two essential components: a sequence-specific DNA-binding
domain and a functional domain to manipulate transcription.
2.4.3.1.

## Protein Tags to Build Regulators
A DNA-binding domain
can be turned into a repressor to block the
transcription of a gene. One way to achieve repression is to fuse
the protein to the C-terminal SRDX tag, which is only 12 amino acids
and functional in plants.
−

 It has been added to ZFPs to
improve salt tolerance in ryegrass, TALEs in Arabidopsis, and dCas9 in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves. Additional repression domains have been identified
that work in plants, including EAR and OFPx.
−

DNA binding domains can also be turned into activators that
recruit transcriptional machinery to turn on gene expression. A commonly-used
activating domain is from the Herpes Simplex Virus VP16 protein that
turns on transcription by interacting with chromatin remodelers and
recruiting transcriptional machinery.
,,
 The C-terminal VP16 domain consisting of 11 amino
acids has been fused to ZFPs, TALEs, and dCas9 to create synthetic
transcriptional activators in a wide variety of plant species.
−

 There are several ways to increase expression. Fusing four tandem
repeats of VP16 (VP64) improves activation. Mutant VP16 sequences increase expression in tobacco. Other activating domains originating from
plant TFs have been identified based on sequence similarity with VP16.

There are additional protein tags that
can modulate the activity
of TFs. The transfer of TFs from other kingdoms requires that they
be fused to a nuclear localization signal (NLS) to enter the nucleus
after translation. The most common NLS is simian virus 40 (SV40) motif
which works across a wide range of plant species. To make TF expression short lived, a destabilizing domain
can also be added, such residues 21-30 of the KIP-RELATED PROTEIN1
(KRP1) that has been shown to increase synthetic TF degradation in Arabidopsis. This approach
is analogous to the often-used bacterial “LVA” tags
that can be added to regulators in bacteria to increase their degradation
rates.
−

 These tags have been critical in the design of rapidly responding
and dynamic genetic circuits in microbes.
Chromatin remodeling
is a means for a regulator to control the
access of transcriptional machinery to a gene. Synthetic regulators
of chromatin remodeling have been developed in other eukaryotes but
have not yet used in plants. In yeast, the recruitment of the chromatin
remodeling repression domain Mxi1 by fusing it to dCas9 resulted in
strong repression, targeted to a specific genomic locus through gRNA
design.

2.4.3.2.

## DNA-Binding
Regulators for Plants
Regulatory proteins from outside the
plant kingdom have been shown
to function in plants. In tobacco, TetR:VP16 drives expression from
a synthetic promoter containing tet operators and
the TATA box. Yeast TFs from different
families (MADS, Homeobox, GATA, and bZIP, Gal4) also function as activators
or repressors in Arabidopsis and tobacco, depending
on the tag fused to them.
,

A library of
prokaryotic TFs was transferred to tobacco and Arabidopsis to serve as transcriptional activators and repressors. Synthetic inducible promoters were built by
fusing up to six repeats of the TF operator motif to the CaMV35S promoter.
A VP16 or Arabidopsis ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 2
(ERF2AD) activating domain or SV40 nuclear localization signal was
fused to the C-terminus of the TF. Decreasing the number of operator
sites tuned down the ON state of the gate. To create a repressible
promoter, a single copy of the operator was placed immediately downstream
of the CaMV35S promoter. While expressing the TF fused to a NLS was
sufficient for repression, the OFF state of some TFs could be further
decreased by adding endogenous repressor domains. In Agrobacterium transient assays, the synthetic activator- and repressor-promoter
pairs displayed up to 45-fold and 13-fold induction, respectively.
Genetic circuits are artificial regulatory networks that perform
computational operations. They usually are built using multiple regulators.
These regulators must be orthogonal to be used together in a circuit;
in other words, not interfere with each other or to each other’s
DNA motif. Orthogonal regulators based on dCas9 are simple to create
by designing sets of unique gRNAs, an approach that works in plants.
,,,
 However, because the gRNAs share dCas9, this resource can be drawn
down and cause the fold-repression to decrease (referred to as “retroactivity”).
,
 Alternatively, TALEs and ZFPs can also be designed to be orthogonal
and not target sequences found in the plant genome.
−

 They have modular sequences designed to allow their DNA operator
to be programmable. In practice new sequences do not always work and
they can exhibit nonspecificity, so orthogonal sets must be screened.
Synthetic regulators can impact gene expression by controlling
chromatin access. MARs are anchor points for the genome to the nuclear
matrix ( ).
,,,,−

 Flanking a gene with MARs has been shown
to upregulate its expression in Arabidopsis, potato,
and rice.
,,
 In yeast, the control of chromatin access at specific loci has been
achieved by fusing chromatin regulator (CR) proteins to ZFPs designed
to flank the recombinant gene. TFs
can also be recruited to genome regions neighboring the recombinant
gene to control it through DNA looping or bending.
,
 While these approaches have not been shown to work in plants, they
or analogous strategies with homologous proteins are likely to be
able to implement similar expression control.

2.4.4.

## Genetically-Encoded Sensors in Plants
A sensor responds
to an environmental signal or cell state and
controls a function (output). The output could be a reporter, program
of gene expression, or cellular response. This section focuses on
transcriptional sensors, where the output is a promoter. These sensors
are simple to connect to recombinant genes directly or native genes
through genomic insertions or the expression of a natural or synthetic
TF.

Sensors can be based on natural
regulators in the cell and implemented using native promoters known
to be turned on under the desired conditions. They can also be entirely
synthetic, where de novo regulators are computationally
designed to bind to a desired small molecule. The number of sensors
available for plant engineering has been growing, with examples that
respond to environmental conditions (drought, high temperature, etc.),
agrochemical inducers, phytohormones, cell-cell communication signals,
and synthetic small molecules (agrochemicals, fentanyl, TNT, etc.).
,
 Most of the work performed to date involves moving a single sensor
into one plant line as a proof-of-principle, but one can imagine a
future where plants contain an array of synthetic sensors that provide
a myriad of situational awareness.
2.4.4.1.

## Condition-Responsive
Plant Promoters and
Transcription Factors
The simplest sensors are based on a
native promoter that turns on or off under the desired conditions.
This section focuses on the creation of promoters that respond to
synthetic signals. ( ) and ( ) provide promoters, both natural and synthetic, that respond to
tissue types and stresses, respectively. Natural promoters that respond
to a signal can be used to create a sensor. For example, methanol
regulates some biosynthetic genes in rice and this was used to develop
a methanol-inducible system based on the natural TDC1 promoter.
,
 This promoter was used to control
tyrosine production by modulating the expression of tyrosine decarboxylase
in transgenic rice. Finally, a promoter
that serves as a sensor can be built by incorporating CREs that respond
to plant TFs into a minimal synthetic core promoter ( ).
The mechanism by which the promoter responds to the signal
does not have to be well understood. Methods to scan the genome for
the induction of gene expression (microarrays, RNA-seq, etc.) have
been used to find promoters that turn on in response to a particular
stimulus. This strategy has identified promoters that respond to nutrient
deficiencies (phosphorus, sulfur, magnesium, etc.), heavy metal contamination
(copper, cadmium, nickel, etc.), and stress (heat, cold, drought,
etc.).
−

 Isolating transcripts upregulated in leaf tissue after harvest in
alfalfa led to the identification of a post-harvest inducible and
ABA-responsive promoter.

The
problem with using a natural promoter is that it is subject
to other input signals, some of which may be unknown. Synthetic promoters avoid this problem by
placing well-defined binding sites for native TFs into a scaffold
promoter. The identification of the TF binding site and the placement
of its corresponding CRE placement into a promoter are aided by computational
tools and databases of plant regulators.
,,−

 Promoter design is described in more detail in . This approach has been used to build promoters that respond to
pathogens, stress, cell type, and developmental stages.
,

Promoters can also be designed to bind synthetic TFs (ZFPs,
TALEs,
dCas9) that can be engineered to respond to signals. This simplifies
the construction of a sensor because the operator for the DNA-binding
domain is well-defined, making it easier to place into a promoter
scaffold. This method was used to build phytohormone sensors that
respond to jasmonic acid, gibberellic acid, and auxin (so-called HACRs
“hormone activated dCas9-based repressors”) ( A). Plant sensory domains were
used that, upon binding their ligand, recruit proteolytic machinery
to degrade the TF. By fusing this domain to dCas9, the ligand causes
the fusion protein to degrade, leading to de-repression of a promoter.
 
2.4.4.2.

## Moving Sensors from
Other Species to Plants
Regulators from other kingdoms, such
as fungi or bacteria, are
more likely to not interfere with native plant regulatory networks.
They also offer many more options for signals that one may want to
sense in a plant. The simplest mechanism is a single regulator that
binds to its ligand and changes conformation to bind or unbind a DNA
operator in a promoter. They can be
moved to plants by fusing them to a NLS and placing their operators
in a plant minimal promoter. The binding event can activate or repress
a promoter by fusing the regulator to VP16 or SRDX domains, respectively. This approach led to antibiotic (anhydrotetracycline)
and ethanol sensors using bacterial TetR-family repressors.
,,
 Many bacterial TetR homologues
that respond to a myriad of ligands have been moved to yeast and mammalian
cells and are likely to also work in plants.
−

 The so-called “XVE system” uses the DNA-binding domain
of bacterial LexA, fused to VP16 and the regulatory region of the
human estrogen receptor. The resulting
estradiol-activated regulator works in Arabidopsis, tobacco, and rice. Ligand-binding domains from other eukaryotes
have been used to build plant sensors, including quinic acid, glucocorticoid,
and estrogen sensors, sourced from mold, rats, and humans, respectively.
−

 The pC-HSL-responsive quorum sensor RpaR from Rhodopseudomonas
palustris was fused to a NLS and VP16 activating domain to
create a microbe-to-plant communication channel.

Plants could experience hypoxia as the result of
floods or otherwise waterlogged conditions. An oxygen sensor was constructed
using a TF that had been divided into two parts that need to come
together for activity (split TF). One
TF half was fused to a human enzyme that responds to oxygen (hypoxia-inducible
factor, HIF) and the other TF half was fused to the Gal4 binding domain
from yeast fused to human pVHL (von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor).
The PHD3 (hyman prolyl-hydroxylase) enzyme was co-expressed and hyroxylates
the HIF domain, causing it to bind to pVHL and together they form
a transcriptional activator.
Domains can also be attached to
a protein to make them active under
specific conditions. For example, proteins fused to a temperature
sensitive dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) mutant from yeast become
unstable and are degraded at high temperatures. To use it in plants, two mutations were made to shift the
temperature range to that which is more consistent with plant growth. In Arabidopsis, it was used
to modulate native TFs involved in trichrome development and flowering
time. Certain degradation domains can also be protected by or induced
by the presence of a small molecule, but these systems have not been
demonstrated in plants.
,

Chemicals used
in agriculture could be used to induce gene expression
in the field. A sensor for the commercially-available insecticide
methoxyfenozide was built by fusing the ligand-binding domain from
spruce budworm ecdysone receptor (EcR), a yeast DNA-binding domain
(Gal4 or LexA), and a VP16 activation domain.
−
,
 However, the sensor had low
sensitivity and high background expression. An improved “two-hybrid”
sensor was developed using retinoid X receptor (RXR) from Locust migratoria that heterodimerzises with EcR upon the
addition of methoxyfenozide. The DNA-binding
and activating domains are separated by expressing an EcR-Gal4 and
RXR-VP16 fusion hybrid, ensuring DNA binding and transcription activation
can only occur in the presence of methoxyfenozide. These sensors have
been used in Arabidopsis and tobacco plants as well
as corn and soybean protoplasts. Tebufenozide is an insecticide used
to counter caterpillar pests. A sensor for it was constructed in tobacco
by combining the ligand binding domain from a receptor from a caterpillar
and the DNA-binding domain of the mammalian glucocorticoid receptor.

RNA can also serve as the sensing modality,
implemented through
the protection or cleavage of mRNA encoding the gene-of-interest.
Ribozymes have an aptamer domain that binds to the ligand (aptamer)
that controls its cleavage activity.
,
 Typically,
the riboswitch is placed in the 3′-UTR of the mRNA and it controls
transcript stability. The plant-derived TPP (thiamine pyrophosphate)
riboswitch controls 3′-UTR splicing and can be moved to other
genes to make them downregulated by TPP allowing for post-transcriptional
regulation.
−

 Using high-throughput selections, aptamers
have been identified that bind to many ligands, including small molecules
and proteins.
,
 The frequently-used theophylline-responsive
riboswitch has been used to control a nuclear gene in plants.
,−
,,
 RNA regulators can also be part of transcriptional
sensor when their response can be converted to the activity of a promoter.
One such method is to fuse it the mRNA encoding a TF whose translation
leads to the regulation of a promoter.

2.4.4.3.

## De
Novo Sensor Design
Most sensors
rely on an existing natural domain that responds to the signals. It
is very difficult to create a protein that binds to a molecule or
responds to a signal when there is no natural protein that does so
already to some degree. However, as the structures of more plant receptors
are being solved, this information can be used to guide mutations
so that they bind to new ligands. Computational protein design or
directed evolution can be used to alter the amino acids of a ligand
binding pocket to make it accept a new ligand.
,
 The computational design of RNA aptamers remains out of reach, but
powerful SELEX methods can be used to find sequences that bind to
a target molecule.

Using the
protein design software Rosetta, the binding pocket of a eukaryotic
regulator was mutated to make variants that bind to the pharmaceuticals
digoxin, fentanyl, or progesterone ( B).
−

 These variants function as
sensors in Arabidopsis. The “bump-and-hole
strategy” is a computational method to expand a binding pocket
to bind to a larger molecule. It has been applied to design an auxin
receptor to bind to other auxin-like molecules in plants. Mutations can be made to make a protein stable
only when bound to the target molecule. This approach was used to
create a digoxin sensor in Arabidopsis by fusing
a ligand-dependent stabilization domain to the Gal4 DNA-binding domain.

Signaling networks often use phosphorelays
to integrate stimuli
or transmit a signal to the nucleus. The simplest phosphorelay motifs
in plants and bacteria are two-component systems, where a sensor histidine
kinase phosphorylates a response regulator that binds to DNA. A sensor for the explosive TNT (trinitrotoluene)
was constructed in Arabidopsis by fusing a computationally-designed
TNT-binding domain to the prokaryotic histidine kinase PhoR, which
phosphorylates PhoB. PhoB fused to
VP16 activated a plant promoter and TNT concentrations as low as 10
pM could be detected. The response, however, was limited by cross
reactions with endogenous histidine kinases.

2.4.4.4.

## Tuning the Sensor Response Function
The output of a
transcriptional sensor is a promoter that turns
on or off in response to the signal. The change in a sensor’s
output promoter activity as a function of the input is known as the
“response function,” which can be represented mathematically.
,
 Its shape determines how the sensor can be connected to a genetic
circuit or used to control a change in phenotype. The activities of
the output promoter in the OFF (basal level or “leakiness”)
and ON (maximal) states are important in determining whether the promoter
can be connected to a downstream circuit or used to induce gene expression
across a threshold required for a phenotype. The ratio of these output
levels is the dynamic range and the threshold is the level of input
signal at the output half-maximum. The cooperativity determines the
shape of the response, with low cooperatively leading to a graded
response and high cooperativity leading to a step-like response. When
engineering microbes, there are many ways to genetically change the
response function of a sensor, including by computational design,
the selection of genetic parts, or directed evolution ( ).
−

 In principle, these approaches are applicable to plants, but it
is more challenging and longer process to do so. The inducer of a
small molecule-responsive sensor may also have limited uptake rates
or be cleared by plant metabolism, limiting its concentration in the
plant cell. Therefore, the response characteristics of plant-based
sensors tend to be less desirable than their microbial counterparts,
even for well-characterized inducible systems.
,

A common problem with sensors is that the OFF state is leaky,
which can make them difficult to connect to circuits or cause growth
defects when used to control toxic genes. One method to achieve a
low OFF state is to insert the plant 5S rRNA mimic (P5SM) suicide
exon within the output gene. The P5SM sequence contains a stop codon
that prematurely terminates the translation of the output gene when
included in the mature mRNA.
,
 Through a process
called exon skipping, the expression of the ribosomal protein L5 induces
efficient RNA splicing and excision of the P5SM exon, leading to translation
of the complete mRNA. To reduce the
leakiness of the dexamethasone-inducible sensor, P5SM was placed in
the mRNA of the output gene and both the output gene and L5 were placed
under control of a Dex-inducible promoter. This modification eliminated detectable leaky expression when the
sensor was OFF.

2.4.5.

## Computing in Planta with
Synthetic Circuits
Cells can be programmed to perform computational
operations using
synthetic genetic circuits. They implement
signal processing functions that can alter the output of a sensor,
including noise filters, thresholding, inversion, or making the response
more graded or switch-like. Integrating multiple sensors using logic
operations increases the specificity of a response, ensuring that
a gene only turns on in the correct combination of conditions. Circuits
can also coordinate a multi-stage process during development or growth.
They can implement dynamics, such as producing a pulse of activity
or oscillations. Analog circuits perform complex mathematical operations,
such as addition, with an efficient small number of regulators.
−

 Memory permanently records a transient signal. Collectively, these
circuits enable the programming of “smart plants” to
continuously surveil the environment, respond to or remember threats,
and change gene expression when a farmer applies an inducing agrochemical
in the field.
The bulk of genetic circuit design has been performed
with prokaryotes and the eukaryotic work has focused on yeast and
mammalian cells.
,,−

 There are several challenges when building
circuits in plants. First, more complex circuits require precision
in balancing the expression of multiple regulators. This has been
difficult because of a lack of part libraries encompassing wide ranges
of expression and the historical reliance on techniques that insert
genes in random locations in the genome. Second, the slow growth of
plants makes it difficult to rapidly evaluate designs ( ) and makes
it difficult to use directed evolution methods in planta ( ). In contrast, microbial circuit design has required iterations
of alternative designs and trial-and-error mutations to tune the circuit
response. Finally, it is difficult to measure the output of a circuit
due to interference with fluorescent reporters, tissue-specific expression,
and the inability to use single cell methods (e.g., flow cytometry). Despite these challenges, circuits are slowly
being developed for plants. This capability would allow plants to
be programmed to sense and respond to environmental stresses in the
field and communicate with microbes in the soil. Further, genes could
be turned on in specific tissues or stages of development to have
a desired effect.

2.4.5.1.

## Tuning
Sensor Response Functions
Circuits can change the response
of a sensor output promoter. They
can amplify a signal, filter noise, create a biphasic response, or
change the input threshold at which the sensor turns on. An amplifier
has been built for plants. In Arabidopsis, a positive
feedback loop was constructed by placing TALE-VP64 expression under
the control of a promoter it induces. This amplifier was connected to the anthocyanin biosynthesis regulator PAP1, which led to a 150-fold increase in PAP1 mRNA.
Another signal amplifier, the so-called “Q-system,”
has a minimal promoter that is controlled by the expression of a transcriptional
activator and a repressor that is inhibited by quinic acid. This system has been validated in soybean
protoplasts and Nicotiana benthamiana leaves. Expressing
the transcriptional activator can amplify a promoter output by 8-fold.
Further, the level of amplification can be tuned by mutating or removing
domains in the activator protein.

2.4.5.2.

## Logic
Operations
Logic is at
the core of every computer. A logic circuit takes one or more inputs
and produces an output following a defined operation. The inputs and
outputs of digital circuits can be either a 1 (on) or 0 (off). An
AND gate is an example; the output is only on when both inputs are
on and is otherwise off. NAND and NOR gates are special because they
can be used to build any computational operation. Thus, they are referred
to as “universal” or “Boolean complete.”
Logic is common in natural regulatory networks. It is used to integrate
signals to identify a cell type, improve the specificity of a response,
or control multiple traits in response to different combinations of
signals. Note that biological responses, including synthetic genetic
circuits, have on/off states that are “fuzzy,” meaning
they have intermediate values between 1 and 0 (e.g., 0.9 and 0.2).
Natural promoters encode logic operations by
combining CREs upstream
of the core promoter ( ). Synthetic promoters can be designed
that implement logic through the placement of CREs.
,,
 For example, if the binding
of either of two TFs turns on the promoter, this acts as an OR gate.
Different logic operations can be realized by changing the number
and organization of the operator sites (CREs) in the promoter ( ). All 2-input logic operations were demonstrated in Arabidopsis using bacterial DNA binding proteins and the placement of their
bacterial DNA operators as CRE ( ). This work was demonstrated by transforming
different combinations of repressors and measuring the response in
plants (each plant is a different combination of inputs). Similarly,
a 3-input 1-output logic gate was built by designing a promoter to
respond to three synthetic TFs (two activators and one repressor).

 Logic can be used in a single plant to dynamically
respond to changes
in conditions. Doing so requires the connection of the logic operation
to upstream sensors ( ). The sensor output is a promoter, which can be used
to drive the expression of a TF that then serves as the input to the
promoter implementing the logic operation. For example, a DEX-inducible
sensor was connected to a NOT gate, which was shown to invert the
response ( A). The response
was measured in Arabidopsis and sorghum protoplasts
and the data used to parameterize a mathematical model to aid the
connection of the sensor to the circuit. A larger set of NOT gates
for plants was constructed using a set of six orthogonal bacterial
repressors ( B).
,
 These were characterized by connecting an
auxin sensor (NAA, 1-naphthaleneacetic acid) output to drive the expression
of a repressor. The data were obtained using protoplasts ( ) and used to parameterize a mathematical model that could predict
how to connect (“layer”) the repressors to make all
possible 2-input logic gates ( B). The model used promoter activities measured using
a reference standard to convert to RPU ( ). Finally, it was shown that the
data could be used to build a NAND gate in Arabidopsis plants that could dynamically integrate the NAA sensor with a cytokinin
sensor (tZ) ( B). These experiments are the first step toward the development of
genetic circuit design automation software, where the user specifies
the desired circuit and the DNA sequence is generated ( ).
,,
 This tool is available for
other eukarotyes, including yeast and mammalian cells.
 Other regulatory interactions have been used to
build layered gates.
In Arabidopsis protoplasts, NOR gates were constructed
using dCas9 to target sequences that repress an otherwise constitutive
promoter. These NOR gates were layered
by having the output of an upstream gate be a gRNA that represses
a promoter that is the input to a downstream gate. These circuits
were used to integrate dexamethasone-inducible and heat-inducible
promoters in Arabidopsis plants. In tobacco leaf
infiltrations, an AND gate was built using TFs based on TALEs that
had been split into two proteins that must both be present. Logic gates have also been built by fusing
computationally-designed heterodimerizing domains to either DNA-binding
or a transcription-activation domains: when the correct pair bind,
the complete TF is formed.
,
 In Arabidopsis plants, the system was used to express luciferase only when two
hormone-responsive promoters were activated. Finally, sensors can
control the expression of enzymes that produce ligands that then activate
or repress TFs to impart genetic logic at a promoter. For example, the bacterial TtgR is derepressed
by flavonol-derived metabolites that are produced in plants by expressing
the endogenous MYB12. By using MYB12-induced flavonol production as
a circuit input, AND and NIMPLY logic operations were performed in Nicotiana benthamiana transient transfections.

A problem with this approach is that
each layer has a delay, which
can lead to transient incorrect outputs known as a “fault”
in electronics. A fault could lead
to a pulse of gene expression when it is unwanted, during the transition
between two circuit states that should both be off, expressing a pesticide
gene even when there is no insect. Any given logic operation can be
implemented with many different combinations of gates. Wiring diagrams
can be selected to reduce the possibilities of faults by choosing
a design with fewer layers.

2.4.5.3.

## Memory
Memory records events.
In the field, genetically-encoded memory could convert a transient
into signal into a persistent change in gene expression. For example,
a single treatment with an agrochemical to mature plants could be
converted to a response that continues to the end of a growth season.
Plants naturally have mechanisms of memory, for example exposure to
a stress, but they involve epigenetic and chromosome changes that
affect many native genes and are hard to control with genetic engineering.

“Volatile memory” requires
the constant usage of energy and resources to maintain the state.
For example, bistable switches formed by positive feedback loops or
cross-repression require the continuous expression of the TF(s), otherwise
the memory state is lost.
−

 For a range in the input stimulus,
bistable switches have two stable steady-states (on and off) and therefore
exhibit hysteresis in the transition from on-to-off and off-to-on.
,
 Positive feedback loops have been built in plants (Section 2.3.4),
but bistability was not experimentally shown. Cross-repression has
been implemented in Arabidopsis using two repressors (the LexA and
Gal4 DNA binding domains fused to either the EAR or OFPx repressor
domain) that inhibit each other’s expression. Each repressor was also expressed by a sensor
(DEX or 4-hydroxytamoxifen). This circuit was shown to behave as a
bistable switch in the plant.
“Permanent memory”
does not require constant energy
to maintain the state. In other words, the state would persist even
after the plant has died. Enzymes that modify DNA act as a form of
memory. For example, when an invertase flips a DNA sequence in the
genome, each orientation corresponds to a different memory state.
,
 The state can be read out as a change in gene expression when the
flip re-orients a promoter or terminator to turn expression on or
off. Such a memory switch has been built in tobacco using a phage
integrase to invert DNA containing a promoter ( A). The integrase was placed
under the control of an estradiol sensor and when plants are exposed
transiently to this molecule, expression continued permanently.
 The presence of a particular combination of signals
can also be
recorded by memory that is implemented by logic operations where the
underlying biochemical mechanism is permanent. While this implements
a logic-like function, it is not true logic because it can only respond
once and does not change output states. Here, we refer to this type of circuit as “memory logic.”
Memory logic can be implemented with recombinases.
,−

 FLP recombinase binds to two target sequences and excise the DNA
between them (CRE recombinase does as well). They can impact gene
expression several ways. They can remove a part, such as an upstream
terminator, that turns genes on or off. Or they can permanently remove
an entire gene. Two-input Boolean logic gates were made in Arabidopsis plants using two orthogonal recombinases (Flp
and B3) and recombination sites flanking a strong terminator, promoter,
or reporter gene ( B). When a single upstream
terminator (tOCS) was flanked by both Flp and B3 recombinase sites,
either of the recombinases could activate expression, thus functioning
as an OR gate. A different arrangement that included placing the recombinase
sites outside of the promoter sequence, rather than terminator, led
to a NAND gate.
Memory logic can also be implemented at the
post-translational
level. In tobacco, a transcriptional activator was fused to viral
protein domains that suppress its function. Cleavage sites were introduced into the fusion protein so that the
suppressing domain is removed upon the expression of the protease.
OR logic was implemented by placing two protease recognition sites
for two separate proteases (TEV and TVMV) between the protein domains.
To perform AND logic, two different suppressing domains were fused
to the N and C-terminal of the activator to require two cleavage events
for activation. The output was converted to pigment (anthocyanin)
biosynthesis.

2.4.6.

## Connecting Synthetic
Circuits to Plant Phenotypes
While often characterized using
a reporter gene, the outputs of
sensors and circuits can be used to control plant phenotypes. The
simplest approach is to express the gene(s) controlling the phenotype
by placing them under the control of the output promoter of the circuit.
Complex traits, that require the more subtle perturbation of multiple
native genes on the genome, can be more difficult to control. For
example, to alter progression through a developmental pathway or to
up- or down-regulate enzymes to change fluxes through metabolism.
To this end, there are technologies to connect a promoter activity
to the control of expression of multiple genes at the transcriptional,
translational, or post-translational levels.
2.4.6.1.

## Expression
of Native TFs
An output
promoter can control the expression of a native TF sourced from the
plant's regulatory network. In effect, this connects a synthetic
circuit
to natural circuits. This connection
can be implemented either by knocking out the native copy of the TF
gene or connecting a second copy to the output promoter of the synthetic
circuit. The latter approach allows the TF to be mutated to remove
unwanted natural inputs. For example, the gai repressor
was mutated to make it insensitive to the phytohormone gibberellin. When the mutated Gai was expressed in rice,
wheat, and maize, this induced a dwarf phenotype with increased grain
yield.
There are several examples where a TF was placed under
the control of a sensor to induce a phenotype at a desired time. Petunia
growth can be stunted at a specified time using a dexamethasone sensor
to control the expression of the mutant Gai-1 ( A). Similarly, to time rice
flowering to optimize yield or react to inclement weather, a repressor
was constitutively expressed and its anti-repressor placed under the
control of sensors that respond to the agrochemicals Routine and Orzyemate
( B).

 A delay can also be implemented with a BUFFER gate,
which is single-input
single-output logic where the input and output states are identical.
The gate was built by having the output of the sensor or circuit control
the expression of an intermediate activator, which then controls the
final TF responsible for the phenotype. The delay was due to the additional
time required to express the intermediate activator. A BUFFER gate
can also tune the expression of an output by using the intermediate
TF to amplify or suppress the input signal. In Arabidopsis, a BUFFER gate based on an AmtR-VP16 activator was used to control
a mutant of the native TF IAA14. In lateral root cells, IAA14 is responsible
for determining the degree of root branching. By modulating the intermediate
activator strength by adjusting the number and strength of AmtR operator
sites in a synthetic promoter upstream of the mutant IAA14, the degree
of lateral root branching was controlled ( C).

2.4.6.2.

## Expression of Synthetic TFs
The
output of a circuit can be connected to the transcriptional control
of native genes by repurposing the DNA-targeting tools developed for
genome editing ( ). By fusing them to activation or repression domains,
TALEs, ZFPs, and dCas9 can repress native genes.
,,
 In Brassica, ZFPs have been used to reduce the saturated fatty acid content
of canola oil by elevating the expression of two canola β-ketoacyl-ACP
synthases. In Arabidopsis, dCas9 fused to various epigenetic modifiers targeting the floral
regulator FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) caused altered flowering time.

Plant morphology can also be controlled
with synthetic circuits. Repressors based on dCas9 that respond to
ligands can be targeted to specific regions of the genome (HACRs,
Section 2.3.4.1). In Arabidopsis, a HACR responding to auxin was targeted
to the promoter of an auxin transporter, thereby reducing the gain
of a natural positive feedback loop. This change reduces the strength by which auxin regulates its own
abundance in the shoot, leading to a reduction in shoot branching
( D).
Simultaneously targeting multiple genes could redirect carbon flux,
mediate complex phenotypes (e.g., lignin biosynthesis),
or coordinate stress responses. Multiple TALEs were used to simultaneously
activate three Arabidopsis genes. However, each gene targeted required the design of a different
TALE. It is comparatively easy to direct dCas9 to multiple genes because
of the simplicity of designing gRNA; in bacteria, up to 22 gRNAs have
been used to regulate 13 genes simultaneously. Directing multiple gRNAs to a single promoter leads to
a stronger activation or repression than relying on a single gRNA. In rice protoplasts, this approach was used
to simultaneously activate three genes. The three genes were targeted using a multiplexed CRISPR system
(CRISPR-Act2.0) that combined a gRNA scaffold with bacteriophage aptamers
that recruit four VP64 activating domains to dCas9:VP64. This system
activated three genes simultaneously in rice protoplasts. Note that multiplexing a shared resource (e.g., dCas9) to different genes could weaken their activation
due to retroactivity ( ).
,

2.4.6.3.

## Control
of mRNA Degradation
Circuits
can also control expression of native genes by expressing factors
that target their mRNA. RNAi ( ) can be used as the output of a genetic
sensor or circuit. To control root growth in Medicago, a dexamethasone sensor drove the expression of hpRNA that led to
the suppression of a fatty acid synthesis gene that is critical for
root survival ( E). An ethanol sensor was used to
control dsRNA to knockdown genes involved in chlorophyll biogenesis
in tobacco plants. A 17β-estradiol
sensor was connected to a cre/lox memory switch to control RNAi that
suppressed a GFP reporter in Arabidopsis thaliana and Nicotiana benthamiana plants.

Endonucleases can also be used to regulate
expression at the mRNA level. The bacterial Csy4 endonuclease targets
a 28 nt sequence that can be inserted into the 5′-UTR of a
transcript. When this sequence is present, the induction of Cys4 degrades
the mRNA. Csy4 and homologues thereof have been used to degrade mRNA
in tobacco and rice. RNA-guided RNA-targeting
endonucleases (e.g., Cas13a) offer the ability to
target any mRNA for degradation ( ). Cas13a can be directed to cleave
viral RNA, thus providing engineerable viral resistance to the host
plant.
,
 Alternatively, catalytically
deactivated dCas13a fused the functional domains IF3 and Rbfox1 can
be used to enhance translation or alter splice sites, respectively.
,

2.4.6.4.

## Epigenetic Modifications
A sensor
or circuit can also drive epigenetic modifications to the plant chromosome.
A DNA methyltransferase has been fused to different ZFPs to target
various promoters for methylation, thus silencing downstream gene
expression. Upregulation of a promoter
can also be induced in this way. In Arabidopsis,
a human demethylase was fused to a ZFP to target it to a promoter
to turn it on. Epigenetic modifications
can also alter access to and recognition of DNA motifs. In cassava,
a methyltransferase domain fused to a ZFP targeted a promoter that Xanthomonas effectors bind to during infection, thus preventing
gene activation and increasing bacterial resistance. A wider range of DNA sequences can be targeted
by fusing the methyltransferase to dCas9. Multiple gRNAs can be tiled in the promoter to methylate a larger
region of the DNA, thus having a larger effect.
An interesting
aspect of epigenetic modifications is that they can result in a heritable
phenotype (epialleles).
,,
 For example, a demethylase targeted to the promoter of the FLOWERING
WAGENINGEN (FWA) gene in Arabidopsis caused up-regulation
of FWA and a late-flowering phenotype. When the demethylase was segregated away in later generations, the
FWA remained demethylated and the late-flowering phenotype was inherited
despite the loss of the recombinant demethylase gene.

2.4.7.

## Genetic Sensors and Circuits in Plastids
Plants have
the capacity for large circuits, as evidenced by their
complex native regulatory networks, but the ability to design synthetic
circuits is far behind bacteria.
,−

 Genetic circuit design is much more advanced in bacteria, where
entire electronic circuits can be encoded; for example, adders, counters,
or multiplexors ( ).
,,
 Even entire electronic chips, including one controlling the liquid
crystal display (LCD) of a calculator, have been encoded in DNA and
carried by a bacterium.
,
 Design automation
software, such as Cello, aid in the design of DNA sequences encoding
these circuits and simulation software can be used to predict performance
in the cell ( ).
,
 Further, many more sensors
have been developed for bacteria and a dozen or more can be carried
by one cell.

As an alternative,
the plastid may be a promising place to carry circuits because of
its prokaryotic origin. Chloroplasts or differentiated non-green versions
of them ( ) could be used as a sort of central processing unit
(CPU) in the plant. One can imagine sensors in the plant nucleus communicating
their output to the chloroplast, where the computation is performed.
There are protein transport pathways by which tagged proteins produced
in the cytoplasm are imported into a plastid. These have been used
to direct T7 RNAP, proteins required for mRNA stability to the plastid.
,,
 The result of the calculation
could be connected to recombinant gene expression from the chloroplast.
However, to truly serve as the CPU, the chloroplast would have to
be able to send the signal back to the nucleus, but no such signal
has been identified or devised.
As an early step to this vision,
genetic sensors built using E. coli parts have been
moved to the plastid genome. An
IPTG sensor was constructed in the tobacco plastid by placing the
LacI operator into a constitutive plastid promoter. A light sensor has been built based on cyanobacterial Orange
Carotenoid Protein (OCP) domains that dimerize in blue light. Each domain was fused to a σ and anti-σ
pair that turn on a promoter when dimerized. A sensor based on a theophyllin
riboswitch has been built by fusing it to mRNA encoding T7 RNAP.
,
 When bound to theophylline, the RNAP is expressed leading to the
100-fold induction of a T7 RNAP promoter ( D). A heat sensor was built in tobacco plastids using a switch
based on a repressor from bacteriophage λ. A mutant of the repressor cI857 is heat sensitive and when
it degrades, a promoter turns on. In tobacco plants, it turned on
after 12 days of heat induction at 39°C.
 A signal can be transmitted from the nucleus to
regulate plastid-
and mitochondrial- encoded genes using PPR proteins. PPR proteins bind to mRNA to regulate translation
by increasing transcript stability and access to the Shine-Delgarno
(SD) site of the RBS ( A). Binding to a specific RNA
sequence can be programmed by concatenating binding domains, like
the modular DNA-binding domains of TALE and ZFP proteins ( ).
,
 By swapping out two of the repeat nucleotide binding domains in
the PPR10 protein, the protein was engineered to selectively recognize
a new PPR sequence motif containing the nucleotides GG instead of
the wild-type UC. The activation of
a promoter in the nucleus can be linked to the activation of a gene
in the plastid using these proteins. For example, a nuclear ethanol
sensor was connected to the expression of a PPR protein that transmitted
this signal to the chloroplast and amyloplast ( B). By conditionally
expressing the PPR protein from tissue-specific promoters, PPR-dependent
translation can be activated in non-green plastids such as the amyloplast
in potato ( C).

2.5.

## Accelerating
Plant Engineering
Technique
development in synthetic biology has emphasized accelerating the design-build-test-learn
(DBTL) cycle for organism engineering. However, plants grow slowly, leading to tediously slow build and
test phases. Constructing new crop cultivars
and evaluating them in the field can take years. Even making a stable
laboratory strain of Arabidopsis or Tobacco can take
a year. The most immediate impact is
that fewer design cycles are possible to optimize the system. This
fact, combined with the relatively small number of variants that can
be tested for each cycle, reduces the complexity and ambition of the
systems constructed. This limitation is due to the rapid increase
in the probability of failure as each recombinant gene or genetic
part is added to a design.
For microbes and even mammalian cells,
computer aided design (CAD) software has helped manage the process
( ).
,,
 These tools encompass algorithms
to facilitate DNA design, construction, and application of ML/AI to
guide the next round of design.
−

 Some CAD tools have emerged for plants, but they are far behind
in sophistication, are focused on growth simulation and not DNA design,
and have not been integrated into unified packages.
−

 The slow DBTL cycle could also be addressed by developing a method
to prototype genetic designs before having to build a complete plant,
for example by using protoplasts, single-cell algae, cyanobacteria,
or cell-free systems.
−

2.5.1.

## Plant
Computer Aided Design (CAD)
Fully realizing the potential
of plant genetic engineering will require
dedicated design tools that integrate the construction of synthetic
regulatory networks, metabolic control, inter-organelle signaling
and growth/differentiation. Thinking into the far future, where designs
approach the scale of whole genomes, design automation will be required
to physically map the phenotypes desired by a user to the DNA sequence.
Design automation can address the larger number of constraints that
need to be balanced, far beyond what is possible to do “by
hand”.
,,
 The output of these design algorithms will automatically connect
to pipelines, increasingly robotic, where the physical DNA is constructed,
and the plant strains built. While
plant genetics have generally suffered from a general lack of sequence-to-function
models, many CAD tools already developed for bacteria or mammalian
cells will continue to be extended to crop plant engineering.
Most software developed for genetic engineering relies on CAD tools
that specialize in individual steps of the design process. Some tools
allow genetic parts to be manually combined to build up a system;
for example, selecting from a set of characterized promoters and terminators
to build an expression cassette. Initially, there were few characterized
parts from which to choose. Increasingly, an engineer is able to draw
from registries of characterized genetic parts, such as JBEI-ICE and the Registry of Standard Biological Parts. Synthetic biology software packages have not
been widely adopted for engineering plants, in part because most designs
to date have been fairly simple. As more genetic parts, design rules,
and automated strain construction platforms become applied to plants,
these can be integrated into the software.
Some CAD tools have
been developed to help a user combine genetic
parts, often designed to follow assembly rules. Clotho is a software
platform that both serves the role of a repository of genetic parts,
sequences, and samples and hosts built-in applications that enable
genetic design and engineering. GenoCAD
facilitates the construction of vectors from a set of genetic parts
using a user-defined set of rules, such as the order and orientation
of proteins tags on a gene-of-interest. Golden Gate cloning is a precise part assembly method based on overhangs
generated by Type IIs restriction enzymes. For plant genetic parts, GoldenBraid uses Golden Gate cut sites
but is able to assemble larger and more complex DNA constructs through
hierarchical steps. GB2.0 is a web-tool
that provides both software tools to facilitate the design of DNA
sequences for GoldenBraid assembly and a database of characterized
plant genetic parts.

Genetic
parts stored in repositories often lack functional information
required for them to be used as part of a new design. SynBioHub addresses
this problem by providing a user-facing genetic repository that facilitates
the sharing of genetic designs encoded in Synthetic Biology Open Language
(SBOL). SynBioHub allows users to search
registries for genetic parts and upload and share genetic designs.
Further, it can interface with other applications such as Benchling,
which can automate the design of molecular cloning strategies. The
output of design software can be connected to experimental planning
algorithms, including the control of liquid handling robots, to physically
assemble the DNA and transform cells.

2.5.1.1.

## Computational Genetic Part Design
Genetic
parts can either be selected from a database or generated de novo with a computational tool.
De novo part design has been applied to
the optimization of metabolic pathways and genetic circuits in prokaryotes. Tools have been developed to design RBSs,
promoters, and terminators to a strength defined by the user ( ).
,,−

 Extending such tools to plants is complicated by the inherent complexity
of eukaryotic biology.
A potential direct application of the
existing tools would be plastid engineering, where transcription and
translation mechanisms mimic that of prokaryotes. The RBS calculator
is a tool that designs RBS sequences using a biophysical model to
obtain a desired strength (translation initiation rate). In theory, RBSs can be designed for different
species by selecting different 16S sequences. The UTR Designer uses a similar approach but incorporates
additional thermodynamic parameters to quantify alternative mRNA folding
dynamics. In cyanobacteria, a positive
correlation between measured translation efficiency and that predicted
by the RBS Calculator and the UTR Designer. It was applied to optimize expression of an ethylene producing enzyme
in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis. It was applied
to control expression of a recombinant gene in the tobacco plastid
over three orders-of-magnitude. A transcription-translation
cell-free system generated from tobacco plastids was used to measure
the translation efficiency of 103 RBSs ( E). The characterized
library spanned 1300-fold range in expression and had a weak correlation
between measured and predicted translation rates.
The efficacy
of RNAi ( ) is determined by both the on-target
and off-target activity of the siRNA derived from the dsRNA/hpRNA
design. A suite of computational tools has been developed to aid in
the selection of effective, specific, and non-toxic sequences for
RNAi. The web-tool pssRNAit accepts
an mRNA input and screens potential siRNA sequences for off-target
homology and toxic sequence motifs, as well as on-target considerations
such as target mRNA accessibility and siRNA affinity to RISC complex. The output is a ranked list of RNAi sequence
candidates for your designated mRNA target along with the expected
pool of siRNAs. Other RNAi design software tools include siRNA-Finder, AsiDesigner, desiRm, DSIR, and i-Score, with each tool
using different strategies for on-target and off-target predictions.

2.5.1.2.

## Codon Optimization
Changing the
codons encoding a protein can increase expression of a gene in its
native species and facilitate its transfer to species with different
codon usages. Codon optimization traditionally
designs genes by selecting codons corresponding to abundant tRNAs,
which differ between organisms. Changing the gene sequence can lead
to secondary affects, including altering the mRNA structure and its
stability, introducing internal promoters, RNAP/ribosome pause sites,
and epigenetic modification sites, all of which affect expression
levels. As such, codon optimization can also eliminate (or accidentally
introduce) these sequences to affect expression in the same or different
host species. In fact, these effects
have been postulated to have a larger impact on expression than matching
codon usage to the tRNA abundances. Codon optimization has been used to move genes from other kingdoms
to plants and can result in up to 100-fold greater expression.
,−

Codon optimization has also been used to increase recombinant
expression in chloroplasts, particularly for large human-derived biologicals
that are biased toward human codon usage.
,
 Eliminating sequence motifs implicated in RNA instability, such
as endogenous siRNA binding sites or AT-rich sequence strings for
polyadenylation, led to an increase of bacterial and insect gene expression
in sugarcane callus.

2.5.1.3.

## Protein Design
Computational
protein engineering can manipulate existing proteins or even design de novo proteins with structures that do not exist in nature.
,
 Rosetta is a software suite for protein design that has been applied
to plant engineering. Enzymes can be
designed by combining Rosetta’s structure prediction and protein-ligand
binding prediction capabilities. For example, it predicted the structure
of a cucumber P450 oxidase and calculate all mutations that could
be tolerated in the active site. The mutants were constructed and
screened to identify a new metabolic route to the sweetener mogroside
in cucumber.

Regulators that
can be used to build sensors (Section 2.3.4) can be designed by computationally
docking the ligand to the binding site to identify amino acids that
facilitate binding (PatchDock), followed by binding pocket optimization
by Rosetta. Scaffold proteins were
engineered to bind to the plant steroid digoxigenin and fentanyl and
the binding domain used to build sensors in Arabidopsis.
,

De novo proteins that bind to pairs of excited
state chlorophyll molecules in a way that mimics that natural systems
were also designed using Rosetta. The
ORBIT protein design software was used to engineer a maize lipid transfer
protein into a fluorescent biosensor for lipids.
,
 This was done by using ORBIT to identify disulfide bonds that could
selectively destabilize the protein in its unbound form when mutated
and conjugating fluorescent probes to these mutated proteins.

2.5.1.4.

## Computational Metabolic Engineering
Plant metabolic
engineering has been aided by computational methods
that predict how to make changes to the genome to redirect flux to
a desired product ( ). Genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) capture an
organism’s metabolism as a set of stoichiometric reaction equations
associated with enzymes. These models can include compartmentalization,
for example assigning reactions to the chloroplast ( ) and interactions between species. GEMs have been developed for Arabidopsis

−

 as well as many major crops,
including maize,
−

 sorghum, barley, rice,
,
 rapeseed,
−

 sugarcane, and tomato. GEMs are validated by comparing predictions
with experimentally-determined metabolic flux distributions. However, gene and protein regulation data
are absent and an assessment of Arabidopsis GEMs
showed that even the most comprehensive models missed many enzymatic
reactions, lacked gene-protein-reaction associations, or contained
mass and charge imbalances. Therefore,
the application of these models to guide plant engineering has not
been fully realized.
Flux balance analysis (FBA) predicts steady-state
flux distributions using a GEM and a set of constraints arising from
metabolic reaction stoichiometries and bounded estimates of flux through
individual reactions ( A). There are many more fluxes than can be measured, making it a highly
under-constrained problem. To address this problem, FBA uses an objective
function, such as the metabolite concentrations corresponding to the
maximum growth rate, to predict the complete set of fluxes. Optimization
software such as COBRA, OptKnock, OptReg, and OptStrain use GEMs and
FBA to suggest gene knockouts or even tune enzyme expression levels
to maximize the production of a specified metabolite.
−

 For plants, FBA models have been used more to understand
natural
biological processes, as opposed to aiding genetic engineering. They
have been used to study tissue-specific metabolism, compartmentalized
metabolite transfers, and nutrient transfer between the plant and
symbionts in the root nodule.
,,
 Some studies have begun to use them to guide engineering efforts
at a high level. For example, FBA was used to simulate the effects
of photorespiratory bypass routes on photosynthesis productivity. A FBA model that incorporates day and night
metabolism showed that introducing synthetic CAM photosynthesis pathways
into C3 crops could benefit yield, thus demonstrating the
carbon-concentrating effects outweigh the associated increase in energy
consumption associated with intracellular metabolite transport ( B).

Elementary flux mode (EFM) analysis
enumerates all possible metabolic
routes between a set of substrate and product metabolites.
−

 This tool is useful for plant engineering, where metabolic pathways
are highly branched and redundant. In rapeseed, EFM was used to describe
a previously unknown carbon flux pathway used to efficiently convert
sugars to oil. Although EFM can be
powerful for exploring and engineering metabolism, it is computationally
intensive and is therefore generally confined to small networks, such
as central carbon metabolism.

2.5.1.5.

## Regulatory
Network Design
Simple
plant sensors and genetic circuits can be simulated as ordinary differential
equations (ODEs) with a solver (e.g., MATLAB) ( ). It is more difficult to design larger circuits
involving multiple sensors and a dozen or more regulatory proteins.
Cello allows a user to specify a desired circuit function using the
Verilog high-level text language used for electronic circuit design.
,,,−

 The software then converts the Verilog text to a wiring diagram
using logic minimization and then assigns regulators to each gate
within the diagram. The output is a DNA sequence and prediction regarding
performance. While it has been mostly applied to bacteria ( ), Cello
has been extended to yeast ( ) and
the design automation software package EQuIP has been applied to mammalian
circuit design. It could be extended
to the plant chromosome or plastid genome by defining a locus to carry
the circuit and characterizing a set of simple logic gates at that
position ( ). Once this is complete, Cello could put the regulators together
in many ways to recreate the desired operation and automate the connection
of sensors.

2.5.1.6.

## Multi-cellular Growth
Simulation
Plants are multi-cellular organisms with complex
tissues that change
dynamically during growth. A suite of software tools can simulate
3D growth and morphology, while also incorporating inter- and intra-cellular
signaling.
,
 Some models predict plant resilience
to environmental stresses, such as soil moisture, temperature, and
dought.
−

 The most immediate application of these
tools in genetic engineering is to link the results of metabolic flux
models with phenotypic growth, morphology, and stress response. Multi-tissue
GEMs have been developed for Arabidopsis that compartmentalize
leaf, root, and stem tissues and capture resource partitioning.
−

 These simulations have been used to predict the whole-plant impact
of phytohormones.
−

There is potential to use multicellular
models to guide the design of more complex plant phenotypes. CellModeller
uses cell interaction models to simulate complex morphogenic processes. It was used to model trichome differentiation
through known gene regulatory networks in Arabidopsis ( C). Another
example is SimRoot, which has been used to predict advantageous root
phenotypes for nutrient or water-limited growth, such as basal root
whorl number, basal root growth angle, hypocotyl-borne roots, and
lateral root branching ( D).
,
 Whole plant simulations have
been getting more sophisticated, including the extension to crop plants.
,
 One can imagine a future where designers rely on these simulations
to predict the phenotypic impact of genetic changes.

2.5.2.

## Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine
Learning (ML)
Plant engineering often suffers from an overabundance
of data, particularly with -omics methods, and a lack of means to
interpret it to drive actionable design choices. To address this challenge,
AI/ML models process large quantities of -omics data, annotate genomes,
and process images of plants to automatically quantify their phenotypes.
While often used interchangeably, ML is a subset of AI algorithms
that encompasses the development of computational models to automatically
perform complex tasks. These algorithms have the potential to accelerate
plant engineering projects. Ultimately, they could be integrated into
fully automated plant engineering pipelines to parallelize the design
of many more genetic designs than could be created “by hand.”
ML is applied to analyze input data to identify patterns, make
predictions, or classify data. ML algorithms implement either supervised
or unsupervised learning. Supervised learning uses input data to train
the model, which then makes predictions for sets of unlabeled data.
Supervised learning was applied to identify pseudogenes in maize without
transcriptomic data. The input data
was a set of maize genes that associated epigenetic markers with expression
data and model predicts whether a new gene is a pseudogene.
Unsupervised learning uses unlabeled data to identify patterns
or associations and encompass dimension-reduction and clustering algorithms.
Neural networks are a form of unsupervised deep learning that can
interpret more complex patterns in a dataset, including as nonlinear
effects or spatial relationships. Unsupervised learning was used to
cluster highly-dimensional single-cell transcriptomic data in order
to classify cell types and extract the genetic determinants of root
development. For plants, ML has been
used to for functional gene annotation,
,
 identify transcriptional start sites, predict long non-coding RNAs,
,
 and find
alternative slice site motifs.

The “learn” step in the DBTL cycle has been developed
for high-throughput pipelines for microbial strain engineering ( ). Tools have
been developed to interpret screening data of pathway variants to
feed into the design of the next set of strains to be tested.
−

 AI/ML has the potential to aid the screening of plant phenotypes
as part of an automated DBTL pipeline. Characterizing engineered plants
can be difficult because plant phenotypes, such as growth morphology
or disease tolerance, can be time consuming to assay at scale. Image
recognition will assist in the screening of engineered plants. To
this end, neural networks have been applied to high-throughput plant
phenotyping, including identifying plant stress, growth patterns,
plant architecture, morphology, and yield quantification.
−

ML can aid the design step of the DBTL cycle. Neural networks
have
been applied to DNA motif identification, for example to help design
promoters or other genetic parts ( .a). DeepBind and DeepSEA use neural
networks to analyze protein-nucleic acid binding data (CHIP-seq, ATAC-seq,
etc.) to predict protein binding sites in DNA and RNA sequences. This information could be applied to build
new sensors ( ) or avoid unintended functional sequences in large designs.
ML has been used to extract TF binding motifs that affect chromosome
accessibility. For example, a model was trained on DAP-seq data to
identify CREs responsible for improved high-salinity response in Arabidopsis roots. These
could aid the design of sensors to program stress response ( ). ML models
have also been trained to predict cleavage and polyadenylation sites
in the 3′-UTRs of Arabidopsis mRNA and to
predict CREs in maize.
,,

Neural networks can aid the analysis of genome sequencing
data
to identify native targets for engineering efforts.
−

 DeepSEA uses a neural network trained on chromatin accessibility
data (ATAC-seq) to predict if genetic variants have a functional role
in epigenetic regulation and annotate CREs.
,
 The Plant DeepSEA model was used to identify high-impact SNPs in
the promoter region of DEP1, an important gene in rice breeding that
regulates leaf and panicle morphology. The SNPs found could be used
to inform more efficient breeding strategies.
Regulatory networks
and metabolic pathways can be inferred by measuring
the correlations between the expression of genes in transcriptomics
data. GENIE3 uses ML to build network models by predicting the linkages
between genes from RNA-seq datasets. It predicted TFs that regulate pathways-of-interest for plant breeding,
such as anthocyanin biosynthesis and jasmonic acid biosynthesis. Other ML approaches have elucidated plant
secondary metabolism; for example, a model was trained to identify Arabidopsis enzymes involved in secondary metabolism. Similarly, a ML algorithm was trained using
metabolomics data to predict previously unidentified metabolic pathways
in tomatoes.

2.5.3.

## Rapid
Prototyping and Automation
Applying principles to optimize
the DBTL cycle to plants has been
impeded by two challenges. First, transformation is a tedious and
labor-intensive low probability event (worsened by the need to achieve
homoplasty if transforming plastids). Second, plant growth is slow,
especially for non-model plants, including crops of global agricultural
interest, and this limits the cycle time. To overcome these problems,
several solutions have been proposed including the use of accelerated
transformation methods, alternative model plants, cell-free systems,
protoplasts, and robotics.
2.5.3.1.

## Model Plants and Plant
Cell Cultures
One way to address these challenges is to pick
or create species
that are close to high-value plants, but are easier to genetically
modify and have faster growth times. For example, Brachypodium
distachyon often substitutes for wheat, foxtail for millet,
and a fast-growing “mini-maize” variant has been developed
for corn.
−

 However, these plants still require months to grow, making them
still the slow step of a DBTL cycle.
While Arabidopsis has been the workhorse model plant, it still has an 8 - 12 week
generation time; thus, it may be beneficial to work with even simpler
plants. The moss Physcomitrella patens is unique
for its capacity for homologous recombination, achieving yeast-like
integration efficiencies, and is thus useful for precise genome engineering.
−

Physcomitrella patens has become a popular for
metabolic engineering due to its ease of manipulation, photoauxotrophic
metabolism, and cofactor availability.
,
 To demonstrate the production of structurally diverse terpenes,
combinations of diterpene biosynthesis genes were transformed into
this species.
Marchantia polymorpha, in the liverwort family, also provides a promising platform for
synthetic biology, due to its simple morphology, smaller genome (220Mb),
reduced gene redundancy, haploid dominant phase, and ease of propagation
and transformation.
,
 The Parts Registries, MarpoDB
and OpenPlant, aid the identification of M. polymorpha genes and selection of genetic parts.
,
 Through Agrobacterium-mediated transformation,
part libraries can be characterized in the matter of days ( A).
M. polymorpha can also be individually encapsulated in aqueous microdroplets for
high-throughput sorting and quantification, analyzing >100,000
cells
per hour.

 Plant cell cultures comprise proliferating, undifferentiated
cell
suspensions grown in liquid medium. The most common plant cell line is Tobacco Bright Yellow 2 (BY2),
but suspensions have also been made for carrot, rice, tomato, alfalfa,
soybean, and potato, amongst others.
−

 So-called “plant cell packs” are microtiter plates
containing Tobacco BY2 cells that can be transformed at scale, thus
simplifying the high-throughput screening of plant cells.
,
 Cell suspensions have been used to manufacture recombinant proteins
and natural products in bioreactors.
−

 They have also been
used to characterize genetic parts and metabolic pathways. A set of
native promoters was shown to have similar activity in both soybean
tissue and a soybean cell culture. Plant
cell packs were used to characterize a library of different promoter-terminator
pairs ( B).
,
 They were used to screen genetic variants for tryptamine production
when tryptophan decarboxylase was targeted to different cellular compartments.
,

Hairy root cultures are generated from the infection of roots
by Agrobacterium rhizogenes, which causes the overproduction
of phytohormones and rapid root proliferation. Hairy roots possess the metabolism of normal differentiated
plant tissues. This system was used
to screen combinations of genes from the precursor biosynthesis pathway
to identify variants that overproduce the medicinal diterpene tanshinone
in the plant Salvia miltiorrhiza. Soybean hairy root cultures were used to screen TFs for
upregulation of isoflavone biosynthesis ( C).

2.5.3.2.

## Surrogate Microbes
Single-cell
organisms also can accelerate the DBTL cycle by acting as a surrogate
for a complete plant, but the accuracies of their predictions for
higher plants are low. The algae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii has been used as the model organism to study eukaryotic photosynthesis
and chloroplast biogenesis. They are conducive to high-throughput
studies. For example, a library of 600,000 barcoded mutants was generated
and 58,000 mutants in 121 different conditions were phenotyped.
,

Chlamydomonas reinhardtii can serve as a platform
for plant metabolic engineering and has been engineered to produce
diverse diterpenoids.

Plastid
genomes are particularly hard to genetically modify and, therefore,
different prototyping species have been proposed. Chlamydamonas has been used as a model system to study plastids, as it only has
a single one that is easily transformed and this has been used to characterize promoters and RBSs ( D).
,
 However, algal plastid regulatory signals are very different from
higher plants and thus it is usually not a good approach for quantitative
characterization.

Escherichia coli shares many
transcriptional and
translational signals with the plastids of higher plants ( .e). Many
promoters work in both hosts. One reason for this observation is that
both share the same housekeeping s70 for RNAP. However, it also is
an imperfect model. First, translational signals (e.g., the RBS) can differ between the two, making it difficult to use Escherichia coli to model an accurate translation rate.
,
 Second, the maturation of mRNA and degradation signals are much
different in chloroplasts and change during the day and night, thus
complicating the interpretation of results.

2.5.3.3.

## Protoplasts
The outer wall can
be stripped from a plant cell to create protoplasts that are easy
to transform and use in high-throughput experiments.
,,
 The complete plants can also
be recovered after the protoplast is made. For example, genome-edited
cabbage, rapeseed, Chinese cabbage, rice, and wheat have been regenerated
from their protoplasts. They have been
widely used to characterize plant signal transduction, cell phenotypes,
and differentiation.
−

 The key challenge with using protoplasts is that they are difficult
to prepare and wide variability has been observed batch-to-batch and
between labs.
Protoplasts enable rapid screening of functions
relevant for genetic engineering. They have been used to evaluate
gene silencing and genome-editing tools because the chromosome is
intact and epigenetic enzymes active. Protoplasts can be used with
FACS or deep sequencing to characterize synthetic sensors/circuits
and genetic part libraries ( E) ( and ).
,,
 To elucidate sequence motifs
that determine promoter strength, the activities of 18,000 Arabidopsis,
34,000 maize and 27,000 sorghum core promoters was measured in maize
protoplasts using barcoded transcripts to measure activity. Two million synthetic CREs were transformed
into parsley protoplasts to identify those responsive to stress.

2.5.3.4.

## Cell-Free Protein Synthesis
Cell-free
gene protein synthesis (CFPS) systems reconstitute the cellular machinery
for transcription and translation in a mix.
,
 The mix can either be made by lysing cells or by combining independently-purified
proteins to minimally reconstitute these processes (e.g., the PURE system).
−

 For many bacteria, fungi, and mammalian
cell types, CFPSs have become widely used to evaluate many variations
of genetic parts and designs, to prototype
genetic circuits, and to identify optimal
enzyme levels in multi-step pathways.
−

 They have been encapsulated in lipid vesicles
in to perform high-throughput screening using FACS
,
 or other liquid handling systems (e.g., the Echo). A DNA construct simply must be dropped into
the CFPS mix and transcription and translation initiates, thus eliminating
the need for transformation and cell growth. One challenge with CFPS
systems is that they can exhibit variability due to fluctuations in
the component concentrations over time and are sensitive to small
changes in the protocol for their preparation. They also run out of energy (ATP) and materials (amino
acids, nucleotides, etc.) over time, making the responses of some
systems difficult to interpret.
There are several ways that
CFPS's could be used to prototype plant genetic designs. The
first
is to characterize large libraries of simple genetic parts, such as
promoters. Wheat germ has often been used as an in vitro protein expression system and has been used in the context of DBTL
pipelines. While wheat germ extract
cell-free systems are primarily used for eukaryotic protein production,
genetic parts have been screened using wheat germ extract to optimize
cell-free expression. Wheat germ extract has been used to identify
5′-UTRs that improve mRNA stability and synthetic IRES variants
that improve translation initiation ( F). To identify
binding sites for endogenous TFs, 647 Arabidopsis TFs were individually expressed in wheat germ extract and screened
for binding to the 5′-UTRs of two Arabodopsis genes.

Plastid genomes have
long been studied using CFPSs, in part because
they are difficult to transform. They have been used extensively to
deduce regulatory signals involved in transcription and translation
in the plastid genome. These experiments often have involved making
small libraries of promoters, terminators, mRNA-processing RNAses/protease
sites, spicing sequences, and RBSs ( .f).
,,,,−

 While these systems were used to elucidate the basic biology of
plastids, another way to interpret the results is that are part libraries
whose characterization data could be applied to genetic engineering.
A tobacco plastid CFPS was used to quantify the strength of computationally-designed
RBSs ( ) ( E). T7 RNAP was added to this CFPS to transcribe
mRNA containing the RBS to be measured that controlled the expression
of a fluorescent reporter. The fluorescence measurements were normalized
to mRNA concentration using a malachite green aptamer within the transcript. Some care has to be taken in using a parameter
value measured using a CFPS system, as differences between in vitro and in planta expression have
been noted. They can also be sensitive
to lab-to-lab conditions during preparation.

3.

## Engineering the Soil Microbiota
Plants
interact with soil microbes that acquire nutrients, suppress
pathogens and pests, and improve stress tolerance.
−

 Many beneficial crop traits can be obtained by modulating these
microbes, either altering which natural microbes are present or engineering
them to introduce a new function.
The term “chassis”
has been used in Synthetic Biology
to describe a strain that can be reliably engineered. The sheer scale of the soil microbiome provides
many potential chassis. A gram of agricultural soil has an estimated
1 mg bacteria (109 cells), 1 mg fungi (107),
10 μg archaea (107), and 0.1 μg viruses (108). The specific microbes present
depends on the soil chemistry, geography, weather, and agricultural
practices.
,
 There can be thousands of bacterial
species in a gram of soil, many of which can be genetically manipulated. Filamentous fungi are less easily engineered,
but have critical roles in plant health; notably, arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungi (AMF) provide nutrients and others defend against pathogens
and enhance stress tolerance. Archaea
have been even less studied, but are critical in agricultural processes,
including the impact on climate change through the release of the
greenhouse gas methane.
−

Plants actively shape
their microbiome, both directly through the
excretion of metabolites and indirectly by manipulating environmental
conditions or recruiting competitive species.
−

 This enriches the species toward a unique pattern associated with
the plant type that can be robust to varying soil types.
,
 This chemical language is rich and poorly characterized. For example, Arabidopsis dedicates 50% of its fixed carbon to make 100s
of chemicals excreted from its roots, the composition of which varies
under different conditions.
,
 Networks of interacting
species create consortia that are more stable when introduced in the
field together and are more resilient to environmental stresses.
−

 Engineered consortia could support a species carrying a function-of-interest
or it could be distributed across multiple strains to reduce its burden.
,

For over 100 years, many agricultural products whose active
ingredients
are living bacteria and fungi have been sold to enhance these effects,
including a bacterial insecticide with the unfortunate name “Doom”.
−

 Engineered microbes have been slower to be adopted, with only a
few examples approved to date, most of which involve random mutagenesis,
removal of genomic DNA, or the movement of genetic parts from one
region of the genome to another, to enhance a function. However, the potential is huge, as our ability
to genetically modify these bacteria has expanded rapidly. With the
rise of genome editing, large multi-gene pathways can be combined
into a single cell. Further, they can be placed under the control
of genetic circuits to regulate when the pathways are active or to
create interlocked symbiotic relationships between each other and
the plant ( ). Methods are being developed to control microbial persistence in
the environment, prototype performance, quantify risk before field
trials.
,,
 This section
focuses on these and future applications as well as the state of methods
from Synthetic Biology to engineer soil bacteria, fungi, viruses,
and archaea.
3.1.

## Genetically Modified Microbes (GMMs) in Agriculture
Many natural microbes have been marketed to enhance plant growth
or protect against stresses. These products have been extensively
reviewed elsewhere.
−

 Examples of commercial inoculants that use
natural microbes as biopesticides and fertilizer supplements are from
the following genera: Bacillus (Nortica, PONCO, VOTIVO,
Serenade), Streptomyces (Mycostop, Actinovate), Bradyrhizobium (Optimize, Vault, Excalibre-SM), Sinorhizobium (Optimize), Azospirillium (MycoGold, MicroAZ-ST), Azotobacter (bio-N, MycoGold).
In additional, natural filamentous fungi have been used in products: Trichoderma (Excalibre-SM), Beauveria (MycoGold), Penicillium (JumpStart), and AMF (Mycormax, BioOrganics,
MycoGold, BLUEPRINT). Note that bacteria that protect against abiotic
and biotic stresses are described in .
All of these examples are not genetically
modified. This section describes strains genetically engineered to
enhanced performance. Most of these strains have only been tested
under laboratory or limited field conditions, with almost none passing
regulatory hurdles to be used for agriculture. Reviews have been written
regarding the challenges of obtaining regulatory approvals for the
commercial release of GMMs.
,,

3.1.1.

## Microbially-Derived Nutrients
Plants
rely on the soil microbiota to convert nutrients to forms that can
be taken up by the plant. Fertilizer is a major input to agriculture
and critical for maximizing yields. The most energy-intensive input
is nitrogenous fertilizer, whose production uses 1% of the world's
energy and is up to 55% of the energy input to crops.
,
 Phosphate is mined to be added to fertilizer, with cheap sources
being geographically limited (70% comes from Morocco) and “peak
phosphorous” is anticipated in 2040, after which the supply
begins to become depleted. Potassium,
as well as metals and micronutrients, are essential for growth and
stress resilience. Microbes can be
engineered to produce these nutrients, convert them into a form that
can be utilized by the plant, or aid their accessibility in the soil.
Nitrogen is limiting for plant growth, because plants are unable
to convert atmospheric nitrogen to a fixed form that can be used to
build metabolites and proteins. Some bacterial species have the enzyme
nitrogenase, which converts N2 to ammonia, which can be
taken up by the plant. Cereals are generally not able to form associations
with N-fixing bacteria and it has been a longstanding challenge to
move this capability to them. Different engineering approaches are
being taken to modify bacteria and plants. We describe these efforts
as a “grand challenge” in .
Orthophosphates (H2PO4
–, HPO4
2–)
are the preferred form of
phosphorus for plant uptake, but much of the phosphorus in the soil
is found in inaccessible forms, such as in organic matter, insoluble
mineral precipitates, or adsorbed on soil particles. Bacteria can
convert phosphorus from inaccessible to bioavailable forms by secreting
phosphatase or phytase enzymes to release phosphates from organic
matter.
,
 To this end, 82 phytases were
screened in plant-associated bacteria to identify those that increased Arabidopsis growth under phosphorus-limited conditions. A similar effect can be achieved by secreting
organic acids and siderophores to solubilize mineral phosphates. Phosphate
solubilization was improved by increasing gluconic acid secretion
through the recombinant expression of the pyrroloquinoline quinone
(pqq) gene cluster in Pseudomonas fluorescens, Burkholderia cepacian, Pseudomonas sp. PSS, and Herbaspirillum seropedicae.
−

 Citric acid secretion will also solubilize phosphate, which was
demonstrated by transferring citrate synthase and citrate transporter
genes into P. fluroescens.

Iron is required for chlorophyll biosynthesis and deficiencies
lead to foliage yellowing and reduced yield. Plants and microbes release
siderophores that efficiently chelate and transport iron ions, which
would otherwise be insoluble and unavailable for absorption. Siderophores
purified from Chryseobacterium alleviated iron starvation
when applied to tomato roots. Further,
high siderophore production from Streptomyces improved
rice and mungbean growth under low iron conditions. Replacing the native iron-regulated promoter of the siderophore
biosynthesis gene pvdS with an inducible promoter
resulted in elevated siderophore production and iron leaching.

Zinc is involved in many metabolic and
physiological processes
in plants and is required for the activity of some enzymes. Bacillus soil isolates selected for their ability to solubilize
zinc oxide in halo assays were shown to increase zinc concentrations
in soybean likely through the release of organic acids that dissolve
insoluble zinc compounds. Other Bacillus and Enterobacter strains identified for zinc solubilization in vitro have been shown to reduce zinc deficiencies in
maize, rice, and wheat when inoculated in soil.
,
 To our knowledge, soil bacteria have not yet been engineered for
zinc solubilization.

3.1.2.

## Hormone Production to
Promote Plant Growth
Bacteria can synthesize the phytohormone
auxin indole-3-acetic-acid
(IAA), which drives cell elongation and division during plant growth,
root formation, and leaf development. In nature, auxins are produced by over 80% of bacteria in the rhizosphere. Overexpressing IAA biosynthesis enzymes in Pseudomonas improved root growth in rapeseed. Similarly, the transfer of these genes to Cupriavidus pinatubonensis, which does not naturally produce
IAA, increased Arabidopsis root length and weight. These genes were placed under the control
of a quorum sensor to allow the bacteria to increase in biomass before
making IAA. This regulation reduces the metabolic burden of making
the molecule before it is needed ( A).

 Bacteria can also control plant growth by reducing
the presence
of the volatile stress hormone ethylene, which regulates plant growth
and stress response.
−

 In legumes, high ethylene levels inhibit
nodulation. Ethylene production is
induced by abiotic or biotic stress, leading to detrimental effects
on plant growth in some cases. The enzyme ACC-deaminase degrades an
ethylene precursor, thereby reducing its production. Beans inoculated with the endophyte Serratia grimesii engineered to express ACC-deaminase displayed
enhanced nodulation, increased plant growth, and improved disease
resistance ( B). Inoculating rice with an engineered
endophyte (Azoarcus) constitutively expressing ACC-deaminase
increased the weight of rice growing in cadmium-contaminated soil. Similarly, engineering the banana endophytes Kosakonia and Enterobacter to express ACC-deaminase
to degrade ethylene prevented Fusarium wilt disease.
−

3.1.3.

## Protection against Abiotic and Biotic Stresses
Engineered microbes can also confer both biotic and abiotic stress
resistance to the plant. describes many of the potential uses
to incorporate microbes into systems that can dynamically respond
to these stresses. Some natural microbes have been found to protect
plants from salt and drought stress. Mechanistically, they perform
this function by inducing plant phytohormones, osmolytes, ion transporters
and aquaporins, and antioxidation or impeding salt uptake.
−

 Most cases of their commercial use do not involve genetic engineering.
The first example of a genetically-modified microbe (GMM) that
protected a plant was designed to reduce the formation of frost.
,
 Wild-type Pseudonomas syringae contains an ice-nucleating
protein that nucleates ice formation and damages plants at temperatures
below -5 °C. This problem was addressed by knocking out the nucleation
gene to create a strain (Ice–) that outcompetes
the native strain, thus inhibiting its colonization and frost formation.
Field trials testing Ice– were run in 1987 on potato
and strawberry.
−

Nonpathogenic bacteria promote resistance to various diseases
by
producing molecules that prime the plant immune system. This mechanism
has been used to engineer better biocontrol agents. For example, salicylic
acid is known to upregulate plant defenses. Inoculating tobacco with a strain of Pseudomonas fluorescens engineered to express a biosynthetic pathway for salicylic acid
reduced damage caused by tobacco necrosis virus.

Bacteria can also protect plants against pathogens
and insects
( ).
Some of these are wild-type strains that naturally produce antibiotics,
antifungals, or insecticide compounds. Most GMM commercial products
are based on microbes that protect against insects. Bacillus
thuringiensis or Pseudomonas fluorescens engineered to produce the Cry toxin are the active ingredient in
Agree, Condor, Design, Foil, Raven, CRYMAX, and MATTCH.
−

 The Cry toxin is a potent bioinsecticide that kills insects by binding
and forming pores in the insect midgut after ingestion. Many variants of the Cry toxins have been
moved between species in order to change or expand the range of insects
targeted. Protein engineering has also
been applied to the toxins to the same effect.
−

Bacteria can also be toxic to fungi and insects by expressing
dsRNA
that target essential genes when consumed by the pest ( and ). Engineered bacteria can also be used to “vaccinate”
a plant against future pathogens. Plant defenses can be primed with
small peptides (“hairpin proteins”) that are used by
some phytopathogens to trigger localized cell death in plants.
,
 Exposure to hairpin proteins leads to systemic acquired resistance,
which protects a plant against later exposures, analogous to the innate
immune response in animals. Bacilli engineered to
express hairpin proteins decreased disease caused by bacterial leaf
blight when inoculated on rice.

3.1.4.

## Toxin
Removal from Soil
Microbes
can remediate soil pollutants, both to promote plant growth and to
reduce the risk to consumers. Heavy metals cause plant tissue damage,
stunt growth, and pose a food safety risk.
,
 Microbes have been engineered to remediate heavy metal contamination
by sequestration or chemical conversion. Bacteria have been engineered
to sequester cadmium, mercury, lead, copper, and zinc by targeting
metal-binding peptides to the cell surface or periplasmic space.
−

 These strains improve Arabidopsis germination and
mung bean growth in the presence of heavy metals.
,
 Another strategy is to sequester heavy metals intracellularly by
expressing ion transporters, suppressing efflux systems, and producing
intracellular detoxifying molecules, as was demonstrated for cadmium,
nickel, cobalt, and arsenic.
−

 Heavy metals can also be transformed
by engineered microbes into volatile forms to eliminate them from
soil. For example, recombinant methyltransferase was introduced into Pseudomonas putida to convert toxic forms of arsenic to
volatile dimethylarsine and trimethylarsine to remove them from soil.

Chemicals used in agriculture and industry
can contaminate soil and water and cause toxicity in plants and humans.
Numerous microbes capable of degrading recalcitrant chemicals have
been isolated from polluted areas. To
improve their efficacy, catabolic genes from such microbes have been
transferred to other hosts to improve resilience in the environment
and expand their activity. For example, a polychlorinated biphenyl
(PCB) degradation pathway from Burkholderia was expressed
in a bacterium that colonizes the alfalfa rhizosphere. Genes for organophosphate, pyrethroid, and
carbamate pesticide degradation were introduced into Pseudomonas
putida to create a strain that could simultaneously degrade
the pesticides methyl parathion, fenitrothion, chlorpyrifos, permethrin,
fenpropathrin, and cypermethrin ( C).
,
 Other pseudomonads
have been engineered to degrade phenols that are a cancer-causing
pollutant from industry and mining.

Combinations of bacterial species performing different degradation
steps have been developed. There is a metabolic pathway for the degradation
of dibenzothiophene, a sulphur-containing pollutant from coal and
fossil fuels. However, one step produces an intermediate metabolite
that inhibits upstream enzymes. To address this problem, a consortium
of Pseudomonas putida strains was designed where
one strain performs the first step and a second strain performs the
remaining degradation steps ( D). This consortium
outperformed a single strain expressing the complete degradation pathway.
When there is no known natural pathway for the breakdown of a pollutant,
an artificial one can be created by combining enzymes from different
sources or engineering new ones. An example is a pathway designed
to remove 1,2,3-trichloropropane, a byproduct of industrial chemical
processes, for which there is no known natural degradation pathway. A pathway to convert it to glycerol was created
by combining an aloalkane dehalogenase from Rhodococcus rhodochrous with a haloalcohol dehalogenase and epoxide hydrolase from Agrobacterium radiobacter. To improve degradation and reduce
toxicity, the aloalkane dehalogenase was mutated and the enzyme levels
optimized. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are also a byproduct of
industrial processes and are difficult to degrade once in the environment.
The strain Cupriavidus necator can grow on benzoate
and biphenyls, but cannot metabolize halogenated versions. The recombinant expression of a chlorocatechol
metabolizing pathway, and broad-spectrum 2-halobenzoate dioxygenase
and toluate dioxygenases in Cupriavidus necator conferred
the ability to grow on a wide range of mono- and di-chlorinated benzoates
and biphenyls.

3.1.5.

## Phage Engineering to Manipulate the Microbiome
Phage
are bacterial viruses that replicate within their host, ultimately
killing it. There is approximately one phage particle for every bacterium
in soil, and it has been estimated that 40% of the bacteria in the
ocean die daily due to phage attack.
,
 Since 1924,
when Mallmann and Hemstreet used the filtrate of decomposing cabbage
(containing phages) to inhibit pathogenic Xanthomonas campestris, they have been recognized as potential bio-control agents in agriculture. Phages have been tested in field trials for
the treatment of Dickeya, Pectobacterium, Ralstonia, Pseudomonas, Xanthomonas and Erwinia infections.
,
 Phage biocontrol is commercially used to protect potato crops against
tuber soft rot (Enterobacteriacea), tomatoes from
bacterial canker (Clavibacter michiganensis), citrus
from canker (Xanthomonas citri), and apples from
fire blight (Erwinia amylovora).
,
 They have also been used to treat leek, lime, grapefruit, orange,
mushrooms, radish, lettuce, onion, pepper, rice, cherry trees, and
pear trees. Phage treatment is not
limited to the soil, as they can be taken up by plant roots and translocate
to the upper leaves through the plant vascular system.
,−

Traditionally, phage have been isolated
from environmental samples and used without genetic manipulation.
Tools from Synthetic Biology could manipulate the phage genome to
enhance or control activity for agriculture.
,
 Phages can be engineered to deliver vectors to re-sensitize bacteria
to antibiotics or to deliver Cas9:gRNA to disrupt bacterial virulence
genes.
,
 Incorporating the capsule depolymerase
gene of Erwinia phage L1 into phage Y2 improved the
phage efficiency against Erwinia by degrading biofilms
and reducing colonization by the pathogen.
De novo DNA synthesis can reconstruct entire phage
genomes ( and ) and infectious phage have
been reconstituted using CFPSs ( ).
−

 These tools make it possible to reconstitute
phage using only sequence data in databases, without needing access
to the original infectious material. The potential is vast: the complete
viromes of microbiota are being illuminated with sequencing, often
finding 100,000’s of viruses in a soil or aquatic sample. Mining these phage genomes using de
novo DNA synthesis ( .) will lead to the discovery of many
with the potential for biocontrol, whose efficacy and specificity
could be further enhanced with genetic engineering. Powerful AI tools have been used to optimize phage for
the food industry and generative AI has been applied to design de novo phage genomes, but they have not yet been applied
to problems in agriculture.
−

Phages generally target
specific bacterial species. Unlike
broad-spectrum antibiotics, they can
target individual species inhabiting a complex microbiota without
impacting beneficial microbes. They
can also be engineered to change their host range. In part, species
specificity comes from the tail protein binding to the surface of
the bacterium. By swapping the tail appendage gene of a phage with
related genes, it could be retargeted to new pathogens.
,
 The phage genome can also be manipulated to improve biocontrol properties;
for example, by removing lysogenesis genes to enhance the killing
of target species.

A challenge
for effective phage biocontrol is the poor persistence
in the field, due to UV exposure and other environmental factors.
,
 Engineering phage to have protective surface phospholipids can increase
their survival in harsh environmental conditions. Another approach
is to use carrier bacteria, rather than the purified phage themselves,
that encode the phage in their genome. Once the bacterial carriers
colonize an environmental niche, the phage are continuously propagated.
A virulence-attenuated mutant of Xanthomonas perforans was used as a persistent carrier to produce phage on tomato foliage
in both greenhouse and field conditions.

There is a constant evolutionary race between phage and bacteria.
Bacteria can become resistant to phage through various mechanisms,
including CRISPR/Cas immunity, abortive infection (cell death before
replication), blockage of phage DNA replication, and restriction-modification
systems.
−

 The rapid acquisition of resistance has frustrated their use as
human therapeutics and biocontrol agents in agriculture. For example, the use of phage to treat humans
for Escherichia coli diarrheal infections worked
well the first time, but subsequent treatments were ineffective due
to the rapidly acquired resistance.

There are some genetic engineering approaches to circumvent
resistance.
Incorporating anti-CRISPR genes into the engineered phage genome can
delay or prevent the rise of bacterial resistance. Genome-scale screens can identify host proteins that are
required for phage infection and are potential resistance hot-spots.
Engineering phage infection to be independent of these host proteins
or including phages with different host requirements in a phage cocktail
can remove potential routes of resistance.

3.1.6.

## Manipulating the Plant Microbiome
Plants can curate a favorable microbiome composition and induce beneficial
microbial functions.
−

 This control is implemented through the
excretion of chemicals from their roots that encourage colonization
of some species, while inhibiting others. For instance, indica rice recruits a different microbiota than japonica rice that is more diverse, more abundant in nitrogen cycling genes,
and linked with better nitrogen use efficiency by the plant. Rather than relying on natural variability
or selection, plants can be genetically engineered to change the microbial
composition of their roots. By mutating TFs to downregulate the plant
immune response, Arabidopsis was engineered to recruit
an alternative microbial composition.

Plants can also be engineered to excrete chemicals from the
root that alter the microbial composition. One approach exploited
opines, which are naturally part of an Agrobacterium infection. DNA injected by this pathogen causes it to release carbon/nitrogen
rich opines that are catabolized by the bacteria.
,
 Engineered opine excretion from Arabidopsis, Lotus, and Tobacco skews the microbiome composition toward opine-consuming
species ( A).
−

 Genetic sensors and catabolic pathways have been transferred to
soil bacteria so that they can respond to opines and consume them
as a carbon/nitrogen source.
,
 Similarly, rice has
been engineered to excrete larger amounts of the natural flavone apigenin
( B). The application of these approaches to improving
microbial nitrogen delivery to the plant are described in .
 Gram negative bacteria communicate
using acetyl-homoserine
lactones
(AHLs) that diffuse freely through the membrane and bind to regulatory
proteins.
,
 These “quorum systems”
connect gene expression to the density of bacteria or are used to
detect the presence of competing or symbiotic species. They can control
many genes, including the production of antimicrobials, biofilm formation,
chemotaxis, and virulence programs.
,
 In agriculture,
they are important for the colonization of roots and the induction
of endosymbiosis or pathogenesis.
−

Plants have been engineered
to synthesize acetyl-homoserine lactones
(AHLs) to hijack these bacterial communication systems with beneficial
effect. Tobacco plants engineered to synthesize N-hexanoylhomoserine
lactone and N-(3-oxohexanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone secrete these molecules
from their roots ( C). When sensed by soil bacteria,
these molecules induce cell wall degrading enzymes and phenazine antibiotics
that can alter the composition of the microbiota. Bacteria have also
been engineered to recombinantly express the enzyme AiiA, which degrades
AHLs, to interfere with pathogenesis ( ).

3.1.7.

## Synthetic
Symbiotic Plant-Bacteria Relationships
A symbiotic relationship
is defined by a long-term, close association
between two species. The symbiotic relationship is mutualistic when
the interaction is beneficial to two or more organisms that support
each other’s growth. For example, two species can be interlocked
if each makes a metabolite that the other needs but cannot produce.
Natural mutualistic relationships exist between plants and bacteria,
for example when the bacterium fixes nitrogen from air, which is needed
by the plant and rewarded with a metabolic carbon source ( ).
Mutualistic relationships between plants and microbes can aid in
obtaining regulatory approval for their release.
,
 If it can be shown that the bacterium only associates with the target
plant, not weeds, and dies when the plant is removed, this reduces
risks associated with persistence in the environment. The release
of genetically-modified Sinorhizobium that increases
nitrogen delivery to alfalfa passed regulatory approvals, in part,
because it was shown that the bacterium cannot associate with weeds
and was eliminated from the field when the crop was removed ( ).
,−

Synthetic obligate mutualistic relationships
could be designed
from scratch, where the microbe and plant each make a nutrient that
the other needs.
,
 Steps have been taken toward
this goal, where barley has been engineered to produce rhizopine as
a carbon source and Azorhizobium caulinodans has
been engineered to respond to this signal and fix nitrogen, which
can be taken up by the plant.
,
 If the plant can
utilize the nitrogen and the bacterium could catabolize the rhizopine,
this would complete a mutualistic relationship. However, to be fully
orthogonal from native microbe:plant relationships, both molecules
would have to be in a chemical form that cannot be consumed by those
species and is entirely absent in the rhizosphere. However, using
such a chemical would likely face additional regulatory scrutiny as
it potentially introduces a new chemical into the environment and
food supply.

3.2.

## Engineering Tools for Soil
Bacteria
Numerous tools have been developed to aid microbial
strain design
and construction. The scale of engineering
projects has increased dramatically with the rise new techniques to
edit the genome and insert large DNA payloads into specific sites.
New plasmid systems address their instability and remove the requirement
for a selectable marker. De novo DNA synthesis makes
it possible to access and recode large multi-gene constructs, or even
whole genomes. Creating multi-gene constructs requires access to libraries
of characterized parts, such as promoters, RBSs, and terminators.
Most of this work has been focused on model organisms, especially Escherichia coli, with much less being applied to agriculturally-relevant
species, such as Rhizobia, Pseudomonads and Bacilli. This section
describes the tools that are available to genetically manipulate soil
bacteria.
3.2.1.

## Stabilized Plasmids
Plasmids are
commonly used to introduce DNA into bacteria because, for most species,
they are much easier to manipulate and transform than making changes
to the genome.
,
 Different plasmid origins have
different replication dynamics and the number of copies per cell ranges
from a few to hundreds. Plasmids with compatible origins can be used
together in one cell. Early plasmids
were selected because they were unstable, due to concerns in the 1970's
regarding their propagation in the wild. Thus, most require a selection marker, such as an antibiotic gene,
without which the plasmid is quickly lost. For agricultural strains,
using antibiotics in the field is infeasible, and the release of antibiotic
genes into the environment is a regulatory concern. In addition, these
plasmids can have surprisingly wide distributions of copy numbers
(plasmids per cell) across a cell population, making the design of
a genetic system unreliable.

Plasmids
rely on host machinery to replicate, and some species may be missing
essential components, thus blocking replication. Broad-host-range
plasmids have all of the necessary components to replicate across
a wide range of species.
,
 Common broad host
range plasmids include pBBR1, RK2/RP4, RSF1010, and RO1600, which
have been used in various Gram-negative species, including Escherichia coli, Rhizobium meliloti, Pseudomonas putida, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Agrobacterium tumefaciens, Azotobacter
vinelandii, Rhizobium tropici, Cupriavidus
necator, Azorhizobium caulinodans, Pantoea ananatis, and Pseudomonas protegens.
,−

 The RSF1010 origin was tested for stability in Pseudomonas
syringae and only 2% of the cells lost the plasmid in sterile
soil after 130 days at ambient temperature. It has been suggested that plasmids may be stable in soil because
of the reduced growth rates, as most plasmid loss occurs during replication.

Certain features improve plasmid stability
and reliability for
carrying DNA in soil bacteria. Some origins use an active partitioning
system to push plasmid copies to opposite sides of the cell prior
to division.
,
 The pSC101 par locus uses active partitioning and is stable in Escherichia
coli, with almost all of the cells retaining the plasmid
after 100 generations in the absence of selection.
−

 “Addiction systems” can stabilize an otherwise unstable
origin. They encode a toxin-antitoxin
pair, with the toxin degrading slowly and the antitoxin quickly. If
the daughter cell does not inherit the plasmid, then the antitoxin
degrades, but the toxin remains and kills the cell. An addiction system
has also been developed for B. subtilis that stabilized
a plasmid for 100 generations. The
broad-host-range RK2 plasmid has both active partitioning (par) and an addiction system that together contribute to
a highly-stable system.
,−
,
 Stabilized mini-RK2 have been
constructed by removing unnecessary native DNA. A mini-RK2 replicon in Rhizobium meliloti was maintained in 100% of the cell population for 100 generations
in culture and 4 weeks on alfalfa.

Plasmids have also been stabilized by knocking out genes on the
host genome to introduce a synthetic auxotrophy and providing the
complementary gene on a plasmid. GeneGuard is a host-plasmid platform
that moves plasmid replication genes into the host genome and essential
metabolism genes thyA and dapA onto
the plasmid. Essential genes required
for the synthesis of amino acids, redox factors, and intermediates
of glycolysis have also been transferred to plasmids for this purpose.
−

 Plasmid stabilization strategies that rely on metabolic auxotrophies
can suffer from small populations of cells that lost their plasmids
but remain viable by feeding on metabolites secreted by plasmid-harboring
cells. This problem can be addressed
by transferring essential proteins for transcription or translation,
which cannot be transferred to neighboring “cheaters.”
For example, when the essential transcription initiation factor gene infA was removed from the Escherichia coli genome and placed onto a plasmid, this led to stable plasmid maintenance
and reduced cell-to-cell variation in plasmid copy number.
,

3.2.2.

## Laboratory Strain Evolution
Random
mutagenesis has been frequently applied to improve the properties
of strains of agricultural importance. It is particularly important
in this context because these strains are not regulated as recombinant
microbes, easing their regulatory approval. Some background on directed evolution applied to enzymes and pathways
is provided in and would be relevant for optimize biosynthesis in
microbes as well. Here, we review several more modern approaches to
creating diversity to the genome and screening for improved functions.
3.2.2.1.

## Adaptive Laboratory Evolution (ALE)
ALE is applied
to optimize a strain or genetic construct by coupling
its amplification to a desired phenotype. Coupling can be the overproduction of a metabolite or growth under
specific conditions. ALE can optimize strains even without prior knowledge
of the system and is therefore a powerful technique for optimizing
poorly understood biological phenomena or non-modal organisms.
ALE requires a selection scheme that couples the desired phenotype
with the growth rate. One approach is the repetitive growth and dilution
of a strain under environmental conditions where improved strain performance
is desired. A Pseudomonas putida strain was engineered
to catabolize xylose and galactose, which are abundant in biomass,
but the wild-type strain grew poorly on them. By continuously propagating the strains in cultures where
glucose was slowly replaced by galactose as the sole carbon source, Pseudomonas putida evolved high rates of galactose import
and catabolism to recover its growth rate. The selection conditions
can be for a complex environment, rather than nutrient preference.
For example, Bacillus and Pseudomonas strains were evolved for better root colonization through repetitive
cycles of isolation and inoculation onto Arabidopsis roots.
−

 Mutations were discovered that increased
carbohydrate consumption and improved biofilm formation.
The
production of a chemical product can be improved with ALE,
but this requires a selection that couples its concentration to the
growth rate. This can be done by building a genetically-encoded sensor
( ) to
the expression of an essential gene (positive selection) or antitoxin
(negative selection). To increase the production of the plant flavonoid
naringenin in Escherichia coli, the naringenin-responsive
TtgR repressor was used to control a dual selection.

3.2.2.2.

## Targeting Mutagenesis
to Genomic Regions
The pace of evolution can be accelerated
by increasing the mutation
rate. There are many methods to control the mutation rate, including
chemical mutagen concentration, UV/radiation levels, or the induction
of low-fidelity DNA polymerases.
,
 There is
a limit to how high the mutation rate can be raised across the entire
genome; while most mutations are neutral, deleterious ones will eventually
outpace those that are beneficial. As a result, techniques have been
developed to target mutagenesis to specific regions. For example,
the system to be mutagenized can be encoded on a plasmid that uses
an error-prone DNA polymerase for replication.
,
 Instead of replacing regions of the genome with a single defined
DNA sequence, MAGE could also diversify a region using pools of degenerate
DNA oligos to build a library to be screened.

The EvolvR technique directs mutations to specific
regions of the genome.
−

 It uses genome-targeting ability of nCas9 (nickase) to direct an
error-prone DNA polymerase to a specific site determined by the sgRNA.
Random mutations occur in a 1-350 bp region around the targeted site,
the width of which is determined by the processivity of the DNA polymerase.
−

 There is a tradeoff between the length of the mutated region and
the mutagenesis rate. Error rates can be 8 million-fold greater than
wild-type cells at the nick site and then decline further from the
site.
,
 EvolvR has been used in Pseudomonas
putida to evolve the activity and expression of ornithine
cyclodeaminase to increase proline production. The mutagenized region can be extended by tilling gRNAs. Alternatively, MutaT7 techniques utilize a
T7 RNA polymerase fused to a mutagenic protein, such as a DNA deaminase,
to target mutagenesis to a region downstream of a T7 promoter.
,−

3.2.3.

## Genome
Editing, Recombineering, and Complete
De Novo Synthesis
Strain engineering requires DNA payloads
be inserted into the genome or introduced on a plasmid. This step
is trivial for model organisms, such as Escherichia coli or Bacillus subtilis. However, for non-model bacteria,
many methods for transforming recombinant DNA are difficult, need
extensive optimization, and can only be performed in specific strains.
,
 Just physically getting into the cell is not enough. Once there,
integrating the payload into the chromosome can be blocked by a lack
of host cofactors, native restriction endonucleases, or other host
defenses.
−

3.2.3.1.

## Advanced Conjugation
Methods
Conjugation, where one bacterium transfers its DNA
into another through
a physical interaction, is a means to deliver DNA payloads into cells.
,
 The integrative conjugation element (ICE) from B. subtilis was engineered to create a system (XPORT) to efficiently transform
Gram positive soil bacteria ( ).
,
 The advantage of ICE as conjugation system is that it can deliver
large DNA payloads (100 kb+) and has very broad species range. XPORT
was developed to eliminate the possibility of continued propagation
and to reduce the size of the DNA containing conjugation machinery
that also has to be transferred. A DNA payload can be inserted into
XPORT and then transferred to many Gram-positive species, including
metabolic pathways, sensors, or nutrient production.
,
 This system has been used to move reporters, biosynthetic pathways,
sensors, and nitrogen fixation gene clusters ( ) into diverse soil bacteria.
−

 XPORT has also been used to transform mixed populations of species
directly in soil (Section 3.4.8).
 
3.2.3.2.

## Site-Targeted Delivery of DNA Payloads
Many transposons, such as Tn5, Mariner, or Mu,
can deliver DNA payloads to random sites in the genome. However, random insertion often leads to the
disruption of endogenous genes and position effects in expression
and is therefore usually reserved for mutagenesis or probing position-dependent
expression.
,
 Some transposases and integrases
target specific sequences.
,−

 For example, the Tn7 transposon targets the highly-conserved attTn7
site. Similarly, phages use integrases
that recognize attB sites to insert phage genomes
into bacterial chromosomes. Site-specific serine integrases have been
used to deliver DNA payloads because they have short attB sites (<50bp) and do not require host-specific factors. They have been used in many agriculturally-relevant
species, including Pseudomonas, Agrobacterium, Rhizobiua, Ralstonia, Pantoea, Erwinia, Yersinia, Dickeya, and Photorhabdus.
−
,−

“Recombineering” uses homologous recombination
to insert a single or double-stranded DNA template with the desired
modification into the genome. The DNA
payload is targeted to a particular genomic location by flanking it
with homology arms that match the targeted site. In some species,
including Acinetobacter, Bacillus, Bradyrhizobium, and Azotobacter, the native recombination machinery is sufficient to integrate homologous
DNA sequences, so only the DNA needs to be provided.
−

 In others, phage recombination proteins are required to catalyze
the insertion; the most commonly used is the λ red system.
,
 These phage proteins tend to lose efficiency in distantly related
species, so homologous proteins have
been identified from phages that infect diverse bacterial species.
Recombination proteins have been found for the soil bacteria Bacillus,
Shewanella,
Pseudomonas,
−

Xenorhabdus, and Photorhabdus. One downside
with recombineering is that its efficiency is low. Also, off-target
recombination can occur, necessitating clean-up steps using phage
transduction to transfer a genetic insertion from the modified strain
into a clean genomic background.
CRISPR tools can increase the
efficiency and specificity of prokaryotic
genome editing. CRISPR/Cas9 (or other nuclease proteins) generates
a double-stranded DNA break at a specific target site that is then
repaired by HR.
−

 When the repair template has the DNA payload,
it will be inserted into the site. The location can be targeted through
gRNA design and off-target effects tend to not be a problem in bacteria. This strategy improves editing efficiency
over recombineering alone because double strand breaks increase DNA
repair and recombination activity at the desired site. Furthermore,
as unrepaired double-stranded breaks are lethal in most bacteria,
CRISPR creates a negative selection pressure against the genomes that
have not been repaired with the payload DNA. CRISPR can be combined with high efficiency recombination
machinery, such as the λ red system (CRISPR-λ Red Recombineering),
to perform seamless one-step genome editing without the need for selection
markers. First shown in E.
coli and Streptococcus
pneumoniae, versions of this system have since
been used for Bacilli

,,

Azorhizobium,
Streptomyces,
,

Xanthomonas,
Ralstonia, and Pseudomonads.

Limitations of CRISPR-mediated
genome editing include low recombination
frequencies and the need for host-specific recombination factors. CRISPR-guided transposases (CASTs) overcome
these obstacles, attaining the high integration efficiencies of integrases
and transposases while maintaining the programmability of gRNA. CASTs
have transposases that bind to CRISPR-Cas9 proteins, which guide them
to the target encoded on the gRNA.
,,
 Optimized CASTs can efficiently insert 10 kb+ DNA
payloads at a targeted locations. Expressing
transposases that target orthogonal insertion sequences permits multiplexed
DNA insertions in a single step. CASTs have been used to modify soil
bacteria, including Klebsiella
oxytoca,
Pseudomonas
putida,
Klebsiella
michiganesis, and Pseudomonas
simiae ( A).

 
3.2.3.3.

## Base Editing the Genome
Targeting
domains used for genome editing have been repurposed to bring other
modifying enzymes to specific positions. So-called “base editors”
combine a DNA-binding domain (e.g., dCas9:gRNA) with
a DNA-modifying enzyme to make single mutations to the genome ( B).
,−

 Their use in plants is described in . In prokaryotic
genomes, deaminase domains fused to dCas9 introduce single C-to-T
or A-to-G edits. This editing has been applied to many soil bacteria,
including Streptomyces, Pseudomonas, and Klebsiella.
,,

3.2.3.4.

## Genome-Scale Engineering
Multiplex
automated genome engineering (MAGE) performs rapid genome engineering
through repeated robot-assisted rounds oligonucleotide transformation
that recombine with the genome during replication. Edits can be multiplexed by pooling oligonucleotides to
simultaneously target many genome locations. MAGE is limited by the length of the genome that can be
edited by a single oligo (<1 kb). Thus, many iterative steps are
required to cover the genome.
Transferring MAGE to bacteria
beyond Escherichia
coli has been
challenging because the phage recombinase has low activity outside
of enteric bacteria and high-efficiency recombination requires inactivating
native mismatch repair systems.
,
 Alternative
phage recombinases with broader host-range were identified using bioinformatics. A selection was performed on single-stranded
DNA-annealing proteins to improve ssDNA-based recombination across
diverse bacteria, including Klebsiella
pneumoniae and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa ( C). To move MAGE into Pseudomonas
putida, a ssDNA-annealing protein (Rec2) and an
inactive mutant of the native mismatch repair protein MutL were transiently
overexpressed during recombineering. The mutant MutL inhibited the reversion of MAGE-derived edits by
disrupting efficient mismatch repair. Cas9 was used to select for
recombination events to replace the TAG stop codons in Pseudomonas
putdia.

An
example of the application of MAGE was to convert 314 occurrences
of the UAG stop codon in Escherichia
coli to synonymous UAA codons, thereby freeing up UAG for other uses,
such as encoding non-natural amino acids. Such amino acids introduce a range of new functions to proteins
in living cells, including fluorescence, reactive functional groups,
,
 diverse amino acid
structures,
,
 and entire synthetic peptides. To deliver the new amino acid, the corresponding
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase and tRNA (UAG) pair, orthogonal to the host’s
translation machinery. This approach has enabled the incorporation
of more than 200 non-canonical amino acids into proteins.
,
 Non-canonical amino acids have introduced into the soil bacteria Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Streptomyces
venezuelae, and Bacillus
subtilis.
−

 Notably, non-canonical amino acids allow “click chemistry,”
which uses chemical functional groups that can perform highly efficient
and selective reactions, to be performed in living Pseudomonas
putida.

Conjugative
assembly genome engineering (CAGE) performs large-scale
genome recombination between two related strains. CAGE employs an origin of transfer (oriT) inserted onto
the genome of an engineered donor cell that directs the transfer of
the engineered genome to a recipient bacterium. Following conjugation,
the engineered and recipient genomes recombine. It can iteratively
replace large fragments of DNA (>100kb) until a genome is completely
replaced.
,
 CAGE has only been performed
in Escherichia
coli. Similarly large-scale
replacements can be made by assembling de novo synthesized
DNA fragments in yeast that are then used to iteratively replace the Escherichia
coli genome using CRISPR-λ
Red recombineering.
,,
 Using this approach, all 18,214 instances of the UAG stop codon
and the UCG and UCA serine codons were removed.
,

The complete de novo synthesis of a genome
and
its transformation into a cell lacking a genome opens the possibility
for even more radical genome-scale engineering. The potential for its application to plant chromosomes
and plastid/mitochondrial genomes are described in . Entire viral and prokaryotic
genomes have been constructed from scratch using DNA synthesis. For
example, a 1 Mb synthetic genome was constructed and placed into a
cell where the native genome was removed to “boot up” Mycoplasma
mycoides JCV-syn1.0 in a single
step. During assembly, the synthetic
genome was divided into multi-kb fragments that were either systemically
replaced into a prokaryotic genome or assembled in one step in yeast
before the complete genome was transferred into an empty cell.
,,,
 The ability to synthesize genomes simplifies the ability to remove
unnecessary or harmful regions and massively reorganize it to simplify
future engineering (e.g., grouping functionally-related
genes in a way that would make sense to a human designer).

Using the natural competency and homologous
recombination abilities
of B. subtilis, the 3.5 Mb genome of Synechocystis PCC6803 was inserted onto the Bacillus genome in
four approximately 900 kbp fragments through reiterative rounds of
short genome integrations. This method
was then used to construct the complete 6.3 kb mitochondrial genome
from mice and the 134.5 kb chloroplast genome from rice.

3.2.4.

## Minimal
Genomes
Genome reduction
aims to enhance engineerability by reducing complexity. Under field conditions, it has been observed
that bacteria with smaller genomes grow more rapidly. The elimination of superfluous genetic elements
could increase the capacity to make recombinant proteins or produce
new chemical products. However, removing genomic DNA could come at
the cost of defense mechanisms, metabolic flexibility, and stress
responses that benefit in rare, but critical conditions.
The
creation of a “minimal” genome seeks to only retain
the essential genes necessary for the survival and growth of the organism.
In Escherichia coli, about 300 out of 4000 genes
were estimated to be essential, although estimating the true set of
minimal genes difficult. For one, genes
can have redundant functions. Also, whether a gene is essential depends
on which molecules are provided in the growth media.
One approach
for genome reduction involves iteratively deleting
regions of the genome in a “top-down” approach. Early
attempts at creating a reduced Escherichia coli genome
removed mobile genetic elements. The
reduced genome had improved transformation efficiency and genetic
stability. This approach was taken further,
where 40% was removed by deleting 33 genomic regions encoding only
non-essential genes.

Reducing
the genomes of soil bacteria could improve their performance
in the field. For example, a reduced genome could be designed to remove
mechanisms for the disruption of recombinant systems (prophage, transposons,
etc.) or no longer produce natural products that could negatively
influence the microbial composition of the rhizome (e.g., antimicrobials). Toward this goal, the genome was reduced for the
soil bacterium Pseudomonas putida, albeit to improve
its use in bio-manufacturing. Mobile genetic elements, prophages,
and flagellar genes were deleted to improve genetic stability and
reduce background energy consumption, respectively. The genome-reduced strains outcompeted the parental strain
in every industrially-relevant phenotype assessed and displayed a
40% increase in recombinant protein expression. Deleting large genetic islands containing nonessential
genes in the polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) producer Pseudomonas
mendocina led to an 8% reduction in genome size
and a 2-fold increase in PHA yield. To simplify secondary metabolite engineering in the plant growth-promoting
rhizobacterium Pseudomonas
chlororaphis, gene islands not conserved amongst Pseudomonads, including five biosynthetic gene clusters (BCGs), were deleted
to reduce the genome size by 10% ( D). A minimal
version of the B. subtilis, referred to as “miniBacillus,”
was constructed by removing 35% of its genome ( E).
,,
 Despite the removal of so much genetic material, its growth rate
was the same as wild-type and it even had increased translation and
protein secretion rates.

De novo DNA synthesis
has been applied to build
and replace entire microbial genomes. Smaller genomes can be custom-designed
and synthesized to improve performance and stability in a “bottom-up”
approach. The smallest reduced genome
is 531 kb genome of Mycoplasma
mycoides (JCV-syn3.0) with 473 genes. The growth
rates of genome-reduced strains are often much slower than wild-type
strains but can sometimes be recovered through adaptive laboratory
evolution ( ).
,

3.2.5.

## Genomic
Landing Pads
Landing pads
are dedicated sites for the insertion of DNA payloads that have been
placed into a host’s genome.
,,
 Their role is to increase the integration efficiency
and to ensure that a recombinant genetic system performs reliably
in the context of the host genome. They also reduce the impact on
native gene expression. Landing pads have become important for eukaryote
engineering, particularly mammalian cells, and have been implemented
in bacteria.
,
 They have begun to be considered
in the plant genome ( ).
The first step in building a landing pad is
to identify an appropriate position in the genome. The problem is
that prokaryotic genomes are efficiently encoded and there are few
sites that are free to carry additional genes without disruption.
Also, for engineering projects, high recombinant gene expression is
generally needed. For example, it might be to express enzymes at the
highest level to produce maximum products of a growth hormone. Different
regions of the genome can lead to different expression levels due
to chromosomal structure and local transcriptional processes.

Methods have been developed to systematically
scan the genome for
regions of higher expression. These
sites tend to occur close to the origin of replication because during
cell growth and division, the origin is replicated first leading to
higher effective copy number. The copy
number around the origin can be as high as 8, whereas at the chromosomal
terminus it approaches 1. The higher copy number comes during rapid
growth, during which multiple replication bubbles form in the genome
during replication. Expression can vary by up to 200-fold across the
genome, an effect that has been observed in Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, and Acinetobacter baylyi.
,−

 If higher levels of expression
are required, then the same construct can be inserted into multiple
landing pads.

Sites must also
avoid disrupting native pathways. Disruption can
occur because the site occurs within a gene, but also can affect gene
expression indirectly by altering regulation or chromosomal structure.
The effect may not be obvious under laboratory conditions, but could
impact fitness under stressful or nutrient limitations, as would be
expected in the field. For example, in Escherichia coli, a landing pad that disrupts the production of a vitamin was not
discovered until growth media was used where it is absent and this
would have affected its use as a therapeutic bacterium in the human
body. The affect can be crudely measured
as a change in growth rate, but RNA-seq provides a clearer picture
of the disruption of native transcription. Computational methods have been developed to identify non-disruptive
positions for a landing pad by using ML to assess RNA-seq data taken
under a range of conditions to find transcriptionally silent sites.
,

Landing pads comprise two features. First, a landing pad may
have
a sequence to facilitate the insertion of a DNA payload to this site.
This sequence could correspond to an integrase or recombinase or a
sequence associated with a specific gRNA designed to deliver Cas9
to the target. In theory, a gRNA does
not need a target site as it can be programmed to target many sequences.
However, calculating an ideal sequence that takes the genome into
account can improve efficiency and reduce off-target effects.
Second, the landing pad should be insulated from the genome. In
prokaryotes, transcription is the dominant mode of interference. Pervasive
transcription from the genome could interfere with the recombinant
system and vice versa. One way to mitigate this problem is to flank
the landing pad with strong terminators that block transcription in
both directions.
,,
 A Pseudomonas putida landing pad that included
two terminators flanking the gene-of-interest was used to screen a
library of synthetic promoters. Chromosomal
structure, interactions with nucleoid associated proteins, supercoiling,
and protein occupancy can also affect transcription depending on the
genomic location. Additional insulating
elements may be beneficial to include where these mechanisms are prevalent.
CRAGE (chassis-independent recombinase-assisted genome engineering)
is a method for landing pad construction that has been used in over
40 species, including many from soil.
,,
 In the first step of CRAGE, a transposase randomly
inserts a landing pad containing recombinase recognition sequences.
A screen can be performed after the first step to select for insertions
with the desired activity, such as high expression. Other functions can also be screened; for example, when
CRAGE was used to engineer the plant growth promoting bacterium Pseudomonas simiae WCS417r using a screen to select for
a strain with unimpaired plant colonizing ability. CRAGE has also been used to screen gene clusters from symbionts
of insect-pathogenic nematodes in various chassis for the potential
development of novel bioinsectides.

3.2.6.

## Genetic Part Libraries for Soil Bacteria
Advanced genetic engineering hinges on the availability of precision
genetic parts.
,,,,
 Parts are needed to control expression, such as RBSs or promoters,
but the concept encompasses any unit of DNA with an assigned function.
Characterized part libraries have been used to balance enzyme levels
to optimize a biosynthetic pathway or connect regulators to build
a genetic circuit. To perform this role, there need to be many parts
of varied function, such as a library of promoters of different strengths.
In bacteria, homologous recombination can disrupt a synthetic system,
so part reuse in a design requires a functionally redundant set with
sufficiently divergent DNA sequences.
,,
 In Synthetic Biology, there have been major efforts,
including by the “BioFAB” and “BioFoundries”,
to use robotic automation and high-throughput assays to characterize
large sets of genetic parts, as well as to define new ones, to facilitate
genetic design.
−

The ideal genetic parts will function the same irrespective
of where they are encoded in the genome.
,
 Very large part libraries, sometimes consisting of thousands of
characterized members, have been constructed for model species and
these have been used to populate on-line databases.
,,,,
 Here, we focus on part libraries,
often relatively small, that have been developed for soil bacteria.
These libraries are based on simple non-coding parts to control expression. shows part libraries
that we have gleaned from the literature for soil bacteria.
 3.2.6.1.

## Promoter
Libraries
Constitutive
promoters are always on, producing a constant transcription rate.
The rate can be quantified as the flux of RNAP on the DNA (RNAP/s).
,,,
 Ideally, this rate does not change in different growth phases or
environmental conditions. The most common method to report the strength
of a promoter is to use a reporter, such as a fluorescent protein,
but this also encompasses translation. More direct measurements of RNAP flux can be obtained using RNA-seq
or even direct single-molecule imaging of RNAP progression on DNA
strands.
,−

 Promoter activity can be compared to a reference standard to report
as “relative promoter units” (RPU) and single molecule
experiments allow this to be converted to absolute units of RNAP/s
(for plants, see ).
,
 Note that
often the lengths of promoter sequences provided in a part library
are too short (35-50 bp) and an upstream region needs to be added
to avoid interference from the upstream sequence (up to 150bp).
,

Promoter libraries also have been built for RNAPs that are
orthogonal to native transcriptional processes. Promoters that are
turned on by phage RNAP are not transcribed by native RNAPs. Libraries containing promoters of different
strengths have been built for RNAP from T7 and related phage ( ).
,−

 A characteristic of these promoters is their small size; the T7
and SP6 promoters are only 18 bp. Phage RNAPs tend to function similarly
across species and the rank order of their strengths usually does
not change.
,,
 They have been shown to be functional in various soil bacteria. However, phage RNAPs and their promoters can
exhibit toxicity when used together in a design (either individually
is not), possibly due to its fast processivity and decoupling from
the ribosome. The impact on growth rate
has been anecdotally observed to be worse for wild strains.

3.2.6.2.

## Ribosome Binding Sites
The first
step of translation is the binding of the ribosome to an mRNA. For
many species, the affinity of the ribosome to the RBS is a primary
determinant of the translation rate and ultimately the level of gene
expression.
,
 Therefore, the RBS has played
a key role to modulate expression levels. There are two approaches
for creating synthetic RBSs. The first is to characterize the strengths
of a large library created using random mutagenesis.
,,−

 RBS libraries comprising thousands of members have been characterized,
including for some soil species ( ).
The second approach is to calculate an RBS
sequence de novo for each gene to be controlled using
the RBS Calculator or related tools.
,−

 These calculations assume that the only sequence determinant of
strength is the ribosome binding to mRNA and there are no other biochemical
factors that contribute, which is not always true.
,
 The calculators predict the strength based on the unfolding of the
local mRNA structure, the free energy of binding of the ribosome to
the SD and start (ATG) sites, and other thermodynamic factors. In
theory, this can be applied to any species by using the 16S rRNA sequence.
The RBS Calculator has been used to design sequences for soil bacteria,
including Bacillus and Pseudomonas, and plastids ( ).
−

RBSs can be dependent on the local sequence context of the
mRNA,
especially the first 10 bp of the open reading frame. Insulators have been developed to mitigate
these effects.
,,,
 The insulator RiboJ contains
a ribozyme that cleaves the upstream region of the mRNA after transcription,
thereby reducing context effects. It
also stabilizes the mRNA by creating a hairpin and removing the hydroxyl
at the 5′-end, thus protecting against degradation, and improving
access to the RBS.
,
 In an analysis of 63 promoter:RBS
combinations with the ribozyme RiboJ in Streptomyces venezuelae, inclusion of the ribozyme RiboJ reduced unexpected changes in gene
expression due to interference between the promoter and RBS. RiboJ has also been used in the soil bacterium Pseudomonas taiwanensis. Many
variants of RiboJ are available that are sufficiently sequence diverse
so that they can be used in a design without leading to homologous
recombination.

Another means to
reduce the context dependence of an RBS is to
use a bicistronic design. It places
an RBS and leader peptide upstream of the RBS that is used to control
the protein-of-interest. The first RBS and peptide eliminate secondary
structures, making changes to the downstream RBS more reliable. Bicistronic
RBS’s have been used in the soil bacteria Acinetobacter
baylyi and Pseudomonas taiwanensis.
,

3.2.6.3.

## Terminators
Intrinsic terminators
stop transcription by not allowing RNAP to pass. In prokaryotes, they
consist of a hairpin, followed by a poly-T region. Stronger terminators
block a larger fraction of RNAPs. Mutations that weaken the hairpin
or disrupt the poly-A region led to a less effective terminator. However,
creating a mathematical model of terminator strength remains a challenge,
pointing to unknown contributing factors.
,,
 The inability to design terminators
computationally has limited the development of terminator libraries
to screening large libraries of natural or designed terminator sequences. Terminator strength can be measured by placing
it between two reporter genes and quantifying the drop in expression
between the two.
,
 Alternatively, the terminator
strength can be quantified as the drop in transcription across a region
measured by RNA-seq.
,

Placing two terminators
in series (a “double terminator”) can lead to the stronger
blocking of transcription. Note that
terminator strengths do not always combine additively and the spacer
between the two can affect strength, so simply placing terminators
in series is not a guarantee of improved knockdown. In fact, if not
done correctly, it can negate the effect of both terminators. Terminators
also leave a 3′-UTR on the mRNA, the sequence of which can
affect transcript stability. Terminators can either block transcription
in one direction or in both (bi-directional).
In general, terminator
strengths are conserved across prokaryotes.
In other words, an intrinsic terminator in E. coli is likely to function as such across species. However, care needs
to be taken when using any part library that has not been characterized
in a specific species. For example, some E. coli terminators
were shown to function as promoters in soil Rhizobia; completely the
opposite function. Some terminator
libraries have been characterized in soil bacteria ( ).

3.2.7.

## Directed Evolution
Directed evolution
has been applied to improve many enzymes and pathways of interest
to agriculture (for plants, see ). Iterative rounds of the creation
of mutant libraries and the screening of them for function have been
shown to improve enzymes, pathways, as well as entire strains. These
enzymes could be used as part of biomanufacturing, such as the synthesis
of an insecticide in a fermenter, or it could be put into a strain
that is then applied in the field.
Evolving enzyme variants
with improved catalytic rates, altered substrate specificity, or stability
can be useful for the bioproduction of agrochemicals. The biosynthesis
of the insecticide limonene in yeast was improved through by targeting
mutagenesis to specific residues in a rate-limited enzyme from the
terpene pathway.
,
 Insect pheromones can be released
to disrupt mating, but their widespread use was limited by the difficulty
of synthesizing these molecules. A key step in pheromone biosynthesis
was improved by applying directed evolution to a cytochrome P450 from Bacillus megaterium to produce cyclopropane precursors. This advance has allowed the pheromones to
be commercialized for field use.
,

Pesticides
and their production hosts have been improved using
directed evolution. Derivatives of the antibiotic andrimid were produced
by evolving a chimeric NRPS-PKS (non-ribosomal peptide synthase –
polyketide synthase) from two soil bacteria (Pantoea agglomerans and Bacillus licheniformis) that initially had
low activity.

Many plant-growth
promoting bacteria (PGPB) release beneficial
antimicrobial or antifungal peptides. For example, the soil bacteria Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus amxyloliquefaciens have been shown to be effective biocontrol agents for the pathogenic Macrophomina phaseolina soybean fungus through the production
of lipopeptides.
,
 The soil bacteria Bacillus
subtilis and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens produce
lipopeptides that kill Macrophomina phaseolina soybean
fungus. However, overproduction of an antimicrobial peptide can be difficult
due to toxicity in its microbial host. To solve this problem, B. subtilis was evolved to be tolerant to the lantipeptide
nisin by using dCas9 to target mutations to a transporter gene.

3.3.

## Pathway
Engineering
Bacteria contain
pathways that can produce many chemicals of agricultural importance.
Structurally complex natural products can function as insecticides,
antimicrobials, phytohormones, or play roles in colonization or survival.
These chemicals may underly the functional effects of a bioinoculant.
−

 The native species that makes a chemical may not be suitable for
a particular application, crop, or may be fragile in the environment.
The pathway may also not be expressed (“silent”) under
the conditions where it is needed for an application. This section
focuses on the engineering of complex multigene pathways, either in
their native host or in transferring them to a host-of-interest for
an application.

3.3.1.

## Biosynthetic
Gene Clusters
In bacteria,
genes encoding natural product pathways are typically clustered together
on the genome. These clusters vary in size, often from 10-20 kilobases,
but can be as large as 100 kilobases or more. They also often involve
dozens of genes, multiple operons, and complex regulatory mechanisms.
The most commonly-studied natural product pathways are those that
make chemical natural products, such as polyketides, which have been
used as medicines. However, there are many other pathways that are
organized as BGCs, including metal nanoparticles, CRISPR immunity,
and molecular machines involved in locomotion and pathogenesis. Gene clusters are not a unique feature of
bacteria; while less common, functional genes can also be clustered
in fungi and plants and there are computational tools for their discovery
as well.
−

BGCs encode pathways for many agriculturally-relevant chemical
products. Spinosyns are insecticides that are neurotoxins comprised
of a polyketide-derived tetracyclic macrolide with two saccharides
that is synthesized by 19 genes on an 80kb cluster.
,
 Originally isolated from a sugar mill in the Virgin Islands, Saccharopolyspora spinosa underwent extensive genetic optimization.
−

 Globally, it is commercially available as a treatment for many insect
pests. There are many other insecticides encoded in BCGs.
−

To identify new natural products that mediate bacteria–nematode–insect
interactions, 1,000 putative BGCs from 45 nematode-associated bacteria
were identified using antiSMASH. Homologous
overexpression of a subset of six of these BCGs demonstrated their
products serve as insect virulence factors, immunosuppressors, and
protease inhibitors. Herbicides are also encoded in gene clusters,
such as phosphonothrixin in Saccarhothrix, which
has activity against weeds.
,

BCGs also produce
chemicals that protect crops against pathogenic
bacteria and fungi. For example, phenazine is an antifungal that has
been shown to protect wheat against diseases.
,
 It is encoded on a 7-gene biosynthetic gene cluster encoded in Pseudomonads.
2,4-Diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG) is another antifungal from Pseudomonads
with broad spectrum activity. A study
of agricultural soils across China and the United States revealed
tens of thousands of such clusters.
,
 The lettuce
and tomato rhizomes were found to be enriched with polyketide synthases
(PKS) and non-ribosomal peptide synthase (NRPS) gene clusters as compared
to soil, indicating an abundance of antimicrobial compounds.

The increased use of metagenomics to
analyze soil samples has led
to new computational tools and databases to catalogue BCGs. AntiSMASH
is a ML-trained model that can scan genomes for BCGs in bacteria and
fungi.
,
 The AntiSMASH database maintains
annotated gene clusters that can be mined for activities-of-interest
or compared to a newly sequenced pathway.
,
 The 2021 release had 47,517 clusters from 25,236 bacterial genomes
(388 archaeal and 177 fungal). The Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic
Gene cluster (MIBiG) database similarly catalogues gene clusters with
a focus on high-quality chemical structures and bioactivities. The Natural Product Atlas has over 30,000
unique chemical structures and their taxonomic sources.

3.3.2.

## “Waking up”
Silent Gene Clusters
Many genomes are rich with BCGs, particularly
for bacteria that
reside in the plant rhizosphere. However, most do not produce their
chemical product under laboratory conditions or under conditions desired
by the farmer in the field. These clusters are referred to as being
“silent.” The natural regulatory control of BCGs encompasses
both the global regulatory network in the bacterium as well as regulation
encoded within the cluster itself. It can be difficult to figure out
what combination of signals turns a desired pathway on. One approach
is to extensively try different media concoctions with various nutrients
or stressors in an attempt to turn on the gene cluster. However, genetic
methods are required if the organism is going to be used as a bioinoculant
and the chemical product needs to be produced in situ. Similarly, whether it is for chemical discovery or to optimize
bioreactor conditions, BCGs often need to be transferred to a production
host under inducible or constitutive control. BCGs also need to be
transferred when the function, such as an antifungal, needs to be
moved to an organism that associates strongly with a desired crop,
for example forms biofilms on the roots.
3.3.2.1.

## Inducing
BCG Transcription
One
strategy to overexpress the BCG is to replace the inactive or inducible
natural promoters with strong constitutive promoters. This approach
is commonly taken for BCG-rich Actinobacteria, including Streptomyces
species. Native constitutive promoters of various strengths have been
used to turn on BCGs.
,,,,−

 Sometimes a BCG can be a single operon,
in which case placing and upstream promoter is relatively easy. However,
it is more often the case that there are multiple operons in different
orientations. Methods have been developed to perform DNA assembly
in yeast, allowing for up to 16 promoters to be replaced simultaneously. The simultaneous replacement of promoters
enabled the optimized production of the antibiotic tetarimycin in Streptomyces albus ( A).

 Inducible
promoters can also be inserted into a BCG so that it is turned on
by a particular signal or set of conditions.
−

 This approach can be used to place the chemical product of a BCG
under the control of genetically-encoded sensors or circuits ( ). Promoters
that are transcribed by T7 RNAP have also been used to turn on BCGs. The small lengths of T7 promoters simplifies
their insertion into multiple sites and the expression of T7 RNAP
can turn them all on simultaneously. There are also promoters available
of different strengths.
Deleting the transcriptional repressor
of a BGC can lead to the
activation of a silent cluster.
−

 For example, the deletion
of two repressors in Streptomyces rapamycinicus led
to an increase in the production of the antifungal rapamycin. Overexpressing endogenous transcriptional
activators by inserting additional copies downstream of strong promoters
can also activate silent gene clusters.
−

 Random mutagenesis can also be used to wake up a BCG or optimize
production.
,
 Finally, placing additional
copies of the entire BGC onto the host genome can improve production.
−

Variants of dCas9 can be used to turn on BCGs. The programmability
of the gRNA allows it to be directed at specific single or multiple
sites through the genome. It can serve as a repressor when it blocks
a gene (CRISPRi) or as an activator if fused to a domain that recruits
RNAP (CRISPRa). CRISPRa has been used to turn on PKS/NRPS BCGs in Photorhabdus luminescens by targeting sgRNAs to 300 bp upstream
of the cluster’s native promoters. To activate the expression of the polyketide jadomycin B in Streptomyces venezuelae, CRISPRi was targeted to the native
pathway repressor.

3.3.2.2.

## Remodeling
Engineered microbes
containing sequences derived from other organisms or synthetic genetic
parts risk being designated “intergeneric” by the EPA
and face a difficult regulatory process before being approved for
field release. Genome “remodelling”
is an approach that seeks to reduce regulatory risk by not adding
recombinant DNA to the genome. Remodelling
restricts genetic changes to deletion, duplication, or reshuffling
of genetic sequences sourced from the native genome; for example,
moving a promoter from one spot to another to turn on a BCG. The genetic
changes also do not lead to the addition of selection markers, construction
scars, or plasmids from the cloning process.
Remodelling requires
a scarless genetic engineering method. To this end, the “two-step
allelic exchange” method was developed ( ).
,
 The genetic part that needs
to be moved in the genome is cloned into a plasmid that cannot replicate
in the host (suicide vector), flanked by homologous sequences corresponding
to the desired final genomic position. The plasmid also contains selection
and counter selection marker. The first step is to transform the plasmid,
integrate it into new genomic site, and select for integration using
a marker. The second step is to apply the counter selection to recombine
the plasmid out of the genome and remove it from the cell. This approach
has been used to turn on a nitrogen fixation BCG to make it constitutively
express nitrogenase ( ).
 Allelic exchange relies on the endogenous recombination
machinery.
Efficiency can be improved by using phage recombinases, which allow
the genome engineering to be performed in one-step scarless genome
engineering. These recombinases can
reduce the homology regions to as little as 50 bp. However, a problem
with phage recombinases is that they can be very host-specific. To
this end, recombinases were mined from Burkholderia species to activate Burkholderia BGCs by inserting
a strong constitutive promoter (PApra) from Streptomyces
clavuligerus. These pathways
produced a total of five nonribosomal peptides from two classes of
lipopeptides, glidopeptins, and rhizomides.

3.3.3.

## Tools for Heterologous Expression
For some applications,
the BGC must be transferred to a new host.
Moving it to a production strain could make it easier to optimize
and lead to higher product titers. The insecticide spinosyn BCG has
also been reconstituted in Streptomyces, which is easier to genetically
manipulate than its native producer. It could also be to combine it with a strain that naturally colonizes
a niche of interest. For example, a gene cluster producing an antibiotic
against crop pathogens (caryoynencin) was moved from a Burkholderia
pathogen to a non-pathogenic Paraburkholderia (does not grow at 37°C)
so that it could be used as a living inoculant in the field ( B). Production of the molecule using a living
cell, versus spraying it in purified form, ensures its delivery when
it is chemically unstable.
3.3.3.1.

## Transferring Gene Clusters
to New Species
Delivery of the assembled gene clusters can
be carried out through
recombination or assisted by transposons and integrases. To efficiently
deliver BGCs to diverse proteobacteria, genetic landing pads containing
Cre recombinase sites were randomly integrated onto host genomes using
Tn5 or mariner transposons. Upon introducing
the BGC vector flanked by the reciprocal CR recombinase recognition
sites, a co-delivered Cre recombinase facilitated integration of the
gene cluster. Robust expression of the BCG across hosts was achieved
by including a T7 RNAP and T7 promoter within the landing pad. One
promoter assumes all the genes are oriented in the same direction.
Another approach is to flank the BCG between two promoters so that
the genes in both directions are transcribed.

The removal of alternative pathways from the genome
can also wake up a BCG or increase the titer of its product. A genome-reduced
( ) Streptomyces coelicolor, where four endogenous NPRS and
PKS pathways were removed, produced higher titers of the antibiotic
congocidine. Another strain of Streptomyces albus had 15 BGCs removed in order to express
a cryptic cluster from the bacterium Frankia. A 1.4-Mb region harboring many BGCs, but no
essential genes, was removed from Streptomyces avermitilis to express twenty BGC from various Streptomyces species.

3.3.3.2.

## Refactoring
Large gene clusters
often contain layers of redundant and poorly understood regulation.
Refactoring is a strategy to rebuild a genetic system from the ground
up, resynthesizing the component genes under control of synthetic
genetic parts to remove native regulation.
,−

 Refactored systems can be placed under control of a sensor or the
output of a synthetic circuit ( ) and are more easily transferred to other
species.
,
 The simultaneous replacement
and recoding of all of the parts in large gene clusters requires the
use of de novo DNA synthesis.
Refactoring was
first applied to a 32 kb cluster that encodes a PKS that makes the
human antibiotic erythromycin. As part
of reconstructing the cluster, they placed sets of genes under the
control of heterologous genetic parts, including T7 promoters and
synthetic RBSs. These changes facilitated its functional transfer
from Streptomyces erythraea to Escherichia
coli. The titer increased when the genes were codon optimized,
possibly because of the elimination of regulatory sequences internal
to the genes. Phage genomes have also
been refactored, with an emphasis on removing overlapping genes and
to introducing restriction sites to aid cloning.
,,
 Since then, these principles
have been applied to many BCGs to increase titers or to transfer them
between hosts.

Refactoring has
been applied to gene clusters of relevance to agriculture.
The 80 kb biosynthetic gene cluster for the insecticide spinosyn was
refactored, including the replacement of all promoters and reorganization
of operons, leading to a 300-fold titer increase when transferred
into a production host. The 25 kb nitrogen
fixation gene cluster (nif) from Klebsiella
oxytoca was refactored by separating overlapping genes, codon
optimizing them, replacing all genetic parts with synthetic variants,
and placing operons under T7 RNAP control ( ).
,
 A refactored E. coli Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas (EMP) glycolytic
pathway increased glucose utilization when transferred to the soil
bacterium Pseudomonas putida.

Refactoring can improve biosafety by eliminating
pathogenic components
or moving minimal desirable machinery to a non-pathogenic host. For
example, the tumor-inducing (Ti) plasmid responsible for Agrobacterium-mediated plant transformation was refactored to limit natural virulence
( C). The minimal set
of virulence genes required for transformation were organized into
artificial operons controlled by either constitutive or IPTG-inducible
promoters. The refactored Ti-plasmid remained functional even when
transferred to Rhizobium rhizogenes, a non-pathogenic
strain incapable of plant transformation.

3.3.4.

## Combinatorial
Pathway Optimization
Pathways can be optimized by creating
libraries that vary the genetic
parts used to control each gene. It is easier to build a combinatorial
library for a refactored gene cluster because overlapping parts (often
genes) are separated and the parts modularized so that alternatives
can be easily substituted.

The
combination of automation with genome editing tools has massively
scaled up the size of libraries that can be screened. Over 4 billion Escherichia coli strains per day were generated using MAGE
( )
to place different RBSs to control the expression of 24 enzymes in
a pathway for a key isoprene intermediate (1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate). The isoprene pathway provides precursors to
many phytohormones and plant signalling molecules. The three-enzyme pathway to the carotenoid pigment neurosporene
was optimized through a multi-dimensional search of RBS seqeuences. Neurosporene is present in many environmental
bacteria and carotenoid-rich fruits, such as tomatoes.

3.4.

## Programming Soil Bacteria to Sense-and-Respond
Many
functions carried by engineered bacteria need to be timed
properly to have the desired impact. For example, the production of
growth-promoting hormones may have a negative effect if the plant
should instead be conserving resources or activating a response to
deal with a transient stress. In addition, if always turned on, the
function may also impose a growth burden on the bacterium, making
it less competitive in the field. Rather than always being active,
these functions could be placed under the control of genetic sensors
that only turn the function on when needed.
The agricultural
system consists of the crop plant as well as many bacteria and fungi
that reside in the rhizosphere. Synthetic sensors can program communication
between these organisms. These channels could be used to stabilize
artificial consortia against environmental fluctuations or establish
synthetic symbiotic relationships. They could also be used to divide
up functions across species. For example, the plant could “ask”
an engineered bacterium to make a needed molecule in response to a
stress it is facing.
Genetic circuits can integrate information
from multiple sensors
to identify an environment with higher specificity. For example, sensors
for various metals or nitrogen sources could be integrated to respond
to a particular soil type. Circuits can also respond dynamically;
for instance, to produce a pulse of insecticide.
3.4.1.

## Sensors
of Soil Conditions
Genetically-encoded
sensors convert a signal into a cellular response.
,,−

 A stimulus, such a small molecule, serves as the input to a sensor
and the output is a promoter. This promoter can either be connected
to the gene that is the response or be used as an input to a genetic
circuit. Many sensors have been built for bacteria, some of which
respond to agriculturally-relevant signals, such as nutrients, plant
metabolites, signaling molecules, agrochemicals, and heavy metals.
,−

 Most sensors have been designed for laboratory strains that would
not survive in the field (notably, Escherichia coli), but sensors are increasingly being built for soil bacteria, such
as Pseudomonas, Rhizobia, and Bacilli.
,,
 Sensors
have been developed to respond to temperature, light (and color),
gases such as oxygen, pH, extracellular peptides, bio-active natural
products, extracellular proteins, and adhesion in a biofilm.
,−

 Sensors can also respond to the internal state of the cell, including
metabolites.
,,−

 Native promoters that respond to stress
or other conditions can be viewed as sensors.
−

Sensors that respond to a desired signal can either be constructed
by finding a natural protein or RNA that binds to the ligand-of-interest
,,,
 or by engineering and evolving it to do so.
−

 Once a sensing domain is identified, it can be moved across organisms,
including to eukaryotes, with relative ease so long as there are sufficient
genetic parts to retool it for the new host. Databases containing
ligand-responsive prokaryotic sensors and their associated protein
and operator sequences are available to facilitate the transfer of
these systems to new organisms.

Sensors are based on a biomolecule that responds to the signal
being detected. Binding of the ligand leads to a conformational change
that alters binding to DNA/RNA, thereby affecting a promoter, or changes
the activity of a kinanse/phosphatase in a phosphorelay. In bacteria,
the common TetR-, LysR- and LuxR- families of transcriptional regulators
are single proteins that function as ligand-dependent transcriptional
activators or repressors. Two-component
systems consist of a sensor protein, sometimes membrane-bound, that
receives the signal and phosphorylates a second response regulator.
,
 The phosphate on the response regulator changes its conformation
so that it can up- or down-regulate a promoter. Sensors can also be
made from riboswitches, which are RNA sequences that bind to specific
ligands. By altering the RNA conformation, gene expression is affected
by changing RBS accessibility, ribozyme activity, or terminator readthrough.

A natural sensing domain can usually
be found quickly that “works,”
that is, changes gene expression to a detectable degree in response
to the desired signal. However, the dynamic range is frequently too
low or background too high to connect it to a useful response. The
dynamic range can be optimized through part engineering or random
mutagenesis, but it can be very difficult to decrease the background
or alter the limit of detection. It is also very challenging to build
a sensor that operates identically across different environmental
conditions, genetic contexts, and growth phases. Even under laboratory conditions obtaining reliable performance
can be difficult, but it becomes much harder for bacteria operating
in soil in the field for months. Furthermore, as more synthetic parts
are added to the cell, they can interfere with each other’s
function, which can change a sensor’s response. The application of control theory and the
use of genetic insulation to build reliable sensors is a promising
area of research, but it has not yet been applied to create sensors
that reliably operate under field conditions.
,−

 Finally, most genetic sensors have been
characterized using higher-copy plasmids due to the larger response
they generate. Ultimately, they must be encoded in the genome to be
carried stably in the field and reduce the burden on the cell.

This section focuses on two classes
of sensors. The first are those
that have been developed for agriculturally-relevant bacterial species.
The second are sensors for agriculturally-relevant signals that have
been demonstrated in model species. Many synthetic sensors can be
put together in one cell; up to 12 that respond to small molecules
have been placed into one strain.
,
 Collectively,
genetic sensors can provide an incredible breadth of operational awareness
to the cell.
3.4.1.1.

## In-Field Inducible
Systems
Engineered
bacteria could be induced in the field using a sprayed agrochemical.
Copper-based pesticides, including copper sulfate, copper hydroxide,
copper oxychloride, and copper oxide, are used for crop protection,
particularly in organic farming.
,
 A bacterial
sensor responsive to copper sulfate was built by expressing CueR in Escherichia coli along with its native cognate promoter
and knocking out a copper exporter to increase sensitivity. This sensor could detect μM levels of
copper in water from field samples. Monosodium methylarsonic acid (MSMA) is an herbicide that is approved
in the United States. A sensor for
organic arsenic compounds, including methylarsenite, was built by
expressing a mutated ArsR repressor that is insensitive to inorganic
arsenic. The sensor was turned on in
the presence of Burkholderia sp. MR1, which reduces
MSMA to methylarsenite. A sensor that
responds to the fungicide Mandipropamid was built by using a split
T7 RNAP system fused to protein-ligand interaction domains and shown
to function in Agrobacterium tumefaciens.

3.4.1.2.

## Measuring Soil Nutrients
Genetic
sensors have been developed that can monitor nutrient levels. These
sensors could be used to regulate microbial activity to create or
scavenge for these nutrients, such as nitrogen fixation and phosphate
solubilization.
Nitrogen is critical for crop yields due to
its role as a vital nutrient for plant growth. A nitrate sensor in Bacillus subtilis was constructed by moving the two-component
system NarXL from Escherichia coli and swapping its
DNA binding domain with one from Bacillus subtilis ( A).
,
 Sensitivity was improved by
mutating residues to reduce phosphatase activity of the NarX histidine
kinase, resulting in a sensor that could report on nitrate levels
from 6 - 600 μM in fertilized soil, noting that the threshold
for nitrogen deficiency is 200 μM.
,
 Sensors have also been developed for free amino acids (aspartate, glutamate, lysine, arginine, tryptophan, valine, β-alanine, phenylalanine, tyrosine), which are important sources
of nitrogen in low fertility soils.

 Phosphate is a component of fertilizer that is
required for cell
division and plant growth. Numerous
bacteria sense external phosphate concentrations using a two-component
system (e.g., PhoBR). Sensors were built using the PhoBR-responsive phoA promoter in Pseudomonas fluorescens, and Synechoccus sp. strain PCC 7942 and used to estimate phosphate
concentration in wastewater and environmental water samples.
−

There are seven essential plant micronutrients required for
growth:
iron, zinc, copper, manganese, molybdenum, boron, and chlorine. A
Fe3+ sensor was built in Escherichia coli through the heterologous expression of the regulator DtxR. However Fe3+ is not the best indicator
of iron deficiency, as it is not bioavailable. To this end, the ferric uptake regulator (Fur) directly
senses Fe2+ and derepresses iron importer genes in Salmonella. The sensitivity
of the sensor was tuned by expressing a protein that sequesters Fur.
A zinc sensor based on ZntR was capable of detecting Zn2+ in soil when transferred to Pseudomonas fluorescens.
,
 Copper sensors include the activator CueR
(Escherichia coli and Pseudomonads) and the repressor
CsoR/YcnK (Bacillus subtilis).
,
 Mn sensors are common in nitrogen-fixing bacteria.
,
 MntR serves both as an activator at low Mn2+ concentrations
and a repressor when [Mn2+] > 1 μM. Mo can be sensed by ModE, which activates
a promoter in its absence and can be found in Escherichia
coli, Bradyrhizobium, and Xanthomonas.
−

 No sensors of boron or chlorine ions have
been reported, despite evidence that they impact gene expression in
soil bacteria.
−

3.4.1.3.

## Responding
to Pollution
The detection
of polluted soil is important for both plant and consumer health. Bacterial sensors have been built for heavy
metals, including arsenic,
−

 gold, nickel, chromate, cadmium, lead, and mercury. Several have been tested on soil samples. An Escherichia
coli mercury sensor based on MerR was sensitive to 20 - 110
μg/kg soil. Foods grown in soil
mercury levels of 37 μg/kg are safe for consumption, but foods
grown at >120 μg/kg were not, indicating that this sensor
is
tuned to a relevant range. An array
of heavy metal sensors was constructed by expressing metal-responsive
regulators in various soil bacteria and used to measure cadmium, zinc,
and mercury concentrations in soil (CadR, ZntR, MerB/MerR in Pseudomonas fluorescens; ZntR, MerR/MerB in Escherichia
coli; CadC in Bacillus subtilis). Zinc and copper sensors, based on the ZraSR
and CusSR two-component systems have been used to turn on metal bioremediation
pathways.

Sensors have been developed
to detect chemical pollutants, such as phenanthrene, phenolic compounds,
and organophosphates.
,
 Sensors for phenols,
a common carcinogen in ground water, were developed by mutagenizing
DmpR to bind to 2-chlorophenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol, and 4-nitrolphenol
in Pseudomonas.
−

 The protein design software Rosetta ( ) was used
to predict PobR mutations that bind p-nitrophenol,
a byproduct of organophosphate pesticides. To make a sensor of the insecticide paraoxon, the mutated PobR was
combined with the expression of a phosphotriesterase that degrades
paraoxon to p-nitrophenol.
Benzene, toluene,
ethylbenzene, and xylene (BTEX) are a family
of structurally-related hydrocarbons that are pollutants prioritized
by the EPA. Sensors for BTEX were built
by mutating MopR, which binds phenol, to instead bind benzene or m-xylene. Sensors for alkanes and alkenes usually respond
to compounds of different chain length. Sensors for medium-chain alkanes
in Alcanivorax borkumensis SK2 and Escherichia
coli were constructed based on the activator AlkS.
−

 AlkS has been mutated to respond to various branched-chain alcohols. Similarly, alkane/alkene biosensors in Acinetobacteri baylyi have been constructed using the activator
AlkR.
,
 A butanol sensor was built in Escherichia
coli using the BmoR activator.

Compounds used in explosives are a pervasive environmental
contaminant
that affects both water and cropland. Sensors for TNT and DNT have been developed in Pseudomonas
putida by evolving XylR, a toluene-responsive repressor,
to be responsive to nitrotoluene.
,
 A riboswitch
for DNT has been built that turns on expression from mRNA in the presence
of the compound.
−

 Its response threshold is 9.1 mg/L, which
is within the range of contaminated wastewater. The Escherichia
coli yqjF promoter responds to DNT/TNT and has been used
to map landmines in the field.
−

 In B. subtilis, a TNT-responsive translational riboswitch regulated the expression
of a phage integrase to invert a promoter upstream of a rfp reporter.

3.4.1.4.

## Pathogen
and Pest Detection
The
detection of plant pathogens in the field could guide an intervention
with an agrichemical treatment. The sensor could also induce antibiotic
production by the cell or even communicate this information to the
plant to direct a response. Bacterial pathogens sometimes use quorum
sensing molecules to coordinate pathogenesis. For example, some plant
pathogens produce C10-HSL (N-decanoyl-L-Homoserine lactone), including Pseudomonas fuscovaginae, which causes sheath brown rot
in rice. Sensors of these pathogens
have been constructed by expressing regulator proteins that respond
to their quorum sensing molecules ( ).
,

Escherichia coli has been engineered to detect the soil
bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei by sensing C10-HSL
and 3OHC10-HSL (N-3-hydroxydecanoyl-L-Homoserine lactone).

DNA sensors have been developed in Bacillus subtilis and Acinetobacter baylyi that can detect genetic material shed by pathogens.
,
 In each of these sensors, the bacteria are naturally competent and
take up foreign DNA. The target sequence is pre-encoded in their genome,
separated by genetic parts that disrupt the sequence. For example,
in one embodiment, there is an upstream promoter and then a terminator
in the middle of the target sequence. The uptake of DNA from the environment
and its matching to the genomically-encoded sequence causes the terminator
to excise and RNAP form the upstream promoter to read through to the
end of the target DNA after which there is a reporter or regulatory
gene. Another way to implement a DNA sensor is to design the integration
to excise a repressor so that a repressed promoter turns on. These
sensors could detect gut pathogens and mammalian DNA at concentrations
as low as pM. They could be designed to detect agricultural pathogens,
insect, or herbivore DNA.

3.4.2.

## Chemical
Communication between Cells
There is a rich chemical language
that cells use to communicate.
This communication could be within a species of bacteria. For example,
it could be there to delay biofilm formation or pathogenesis until
a desired cell concentration threshold has been crossed. Bacteria
are also constantly surveying the environment for potential competitors
based on the chemicals they leave in their wake. Finally, plants can
communicate with each other through pheromones, to insects, and to
bacteria and fungi via the chemicals they secrete from their roots
( ).
The genetics underlying the production and receipt of these chemical
signals have been retooled to create a programmable language between
cells.
3.4.2.1.

## Cell Density Sensors
Quorum sensors
respond to cell density. The system consists of an enzyme that produces
a small molecule that crosses the cell membrane and accumulates in
the environment. Gram-negative bacteria use acetyl-homoserine lactones
(AHLs) whereas Gram-positive bacteria have systems that rely on peptides
as the communication signal. When the concentration passes a threshold
due to high cell density, it binds its corresponding regulatory protein
and turns on gene expression. These systems often control programs
of gene expression to form biofilms, including on the surface of roots
and leaves.
−

 They are important for bacteria that are used as biocontrol agents
and plant growth promoters. They are also involved in programs of
plant pathogenesis. Biocontrol bacteria
have been engineered to produce enzymes that disrupt these signals
as a means to block plant pathogens ( ).
,
 Quorum sensing
also is used by bacteria to determine proximity for the horizontal
transfer of DNA.

Quorum systems
are widespread across soil bacteria; for example, in the oat rhizosphere,
24% of the species produce AHLs. They
are essential for the beneficial effects of plant-growth promoting
bacteria (Rhizobium and Pseudomonas) and for the damage of pathogens
(Agrobacterium, Erwinia, Pantoea, Xanthomonas). Soil particles promote quorum sensing and increase biofilm
formation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa by constraining
the bacteria in micro-niches and facilitating cell aggregation.

Quorum sensors can be used synthetically
as a means to implement
a response after a threshold in cell density has been crossed. For
example, it was used to create a set-point for the maximum cell density
by using it to control a protein that is toxic to the bacterium or
to switch from growth to production modes in a bioreactor.
−

 Outside of laboratory cultures, the quorum signal could be used
a proximity sensor to determine when the bacteria are occupying a
physically confined niche.

Quorum
sensors have been used for applications in agriculture. Cupriavidus
pinatubonesis has been engineered to put the
auxin IAA under the control of a quorum sensor to enhance Arabidopsis root growth to avoid making the hormone too
early when it can inhibit plant growth. The nitrogen fixation gene cluster has been transferred to Escherichia coli and placed under the control of different
quorum systems, thus allowing bacterial biomass to accumulate before
turning on this energy-intensive enzyme. The soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis possesses
a quorum system whose signal is received by both a membrane receptor
(ComQXP) and a cytoplasmic regulatory protein (Rap-Phr). Using this system, genetic switches were developed
for cell density-dependent repression or activation of recombinant
genes.

3.4.2.2.

## Microbe-Microbe
Communication Channels
Bacteria naturally communicate amongst
each other using small molecules
or peptides that diffuse between them. Gaining control over them to
build synthetic communication channels allows information to be transmitted
between cells. These channels are a common tool in Synthetic Biology,
where programmable communication consists of a “sender device”
that produces the signal and a “receiver device” that
responds to it. The input to a sender
device is a transcriptional signal (a promoter) and the output is
the expression of the enzyme(s) that synthesize the communication
signal. The “receiver device” expresses the regulator
that binds to this signal and turns on an output promoter. Orthogonal
communication channels, consisting of different chemical signals,
allow independent lines of information to be transmitted between cells.
−

The AHL class of quorum sensing molecules have been co-opted
for this purpose. These molecules diffuse rapidly through cell membranes.
Multiple sender:receiver pairs have been characterized, including
(synthase→molecule→TF): LuxI→3OC6-HSL→LuxR,
LasI→3OC12-HSL→LasR, CinI→3OHC14-HSL→CinR,
TraI→3OC8-HSL→TraR.
,
 Directed
evolution has been used to identify mutants of the enzyme and regulator
with improved specificity and dynamic range. These sensors are associated with Gram-negative bacteria,
but they have been shown to function in many bacterial species, including
Gram-positives, as well as across fungi, plants, and mammalian cells. Most AHLs diffuse across all of the membranes
of these cells.
Soil chemistry can affect the lifetime, diffusion,
and behavior
of AHLs in soil and therefore affect their performance as a communication
signal. Biochar, a common component of soil, reduces the effective
concentration of many AHLs through absorption and pH-dependent hydrolysis. The effect of biochar is dependent on its
physical properties. Biochar manufactured with a high surface area
inhibited 3OC12-HSL-mediated signaling 10-fold more than low-surface
area biochar. Likewise, the rate of
absorption of AHLs to colloidal clays differed depending on the identity
of the AHL and the identity of the clay.

Gram-positive bacteria use peptide-based quorum systems. A pre-peptide is expressed and modified as
it is exported from the cell. The receiver is a membrane-bound protein
that binds to the peptide and transmits the signal to a TF, which
regulates a promoter. For example, the agr system
from Staphylococcus aureus encodes the propeptide
AgrD that is processed by the enzyme AgrB to produce AIP (auto-inducing
peptide). AIP is sensed by a two-component
membrane-bound receptor AgrC and the signal transferred to ArgA, which
regulates a promoter. This system has been transferred to the soil
bacterium Bacillus megaterium.
,

3.4.2.3.

## Plant-Microbe Communication Channels
Plants nurture communities of bacteria and fungi in the rhizosphere
by excreting carbon sources (sugars, organic acids, amino acids, etc.)
and signaling compounds from their roots. Engineering microbes to respond to plant exudates could be used
to only activate microbes when a specific need occurs or when they
are proximal to a plant. In some cases, root exudates may be an indirect
indication of the plant health. For example, nitrogen deficiency decreases
amino acid exudation in maize, phosphorus
deficiency increases organic acid (citrate, malate, and succinate)
exudation, and iron deficiency leads
to coumarin exudation.

Sensors
have been developed that respond to root exudates and turn on in bacteria
adhered to plant roots. Microbial biosensors were constructed in the
plant-associated species Pantoea agglomerans by fusing
native sucrose-, fructose-, tryptophan-, or galactose-responsive promoters
to reporter genes.
−

 A genetic sensor based on the native galactose/galactoside-induced melA promoter in Sinorhizobium meliloti could sense galactosides, and sugars found in root exudates up to
200 μm from the root surface. To identify promoters that respond to root exudates, a set was gleaned
from genome of the legume symbiont Rhizobium leguminosarum and screened, yielding sensors for erythritol, myo-inositol, carboxylates
(formate, malonate, tartrate), amino acids (phenylalanine, GABA) and
flavonoids (hesperetin). Bacteria carrying
these sensors were inoculated onto pea roots to study the spatial
and temporal changes in exudates in the nodule ( B).

Many sensors for root exudates have been constructed by introducing
heterologous regulators and promoters. The simplest sensors are based
on a regulatory protein that binds to a sugar, organic acid, flavonoid,
amino acid or other natural product. Sensors have been built for the
following compounds (regulator name): cumate (CymR),
,
 vanillate (VanR, QacR),
,,
 benzoate (BenM),
p-coumarate (PadR),
,
 protocatechuic acid (PcaV), tartrate (TtdR), succinate (DcuRS), malate (MalKZ), fumarate (DcuSZ), glutarate (CsiR), arabinose (AraC),
,,
 xylose (XylR), cellobiose (CelR), galactose (GalR), ribose (RbsR), fructose (ScrR), gentiobiose (LacI mutant), fucose
(LacI mutant), naringenin (FdeR, TtgR),
,,,
 kaempferol (QdoR), quercetin (QdoR), lysine (LysG), arginine (ArgP), tryptophan (TrpR), β-alanine (OapR), phenylalanine (PhhR), GABA
(GabR), tyrosine (HpdA), stilbenes (Saro_0803), and xanthine (XdhR). Note
that, while these sensors are functional, most have been demonstrated
in a model organism, usually Escherichia coli, and
have not been shown to operate in soil or respond to exudates coming
from a plant root.
Bacteria have also been engineered to sense
several volatile chemicals
and phytohormones naturally produced by plants. Salicylic acid is
a major plant hormone best known for its role in the plant defense
response, but it also is involved in plant growth, development, and
abiotic stress tolerance. Salicylic
acid is recognized by the activator NahR, which has been used to build
sensors in Escherichia coli

,
 and in the soil bacteria Cupriavidus necator,
Pseudomonas putida,
Rhizobium sp. IRBG79, and Azorhizobium caulinodans. Isoprene is an abundant plant-produced
volatile that may be involved in thermo- and photo-protection.
,

Pseudomonas putida expressing the TbuT regulator
responded to isoprene. A sensor for
the phytohormone cytokinin trans-zeatin was built
by fusing the Arabidopsis AHK4 sensory domain to
the PhoQP two-component system from Escherichia coli.

The sensors described thus
far respond to natural exudates that
are common to many plant species. Bacteria engineered to respond to
these molecules would also respond to other plants producing the same
exudate. Building a bacterium to respond to a specific plant could
be done by engineering the plant to secrete a molecule not normally
produced in exudate and then designing a receiver for this molecule
in the microbe. An implementation of this approach used phloroglucinol
as the signaling molecule. It is an antimicrobial precursor made by
some plant-growth-promoting Pseudomonads. The PKS producing this molecule
can be expressed in Arabidopsis. Synthetic sensors that respond to phloroglucinol were built
in Pseudomonas protegens Pf-5 and Rhizobium
sp. IRBG74.
,

Arabidopsis and barley have also been engineered to artificially excrete opines
and rhizopine from their roots ( ).
,,
 Sensors for these molecules
have been built for Azorhizobium caulinodans. Barley
has been engineered to excrete the rhizopine scyllo-inosamine and this can be sensed by Rhizobium leguminosarum or Azorhizobium caulinodans carrying sensors for
this molecule.
,

 To date, the molecules that have been used for
plant-microbe communication
are naturally produced somewhere in the rhizosphere. Molecules such
as opines are uncommon, but still present, leading to the potential
for off-target interactions. From the perspective of establishing
orthogonal communication signals that are unique to a plant:microbe
pair, the molecule would have to be not present in the rhizosphere.
The ideal molecules would be non-toxic compounds that diffuse through
soil without sticking to soil particles and also easily pass through
the plant and microbial membranes. In designing pathways to these
molecules, computational tools have been developed to combine enzymes
from different sources to build non-natural compounds.
,
 Corresponding sensors for these compounds could be built by mutating
binding proteins that can transduce their signal to a promoter (Section
3.2.8).

3.4.3.

## Synthetic Genetic Circuits
An individual
sensor produces a simple response: as the input signal increases,
the output promoter monotonically turns on or off. To change the response,
sensors can be connected to genetic circuits, implemented through
interacting TFs.
,
 In plants, synthetic circuits
were described in Section 2.3.5, but the range of circuits that have
been built in bacteria is much greater. However, the majority of these
circuits have been implemented in model species, such as Escherichia
coli. The classes of responses include:

Switches that alter the threshold, cooperativity,
and amplification or implement noise filters.
,,−

NOT gates that invert
the response, for
example turn a light sensor into a dark sensor.
,,

Biphasic circuits that are on at only intermediate
levels of input, implementable with incoherent feedback loops or promoter
design.
,

Digital and fuzzy logic to integrate multiple
sensors.
−

 This integration can improve the specificity of a response (e.g., turning on in low O2 AND high T AND N stress).
,,

Analog circuits to perform addition, ratiometric
comparisons, or serve as perceptrons in a neural network.
,−

Dynamic
circuits, such as a pulse generator
or oscillator.
,,−

Adaptive
circuits that return to their
initial state despite a step change in input, sometimes described
as a “pulse generator”.
,

Feedback controllers that apply
principles
from control theory to make the output more robust to perturbations
in the environment or cell state.
,,

Memory to
permanently record a transient
signal or combination of singals.
,−

Algorithms from computer
science. Genetic
circuits have been developed that implement entire algorithm, including
the binary-coded digit (BDC) 7-segment display algorithm and a 2-bit
version of the MD5 cryptography algorithm.
,

Transcriptional sensors and circuits
are easy to connect
because the input/output signals are the same (extensible): a promoter. The output promoter of a sensor can serve
as the input promoter for a circuit. Similarly, both the inputs and
outputs of a circuit are promoters so that they can be connected to
each together, where the output of an upstream circuit serves as the
input to the downstream circuit. Multiple circuits can be connected
in series (“layered”) to create more complex operations,
most commonly referred to as a “cascade” in biology.
While this makes them easy to connect, transcriptional circuits are
slow, requiring 0.5 - 2 hours for each layer to complete. Delays in
the calculation can lead to transient errors (“faults”)
where genes are mis-expressed as the circuit changes state.
,

This extensibility has led to rapid growth in the scale of
genetic
circuits in Escherichia coli, now incorporating dozens
of TFs solve complex computational problems.
−

 Further, the division of circuits across a consortium of interacting
cells has increased their scale dramatically.
−

 As the designs have gotten more complicated and require more genetic
parts, design automation and simulation software packages have become
more prominent ( ).
,,,
 One can imagine a future where
the bacteria occupying a biofilm on a seed, root, or leaf work together
to compute something about the environment and report this information
to the plant.
This section highlights the circuits that have
been built in soil
bacteria or are applicable to agriculture. The most advanced capabilities
of genetic circuits have not yet been applied to these species. One
challenge in using circuits in strains that will be applied to agricultural
fields is that the additional genetic parts and TF genes are usually
sourced from diverse genera and are therefore more difficult to obtain
regulatory approval from USDA/EPA6.
3.4.3.1.

## Layering
Circuits (Transcriptional Cascade)
When building a synthetic
genetic circuit, the layering of TFs
has been used to change the response of the output.
−

 It can make it more switch-like, change the threshold, amplify the
output, or reduce the cell-cell variability (noise).
Circuits
have been layered to make sensors more sensitive to environmental
pollutants. A transcriptional cascade was used to amplify the output
from arsenic (ArsR) and mercury (MerR) sensors. Adding a three-layer cascade to the arsenic sensor shifted
its limit of detection from 10 ppb to 0.8 ppb and increased the output
20-fold ( A).

 
3.4.3.2.

## Feedforward and Feedback Loops
A feedforward
motif splits the input signal, which then reconverges
on the output. Feedforward motifs are prevalent in natural regulatory
networks and synthetic feedforward motifs have been built.
,−

 Feedforward motifs can be “coherent” where both the
input and the split signal converge with the same sign (both turn
the output on or both turn it off) or “incoherent” where
one has a different sign than the other (one turns it on and the other
off). Incoherent feedforward motifs
occur frequently in natural regulatory networks and synthetic feedforward
motifs have been shown to filter noise or produce a pulse of activity. They can also reduce the context effects of
carrying a sensor at different copy numbers due to being carried at
different locations in the genome or changes in the growth rate or
medium. A feedforward motif was constructed
in Bacillus subtilis to increase the dynamic range
of an IPTG-sensor from 280-fold to 10,000-fold ( B).

Positive feedback loops occur when a gene product activates
its own expression. They are a common motif in natural regulatory
networks. Synthetic positive feedback
loops can amplify outputs from a sensor. They can also be used to
build a bistable switch, which exhibits hysteresis and memory. The output of an aTc sensor in the nitrogen-fixing
cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. PCC7120 was amplified
using positive feedback.

Negative
feedback occurs when a promoter turns on the expression
of a repressor that then turns off the promoter. They are common in
natural regulatory networks and can reduce the toxicity of TF expression,
reduce cell-to-cell variability, make a switch response faster, and
decrease the impact of mutations that accumulate during evolution.
−

 Negative feedback loops have been used to maintain a constant level
of recombinant gene expression when moved between species. To this
end, the autoregulation of a T7 RNAP dependent promoter reduced the
variability of a reporter when transferred between the soil bacteria Pseudomonas putida and Bacillus subtilis.

Cross-repression occurs when
two repressors influence each other’s
expression. This motif is common in
natural networks. Synthetic circuits
that have this motif are referred to as “toggle switches”
because they can exist in a state expressing one repressor or the
other, but not both. It can lead to a bistable switch, where at a
particular level of input, the circuit could be in either a high or
low state. Bistability leads to different thresholds for the switch
to turn on and off (hysteresis), which makes the switch resilient
at the threshold. A toggle switch has been built on the Bacillus
subtilis genome using the LacI and XylR repressors.

3.4.3.3.

## Logic Operations
Logic circuits
perform a function on a set of inputs to convert them to a set of
outputs. In electronic circuits, the inputs and outputs are binary
(0 or 1), but in biological systems they can take on intermediate
“fuzzy” levels. Logic circuits can have any number of
inputs or outputs. Familiar 2-input, 1-ouput logic operations include
OR, NOR, NAND, AND, and XOR. They can be connected to build more complex
multi-input multi-output logic circuits. Such genetic circuits can
turn on different genes or phenotypes under different combinations
of input activities.
Logic circuits can be used to increase
the specificity of a response. Metal sensors sometimes have limited
specificity due to crosstalk between divalent metal ions (Hg2+, Cd2+, Pb2+, Zn2+) binding to the
regulatory protein.
,
 To create sensors with higher
specificity, an AND gates were built in Escherichia coli by having two sensors express different TFs, both of which were
required for an output promoter to turn on. This approach was used to build a specific Zn2+ sensor
out of regulators that bind nonspecifically to Zn2+, Pb2+, Zn2+, and Cd2+. Additional AND gates
were also built for combinations of the heavy metals As3+, Hg2+, and Cu2+ and small molecules IPTG,
arabinose, and 3OC6-HSL.
AND gates can also make a sensor active
only under defined environmental
conditions. For example, an AND gate was built in the cyanobacteria Synechocystic sp. PCC 6803 to turn on an output promoter
in the presence of a small molecule inducer, but only under conditions
of low oxygen ( C). The AND gate was based on two
TFs, both of which are needed to activate the output promoter. This
gate could be used applied to induce nitrogenase expression only under
conditions where it is not inactivated by oxygen ( ).

3.4.4.

## Remote Detection of Microbial and Plant
Biosensors
Precision agriculture uses remote imaging technologies
to monitor plant health.
,
 Various camera types
mounted on equipment, from tractors to unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs),
interpret images to look for signs of water stress, nutrient dynamics,
and pathogen damage. The cameras do this by quantifying chlorophyll
fluorescence, thermal infrared imaging, and multi- and hyper-spectral
imaging, and other signals. Precision agriculture provides large-scale,
real-time assessments of agricultural systems, from the farm scale
down to individual plants.
Precision agriculture has relied
on the measurement of natural features of the plant. It could also
be used to detect changes that are programmed by genetic engineering.
The output promoter of a sensor or circuit could drive the expression
of a gene that leads to the production of a reporter. The reporter
could be a protein on metabolite that is measurable by the camera
used in precision agriculture, such as those mounted on UAVs. For
example, detecting the early stages of the response to an insect or
pathogen would allow the farmer to react before damage to the crop
become visible. This section describes different reporters that could
be used by microbes to report information via off-the-shelf cameras.
Fluorescent proteins (FPs) are widely-used reporters, compatible
with nearly any cell type, that are detected by absorbing one laser
wavelength and emitting at another. They have been used in microbial
and plant biosensors that monitor soil health, pollutants, and pathogens.
For instance, fluorescent proteins can be integrated into plants to
create osmotic stress “phytosensors” that can be detected
optically from a distance of 3 meters with a pixel resolution of 2.5
cm ( ). Microbial biosensors have used
fluorescent proteins to report TNT via the degradation product of
the TNT residue DNT in soil from 20 meters ( A). The field measurements
required a bespoke land-based imaging system that used a laser exciter
and telescope to capture the emission of bacteria concentrated in
alginate beads filled with growth medium. Sequestering the bacteria
enhances the signal and reduces regulatory concerns. Sunlight can
be used to excite fluorescent proteins, but the resulting signal is
weak.
 Luminescent reporters are used
for remote detection
by measuring
the light that they produce. Light is generated via biochemical reactions
performed by enzymes, sourced from fireflies and other organisms,
the output of which is detectable in low-light environments. The instruments
required for detection are CCD cameras. The DNT sensor was used to
express luciferase and the signal was detectable up to several meters
away. Plants have also been engineered
to be bioluminescent and could be used as biosensors. Petunias engineered to be bioluminescent and
are commercially sold as an ornamental in the United States ( ). They produce a signal that can be clearly
seen in the dark by eye.
Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) measures
the near-continuous spectrum
of light (hundreds of narrow bands). HSI cameras are often used in
precision agriculture to detect plant stress indicators, such as nutrient
deficiencies and diseases, before they become visible.
,
 Plant biosensors have been genetically engineered to change their
hyperspectral signature in response to a signal in the soil. A synthetic
gene circuit in Arabidopsis that responds to estrogen
was connected to a pathway that causes de-greening (the plant turns
white).

Hyperspectral reporters
(HSRs) have been developed to be detectable
by HSI cameras. Metabolites with unique spectral signatures were identified
using a combination of quantum calculations and spectroscopy. Biliverdin IXα and bacteriochlorophyll a were identified as metabolites with unique spectral signatures
that could be detected above background. The reporter for each was
defined as the biosynthetic pathway that can make the molecule. Biosensors
were built based on the soil bacterium Pseudomonas putida and aquatic bacterium Rubrivivax gelatinosus ( B). They were connected
to sensors and could quantify the molecules buried in soil using a
UAV-mounted camera. They were detectable on complex backgrounds and
under ambient light from long distances ( C).
Biosensors based on visual reporters
need to be near the soil surface.
Even then, the soil surface can also be obscured from aerial views,
particularly in the field environment where crop canopies or debris
are prevalent. There are several ways that a signal could be enhanced
from under the surface and detected above ground. First, microbial
biosensors could report a signal to a plant root, which then relays
it to the leaves to create a measurable signal ( ). Second, a volatile
chemical could be chosen that diffuses through the soil to the surface.
To this end, an enzyme reporter produces methyl bromide. An AHL sensor
was connected to this gene and it was shown to be detectable in gas
collected above soil ( D). This approach was used
to measure the presence of the nitrogen-fixing bacteria Rhizobium
leguminosarum.

3.4.5.

## Control of Native Gene
Expression
There are applications where it is necessary to
control the expression
of native genes in the genome. This control can be connected to the
output of a genetic sensor or circuit. One example would be to implement
dynamic control over metabolism to shunt carbon flux into a different
pathway or to shift from growth to a production phase.
,
 This ability could also be used to turn phenotypes on or off, such
as the utilization of different carbon sources. Lastly, it can also reduce the expression of a gene that
would be lethal if knocked out completely.
3.4.5.1.

## Regulating
Host Transcription
Programmable DNA-binding domains can knock
down expression from the
genome by interfering with transcription. dCas9 is easy to re-program
to new sites as it can be targeted to different genes through the
design of gRNA (CRISPRi). This technique
can simultaneously target multiple genes by transcribing an arrays
of multiple gRNAs.
,
 dCas9 cannot be used to target
any site in the genome because of the need for a PAM site; however,
new variants of Cas9 are available that have broader PAM specificities,
thus allowing gRNAs to be designed for more positions. CRISPRi has been used in soil bacteria, including Bacillus subtilis,
,

Streptomyces
coelicolor,
Streptomyces
venezuelae,
Pseudomonas
putida,
,−

Pseudomonas fluorescens,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
,

Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Acinetobacter baylyi.

A limitation in using dCas9 in non-model hosts is
toxicity. It can arise from transient
nonspecific binding of dCas9 to the chromosome even in the absence
of gRNAs.
,
 dCas9 is also a large (>1,000
amino acid) protein that burdens cellular resources when expressed.
The expression of dCas9 in Pseudomonas putida, for
example, has been shown to lead to growth defects.

dCas9 can also be used to activate gene expression
(CRISPRa) by
fusing it to an activating domain that recruits RNAP, thereby turning
on a promoter. Because the activating domain must interact with the
host RNAP, CRISPRa has been more difficult to move across species.
CRISPRa has been used in Streptomyces venezuelae
 and Pseudomonas putida.

TALEs and ZFPs can also be programmed
to target specific DNA sequences
by concatenating DNA-binding domains ( .).
,
 They are
often used in eukaryotes to control native gene expression and have
been used in bacteria in both repressing and activating capacities.
,−

 However, they have not seen widespread adoption
in bacteria. Their use is hindered in prokaryotes because of their
large and repetitive gene structure, low affinity, and large DNA binding
sites that are difficult to place within promoters.

3.4.5.2.

## Post-transcriptional Control
Gene expression can be
knocked down post-transcriptionally using
small RNAs (sRNAs).
,
 They can be designed to bind
to a target mRNA via base pairing and downregulate gene expression
by blocking the RBS so that it cannot recruit the ribosome. The dynamic range of the knockdown is tuned
by modulating the affinity of the sRNA to its target mRNA or by tuning
the sRNA expression levels.
,
 These strategies
have been used to balance gene expression of multiple proteins simultaneously. sRNA can be advantageous over CRISPRi as it
exerts lower burden on the cells. sRNAs have been used in soil bacteria,
including Pseudomonas putida,
Bacillus subtilis,
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, and Streptomyces coelicolor.

3.4.5.3.

## Targeted
Protein Degradation
Proteases can tune gene expression by
controlling protein stability.
For example, Lon protease selectively degrades proteins that are tagged
by the mf-ssrA peptide. The most well-known
is the “LVA tag,” which requires the amino acid sequence
RPAANDENYALVA be added to the C-terminus of
the targeted protein. The LVA tag corresponds
to a half-life of 40 min for GFP, and by changing the last three amino
acids, this can be tuned between 60 to 110 min for GFP.
,
 It can make the half-life even shorter (4 min) for repressors and
it has been used to accelerate the response speed of genetic circuits.

Libraries of degradation tags corresponding
to differing half-lives have been characterized in Bacillus
subtilis and Pseudomonas putida and their
activity is likely conserved amongst a wide range of bacteria.
,
 Encoding mutated variants of the LVA tag on target proteins in tandem
with inducible expression of the mf-lon protease can modulate steady-state
protein levels by at least 10-fold in both Gram-negative (Escherichia coli) and Gram-positive (Lactococcus
lactis) bacteria.

Protein
degradation can also be controlled through the inducible
expression of proteases that expose a N-terminal degron on the target
protein. An orthogonal set of proteases
sourced from Potyvirus, including TEV protease, were
used to activate gene expression by exposing a degron tag on a repressor. While this strategy has not been applied to
non-model bacteria, the strategy should be widely applicable as N-terminal
degron sequences are highly conserved across bacterial species and
even with bacteria-derived eukaryotic organelles. Proteases can also be used to induce protein activity.
For example, the antimicrobial peptide abaecin accumulated extracellularly
in Bacillus subtilis after fusing the peptide to
a TEV protease site and a secretory transit signal from β-glucanase. Activation of abaecin required the expression
of TEV protease, which was slowly released into culture after IPTG
induction, to remove the transit tag.

3.5.

## Ensuring Reliable Field Performance
Engineered microbial
inoculants must operate as expected in the field,
where there is nutrient limitation, competition, and extreme environmental
variability. Temperature, oxygen, desiccation,
and osmolarity all differ depending on the season, timing of the day,
soil type and weather. The microbial composition of bacteria and fungi,
as well as viruses and animals all vary by climate, region, and plants/animals.
−

 Carrying a recombinant function places energetic and material burdens
on the cell that will compound with the growth effects from these
stresses. Therefore, engineered constructs need to be designed to
minimize burden, maintain expression levels across variable conditions,
and limit breakage due to evolutionary forces.
3.5.1.

## Minimizing
Resource Burden
Cells
have finite resources, including RNAPs, ribosomes, tRNAs, amino acids
and other metabolites, nucleotides, and ATP. When a synthetic genetic system is added to the cell, the
expression of recombinant proteins draws from the same resources,
placing pressure on processes needed for maintenance, growth, and
survival. This effect has been empirically quantified, where the expression
of recombinant proteins leads to a corresponding increase in doubling
time. The impact is continuous, where
more burden leads to slower growth. Beyond just growth, burden negatively
impacts many processes in the cell.
,
 It also
invokes evolutionary incentive for mutations to “break”
the functions encoded by the recombinant DNA. It can also cause synthetic sensors and circuits to function
errantly and metabolic pathways to decrease product titer.
,

Burden could impact the performance of an inoculant in the
field by reducing its persistence, ability to colonize and compete,
or reducing the expression of a functional pathway. Methods to quantify
burden could be used to predict its impact on performance in the field.
Burden is specific to the recombinant DNA being introduced and the
species. It depends on which genetic parts are present and genes expressed
and can vary over time for a dynamic system.
Protein expression
requires resources and the number of proteins,
their length, the amino acid content and expression level all affect
burden.
,
 Enzymes can either reduce or
increase the burden based on their energetic and materials needs.
For example, nitrogenase requires approximately 45 ATP per N2 fixed (all in) and, if produced constitutively, the bacterium is
quickly outcompeted in the field. In
contrast, a recombinant phenol degradation pathway in Pseudomonas
contributes 9 ATP and provides carbon metabolites to central metabolism,
making the pathway stable in the field over years.
−

There are few means to predict or experimentally quantify
the burden
imposed by a recombinant system.
−

 Such a measure could
be used to compare alternative designs or to predict the impact of
a system on evolutionary robustness. To this end, a “capacity
monitor” was developed to measure burden through the constitutive
expression of a fluorescent reporter from the Escherichia
coli genome. Increased burden
causes the fluorescence to go down. Thus, it serves as a metric for
cellular resource availability and correlated well with the stress
caused by the induction of heterologous proteins or high-burden metabolic
pathways.
Measurements of transcriptional and translational
burden can also
be made using RNA-seq and ribosome profiling to estimate the number
of RNAP and ribosomes that are available to the cell and what fraction
are being diverted to the synthetic system being carried.
,
 Ribosome availability in particular has been linked to the rate
of growth and low concentrations can lead to a sharp increase in the
system noise.
−

3.5.1.1.

## Sensor/Circuit Design
to Reduced Burden
Feedback loops ( ) can be used to maintain the burden
below a desired
threshold. A synthetic system may have different states of expression
that have different degrees of burden. For example, different states
of a genetic circuit have different combinations of recombinant TFs
expressed.
,,
 The burden could also go up due to shifts in the cell state or environmental
fluctuations. The Escherichia coli heat shock promoter
has been used to respond in real-time to changes in the burden imposed
on a cell. Its output was used to tune
down recombinant gene expression using CRISPRi ( ). If the burden ever
gets too large for the cell to handle, the feedback acts to decrease
it to acceptable levels.
TFs used to build genetic sensors can
also impart burden, especially when overexpressed, due to non-specific
DNA binding. In natural regulatory
networks, TFs often have a negative feedback loop where they downregulate
their own expression. This principle
can also be applied for synthetic sensors.
,
 For example, to reduce the toxicity of a TF that increased deoxyviolacein
production, a negative feedback loop was incorporated into the design.

3.5.1.2.

## Metabolic Engineering
for Reduced Burden
In addition to enzyme expression, metabolic
pathways can impart
additional burden through the accumulation of toxic intermediates.
One approach to correcting this problem is to screen expression libraries
to properly balance enzyme expression so that intermediates do not
accumulate.
,
 For example, a strain of Pseudomonas putida used for environmental remediation of
ethylene glycol showed reduced growth at high substrate concentrations
due to the toxic intermediate glycolaldehyde.
,
 This burden was corrected by rebalancing enzyme expression.
Burden can also occur as the result of the accumulation of intermediates
that are toxic. Sensors can respond to these metabolites and reduce
the expression of upstream enzymes until the intermediates are cleared.
,−

Bacillus subtilis engineered
to make N-acetylglucosamine experienced low yields due to the accumulation
of such an intermediate. A sensor was
built to use a ribozyme that reacts to this intermediate and degrades
pathway mRNA in response, thereby decreasing the burden.

3.5.1.3.

## Resource Allocation in Nutrient-Poor Soil
and during Inoculant Storage
Soil can be nutrient poor compared
to the rich media conditions where strains are evaluated. Additionally,
soil has more environmental fluctuations requiring stress responses
and nutrient limitations that require different pathways to be turned
on under different conditions. There
is a trade-off between how cells divide resources between ribosomal
synthesis (fast-growing) and synthesis of various metabolic enzymes
(more efficient).
−

Escherichia coli strains
with fewer copies of rRNA genes were favored under low nutrient conditions and low rRNA copy number is not disadvantageous
under native conditions in soil. Only
under conditions dominated by an abundant substrate led to the favoring
of rRNA copy number for fast growth. Downregulating the growth rate by reducing RNAP expression in Escherichia coli led to increased production of glycerol,
indicative of a more efficient metabolism. Therefore, tuning down the growth rate by reducing transcription
or translation machinery may be beneficial for the performance of
a bio-inoculant in the field.
Bio-inoculants often must be stored
under conditions that are detrimental to the bacteria. It could be
in a consumer package held at room temperature for months, as a liquid
formulation, freeze-dried power, or coated seed. The ability for a
microbe to stay viable during storage would be beneficial to their
activity in the field. Long-term stationary phase cultures of Escherichia coli are dominated by those that have gained
a growth advantage through mutations in global TFs, amino acid transporters,
and RNAP core subunits.
−

 When stored under nutrient-limiting conditions, various mutations
in global regulatory networks governing stress response (RpoS) and
metabolism (LRD) have been observed in the soil bacteria Pseudomonas and Xenorhabdus.
,
 Transferring
these mutations to wild-type strains confers the same growth advantages
in nutrient-limited conditions, suggesting that these mutations may
be a transferrable genotype to confer advantage in stationary phase.
,

3.5.2.

## Building “Evolution Hard”
Chassis
Microbes are under constant evolutionary pressure
in the environment. Their genomes, and recombinant genetic systems,
change over time due to mutations, homologous recombination, and transposons.
,
 When these changes impart a growth advantage, they rapidly take
over a population.
−

 While it is not possible to eliminate evolutionary
forces completely in a living cell, there are design strategies to
reduce the number of mechanisms for mutagenesis and increase the lifetime
of the engineered function. Note that
engineered cells do not have to be robust forever; rather, they only
need to stay viable for the time required to impart their function
in the field, which differs depending on the application. A microbial
insecticide may only have to function for days or weeks whereas microbial
nitrogen fixation needs to remain viable for months during a growing
season.
3.5.2.1.

## Blocking Recombination
Homologous
recombination is a common mechanism for recombinant DNA to be disrupted.
In Escherichia coli, if a design has repetitive DNA
sequences that share about 20 contiguous base pairs, then homologous
recombination is likely to occur. In Bacillus subtilis, this increases to 70 base pairs. This was a big problem early in Synthetic
Biology, because many characterized part libraries were based on a
common scaffold (e.g., mutants of a promoter core)
or there were few alternatives for commonly used parts (e.g., terminators). Thus, designs had repetitive sequences and were prone
to disruption due to recombination.
A simple solution is to
not reuse parts in a design. To avoid reuse, part libraries have been
constructed that have many variations of commonly-needed parts.
,,,
 Still, in large designs, even if parts are not explicitly reused,
then there could be regions of sufficient sequence identity to promote
recombination. To address this problem, the EFM (evolutionary failure
mode) Calculator scores sequences for stability by searching for repeats
that could cause HR and multiple repeats of short sequences that could
cause DNA polymerase slippage during replication.

3.5.2.2.

## Eliminating Transposons
in the Genome
Transposons are another means by which genetic
systems can be disrupted.
Some transposons have specific sequence preferences for insertion
sites. There are various ways in which these sites could inadvertently
find their way into a design. For instance, genes are often recoded
using codon optimization software to move them into a new organism
or to increase expression ( ).
,
 However,
these sequences are rarely screened for the presence of transposon
integration sequences. In one case, the codon optimization of nitrogenase
genes in Klebsiella oxytoca led to the accidental
insertion of one transposon insertion site in one gene, which rendered
early designs non-functional.

Evolutionary forces can also indirectly reduce the function of a
recombinant system without mutating it. Indirect mutations could reduce
flux into a metabolic pathway, reduce protein expression, or change
the copy number of a plasmid. This effect occurred in Escherichia
coli when passaged for 90 hours with a plasmid that imparted
a growth defect. Over time, it was
noticed that cells grew better and the function encoded on the plasmid
declined. However, sequencing revealed that the plasmid was unmutated.
Subsequently, it was discovered that a transposon mutation to the
genome-encoded native pcnB reduced the copy number
of the ColE1 plasmid, thus reducing the expression of the recombinant
genes it carried.

There are several
methods to reduce transposon mutagenesis. First,
designs could be scanned for common insertion sequences found in databases
such as ISFinder. However, insertion
sequences are often unknown, particularly for more wild strains. Second,
native transposases have been targeted using CRISPRi, which reduced
the frequency that recombinant DNA was disrupted, even when burdensome
on the cell. Third, transposon-related
genes can be removed from the genome. This process was completed for Escherichia coli to create strains where all mobile DNA
elements were removed. These strains
stabilized the genome against insertions and deletions under selective
pressure. The genomes of the soil species Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomonas putida, Pseudomonas chlororaphis, Pseudomonas chlororaphis, Pseudomonas taiwanensis, and Acinetobacter baylyi have also been reduced, including genes
associated with mobile DNA elements, to improve genetic stability
( ) ( ).
,,,−

 
3.5.2.3.

## Linking a Synthetic
Function to Cell Survival
Stability can also be improved
by “entangling” two
genes. Entanglement refers to the encoding of an entire gene within
the open reading frame of another gene, but in a different translational
frame. This organization is a common motif in natural genetics, particularly
in bacteriophage genomes.
To stabilize a recombinant gene, it
can be entangled with a native essential gene that has been deleted
form the genome. If the recombinant
gene is lost, then the essential gene is lost as well and the cells
will die. Computational methods have been developed to aid the design
of entangled genes through codon selection and register shifting the
gene orientations. In an entangled system, 13% of mutations within
the entangled recombinant gene led to a >10-fold decrease in growth
rate and were thus selected against. The entangled gene was stable
for over 150 generations, whereas the unentangled gene was disrupted
after only 50.

3.5.2.4.

## Selection of Spore-Forming Species
Species that form
spores have natural mechanisms to preserve genetic
integrity while persisting for long times in the environment. Spores
form a hard shell that protects against radiation, UV, desiccation,
and many other stresses. It has also
shown to preserve the integrity of the encoded DNA sequence, including
recombinant genes that are being carried. The spore-forming strain Bacillus frigotolerans was engineered to express a recombinant gene. This strain was mixed with dirt and incubated under ambient,
non-sterile conditions for two years. Isolates retained the ability
to express GFP. Furthermore, the recombinant gene did not mutate after
this extended period of incubation. Indeed, only six mutations occurred
throughout the genome.
Spore formation machinery can be manipulated
to alter a strain’s persistence in the environment. Placing
the Streptomyces sporulation regulator WblA under
the control of a sensor made sporulation inducible, whereas its deletion
abolished sporulation altogether. Bacterial
and fungal spores engineered to contain a unique nucleotide barcode
can be used in agricultural supply chains for tracking and origin
determination.
,
 For this purpose, Bacillus
subtilis spores can be made unable to germinate by deleting
receptors and cell wall lytic enzymes.

3.5.3.

## Design to Block Horizontal Gene Transfer
Bacteria continuously exchange DNA to and from the environment. Sometimes, it is taken up an incorporated
into the genome of the new host, in a process known as horizontal
gene transfer (HGT). This transfer is a frequent event in soil and
rhizosphere.
−

 Some soil bacteria have mechanisms to actively
import external DNA into their cytoplasm, including Bacillus
subtilis, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, Acinetobacter baylyi, Azotobacter
vinelandii, and Pseudomonas stutzeri.
,−

 The rate of transfer is high on plant surfaces; while 10–8 to 10–5 transconjugants per donor were obtained
in bulk soil, frequencies up to 0.1 were measured on root surfaces.
,

DNA can also be spread between bacteria by phages.
−

 Phage transfer in contaminated soil led to the proliferation of
genes involved in arsenic detoxification. The chances of HGT are increased when the transferred genes confer
a growth advantage. An example of this occurred when an engineered
phenol-degrading Pseudomonas putida strain was released
into the environment. The recombinant plasmid encoding the phenol
degrading genes could be found in at least nine Pseudomonad isolates
six years later.

Interkingdom
DNA transfer from the plant to its resident bacteria
can occur. For example, a recombinant antibiotic resistance gene was
found to transfer from engineered tobacco to Acinetobacter and Ralstonia species. The likelihood that these transfer events will lead to the functional
expression of the gene are much lower because the signals for transcription
and translation are so divergent between eukaryotes and prokaryotes.
3.5.3.1.

## Measuring Horizontal Gene Transfer
Tools have been
developed to quantify the extent of horizontal gene
transfer in an environment. Traditionally, this has required the direct
measurement of DNA by PCR or the use of antibiotic markers or fluorescent
reporters. A reporter enzyme that allows the detection of DNA transfer
without recovering the bacteria is MHT ( ), which produces a gas that can be measured
in a soil sample by GC-MS. The rate
of transfer was quantified in soil by introducing a donor strain encoding
the MHT gene on a conjugative plasmid.
HGT can also be measured
using CRISPR machinery ( ). The spacer acquisition proteins (Cas1
and Cas2) integrate short DNA sequences into CRISPR arrays that are
later transcribed and processed into RNA that guides Cas9 to its targets. When expressed in Escherichia coli, these genes record imported DNA sequences into an array ( A). After recording the DNA
transfer events, the bacteria can be recovered and sequenced to obtain
the transfer history. This system was used to track the movement of
non-replicative plasmids and mobile genetic elements in fecal material.

 
3.5.3.2.

## Designing for Reduced Horizontal Gene
Transfer
Engineering strategies to reduce the frequency of
HGT have been developed. These methods work either directly by stopping
entry or integration or by making it unreadable by the receiver species.
One approach is to disrupt native genes known to facilitate HGT. The
deletion of genes that impact competence decreased the rate of escape
from a phosphate auxotrophy and plasmid mobility.
−

 Placing conjugation genes under arabinose-inducible control led
to a 3000-fold reduction in HGT. The
activity of conjugation proteins can also be inhibited by expressing
recombinant antibodies, as demonstrated with a relaxase that initiates
and terminates DNA transfer.

Another approach is to harness the natural function of CRISPR machinery,
which is to block foreign DNA to enter the cell. An engineered human
gut commensal Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron strain
was made auxotrophic for thymidylate to improve biocontainment. However, thyA transfer from the natural microbiota led to a high
rate of escape. Introducing a CRISPR system targeting the wild-type
allele thyA into the engineered strain destroyed
the gene if it entered the cell, thus preventing escape ( B).

The introduction of a recombinant strain
into the environment also
has the potential to have its DNA transferred to native species. Plasmids
can be easily transferred between hosts. One way to reduce plasmid
transfer is to move the replication genes from the plasmid to the
genome, so that the plasmid can only replicate in that host. Plasmids can also be prevented from spreading
by encoding a toxin gene on the plasmid and then encoding the antitoxin
gene in the host genome. If the plasmid
transfers, then it would kill the new host. Gene entanglement ( ) can also
be used to block gene transfer. If there is a gene-of-interest that
encodes a function that one does not want to be transferred, it can
be entangled with a toxin gene and the anti-toxin gene encoded far
away in the genome. This strategy reduced
the rate of transfer of the recombinant gene by 3000-fold.
One
way to reduce the likelihood of gene transfer is to degrade
the recombinant or genomic DNA after the function has been performed
in the field. CRISPR nucleases can be targeted to the genome of the
strain or synthetic DNA to degrade it before it can be taken up by
native bacteria in the microbiota. By targeting Cas9 to plasmids or
regions of the genome, up to 108-fold less DNA was present
after cell death. Similarly, the frequency
of a recombinant plasmid was reduced >108-fold following
the induction of a Cas3 nuclease targeted to a plasmid.

The ability to de novo synthesize whole bacterial
genomes ( ) has led to radical re-designs to block horizontal DNA transfer.
Genome-scale changes make it impossible for the host DNA to be read
by other cells in the environment and vice versa for environmental
DNA to be read in the host. These changes involve comprehensive alterations
in the codon usage or parts that only work in the host (e.g., RBS sequences that require a synthetic rRNA). A recoded Escherichia coli strain was built using MAGE that removed
all instances of the UCG/UCA serine codons, as well the UAG stop codon,
by replacing them with alterative serine/stop codons. The UCG/UCA serine codon were reassigned to
encode alanine, histidine, leucine, or proline codons by expressing
chimeric tRNAs engineered to recognize UCG/UCA.
,
 Genes that transferred into this host that contained these codons
would put the newly encoded amino acid where serine should be, thus
causing them to misfold and lose function. When a gene was transferred
from the “recoded” Escherichia coli to a new host, a serine would be translated in place of the correct
alanine, histidine, leucine, or proline causing misfolding and preventing
HGT. Similar approaches can block phage infections, which can facilitate
HGT ( ).
Orthogonal ribosomes (o-ribosomes) recognize alternative
RBSs by
mutating the 16S rRNA sequence that binds the SD sequence. Recombinant genes downstream of these alternative
RBS sequences can only be expressed in host strains containing the
o-ribosome and are nonfunctional in wild-type microbes.
,
 When the strain does not have the o-ribosome rRNA, there is a >99%
reduction in expression of genes with this SD.

3.5.4.

## Engineering Phage Resistance
Phage
are viruses that infect bacteria. In
rich agricultural soil, there are up to 1010 phage/g soil. Phage play a major role in shaping the soil
microbiome.
−

 They can drive HGT between bacteria.
,
 They can reduce the abundance of beneficial microbes or impair their
function upon release in the field.
,
 For example,
the ability of a bio-control strain based on Pseudomonas fluorescens to protect cucumber plants from infection was reduced by natural
bacteriophage ΦGP100. Therefore,
phage pose a barrier to the use of GMMs for agricultural applications.
Hence, there have been efforts to create “phage hard”
chassis that can resist infection.
Bacteria have evolved diverse
phage resistance mechanisms that either prevent virus binding and
entry or target the viral genome once it has entered the cell. Bacteria can be engineered or evolved in the
lab in several ways to reduce phage adsorption to their surface. These
include altering, disguising, modifying, or masking receptors and
the use of decoy outer membrane structures. For example, mutations
in the Vibrio cholerae OmpU receptor increases phage
resistance. The expression of decoy
receptors that bind phage acts as a sponge to decrease productive
infections.

Steps can also be
taken to block the injection of the phage genome
into a bacterium. Restriction-modification systems are a mechanism
used by bacteria to destroy foreign DNA from different exogenous sources.
Modification enzymes chemically modify DNA sequence motifs, marking
them as “self,” and restriction enzymes cut the motif
if unmodified. Because foreign DNA is unmodified, it will be degraded
when it is taken up by the cell. Transferring heterologous restriction-modification
systems into a host improves its phage resistance. For example, transferring
the restriction-modification system DISARM (Defense Island System
Associated with Restriction–Modification) from Bacillus
paralicheniformis 9945a into Bacillus subtilis BEST7003 conferred resistance to seven phage across three families.

Sometimes referred to as the bacterial
“immune system,”
CRISPR arrays encoded in the genome are used by bacteria to defend
against phage. CRISPR enables bacteria
to “remember” infections by integrating short sequences
from the phage genome into the CRISPR array. The array is transcribed
and processed into gRNAs that direct Cas nucleases to cut matching
DNA sequences. Bacteria with CRISPR
systems can be engineered to resist particular phage by transforming
phage-derived DNA sequences so that they are processed and added to
the CRISPR array.

Transferring
a CRISPR system into a new host protects it from the
phage whose DNA were encoded in the array. One was transferred into Bacillus subtilis and
reduced susceptibility to the phage DNA in the array by 106-fold. It is also possible modify
the native CRISPR systems in the strain-of-interest. Inserting spacer
sequences into a native CRISPR array resulted in resistance to the
phage. Note that the number of potential
phages in the environment is much larger than can be protected against
in an engineered CRISPR array. Metagenomic sequencing suggests the
average bacterium contains 20-40 spacers and the largest number of
spacers in a natural host is 587 in Haliangium ochraceum.
,

De novo genome synthesis
( and ) offers an opportunity to design
bacteria
that are immune to phage. Codons can
be removed or reassigned throughout the genome en mass, causing any viral genes that enter the cell to be mistranslated.
This whole genome replacement strategy has only been accomplished
in Escherichia coli.
,,,,,−

 A genetically-recoded E. coli strain was engineered
by replacing all instances of the amber stop codon (UAG) with the
synonymous UAA codon, as well as knock out the UAG release factor
1. The UCG and UCA serine codons were then swapped with the synonymous
AGC and AGU serine codons, as well as eliminating the genes encoding
tRNASer
UGA and tRNASer
CGA. The final strain contained 18,214 recoded codons and 482 additional
mutations resulting from adaptive laboratory evolution to recover
growth rate. Phage transcripts containing the recoded amber or sense
codons would cause ribosome stalling and halt phage infection. This
strain was resistant to a cocktail of phages (λ, P1vir, T4,
T6, T7).

However, it was shown
that on rare occasions, viruses can overcome
this genetic recoding strategy by carrying tRNAs to limit dependence
on host translation machinery (up to 27 have been observed). Expressing
chimeric tRNAs that encoded the missing UCG/UCA serine anticodons,
but carried alanine, histidine, leucine, or proline resulted in the
mistranslation of serine codons as the swapped amino acid and a reduction
in phage replication ( ). There is an ongoing effort to build a 57-codon E. coli strain, with the UAG (stop), AGG (Arg), AGA (Arg), AGC (Ser), AGU
(Ser), UUG (Leu) and UUA (Leu) codons replaced, which should be resistant
to all known coliphages
,

 
3.5.5.

## Safety
Switches
When an engineered
microbe is released into the field, it is desirable to be able to
control its activity in space and time.
,,
 Temporal control would program
the loss of the microbe in the environment after a season, a number
of days has passed, or after a preprogrammed number of cell divisions.
Microbes could also be controlled with respect to space, where if
they exit a defined area or proximity to a plant, they die. To implement
this control, “safety switches” (also referred to in
the literature as “kill switches”) have been designed
to be carried in the genome.
Auxotrophy containment connects
cell division to the presence of a small molecule. Therapeutic gut
bacteria, where the deletion of dapA rendered Escherichia coli unable to growth without an external source
of DAP.
,
 DAP could be fed to the patient,
like a drug, keeping the bacteria viable in the body. After the patient
stops consuming DAP, or if the bacteria are released into the environment,
the bacteria cannot continue to replicate. A similar approach was
taken to make the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC7942 require phosphite for growth ( C).
,
 Two endogenous phosphate
importers were deleted to prevent cell growth on phosphate as a sole
P source. The strain then engineered to have a phosphite importer
and an enzyme that reduces phosphite to phosphate, allowing for the
uptake and incorporation of P. Phosphite is rare in soil and needs
to be spread over the desired area to promote the growth of the engineered
bacteria. Auxotrophy-based safety switches can be broken when the
genes required for replication are acquired from the environment.
The use of multiple auxotrophies reduces this effect by making cells
dependent on more than one small molecule for growth.

Sometimes, it is difficult to find a
unique and required molecule
that is practical to spread over an area for microbial containment.
An alternative is to connect a genetic sensor for a molecule to an
antitoxin that inactivates a constitutively-expressed toxin. When
the bacteria leave the contained area, the molecule is not present,
the antitoxin stops being made, and the cells die. For example, a
safety switch in Pseudomonas fluorescens used an
IPTG sensor to control an antitoxin so that the cells die in the absence
of IPTG. The signal does not have to
be a small molecule; safety switches have been made using sensors
that respond to pH and temperature.
−

 This approach was
taken to build a containment system for the soil bacterium Acinetobacter sp. Tol5 engineered to remediate toluene ( ). An essential protein (BapA)
was placed under the control of a toluene sensor so that the bacteria
stopped dividing after exiting an environment containing toluene.
 Integrating multiple signals
leads to higher specificity
in defining
an environment. Logic was used to build a safety switch for Escherichia coli Nissle designed to perform a therapeutic
function in the mouse gut. It was desired
that cells die after exiting the animal. To sense that they were no
longer in the body, an OR gate was designed to react to the absence
of a chemical fed to the animal in the food or when the temperature
drops below 32°C. Similarly, the “Passcode” switch
uses a logic circuit to identify the environment by integrating signals
to keep the switch off with high galactose and cellobiose and no IPTG. Outside this environment, the switch flips
and a pair of toxin genes are expressed, causing a 107-fold
decline in viable cells after only 6 hours. Using more functionally-distinct
toxins reduces the prevalence of escape mutants. The reliability of a safety switch can be improved by using
multilayered regulatory control at both the transcriptional and translational
levels of the essential or toxin gene to reduce the likelihood of
breakage by mutations. Note, however,
that the use of more complex regulatory control also increases the
ways mutations can lead to escapees.
Synthetic autotrophies
can be introduced by making cells require
a non-natural amino acid to grow. The re-coding of the bacterial genome
using MAGE can be used as a platform to make the species dependent
on a synthetic amino acid for growth.
,
 If a codon
is freed, then a new tRNA can be introduced that incorporates an unnatural
amino acid not found in nature. If this amino acid is not provided,
then the proteins that use it are not made and the cells do not grow.
This approach was taken for three essential genes in Escherichia
coli, which led to a drop in escapee frequencies to less
than the detection limit and no escapees appeared after a week of
growth.

Timers have been constructed,
where cells die after a defined number
of cell divisions once a signal is removed. A timer was built for Salmonella by knocking out two essential genes and placing
them under arabinose-inducible control.
−

 When cells are grown in the presence of arabinose, the essential
proteins are produced. But when the cells are moved to an environment
without arabinose, the essential proteins dilute by half with every
cell division and eventually cross a threshold where they can no longer
divide. The constraint on these timers is that there is little control
over the length of time or number of cell divisions before the bacteria
die. For applications in agriculture, one would want to be able to
tune the length of time bacteria survive in the field from days to
months (a season).

3.5.6.

## Synthetic Communities
(SynComs)
Using a community of species, rather than just
one, can impart several
advantages. First, multiple functions
can be combined into a product without having to stack them in a single
species, such as nutrient scavenging and growth promotion. Second,
consortia may have advantages in colonization a surface, such as a
leaf or root, and stopping the invasion of other species. Finally, stability against environmental fluctuations
can be improved by engineering linkages between the species, such
as metabolic interdependencies.
High-throughput screens can
identify artificial combinations of natural bacteria that enhance
a function-of-interest carried by one. A droplet assay encapsulated
19 soil isolates and 13 carbon sources to create 100,000 multispecies
communities. These were screened to
identify the combination that supported the highest concentration
of Herbaspirillum frisingense, a plant-growth-promoting
bacterium. Similarly, species from the maize rhizosphere were combined
to create a representative seven-species consortium to colonize maize
roots. Changes to the consortium composition
due to the removal of species pointed to the keystone species essential
the consortium stability and protection against invasion by plant
pathogens. Similar synthetic communities (SynComs) have been identified
to aid resistance against other pathogens, increase survival under
drought stress, inhibit fungal growth, serve as biosensors, promote
plant growth, and improve soil quality for various crops, including
cucumber, cabbage, maize and other crops.
,−

 Typically, these communities consist of designed combinations of
natural bacteria, rather than incorporating engineered variants.
Cooperation and competition between strains is important for a
community to colonize a plant and remain stable despite environmental
fluctuations. Stability refers to the
species surviving and maintaining their relative ratios. Environmental
fluctuations could be due to changes in nutrient availability, ambient
conditions, or invading organisms. A common cooperation strategy is
cross-feeding, where members of the community display complementary
autotrophies and require other members to produce the essential nutrient.
Cooperative interactions are stronger when the exchanged nutrients
are metabolically costly to biosynthesize. Cross-feeding communities, where each member feeds the other, can
be highly resistant to environmental fluctuations. An Escherichia
coli and Acinetobacter baylyi community
that exchanged gluconate and acetate returned to consistent equilibrium
ratios after changes to substrate availability or initial culture
conditions. Cross-feeding between an
ammonia-overproducing Rhodopseudomonas palustris and
an organic acid-secreting Escherichia coli was stable
over 30 generations and converged to a constant ratio even when the
starting ratios spanned 12 orders-of-magnitude. The cross-feeding circuits can be tuned to obtain different
equilibrium strain ratios.
,

Interactions
between consortium members can also be antagonistic,
where members create a stable community by competing for shared resources
or producing toxic metabolites targeting a species. While seemingly
contradictory, antagonistic interactions can aid stability by implementing
feedback to stop some strains from dominating the population. Antimicrobial
peptides have been used to establish interactions between Lactococcus lactis strains. This system was tuned to different community structures, including
amensalism (strain A inhibits strain B), competition (strain A and
strain B inhibit each other), and predation (stain A inhibits strain
B and strain B benefits A). A challenge with antimicrobial peptides
is that they can have a non-specific effect that is detrimental to
the natural microbiota.
An alternative approach is to place
a toxic gene under the control
of an inducer. In effect, this makes the inducer molecule an antimicrobial
only to the intended engineered strain. A quorum signal sensor has
been connected to the expression of an intracellular protein that
is toxic to the bacterium so that one species can downregulate another
without producing an antimicrobial. A quorum signalling circuit controlling the expression of lysis
proteins in two Escherichia coli strains with different
growth rates was used to achieve a stable population ratio.

3.5.7.

## In Situ Transformation
of Native Microbiota
Engineering a microbe to persist in
the rhizosphere or colonize
a plant surface can be difficult because the native microbiota blocks
initial infection and growth. This challenge has limited the development
of therapeutic bacteria that need to persist in the human gut to impart
their effect.
−

 Instead of trying to introduce a living
inoculant, the DNA payload encoding the desired function can be directly
transformed into the natural community already in residence. To this
end, tools for in situ genetic engineering have been
developed.
Conjugative systems have been adapted to deliver
DNA payloads in situ from a donor strain to microbial
communities in soil and animal microbiomes.
,
 In soil, a Pseudomonas putida donor transferred
DNA to Peudomonads in a complex microbial community for a month. For a bioremediation experiment, rather than
inoculating poplar trees, Burkholderia cepacia was
used to transfer a plasmid containing a toluene degradation pathway
to natural poplar endophytes. To remediate
petroleum from soil, Escherichia coli donors were
used to transfer degradation pathways to native bacteria. After two months, the donor was undetectable
whereas the pathway continued to propagate in native species. Similarly,
to clean up phenol pollutants, an engineered Pseudomonas putida strain containing a degradation pathway on a plasmid was introduced
in the environment. Seven years later,
the inoculant was undetectable but the pathway persisted in other
species due to HGT.

The transfer
of recombinant genes to a native community could be
advantageous for the long-term maintenance of the functional DNA payload
in the environment, but could also pose challenges for the uncontrolled
spread of recombinant DNA. Therefore, it would be useful to knock
out genes to prevent the continued transfer of recombinant DNA. This
approach was taken to control a conjugative system based on the Bacillus subtilis integrative and conjugative element 1
(ICE). ICE has been shown to have a
wide species range and high conjugation efficiency and can transfer
a DNA payload into multiple species residing in the soil. To reduce
the possibility for the continued transfer of the DNA payload, the
secretion system needed to transfer DNA between cells was separated
from the DNA payload to be transferred. In addition, the Bacillus
subtilis donor strain was engineered to contain an auxotrophy
so that it cannot propagate once introduced into the environment.
This system, called XPORT ( ), was shown to transfer a DNA payload
into multiple soil strains residing in artificial soil ( ).
An approach
that encourages propagation is MAGIC, a DNA conjugation
method capable of transferring DNA payloads into both Gram-negative
and Gram-positive species in situ. The Escherichia coli donor was made auxotrophic
to ensure that it cannot persist once released, but the introduced
DNA can continue to transfer between bacteria in the environment.
It transfers a broad-host range plasmid that contains a transposase
to integrate the DNA payload into the recipient's genome. The
MAGIC
donor containing a DNA payload was fed to a mouse and directly transformed
resident bacterial communities in its gut. It was shown to be able
to conjugate into members of the Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria,
Fusobacteria, and Bacteroidetes phyla while residing in the gut.
The in situ delivery of the DNA payload can be
targeted to specific species and specific genomic sites. An engineered
phage encoding dCas9 and targeting sgRNA was used to deliver payload
DNA specifically to Escherichia coli residing in
a mouse gut. Within a complex community,
CRISPR-guided transposases ( ) can be targeted to specific species
and genomic locations. This strategy
was used to disrupt a native gene in the soil strains Klebsiella
michiganensis and Pseudomonas simiae.

3.6.

## Accelerating the DBTL Cycle for Agricultural
Bacteria
As a field, Synthetic Biology has focused on accelerating
the engineering of biology, often articulated as the Design-Build-Test-Learn
(DBTL) cycle.
,
 In , it was described with respect to plants,
where the slow steps are usually transformation and growth, leading
to intrinsically slow cycles. For microbes, which can grow to saturation
in hours, the cycle time is order-of-magnitude more rapid. Methods
for model organisms, such as Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, have been developed specifically
to automate the design process to make many variations of pathways
or genomes that can then be screened at high-throughput, producing
the datasets required to create AI/ML models to drive the next round
of design. So-called “BioFoundries”
have emerged in industry and academia that have robotic automation
pipelines for strain construction and software needs to guide the
processes.
,
 These can be used to drive
the cycle time down to weeks or even days. Reviews have been written
about these technologies;
,,,
 here, we focus on their application
to soil bacteria or pathways of agricultural relevance.
3.6.1.

## Computer Aided Design (CAD) for Microbes
CAD has become
a crucial driver of genetic engineering projects.
The software can be as simple as plasmid/genome editors and databases
of genetic parts to aid the selection of genetic parts. There are
various tools for biomolecular design, metabolic engineering, and
genetic circuit design. Increasingly, AI and ML aid with managing
the complexity of the systems. They can inform design choices based
on large sets of screening data. Generative AI is just beginning to
automatically compose the sequences of proteins, genetic systems,
plasmids, and even whole genomes.
,,
 The challenge remains that the deluge of tools available
are one-off software packages, and a complex project requires the
manual passaging of information between tools. Here, we review these
tools from the perspective of engineering agriculturally-relevant
bacteria.
3.6.1.1.

## Software to Accelerate the Design of Genetic
Systems and Genomes
The simplest software environments provide
a means to store genetic parts and visualize designs and some can
connect to simulators (genetic circuit dynamics, metabolic flux, etc.).
,−

 Databases for plasmid backbones and genetic parts for soil bacteria
are listed in . To date, the databases are over-populated with parts for model
organisms. As of 2023, the Registry of Standard Biological Parts had
47,000 entries.
−

 However, for soil microbes, there were only
300 for Pseudomonads, 200 for Bacillus subtilis,
and less than 10 for Klebsiella and Streptomyces, respectively. There are some parts databases that encompass taxa
relevant to agriculture, including Bacillus subtilis (SubtiWiki and DBTBS), Pseudomonads (PseudoCAP) and Streptomyces (StreptoBase). Note that these part databases only contain the sequences and
not the functional characterization necessary to inform CAD software.
Synthetic Biology has strived to make parts models easily shared
between groups. Several standards have been adopted as a result. The
Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) is a formal language for representing
a mathematical model of a biological system.
,
 It allows the model to be simulated across different simulation
platforms. The synthetic biology open language (SBOL) standardizes
genetic part sequences along with their functional information (and
visual glyphs using SBOLv).
−

 The CAD software iBioSim brings all of this together allowing a
user to combine parts and parameterize and simulate the system performance
using models.

3.6.1.1.1.

## Mining and Design of Genetic Parts
Parts can be gleaned
from genomes. Computational tools would scan
genomes looking for signatures of a part. For example, promoters could
be identified using mathematical models of RNAP binding to the DNA
or bioinformatics/ML looking for sequence signatures. This software
could be used to stock a part library or identify promoters that could
serve as sensors by turning on under a particular set of conditions
( ).
Promoter prediction algorithms have been used for soil species, including Cyanobacteria, Pseudomonads, Bacilli, and Streptomyces.
−

 Libraries of natural terminators
can also be gleaned from genomes using TransTermHP, ARNold, and RNIE. They have been applied to the soil bacteria Pseudomonads, Bacilli, Streptomyces, and Acinetobacter.
,−

De novo part design tools use an underlying biophysical model to design
part sequences. The RBS Calculator
can design the sequence of an RBS to obtain a user-defined target
level of expression.
,
 Theoretically, it can be used
in any host where the 16S rRNA sequence is known, although there are
differences in other binding factors and spacing between the SD and
start sites that, when unknown, reduce its accuracy. It has been used
to design RBSs for soil species, including Pseudomonads, Streptomyces, Bacilli, and Rhizobia.
,,,
 Additional related computational
tools are available to create RBS libraries, operons, and promoters.
,,

3.6.1.1.2.

## Codon Optimization
Codon optimization
tools aid the transfer of genes between species
and can improve expression within the source species. The algorithms
need to have the codon usage table for the species. Many commercial tools can optimize genes for soil bacteria,
including Pseudomonas, Bacillus, Streptomyces, and Klebsiella.
−

 Codon optimization has had a key role in strain engineering of soil
bacteria. Pseudomonas putida KT2440 was engineered
to consume lignin in part through the codon optimization of a three-gene
pathway.
Streptomyces lividans was engineered to secrete greater quantities of a recombinant enzyme
by replacing rare codons.

Codon
optimization does not just increase expression by eliminating codons
that are rare or not present in the host. Rather, it also serves to
eliminate internal regulatory sequences, such as promoters, that can
reduce expression. This effect can
increase expression even when the gene is being expressed in the same
host.

3.6.1.1.3.

## Genome Editing
Software can
also design genome editing machinery to target particular
sequences while avoiding off-target insertions. For bacteria, these
tools are for the design of gRNAs to guide Cas9 to the target while
avoiding off-target sequences in the genome. The web-based tools CHOPCHOP, CRISPOR and CRISPRscan enable
users to design gRNAs for common soil bacteria and provide the option
to upload a reference genome.
,−

 Tools for more specialized CRISPR-based applications also exist,
such CRISPR-ERA (CRISPRi/CRISPRa) and CRISPR library designer (CRISPR
screens).
,

Software tools have also
been developed for whole genome engineering. MAGE requires degenerate
oligonucleotide pools to create thousands of different genome variants
( ).
,,
 MAGE Oligo Design Tool (MODEST)
suggests optimized MAGE oligos that perform a user-defined list of
genome modifications. These could encompass
RBS libraries or codon changes distributed throughout the genome.
The oligos are designed to avoid secondary structure and shared sequence
identify with off-target locations in the genome.

3.6.1.2.

## Predictive Metabolic Engineering
Metabolic modelling
seeks to predict genomic changes that will increase
the titer of a desired product.
,
 For the
optimization of agricultural strains, the objective could be to maximize
the production of a phytohormone, nutrient, or antimicrobial. To optimize
a product, the software predicts which enzymes can be knocked out
to redirect the carbon flux to the precursor of the product of interest.
Genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) capture a complete metabolic
map of an organism in the form of a stochiometric matrix that enumerates
reactions and metabolites. Each species
needs its own GEM and many are available in the BiGG and ModelSEED
databases.
,
 GEMs developed for species
of soil bacteria are listed in . There are software packages to aid the creation of
GEMs for species for which one is not yet available, requiring only
the genome sequence.
−

 MEMOTE is an automated tool that uses the standard SBML language
to assess the quality of GEMs, such as the presence of blocked reactions
(meaning they are predicted to have no flux) or incorrect stoichiometries.

 Once in hand, a GEM
is a powerful tool to direct genomic
changes
for metabolic engineering projects. Algorithms can predict the impact
of enzyme knockouts on the production of a desired metabolite.
,
 The metabolite could be the product or it could be the precursor
for a recombinant pathway. OptKnock has been used to increase auxin
production to improve plant growth promotion in Bacillus subtilis by increasing the precursor pool. OptReg and EMILiO can suggest gene over- or underexpression
,,,
 and k-OptForce can use kinetic information.

GEMs can also model metabolic phenomena relevant
to agriculture.
For example, the GEM for the soil bacterium Pseudomonas putida KT2440 was used to predict growth on different carbon sources. This information could be used to predict
which root exudates it can consume or sensitivities to soil composition.
Draft GEMs for over 200 soil microbes were constructed to investigate
how microbial physiology and environmental parameters impact soil
carbon cycling. These predictions inform
the optimization of the microbiome composition for soil carbon sequestration.
GEMs have been used to study the symbiosis between bacteria and legumes
at different stages of the biogenesis of nitrogen-fixating nodules.
,
 To guide the engineering of more competitive nitrogen-fixing rhizobia,
a GEM was used to identify key plant metabolites catabolized during
each stage of Rhizobium leguminosarum infection and
differentiation ( A). Transient
myo-inositol catabolism was predicted to be critical for invasion
and differentiation, but not rhizosphere colonization or nitrogen-fixation.
Flux through the core metabolism of differentiated Rhizobium
leguminosarum also differed from that predicted for other
differentiated rhizobia species, meaning flux optimization may need
to consider host-plant specific differences in nutrient availability.
 Software can also aid the design of recombinant
pathways. OptStrain
optimizes the production of a new or existing metabolite by recommending
recombinant enzyme additions. It can
predict the minimum number of non-native reactions required to convert
native metabolites to a target molecule and then suggest genes to
perform those reactions from an enzyme database. In some cases, the
pathway to a desired molecule may be unknown or it may be a molecule
not found anywhere in the natural world.
“Retrosynthesis”
refers to the artificial combination
of enzymes sourced from different pathways in a new way to create
a desired unnatural chemical. Algorithms
have been developed to automate the selection of enzymes based on
a molecule that a user wants to make.
−

 Enzymatic synthesis planning has also been
introduced into programs that have traditionally focused more on chemical
synthesis planning. Retrosynthetic
software could be used to build pathways to agrochemicals for which
no natural pathway exists.

3.6.1.3.

## Simulation
of Microbial Communities
In the field, microbes interact
with one another and organize into
consortia. These interactions can be through metabolic interdependencies,
antimicrobials, resource competition, quorum communication signals,
and other mechanisms.
 outlines
how cells can be engineered to enhance these interactions. Here, simulations
are described that can aid the design of consortia and predict their
spatial and temporal organization.
3.6.1.3.1.

## Microbes as Interacting Agents
Agent-based models simulate
microbial communities by individually
representing each microbe (an agent) and measuring how the system
progresses due to their interactions. NetLogo and FLAME provide generalized
software platforms for agent-based models.
−

 Each allows users to customize the behaviour and characteristics
of the microbe and environment. For example, NetLogo has been used
to model the dynamics of soil organic matter and predict levels of
CO2, soluble N, and mineralized N in the topsoil. It can make these predictions for different
soil types and also simulate plant-microbe interactions by defining
plant growth as dependent on nitrate concentrations in the soil.

Specialized agent-based modelling tools
have been developed for different biological processes. For example, some software packages simulate
2D and 3D bacterial colony and biofilm growth.
,−

 They have been used to map the spatial distribution of soil microbiomes
during rhizosphere colonization. The colonization of clover roots
by Escherichia coli expressing gfp was simulated and validated under different environmental conditions,
including pH and nutrient availability.

3.6.1.3.2.

## Metabolic Modelling of Microbial Communities
Genome-scale metabolic modelling ( ) has been scaled to simulate microbial
communities to make predictions regarding interconnected metabolic
networks amongst the residents.
,
 The symbiosis
between legumes and N-fixing bacteria was studied by combining a multi-tissue
GEM model of the legume Medicago truncatula with
a GEM of the diazotrophic symbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti.
−

 This model predicted that increasing nitrogen
fixation efficiency leads to diminishing returns to plant growth,
meaning engineering efforts to optimize nitrogen fixation in Rhizobia may have limited benefit to legume productivity
( B).
The metabolic modelling of consortia has been used to improve bioremediation.
A GEM for Arthrobacter, which can degrade the herbicide
atrazine, was combined with GEMs of other species to predict which
could enhance degradation when added to the consortium. This model suggested that Halomonas and Halobacillus, which do not degrade atrazine,
could enhance overall degradation by cross-feeding with Arthrobacter.
Arthrobacter can degrade atrazine and its coupling with these
strains increase the prevalence of this species. Other models have
predicted the impact of consortia on the degradation of naphthalene,
uranium, and methane.
−

AI tools can be applied
to build complex synthetic consortia. AutoCD
(Community Designer) uses a Bayesian approach to select the appropriate
set of interactions to achieve a user-defined mathematical representation
of the intended community behaviour. AI tools are being used to design consortia that benefit soil and
plant health.
−

 They can identify microbiome properties that most influence plant
health, growth, and productivity.
−

 A neural network was developed
to predict combinations of species that could aid phosphate accumulation
in Arabidopsis thaliana shoots.

3.6.1.4.

## Designing Genetic Sensors
and Circuits
Genetic circuits are difficult to design by
hand because they require
the balancing of TF expression, the combination of many genetic parts,
and their function is defined by multiple states ( ). Early simulations of
genetic circuits were based on solving ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) (e.g., using MATLAB) and bifurcation analysis
(e.g., AUTO).
,,,
 These models can predict how
design choices can impact the response, including the placement of
TF operators in a promoter and optimal expression levels that could
then guide the selection of an RBS from a characterized library.
−

 As an example in soil bacteria, these tools have been used to design
NOR gates in the soil bacterium Pseudomonas putida. Bifurcation algorithms, such as
AUTO, can analyse sets of ODEs to determine if a switch can have multi-stable
states (e.g., a bistable switch) or Hopf bifurcations
(oscillators).
,,
 These approaches are limited because they only provide qualitative
guidance, rather than making the design choice; for example, that
expression needs to be increased but not being able to identify a
specific RBS sequence to do so.
Design automation seeks to abstract
the problem so that a user can specify the circuit that they want
using a text-based language, like programming a computer.
,,,−

 The software then generates the DNA sequence encoding the desired
circuit. Cello allows a user to upload sensors and specify the desired
circuit operation using Verilog, the same language used to design
electronic circuits.
,
 The DNA sequence encoding the
circuit is designed by the software by combining gates provided in
a “user constraint file” (UCF). The first UCF was for E. coli using only NOR/NOT gates based on repressors. Subsequently, UCFs have been developed for Bacteroides and yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). The same Verilog-specified circuit can be designed for different
species simply by selecting it from a drop-down menu. Large circuits
have been built using Cello, including multi-input multi-output logic,
integrated toggle switches, and the recoding of entire computer chips
inside cells.
,
 Moving it to soil bacteria
would only require the development of UCFs for the species desired.

3.6.2.

## Automated Engineering of Agricultural Bacteria
DBTL cycles are being carried out by BioFoundries, where computer
aided design software informs the design, construction, and characterization
of engineered strains facilitated by automation and high-throughput
robotic platforms.
,,,
 AI/ML tools can be used to
interpret experimental outcomes to inform the next round of designs.
,
 The BioFoundry model has been adopted by industry to develop high-performance
strains to various commercial products.
,,
 Currently, BioFoundries tend
to focus on model bacteria and yeasts because of the ease of automating
their transformation and growth and the availability of part libraries.
However, they could expand into agriculturally relevant strains, such
as bacilli, pseudomonads, and filamentous fungi.
,
 An agricultural example is the rapid optimization of a strain to
produce the pesticide limonine.
,

A
fully automated pipeline was developed to produce the flavonoid (2S)-pinocembrin
in Escherichia coli, an antibacterial/antifungal
against plant pathogens. The pipeline
encompassed the design of the biosynthesis route (RetroPath), enzyme
selection (Selenzyme), sequence optimization (PartsGenie), construct
assembly, automated strain characterization, and ML to generate the
next round of designs. A similar semi-automated approach guided the
optimization of naringenin and other related plant flavanones in Escherichia coli.

3.6.3.

## Rapid Optimization of Pathways Using Inducible
Systems
A problem with using strain construction to test
variants is that it is relatively expensive and time consuming to
build each strain individually, thereby limiting the scale of the
libraries. This consideration is especially true when testing something
relatively simple, like varying enzyme expression levels to balance
flux through a metabolic pathway. Techniques have been developed in
order to find the optimum using a single strain using alternative
methods to scan through expression levels or to use RNAi or dCas9
to knock down combinations of native genes.

A simple approach is to use inducible systems to control each
gene and then test various combinations of inducers to identify the
optimum level. This requires that the strain contain multiple inducible
systems that do not interfere with each other. To this end, the “Marionette”
sensor array offers 12 orthogonal inducible systems, each of which
was optimized using directed evolution to increase the dynamic range,
reduce the off state, and increase orthogonality. Originally developed
in Escherichia coli, the sensors have been moved
into agriculturally-relevant bacteria, including Azorhizobium
calinodans, Azotobacter vinelandii, Pseudomonas
protogens PF-5, Pseudomonas stutzeri, Rhizobium sp. IRGB74, and Klebsiella variicola.
,
 They have been applied to optimize nitrogen fixation and herbicide/nitrification
inhibitor alkylresorcinol products. The challenge with using this
approach is that inducible systems may not scan a large enough range
of expression in a graded manner the concentration of inducers

3.6.4.

## Prototyping Genetic Designs in Cell-Free
Systems of Soil Bacteria
Cell-free protein synthesis (CFPS)
mixes contain the essential components for transcription and translation in vitro. They are made either
by lysing bacteria to make the mix or are prepared from the ground-up
by combining purified components required for transcription and translation.
DNA can be cloned or synthesized and added to the mixture and expression
measured using a fluorescent protein or mRNA reporter or using qRT-PCR.
CFPS mixes have been used as agricultural diagnostics; for example,
CFPS-based sensors have been used to measure water and soil pollution.
−

 The sensor is based on a regulatory protein that is included in
the CFPS mix and turns on gene expression when its signal is sensed.
CFPS mixes also offer the means to prototype a genetic part or
system before testing it in a living cell. The DNA encoding the system is added to the CFPS mix, incubated,
and then evaluated for performance by measuring mRNA or protein concentrations.
This process is very rapid, allowing a construct to be tested immediately
after construction and is conducive to high-throughput testing.
,,,
 It also allows for variables to be tested that would be difficult
in a living cell, such as the impact of varying ATP concentration
on the performance of a pathway. A downside is that the CFPS components
change dynamically during the test and will run out of metabolites
and energy as the reaction progresses. The measurement changes as
a function of these concentrations, making the data sometimes hard
to interpret. Despite this possibility, in vitro results
have been observed to correlate well with in vivo activity.

CFPS systems are
available for many bacterial species, including
agriculturally-relevant Bacilli,
,,

Klebisella,
,

Pseudomonads,
,
 and Streptomyces. They have been used for part characterization by adding DNA containing
the part and an appropriate reporter. For example, a library of 15
RBSs were screened using a Pseudomonas putida CFPS. To increase the throughput, CFPS systems can
be parallelized or multiplexed. A library of 1,300 promoters was screened
for the soil bacteria Klebsiella oxytoca, Pseudomonas putida,
Pseudomonas agglomerans, and Bacillus subtilis. The throughput can be increased
even further by combining CFPS-containing droplets with flow sorting
and next-generation sequencing (NGS). This high-throughput screen
was used to assay more than a million combinations of promoters/RBSs.

Genetically-encoded sensors can be characterized
using CFPS systems.
They aid sensor design when the ligand cannot cross the cell membrane
or exhibits toxicity. For Bacillus megaterium, a
xylose sensor was characterized, including biophysical parameters
that would be difficult to otherwise measure in vivo, such as the impact of DNA concentration. A sensor for the plant root exudate vanillic acid was developed
using a CFPS system by screening a library of TetR-family mutants
for activity. Sensors have also been
developed using CFPSs for the herbicide atrazine, antibiotics, heavy
metals, water contaminants and other signals of relevance to agriculture.
,
 Genetic circuits also can be characterized using CFPS systems, although
measuring dynamic circuits can be difficult to the changing resources
in the CFPS over time.
−

Metabolic pathways have also been
prototyped in CFPS systems.
,
 Combining crude cellular
lysates enriched with overexpressed enzymes
can reconstitute complete multi-enzyme biosynthetic pathways, which
can be optimized by simply adjusting the volumes or identities of
the enzymes added to the final reaction mixture. For example, hundreds
of pathway combinations were tested to improve the production of 3-hydroxybutyrate
and butanol in Clostridium.
Streptomyces CFPS systems have reconstituted
biosynthetic pathways, NRPSs, glycosylated proteins, and proteins
made with non-canonical amino acids.
,,

3.6.5.

## Learning from Large Datasets
Using AI/ML
The evaluation of large strain libraries leads
to datasets that
are difficult to interpret to plan the next round of strain creation.
Computational methods have been developed to aid this process, including
numerical search methods and ML.
,−

 This enables rounds of optimization to be repeated, where each round
interprets data for the previous one. ML has been applied to optimize
pathways and species-of-interest in agriculture. It was applied in
Bacillus subtilis to optimize the coding sequence for recombinant
gene expression and surfactant production.
,
 Pseudomonads have been optimized for flavolin production. Pseudomonas putida was optimized for isoprenol
production by using ML to interpret data over four rounds of optimization
and nearly one million variants that changed the native genes knocked
down by RNAi.

3.7.

## Expanding Microbial Chassis
Bacteria
are only a fraction of the soil microbiota. In soil, for every 100
bacterial cells, there are approximately 10 archaea and 10 fungal
cells. Because bacteria are easier
to genetically manipulate, they have been disproportionately used
in Synthetic Biology. However, archaea and fungi have critical roles
in agriculture and more manipulation tools are needed. This section
reviews the nascent tools that have been developed for these kingdoms.
3.7.1.

## Archaea
Archaea are prevalent in
the rhizosphere and influence soil chemistry and composition. Archaea
associate with crops and play a role in nutrient exchange, growth,
and immunity. Ammonia-oxidizing archaea
contribute to nitrification.
,
 Halophilic archaea
capable of colonizing nutrient-poor soils have been effective at phosphate
solubilization. This process works
by inhibiting a methane-producing enzyme in the methanogen. Archaea
are promising hosts for agricultural applications because of their
unique metabolisms and the fact that there are no known archaeal plant
pathogens.
,
 Despite sparse genetic engineering
tools, they have been engineered to overproduce chemicals and simple
genetic circuits have been designed for them.
−

Archaea are responsible for major emissions of the greenhouse
gas methane from ruminants, such as cattle, and from rice paddies.
,

Methanosarcinales, Methanomicrobiales, and Methanobrevibacter convert H2 and CO2 generated in these anaerobic environments into methane. The methane
generated during rice and ruminant livestock production accounts for
11% and 15% of total anthropogenic methane production, respectively.
,
 The product Bovear, marketed as a cattle feed additive, is based
on molecule 3-nitrooxypropanol, which is an enzyme inhibitor that
blocks methane release.

Archaea
have the potential to be used to enhance plant growth.
Genomic evidence for auxin biosynthesis is widespread and the thermophile Sulfolobus acidocaldarius produces high levels of the plant
hormone IAA.
,

Nitrosocosmicus oleophilus colonizes the roots of Arabidopsis and its emission of volatile
organics mediates the induction of the plant antimicrobial and systemic
resistance responses.

There is
a growing list of genetic engineering techniques available
for archaea. Efficient DNA transformation is based on spheroplasts,
where DNA can be introduced using liposomes or with polyethylene glycol
(PEG). Conjugation-based methods have
also been developed for methanogens. There are genes that can be used for selection and counter selection
markers. Genome editing is possible
using site-specific integrases and CRISPR/Cas9 in specific strains.
−

 Archaeal GEMs have been published ( ), although they have been limited to
industrial methanogenic species.
−

Genetic part
libraries for archaea are available. Promoters are
a simplified version of their eukaryotic counterparts, requiring only
a TATA box and TF B recognition element (BRE). Promoters are recognized by a single eukaryotic-like RNAP.
This relatively simple promoter architecture has led to the identification
and characterization of many promoter libraries across Archaea.
,,,
 Archaeal translation has features similar to prokaryotic
and eukaryotic signals. While some mRNA contains the SD sequence like
a bacterial RBS, most archaeal mRNAs lack a 5′-UTR altogether
and rely on protein factors to facilitate ribosome binding and translation
initiation. While the mechanisms of
archaeal termination are unclear, efficient terminators have been
characterized and generally rely on polyT tracts. The promoter/terminator genetics and RBS biochemistry complicate
the use of computational tools for the de novo design
genetic parts for archaea ( ).
TFs in archaea mimic prokaryotic
repressors and activators and
function by controlling RNAP access to the promoter.
−

 Thus, bacterial TFs can be easily transferred to archaea by placing
their operator sites in an archaeal promoter backbone. Sensors have been built using native archaeal
TFs to respond to nutrients (sulfur, phosphorous, nitrogen, carbohydrates),
−

 metabolites (phenolic compounds, acetate, methanol, amino acids),
,−

 and metals.
−

 Sensors based on riboswitches have also been constructed that regulate
translation and reveal the SD sequence in response to fluoride or
theophylline.
,

CRISPR tools also work
in archaea ( ). Cas9 has been used in very limited
set of archaea for genome deletions and mutant generation. Genome insertions and deletions were made
using Cas9 in methanogenic Methanosarcina acetivorans by supplying HR templates or expressing NHEJ machinery from other
archaea. However, in some archaeal
species, CRISPR nucleases were found to be unstable and were unable
to be expressed. To control native
genes, CRISPRi works and has been used to turn off nitrogen fixation
genes in Methanosarcina acetivorans. Native archaeal CRISPR systems can be co-opted
to target and cleave mRNAs to silence endogenous genes post-transcriptionally.

3.7.2.

## Agriculturally-Relevant
Fungi
Filamentous
fungi and yeast play critical roles in agriculture. Beneficial fungi colonize both plant tissues (endophytic)
and plant surfaces (epiphytic).
−

 Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) are root-colonizing
endophytic fungi that form symbiotic relationships with over 80% of
plants.
,
 AMF provide phosphorus and
minerals to the plant; in return, the plant shares fatty acids, amino
acids, and sugars. For example, Rhizophagus irregularis delivers phosphate to the plant
and is marketed as a product that enhances cassava yield by improving
root growth.
,
 Endophytic fungi enhance tolerance
to environmental stress and improve plant growth and development.
,
 Fungi also increase resistance to pests and diseases and play an
important role in biocontrol. For example, Trichoderma, can sense-and-kill other plant-pathogenic fungi
and comprise more than 60% of biopesticides.
−

 Genetic control of disease-causing fungi has been demonstrated.
In the cereal pathogen Fusarium graminearum, a naturally
occurring selfish gene encoding a toxin-antidote system was used to
spread a nonfunction allele for a blight virulence factor. Fungi can also kill insects and nematodes.
−

 The use of the entomopathogenic fungi Metarhizium against sugarcane spittlebugs is considered one of the most successful
biological control programs, with an estimated 2 million hectares
of sugarcane treated annually.
,

Fungi
also interact with bacteria in the soil, thus participating in the
complex array of interspecies interactions (Section 3.4.8). Interactions
in natural communities in the native Arabidopsis rhizome
were inferred by correlating the abundance of specific members across
populations. Most filamentous fungi
naturally associated with Arabidopsis roots restricted
plant growth when reinoculated alone but could maximize plant growth
and survival when co-inoculated with various native bacteria. The
growth-promoting fungus Serendipita indica is auxotrophic
for thiamine but can grow in the presence of Bacillus subtilis, suggesting Serendipita indica requires nutrient
exchange with soil bacteria.
Pseudomonas fluorescens and the mycorrhizae Laccaria
bicolor have been shown to reciprocally exchange thiamine
and trehalose to support pre-symbiotic growth. To improve their symbiotic competitiveness in low iron
soils, the iron siderophore receptor fhuA from Escherichia coli was transferred to rhizobial isolates from
pigeon pea lacking the ability to uptake siderophores. The engineered rhizobial strains displayed
increased growth rates when co-cultured under iron-limited conditions
with the siderophore-producing mycorrhizal fungus Ustilago
maydis.
3.7.2.1.

## Fungal Transformation
and Genome Editing
Compared to bacteria and yeast, filamentous
fungi suffer from low
transformation efficiencies. One approach is to degrade the cell wall
to make it easier for DNA to pass. Aspergillus, Neurospora,
Fusarium, and Trichoderma, can produce viable
spheroplasts (partially digested cell wall) or protoplast (fully digested
cell wall) following chemical and enzymatic treatment.
,
 Transformation of protoplasts is mediated by CaCl2/PEG
treatment, liposomes, or electroporation. Cell wall composition differs between species and cell types and
so protoplast preparation protocols are not generalizable.

Some filamentous fungi can be transformed
using Agrobacterium co-cultures containing plant-derived
chemical cues (e.g., acetosyringone) that induce
mobilization of Ti-plasmid by Agrobacterium. Transformation by Agrobacterium can utilize different fungal tissue material (protoplasts, spores,
hyphae, or fruiting bodies) and is suitable for delivery of very large
DNA cargo in excess of 150 kbp. Another
advantage of Agrobacterium is that it uses virulence transfer machinery
that transports recombinant DNA into the nucleus and integrates it
into the fungal genome. More rarely,
particle bombardment can be used to deliver DNA to fungal strains
recalcitrant to other transformation methods. Artificial plasmid vectors containing the AMA1 sequence can replicate autonomously in some filamentous fungi and
increase transformation frequency because they do not need to also
be integrated onto the genome.
−

 However, these artificial
plasmids are unstable, even under strong selection.

Gene editing tools ( ) have moved to industrially- and agriculturally-relevant
fungal species. Cas9 can either be
integrated into the fungal genome, maintained on a plasmid, or transiently
expressed.
,
 To facilitate inserting recombinant
DNA payloads in different fungal species, landing pads with a shared
gRNA target site and adjacent homology arms were introduced into the
genomes of four Aspergillus strains ( A). Cas9-mediated base editors
were used to introduce early stop codons and deactivate polyketide
synthases in Aspergillus niger ( B). TALENs were used to make sequence specific knock-outs and gene replacements
in a melanin biosynthesis gene and DNA helicase in the rice blast
pathogen Pyricularia oryzae. The efficiency of site-specific DNA insertion mediated
by double stranded breaks was improved by inactivating the NHEJ pathway.

 
3.7.2.2.

## Engineering Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi
(AMF)
Laboratory cultivation of AMF is difficult because
most AMF are obligate symbionts that require their host plant to complete
their life cycle. Dual-compartment culture systems have been developed
and optimized so that fungal spores can be harvested without being
contaminated by plant material. Certain
fatty acids can stimulate the branching of hyphae and sporulation
of AMF in the absence of their plant hosts.

Introducing recombinant DNA into AMF is also difficult. The
large variety in cell wall structures amongst filamentous fungi poses
a challenge in developing transformation methods and the production
of stable protoplasts.
Gigaspora
rosea was transformed by particle bombardment to integrate
the bacterial β-glucuronidase GUS gene into the genome. Fluorescent reporter genes dsRed and gfp were introduced into Glomus intraradices using particle bombardment and Agrobacterium tumefaciens ( C).

Another problem that inhibits the development
of genome editing
tools is the lack of genome sequences. Only a few AMF species have
fully sequenced genomes (Gigaspora rosea, Rhizophagus irregularis, Rhizophagus cerebriforme, Rhizacophagus diaphanus).

3.7.2.3.

## Fungal
Genetic Part Libraries
Genetic part libraries have been developed
and characterized for
filamentous fungi. A collection of 96 genetic parts containing natural
and synthetic promoters (constitutive and inducible), terminators,
fluorescent reporters, and selection markers have been developed for
modular cloning in Aspergillus or Penicillium species. A library of promoters mined
from Penicillium and Trichoderma were characterized using a dual luciferase assay in two Penicillium strains and spanned four orders-of-magnitude
in transcriptional activity. FungalBraid contains a database of genetic
parts for filamentous fungi, including promoters and 5′-UTRs,
selection markers, and 3′-UTR terminator sequences. As of 2024, the Registry of Standard Biology
Parts has 700 entries for fungal taxa.

Protein parts for fungi are similar to those used in yeasts,
but there are some differences. Codon optimization can play an important
role in improving heterologous gene expression. Codon optimization is also beneficial to expression because
it removes premature poly-A tracts and improves mRNA stability. Polycistronic
operons can be constructed by expressing polyproteins separated by
viral 2A peptides which self-cleave to generate individual proteins.
,
 For example, combinations of modifying enzymes were expressed as
a polycistronic mRNA separated by viral 2A peptides in Aspergillus
nidulans to produce derivatives of the austinoid insecticides
( D).

3.7.2.4.

## Optimizing Fungal Bio-control
Agents
Insecticidal fungi have been genetically modified
to improve biocontrol
properties. A potent scorpion neurotoxin was placed under the control
of a strong constitutive promoter to increase anti-fungal toxicity
of Metarhizium anisopliae ( E). Potency
was further improved by adding copies of a gene encoding a regulated
cuticle-degrading protease to degrade an insect’s cytoskeleton.
,

Beauveria bassiana has been engineered to overexpress
an insect midgut-acting toxin targeting conidia to protect cabbage. Toxicity was increased further by expressing
the toxin from a promoter upregulated specifically during infection
by fungal spores (conidia).

The
fitness of fungi in the field has been improved by expressing melanin
biosynthesis enzymes to protect against UV damage and superoxide dismutase
to increase tolerance to oxidative stress ( F).
,,

Metarhizium anisoplia was evolved for thermotolerance
by culturing the strain continuously while slowly elevating the temperature
in a growth chamber. The resulting
strains grew at higher temperatures but had diminished virulence when
infecting grasshoppers. Metarhizium brunneum is a
promising biocontrol agent for Varroa mites but is inhibited at the
elevated temperatures in active honeybee hives ( ). A Metarhizium
brunneum strain was subjected to ALE ( ) with a dual selection
of elevated temperature and virulence. Bee hives were iteratively infected with Varroa mites the fungal
spores from dead mites were collected. Mycotoxins produced by Fusarium moniliforme in maize are damaging to livestock
that are exposed to infected feed and can be degraded by amine oxidase
enzymes in the fungus Exophiala spinifera. Directed evolution ( ) was applied to amine oxidase to improve
its activity in low pH and to increase protein secretion.

3.7.2.5.

## Fungal Metabolic Engineering
Filamentous fungi can
produce terpenoids, polyketides, indole alkaloids,
and non-ribosomal peptides. They have
been used for decades in industrial bio-reactors to produce small
molecule products and there are reviews of these efforts.
,
 Here, we summarize efforts to produce compounds of agricultural
relevance that could be deployed by living fungi in the field. The
number of GEMs ( ) is growing and facilitates computationally-guided
metabolic engineering ( ).
 Like bacteria, fungi
have biosynthetic gene clusters
that are responsible
for the production of chemicals.
,
 Often explored
in the context of human therapeutics, these chemicals can also be
relevant to agriculture, for example as insecticides and herbicides.
Many of the techniques described for bacterial biosynthetic gene clusters
( ) are
also applicable to engineering their fungal counterparts. There are
software packages and databases specific to identifying and cataloguing
fungal gene clusters.
,,,,

Austinoids are terpenes insecticides produced by fungi. New
insecticides
were made by screening combinations of four heterologous austinoid-modifying
enzymes in Aspergillus nidulans. Such secondary metabolites are produced at too low of titers
for an environmental application. Low titers can be addressed by inserting
strong constitutive promoters in front of the BCG, eliminating feedback
inhibition, or repressing competing pathways. Curcumin and atrochrysone carboxylic acid were overproduced
in Aspergillus oryzae by increasing the malonyl-CoA
pool by deleting a consuming enzyme and negative regulator.
,

Native genes can be upregulated using CRISPRa, where an activation
domain is fused to the DNA-binding domain (Section 3.3.5). CRISPRa
was developed for filamentous fungi by fusing the VPR activator to
dCas12. Targeting CRISPRa to otherwise
silent BCGs ( ) in Aspergillus nidulans led to the production
of the pathway products. A similar system has been demonstrated in Penicillium rubens and applied to activating a silent BCG
that makes the antimicrobial macrophorin.

3.7.2.6.

## Fungal Cell Free Protein Synthesis (CFPS)
A limited number of CFPS systems have been published for filamentous
fungi, produced for only a couple model species. Like other eukaryotic cell-free platforms, filamentous
fungi CFPS reactions contain glycosylation machinery and are capable
of functionally expressing eukaryotic proteins. CFPS reactions from Neurospora crassa and Aspergillus niger were used to express and purify fungal
non-specific peroxygenases from Cyclocybe aegerita, which were previously unable to be expressed in common bacterial
and fungal cells. A Neurospora
crassa lysate system was used to incorporate an unnatural
photoreactive lysine analog into a fungal peptide to study native
translation regulation. Ribosome footprinting
in Neurospora crassa lysates has also been performed
to study native translation initiation and termination.

3.7.2.7.

## Genetic Sensors and
Circuits in Fungi
Libraries of inducible promoters from native
metabolite-responsive
systems have been compiled. One of
the most common inducible promoters is the glaA promoter
from Aspergillus niger, where induction is driven
by the action of maltodextrine, maltose, or glucose. Other metabolite-inducible promoters include
those induced by ethanol (PalcA), cellulose (Pcbh), maltose (PamyB), benzoic
acid (PbphA), arabitol (Pabf), glucose (Pcre1), xylose (Pexyl), methionine (Pmet3), hydrogen peroxide (PsodM), thiamine (PthiA), copper (Ptcu), pH (Pgas), nitrate
(PniiA), and zearalenone
(PzeaR).

The challenge
with using natural promoters as sensors is that that they may be sensitive
to other, sometimes uncharacterized, signals or changes in growth
conditions. Synthetic promoters can be built that are not susceptible
to endogenous regulation. A synthetic universal promoter was built
containing a TATA box and upstream DNA-binding repeats for a LexA/VP16-based
synthetic TF, which was expressed from a separate weak core promoter. The universal promoter showed high activity
in the bioproduction strains Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Aspergillus
niger, Trichoderma reesei, Pichia kudriavzevii, Pichia pastoris, Yarrowia
lipolytica as well as two osmotolerant yeast that not been
previously engineered: Candida apicola and Zygosaccharomyces lentus. Expression from the promoter could
be tuned by varying the number of LexA-binding repeat sequences upstream
of the TATA box.
Sensors have been built using ligand-binding
TFs moved from other
species. When they were obtained from a prokaryote, the proteins needed
to be fused to a NLS and activation domain (e.g.,
VP16). Sensors for xylose, estrogen and tetracycline have been built
for Aspergillus.
−

 A light sensor for Trichoderma was built by fusing the Gal4 DNA binding domain
to a blue-light sensing domain. Note
that some commonly-used NLS tags in yeast, such as SV40, have been
shown to be nonfunctional in some fungi, including Fusarium
oxysporum and Phytophthora sojae.
,
 For these species, native NLS tags have been identified and tested.
,

Simple genetic circuits have been constructed in filamentous
fungi.
A positive feedback loop was built using a cellulose-inducible promoter
to drive the expression of its transcriptional activator CLR-2.

This circuit upregulated multiple cellulase
genes 10-fold to drive
lignocellulosic breakdown in Neurospora crassa. Building
more sophisticated genetic circuits has been complicated by the lack
of precision genetic parts and the growth of multi-cellular mycelia,
which makes single cell analyses difficult.

3.7.2.8.

## Advanced Yeast Tools
Synthetic
biology tools have been developed for yeast, notably Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, that have the potential to be moved to filamentous
fungi. To aid design, large yeast part libraries have been developed,
including constitutive promoters and terminators.
,
 Many genetic sensors have been built for yeast including some that
respond to agriculturally-relevant signals: DAPG, salicylate, vanillic acid, naringenin, xylose, and environmental pollutants. Prokaryotic quorum sensors ( ) have been moved to yeast
that respond to signals produced by bacteria in the rhizosphere. Up to four sensors have been introduced into
the yeast genome at once ( ).
,
 These sensors
have been applied to the high-throughput optimization of biosynthetic
pathways.
Many genetic circuits have been built for yeast, including
logic gates, bistable switches, and memory.
−

 The genetic circuit design automation software Cello has been developed
for yeast ( ).
,
 The software can design multi-input,
multi-output circuits using gates built using phage- and TetR-family
repressors. Similar circuits were build using dCas9-based NOR gates
and simulation software.

The
output of sensors and circuits can be connected to native gene
expression using CRISPRi in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Candida albicans (Section 3.3.5). This tool has been applied to metabolic engineering
projects to dynamically turn enzyme expression on or off to redirect
carbon flux. Genome scale changes can
be guided with software that use GEMs to predict enzyme knock-outs
that redirect carbon flux to the desired precursor.
,

Extensive genome editing tools are available for yeasts, including
those based on CRISPR, ZNFs, and TALEs ( ).
,,
 Landing pads have been integrated into the chromosomes to insert
DNA payloads rapidly and without disturbing native gene expression.
,,
 Genome-scale engineering is
also possible. MAGE ( ) has been extended to yeast (eMAGE). eMAGE involves removing mismatch repair proteins
while overexpressing a ssDNA-annealing protein. Flux through a heterologous
β-carotene pathway was optimized in yeast by targeting 74 oligonucleotides
to promoters, ORFs, and terminators in the pathway. To guide mutations to specific regions of the genome, dCas9
fused to an error-prone DNA polymerase (EvolveR) has been moved into
yeast ( ).

Entire yeast chromosomes
have been built using de novo synthesis and minimization
( ).
,
 The chromosomes
were designed to be easily engineered; all instances of the TAG codon
were removed to facilitate codon reassignment, and repeat genetic
elements, tRNAs, and some introns were removed. Remarkably, all 16 yeast chromosomes have been fused to
make a single connected genome, which could simplify engineering efforts.

3.7.2.9.

## Yeast Applications
in Agriculture
Yeast have been engineered to overproduce
potent antimicrobial peptides
when applied to plant tissue. Antifungal peptides are effective biocontrol
agents against plant diseases, particularly in seeds and fruits. However, economically producing and purifying
these peptides at scale is challenging, making it desirable to express
them in a strain that could be used as a living bioinoculant. To this
end, cecropin A was expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Pichia pastoris. These strains inhibited the germination of pathogenic mold spores
on tomatoes and apple fruits, respectively. Pichia pastoris engineered to produce a pea defensin peptide (Psd1) reduced the
severity of post-harvest decay caused by Penicillium expansum. Engineering a Cecropin A-Psd1 peptide
in Pichia pastoris delayed sour rot (Geotrichum
citriaurantii) in peaches.
Yeast do not use RNAi machinery
for regulation. Therefore, they can express dsRNA to knockdown the
expression of genes when they are consumed by insects and other pests. Saccharomyces cerevisiae was engineered to express dsRNA
targeting the y-tubulin gene of the invasive fruit pest Drosophila
suzukii. When larvae fed on
food containing the engineered yeast, they died.
Many plant-associated
yeast produce phytohormones in the rhizosphere
and are suggested to be plant growth promoting. The gibberellin precursor ent-kaurenoic
acid was produced in the yeast Yarrowia lipolytica by upregulating its endogenous mevalonate pathway and the recombinant
expression of three biosynthetic genes from Arabidopsis. Expressing downstream biosynthesis
enzymes from the fungus Fusarium fujikuroi led to
the accumulation of various gibberellins in the production strains.
A fluorescence-based biosensor of auxin was developed in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae using an Arabidopsis auxin receptor. This enabled strains to be rapidly sorted
based on their auxin production rate. Plant-associated yeast have
also solubilize mineralized phosphate, likely through the release
of organic acids.
,
 Some soil yeasts produce siderophores
that inhibit growth of pathogenic fungi by scavenging bioavailable
iron.

Yeast has been developed
as a bio-remediation tool. Heavy metals
are taken up by the cells by expressing ion transporters, suppressing
efflux systems, and producing intracellular detoxifying molecules,
as was demonstrated for cadmium, nickel, cobalt, and arsenic.
−

 This approach was taken to make hyperaccumulating yeast strains
that sequester heavy metals as well as oxy-polyatomic ions (arsenate
AsO4
2–, chromate CrO4
2–), trivalent ions (aluminum Al3+), and
strontium. Further, yeast engineered
to overproduce hydrogen sulfide gas, which reacts with metals to form
insoluble metal-sulfide particles, were used to precipitate copper,
cadmium, mercury, lead, and zinc from oil sands.

Yeast can also efficiently metabolize agrochemicals
in agricultural
soils and wastewater. Immobilized Trametes versicolor could efficiently degrade the pesticides diuron and bentazon in
a bioreactor.
Pichia pastori transformed with two methyltransferases involved in degrading the
herbicide atrazine from rice experienced less toxicity and were able
to more quickly degrade it in culture.

4.

## Integrated System Engineering
Integrated
design will be required for the most complex agriculture
engineering projects that span the complete living system across kingdoms,
rather than focusing on one species. Within the plant, these projects
will combine sensing/computing with metabolic engineering, distributed
across organelles, cell types, and tissues. Collectively, these will
be connected to native regulatory pathways, stress responses, and
morphogenesis. Further, they will integrate microbial capabilities
within the designs, creating a signaling and metabolic network of
interacting species.
In this section, we outline two “grand
challenges”
in plant synthetic biology: 1. smart plants that actively react to
the environment and 2. self-fertilizing crop systems. These challenges
were selected because they involve all aspects of cellular design,
are large ambitious projects, and portions of the designs need to
be distributed across species. We review steps, currently individual,
toward these goals, noting that the solutions will ultimately require
an integrated approach. Their full implementation will require CAD,
prototyping, and automated screening to fully realize, aided by simulations/AI
to predict performance before growth. Note that these challenges could
also incorporate elements of insect and animal engineering into an
even larger integrated system, although these topics are not covered
in this review.
This section focuses on grand challenges that
require a holistic
approach that could integrate simultaneous plant and microbial engineering.
In other sections of this review, we have focused on grand challenges
that focus on just plant engineering: 1. increasing photosynthetic
efficiency ( ) and 2. introducing apomixis into crops ( ). Similarly,
there are grand challenges that focus only on microbial engineering
alone: 1. stopping honeybee collapse ( ), 2. eliminating methane release from
rice paddies ( ), and 3. overcoming “peak phosphorous” through
AMF engineering ( . and ).
4.1.

## “Smart
Plants” That Surveil
the Environment and Respond
Improving plants’ resilience
to stress is a common objective in plant engineering and breeding.
,−

 Many plants have been developed with traits to improve survival
in extreme hot or cold, drought, pests, salt, pathogens, nutrient
stress, soil conditions, and flooding.
−

 The traits span the expression of enzymes/TFs, metabolic pathways
to make protecting molecules, or RNAs that target pests, amongst other
genetic approaches. It is hard to combine these traits into one plant
because stacking traits that require multiple genes is difficult,
especially when they are constitutively expressed. To our knowledge,
the largest number of traits put into a single commercial crop is
Smartstax PRO (maize), which combines 6 insecticides targeting above-and
below- ground insects and an herbicide resistance trait. Each gene is constitutively expressed, either
in promoters that are on throughout the plant or are tissue-specific.
The vision of a “smart plant” is an engineered crop
that has sensors/circuits to respond to stress that can then be implemented
( ). The signals could either be autonomous or provided
by farmers as agrochemicals in anticipation of an upcoming weather
or climate event or the emergence of a new pest. The response genes
can be distributed across the plant genome (nucleus, plastid, mitochondria,
specific tissues) or introduced into plant-associated microbes that
can be communicated with when the trait is needed. Note that this
approach is different than using microbes expressing a function (e.g., insecticide gene) that is used as a spray ( and ); rather, these would be microbes applied
with the seed that turn on the response pathways when needed.
 The description of this grand challenge starts
with the outputs,
in other words how different stresses can be mitigated by expressing
genes in the plant or interactions with microbes. These traits are
usually constitutively expressed and there are examples on the market.
Then, genetic sensors that respond to various stresses are described.
Ultimately, these inputs would be integrated by large synthetic circuits
( ). Finally,
work to create 1-input, 1-output simple sense-and-respond systems
are described. These results could be scaled up and distributed across
species to create agricultural systems that could actively respond
to dozens or even hundreds of stress signals in the environment.
4.1.1.

## Genes to Confer Stress Resistance
Abiotic stresses
encompass extreme temperatures, flooding/drought,
salt, soil content (metals, nutrients), or high/low light. This subsection
describes the genes that can be introduced into a plant that confer
resistance. Biotic stress can come from microbial pathogens, insects,
animal herbivores, and plant parasites. Here, the focus is on those
genes that can be expressed to increase the resistance against these
threats, with an eye toward putting them under the control of sensors/circuits
that respond to pests and pathogens.
4.1.1.1.

## Abiotic
Stress Resistance
The
overexpression or knockout of native TFs can increase resilience to
abiotic stresses.
−

 For example, the expression of a TF associated with drought resistance
in Arabidopsis led to root structures normally found
during drought. However, native TFs
may be problematic because they impact many genes that may lead to
undesirable plant phenotypes. This problem can be addressed by targeting
specific genes with synthetic TFs. For example, salt tolerant ryegrass
was made by expressing ZFPs to target known genetic determinants of
this trait.

Stress can cause
intracellular proteins to unfold, which can be corrected by chaperones.
Tobacco expressing a chaperone from halotolerant Aphanothece
halophytica had higher heat and salt tolerance.
,
 Rice and maize exhibit improved cold and drought resistance when
a cold shock protein that prevents RNA misfolding was expressed (marketed
as DroughtGard).
,

Recombinant enzymes can
also protect against stress. One mechanism
is to remove a toxic metabolite that accumulates. In rice, toxic methyloglyoxal
accumulates during salt and drought stress and this can be cleared
by expressing an enzyme to degrade it. Other metabolites can confer a protective effect, particularly to
osmotic stress and desiccation, including trehalose, fructans, sucrose,
betaines, glycinebetaine, and proline.
,−

 Salt tolerant maize, rice, and wheat has been made by expressing
enzymes that make these chemicals.
−

 Heat can stress a plant by
producing reactive oxygen species. Heat-tolerant Arabidopsis was made
by expressing an archaeal superoxide dismutase.

Soil properties and composition can also induce stress.
Changes
in pH can impact plant viability. At high pH, plants can experience
iron deficiency because its endogenous scavenging enzyme are inactive.
Tobacco with increased tolerance to alkaline soils was made by expressing
a mutant yeast ferric reductase that is active at high pH.

4.1.1.2.

## Biotic Stress Resistance
Some
approaches to resist biotic stress are similar to those used for abiotic
stress (above). For example, disease resistance was improved in Arabidopsis by tuning the expression of native TFs. Pathogens can also be inhibited by expressing
enzymes. Enzymes can be expressed to attack the microbial cell wall;
for example, the expression of chitinase in broccoli blocked infection
by Trichoderma.
,
 Similar examples have been
shown in potato, tomato, lemon, and
guava.

Defensins are small peptides
involved in innate immunity and confer broad-host-range antimicrobial
functions. Expressing a defensin sourced
from Dahlia flowers in papaya reduced fungal infection by inhibiting
hyphae growth. Overexpressing a defensin
in chili peppers made unripe fruit resistant to a fungal pathogen
that causes anthracnose disease.

Pathogens and pests are susceptible to defense mechanisms that
target their RNA, including plant viruses, bacteria, fungi, and insects. GMO crops have been developed that transcribe
hpRNA, siRNA, or dsRNA ( ) that target conserved and essential
sequences in the pathogen.
,
 This approach has
been used to make papaya trees that resist Papaya ringspot virus,
,
 tomatoes that are immune to crown gall disease caused by bacteria, and barley that resists rust-causing Fusarium graminearum. Insects
are also sensitive to dsRNA that they can uptake when they eat the
plant.
,
 Plants have been engineered
to be insect resistant using this mechanism, including cotton that
resists bollworm and corn that resists root-feeding larvae (SmartStax®
PRO).
,,

Bacterial
CRISPR Immunity has been moved to plants by expressing
Cas9 and designing gRNAs that target plant viruses.
,
 Following this approach, tobacco was engineered to provide protection
against bean yellow dwarf and beet severe curly top geminiviruses.
The output of a circuit can be used to control plant immunity to viruses
by driving the transcription of a gRNA that directs the Cas9 nuclease
to a viral genome.

4.1.1.3.

## Stress Response Genes
Carried in Plastids
Chloroplasts offer a place to carry genes
to confer stress response.
They can be engineered to produce high titers of proteins or RNA and
differentiated plastids can be plant tissue-specific ( ). Some metabolites that concentrate there are precursors for the
biosynthesis of chemical protectants ( ). The chloroplast genome is also
a good place to carry multigene pathways, including BCGs sourced from
prokaryotes, that may encode antimicrobials difficult to produce in
the plant genome (NRPS/PKSs) ( ). Finally, plastids lack RNAi processing
proteins and accumulate dsRNAs (up to 0.4% total cellular content),
thus improving pest resistance. Colorado
potato beetle larvae died when feeding on potato plants expressing
dsRNA from the chloroplast, but not from the nucleus.

4.1.2.

## Engineered
Microbes to Enhance Plant Stress
Response
Some microbes can protect plants from salt and drought
stress. Mechanistically, they perform this function by inducing osmolytes,
ion transporters and aquaporins, and antioxidation or impeding salt
uptake.
−

 Bacteria can also produce phytohormones that improve plant health
during episodes of environmental stress. For example, inoculation of wheat with the IAA-producing Pseudomonads
increased plant growth >50% when exposed to salt. Rice inoculated with Bacillus amyloliquefaciens had increased production of the osmoprotectants betaine and trehalose. The tropical grass Dichanthelium lanuginosum can grow at high temperature (>65°C) in the presence of
the
fungus Curvularia protuberata, which induces heat
shock proteins, melanin, osmoprotectants.
,

Bacteria can kill pathogens by producing antimicrobials. Rhizobium rhizogenes K84 is a commercial biocontrol agent
for fruit trees, nut trees, and roses that produces an antibiotic
that kills the bacterial causative agent of crown gall disease.
,
 Wheat became resistant to fungi when inoculated with bacteria isolated
from the wheat rhizosphere engineered to produce antifungals including
phenazines, phenazine-1-carboxylic acid, diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG),
or pyrrolnitrin.
−

 Tomatoes are protected against damping off disease when inoculated
with Bacillus subtilis engineered to overproduce
mycosubtilin.

Protective bacteria
can also be designed to interfere with the
virulence pathways in a pathogen, rather than killing it outright.
Common targets for interference are quorum signals required for virulence,
the disruption of which is known as “quorum quenching.”
The enzyme AiiA from Bacillus thuringiensis degrades
AHLs used by many bacteria to communicate. Potato soft rot is caused
by Erwinia carotovora, which requires quorum signals for infection. It was blocked by expressing
AiiA on the surface of Bacillus thuringiensis and Pseudomonas putida ( A).
,

 Archaea can also play a role in plant stress response.
Some archaea
can alleviate lead stress in rice paddies.
Nitrosocosmicus oleophilus induces Arabidopsis
systemic resistance against the plant pathogens Pectobacterium
carotovorum and Pseudomonas syringae.

4.1.3.

## Plant and Microbial Stress
Sensors
Most stress response traits involve the continuous
expression of
the genes, whether the stress is present or not. Placing these genes
under the control of stress-responsive promoters has several beneficial
effects. First, it allows may traits to be combined while reducing
the burden on the plant. This burden could result in undesirable phenotypes,
such as growth retardation. Second, it reduces the amount of recombinant
protein and additional metabolites in the food supply. It can also
allow a single plant to resist multiple opposing stress responses,
such as hot/cold, low/high pH, or high/low light. This subsection
describes promoters that respond to stress conditions, most of which
have been characterized in plants. Microbes also have sensors that
respond to stresses ( ) and they could be used to turn on protective factors
from the microbial genome or the information communicated to the plant
( ).
Many individual sensors have been constructed in plants that respond
to stress conditions ( ). Thousands of natural promoters
in the nuclear and chloroplast genomes have been identified in plants
that could be used as stress sensors.
,−

 A problem with using natural promoters is that their response goes
through a regulatory node that controls many genes ( ). This effect is pronounced when the promoter responds to TFs that
are central nodes of the plant’s regulatory network.
Abiotic stressors (e.g., drought)
converge on
abscisic acid (ABA) which controls seed dormancy and physiological
changes to conserve water.
−

 Biologic stresses converge on the salicylic
acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA) regulatory pathway, which regulate
defense pathways.
−

 Pathways controlled by ethylene (ET), reactive oxygen species (ROS),
and calcium (Ca2+) have been linked to both abiotic and
biotic stress.
−

 They can alter leaves, root growth, fruit ripening, cell wall thickness
and other ways that the plant can adapt. There is crosstalk between
these major pathways; thus, natural promoters may respond to different
stressors due to different TF binding sites.
,,−

 Alternatively, synthetic promoters can be built by inserting specific
TF operators into a minimal promoter scaffold ( ).
,,

Pathogen sensors turn
on in response to an infection.
−

 Many natural promoters have been characterized as being inducible
by pathogens.
−

 These promoters can be turned on by general changes in the regulatory
networks involved in defense or in response to cell-surface receptors
that recognize pathogens.
,
 Pathogens inject
proteins into cells (e.g., DNA-binding TALEs) that
regulate native plant promoters to facilitate the virulence program.
−

 Pathogen-inducible synthetic promoters have also been designed by
placing CREs into a promoter scaffold ( ).
,,,−

4.1.4.

## Genetic Circuits to Integrate Sensory Information
Logic circuits could integrate sensory information and select which
response is appropriate ( ). Logic increases the specificity in
identifying which stress is being experienced. For example, drought
induces ABA (AND NOT) ethylene. Salt stress induces ABA (AND) ethylene.
In this example, the same two sensors can be used to differentiate
stresses using logic. A logic circuit can have multiple outputs, one
of which would be connected to the salt response and the other, the
drought response. The logic can get more complicated if some resistance
genes protect against multiple stresses. Logic circuits can be designed where the outputs take this requirement
into account. Logic circuits can be very large, integrating dozens of signals and could be divided between
the plant and microbes ( ), where each communicates the result of the calculation
to each other when necessary using cell-cell communication signals
,
 ( ).
There are also cases where the resistance genes need to
be expressed at particular times. There are two ways that this can
be done. The first is to have another input into a logic circuit that
responds to the condition(s) where the response should be expressed.
For example, a stress response gene may need to only be turned on
at night, so a light sensor could be connected to the circuit. Logic
operations can also incorporate tissue-specific sensors ( ) so that responses
only turn on in certain locations of the plant.
Dynamic circuits
can also time a response. For example, if an insect
is sensed, it may be appropriate to turn on a pulse of insecticide
production. They could also be used to stop producing a chemical protectant
after enough has built up in the cell or to only produce a limited
amount of a gene product that could be toxic.
Memory could be
used to make a response permanent. It is desirable
when it is important to continue to express stress-response genes
even after the stress stimulus is removed. Examples might be to maintain
a defense response after a pathogen is initially detected or if an
abiotic stress (e.g., drought) is likely to occur
again after the first occurrence is sensed.
Circuits based on
cell-cell communication and signaling between
regions of the plant (e.g., root-to-shoot) could
propagate a signal from one region throughout the plant. Similarly,
it could be possible to create volatile signals that are released
by one plant and then signal the stress, such as an insect attack,
to other plants in the vicinity.

4.1.5.

## Stress
Sense-and-Respond
The output
of a stress sensor can drive the expression of a gene that alleviates
the stress.
−

 Examples to date have been limited to single stresses that are sensed
and simple responses. However, they represent the types of sensing
and circuitry that could be expanded upon as envisioned above.
Temperature sensors have been used to turn on pathways to protect
against extreme hot or cold. In transgenic barley and rice, a cold
sensor was used to express a native TF that upregulates cold-responsive
genes to make it resistant to frost. To improve cold tolerance in rice, an abiotic stress sensor controlled
the expression of chalcone isomerase, which increases flavonoid biosynthesis
and leads to the production of protective antioxidants ( A).
Eucalyptus was also made frost tolerant using a cold sensor expressing a recombinant Arabidopsis TF ( B).
,
 It is now being grown commercially
by ArborGen for timber and pulpwood in the southeastern US.
 In rice, the gene controlling the production of
the protectant
proline was placed under the control of an abiotic stress-responsive
promoter. This trait improved salt
and drought tolerance. Also in rice, trehalose biosynthetic genes
were placed under the control of a stress sensor, which decreased
damage due to high salt and low temperatures ( C).

There are several cases where the resistance genes produce a negative
phenotype if always expressed. For example, acetic acid can improve
drought survival. However, overexpressing the acetic acid biosynthesis
genes is detrimental to growth and yield. These effects were eliminated
by placing it under the control of a drought-inducible promoter ( D).
,
 A similar observation led to the connection of a desiccation sensor
to the overexpression of a native TF in Arabidopsis. If only the TF
was expressed, then this led to a decrease in yield, but this was
mollified by making it responsive. Rice
that overproduce proline grew to higher biomass when it was placed
under the control of a stress-inducible promoter.

Plants naturally alter their morphology during periods
of stress
and engineering this response can better balance robustness and yield
for needs in agriculture. Under drought
conditions, plants shed leaves (senescence) to decrease canopy size
and reallocate resources. Leaf senescence can increase survival under
severe stress, but often at the expense of yield. Tobacco expressing the enzyme isopentenyltransferase from
a senescence-inducible promoter overproduced the hormone cytokinin,
which suppresses leaf senescence. The
resulting plants did not shed leaves during transient drought episodes
and more quickly resumed growth following watering.
A farmer
may know a stress is coming days before a plant could;
for example, weather reports of an upcoming deluge or drought. To
prepare the plants, an agrochemical could be sprayed in advance to
induce stress response genes that protect the plant. This approach
requires the design of sensors that respond to agrochemicals. Using
directed evolution, the ABA-binding receptor PYR1 was mutated to bind
to the fungicide mandipropamid. This
sensor was expressed in Arabidopsis and tomato and
used to induce drought tolerant genes when exposed to mandipropamid
( B).

−
,
 Sensors could also induce changes in root architecture in response
to forecasted drought. To this end,
synthetic TF-promoter pairs were used to tune the expression of a
mutant of TF that controls root branching to modify root morphology. These systems would allow plants to be prepared
for drought, based on weather reports, prior to having to experience
its damaging effects.

4.2.

## Self-Fertilizing Agriculture
Nitrogenous
fertilizer is produced in industrial chemical plants using the Haber-Bosch
process, which fixes atmospheric N2 to ammonia. This process
is one of the most impactful in history – nearly 80% of the
nitrogen in humans was derived in such a facility – but it
also has an enormous impact on the environment.
,
 It is an energy-intensive process, accounting for approximately
30% of the energy input to agriculture and 1% of total global energy
usage. Its production leads to greenhouse gas emissions and when it
is applied to soil, 50% is volatilized as N2O (300-fold
stronger than CO2 as a GHG) or run-off water pollution
and dead zones. Some bacteria are able to fix nitrogen using the enzyme
nitrogenase, where the energy and reducing potential come from ATP
and NADH, respectively. Since the dawn of genetic engineering, harnessing
this potential in agriculture has been recognized as a grand challenge.
The bacteria that can fix nitrogen naturally associate with legumes
(beans, peanuts, etc.) by residing in specialized nodules along the
roots. There, they are provided with a carbon source and the low-O2 environment needed by nitrogenase in exchange for fixed nitrogen
(ammonia or nitrate). In contrast, cereals (rice, wheat, corn, etc.)
are mostly unable to form these associations with bacteria, so synthetic
nitrogen needs to be added for them to grow. (A fascinating counterexample
is an indigenous corn variety in Mexico that derives nitrogen from
various nitrogen-fixing bacteria that live in a mucilage excreted
by the plant’s aerial roots). In practice, synthetic nitrogen is also added to legumes on industrialized
farms to maximize yields and this shuts down the formation of nodules
and represses bacterial nitrogen fixation. Therefore, the nitrogen
fixation pathway needs to be moved to relevant crops and turned on
under field conditions.
Since the problem was first articulated
in the 1970’s, there
have been many approaches to make biological nitrogen fixation viable
for cereals ( ). First,
bacteria and archaea that naturally associate with cereal roots could
be made to fix nitrogen. Second, cereals could be engineered to create
nodules that recruit N-fixing bacteria. Third, the nitrogen fixation
(nif) genes could be moved to the plant, either the
nuclear chromosomes, plastid, or mitochondrial genome. Finally, bacteria
have been engineered to use the energy from solar cells to fix and
store nitrogen that can be applied to the field later. Each of these
strategies has its advantages and the 100% replacement of synthetic
nitrogen will likely require a combination of approaches, including
new green chemical sources.

 4.2.1.

## Engineering N-Fixing Species
Many
bacteria that associate with cereal roots have the genes necessary
to fix nitrogen. The challenge is that these genes are strongly repressed
in this context, especially when nitrogenous fertilizer is applied.
Even in the nodule environment, the application of synthetic nitrogen
shuts down the natural ability of the bacteria to fix nitrogen. Genetically
engineered bacteria have been developed to circumvent this problem.
Genetic part libraries and inducible systems have been developed for
N-fixing species, thus improving the ability to optimize N-fixation
and the secretion of fixed nitrogen in a form that can be taken up
by the plant ( ).
,

To improve N-fixation in legumes, Sinorhizobium meliloti was engineered to secrete ammonia
constitutively in the presence of fixed nitrogen. The genome was modified
to overexpress the NifA activator, which turns on the nitrogen fixation
(nif) genes ( A).
−

 Additionally, the pathway to C4-dicarboxylic acid uptake (dctABD) was introduced to support the increased metabolic
demand. This bacterium improved alfalfa yield in the field.
,,
 This strain obtained regulatory
approval because the bacterium cannot associate with weeds and could
not survive after the alfalfa plants were removed.
,−

 Despite being approved for field trials,
commercial approval was not pursued. The challenge was that the pathways
and genetic parts were from different genera: the dctABD from Rhizobium leguminosarum and promoter/terminator
from Bradyrhizobium japonicum/Escherichia
coli. Most problematic was the antibiotic selection marker aadA from the human pathogen Shigella flexneri.
 Because intergeneric parts lead to tough regulatory
hurdles, “remodeling”
was developed to achieve a desired functional effect with the restriction
of only using DNA native to the genome ( ). Klebsiella variicola was isolated from maize roots and has the nif gene
cluster, but it is repressed under the conditions when needed ( B). The strong constitutive promoter Prrn was copied to a position internal to the nifL repressor,
which both knocked it out and upregulated the downstream nifA activator. In addition, the N-terminal domain of GlnE was removed.
A similar process was applied to Kosakonia sacchari, a strain isolated from the sugarcane rhizome that can fix nitrogen
but does not naturally when inoculated with cereals. In addition,
two genes were disrupted: an ammonia importer gene (amtB) and one involved in nitrogen assimilation (glnD) ( C).
,
 Both bacteria produce nitrogen and consume different carbon sources
excreted from the root. Together, these
strains have been commercialized as PROVEN40 by Pivot Bio ( E).
,

Engineered strains may not excrete fixed nitrogen because
it rapidly
enters cellular metabolism. Inactivating glutamine synthase, an enzyme
responsible for nitrogen assimilation, increases ammonia excretion. It is lethal when knocked out but can be placed
under inducible control. Glutamine
synthase is activated by GlnE through deadenylation. Modifying GlnE to remove this activity leads
to constitutive ammonia secretion.
,
 However,
when secreting ammonia, mutations quickly disrupt the activity. The
time before mutation increased to 32 days when multiple copies of
the engineered pathway were carried ( D).

Archaea also occupy the rhizome and fix nitrogen, notably species
that reside in the water of rice fields.
−

 However, far less is known about the nitrogen fixation pathways
in these organisms and genetic tools are behind those of bacteria.
They are a potential target for optimization as these tools develop
( ).
CRISPRi has been used to turn off nitrogen fixation genes in the archaeon Methanosarcina acetivorans. This methane-producing species is found in oil wells and trash dumps.

4.2.2.

## 
nif Transfer to Cereal-Associated
Bacteria
There are many bacterial species that adhere to
cereal roots or are in close proximity in the rhizosphere. Most of
these species do not have the genes necessary to fix nitrogen. One
strategy is to move these genes into an organism that already is used
as a cereal inoculant (e.g., used as a plant-growth-promoting
bacterium) or is known to coat roots or enter them and survive (endophyte). The possibility of functionally moving the nif gene cluster as a whole is inspired from work in 1972
where the 25 kb cluster was moved from Klebsiella oxytoca to Escherichia coli, an incredible feat at the
time. This work has inspired subsequent
experiments to transfer many nif clusters from many
species into strains of agricultural interest. A challenge with commercializing
these strains is that they are recombinant, to various degrees, and
more difficult to obtain regulatory approval than remodeled strains
or even GMO crops.

Pseudomonas protegens Pf-5
is used as a corn inoculant in agriculture and has many benefits,
including disease suppression, plant-growth promotion, and improved
nutrient uptake. The nitrogenase cluster from Pseudomonas
stutzeri has been functionally moved into it.
,−

Pseudomonas protegens Pf-5
has also been shown to fix nitrogen when the nif clusters
from Klebsiella oxytoca and Azotobacter vinelandii were transferred.
Rhizobium sp. IRBG74 is a rice endophyte that enhances growth and yield. While
it forms a N-fixing symbiosis with a legume, it does not turn these
genes on when inside a cereal root. It was engineered to fix nitrogen
under free-living conditions by transferring complete nif clusters from different Rhizobia. Paenibacillus has one of the smallest nif gene
clusters, encoded as a single 11 kb operon with 9 genes. This size
makes it easier to transfer. XPORT ( ) was used to functionally transfer this
operon into Bacillus licheniformis, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens,
Bacillus methylotrophicus, and Bacillus pumilus.
Refactoring is a means by which a gene cluster can be re-organized,
making it easier to engineer and transfer to new species ( ).
,
 The objective is to strip out all native regulation, including that
which is unknown, and reorganize the cluster so that it is a set of
well-defined parts. This approach was initially applied to the Klebsiella oxytoca nif gene cluster. Refactored gene clusters have been transferred between
bacterial species.
,
 Refactoring is required for
any transfer of nif genes to eukaryotes, as the regulatory
encoding is more different. Refactoring
also simplifies changes to the genetic parts, for example, to scan
an RBS library to optimize expression levels. These changes have been
made to build large libraries of nif pathways to
optimize activity in a new host.

A challenge with making a nif cluster constitutively
active is that it imposes a high burden on the cell carrying it. This
burden leads to rapid loss of the strain in the environment and can put evolutionary pressure on a genetic
system to break by mutating. A way to address this problem is to place
the system under the control of synthetic sensors and circuits ( ). To do
this to a native nif cluster, the natural regulator
(NifA) was knocked out and placed under the control of the desired
sensor. NifA is sensitive to ammonia levels, but mutants can be made
to eliminate most of this repression.
,
 This approach
was taken to make the nif clusters in Pseudomonas
putida Pf-5, Azorhizobium calinodans, and Azotobacter vinelandii under the control of phytohormones
and agrochemicals. Further, they could
be placed under the control of artificial root exudates produced by
introducing recombinant genes into plants, including rhizopines and
octopines ( ). These sensors act as proximity sensors, where only bacteria
close to the root fix nitrogen, thus decreasing the burden on those
strains further away.

4.2.3.

## Engineering Crops to Encourage Natural N-Fixers
Plants
release up to 50% of the carbon fixed by photosynthesis
into the soil by exuding it from their roots. Microbes that can utilize these forms of carbon become
enriched in the root microbiome ( ).
−

 Not all bacteria and
plants are compatible in this regard. Some plants do not produce an
exudate needed by the bacterium. To make a bacterium and plant compatible,
either the plant needs to be engineered to make the required exudate
or the bacterium needs to be engineered to consume an exudate made
by the plant.
A N-fixing bacterium can be engineered to include
a recombinant catabolic pathway to consume a carbon exudate of the
desired crop. Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 can fix
nitrogen and produces growth-promoting phytohormones. However, it
is a poor colonizer of rice roots due its inability to eat D-glucose,
which can make up >90% of rice root exudates. Transferring five
D-glucose
catabolism genes into Azospirillum brasilense Sp7
enabled glucose utilization and led to a 15-fold improvement in rice
colonization.

Plants can be engineered
to encourage colonization by specific
desirable bacteria in other ways. Rice has been engineered to excrete
larger amounts of the natural flavone apigenin. A chemical screen discovered that the flavonoid apigenin
was a potent biofilm stimulant for the nitrogen-fixing Gluconacetobacter
diazotrophicus. Rice engineered
to overproduce apigenin and inoculated with G. diazotrophicus had had increased biofilm formation and nitrogenase activity, likely
due to the biofilm mediating root attachment and protecting the enzyme
from oxygen.

4.2.4.

## Engineering Crops to
Form Symbiotic Relationships
with N-Fixers
Symbiosis occurs when two species are in a
relationship where resources produced by one are consumed by the other
and vice versa. It can manifest as commensalism or mutualism, where
either one or both species benefit from the relationship. There are
numerous natural examples of both types of relationships in agriculture,
including between microbial species and between microbes and plants.
The former help stabilize mixed communities of bacteria by maintaining
constant ratios between members and improving resilience to perturbations
(Section 3.4.7). There are innumerable natural symbiotic relationships
between bacteria and plants, where many bacteria consume the carbon
in root exudates (sugars, organic acids, etc.) and provide nutrients
or protective functions to the plants (Section 3.1.1).
−

Nitrogen fixation is a classic mutualistic relationship. Bacteria
provide fixed nitrogen to the plant and are rewarded with a carbon
source. Symbiosis can be enhanced by specialized plant organs (e.g., a legume root nodule or aerial root of corn. It could also occur with bacteria that are
non-specifically attached to the root or in the soil. The previous
sections have focused on harnessing natural symbiosis. Here, we focus
on two approaches. The first is to transfer the nodule-formation genes
into a cereal so that they can form the specialized nodules to recruit
bacteria that naturally associate with legumes. The second is to create synthetic symbiosis where the plant
provides the microbe with a new carbon source not naturally excreted
from the roots.
4.2.4.1.

## Nodule Formation in
Cereals
Designing
a cereal that builds a nodule de novo would require
control over plant morphology beyond what is currently possible. However, it is simpler when the target plant
has most of the pathway already and is only missing easily identifiable
components. Cereal roots develop specialized interactions with AMF
and there are commonalities to the signaling pathway for rhizobia
to interact with cereals ( A).
,
 In fact, rice signaling proteins from this pathway fully complement
knockouts in the legume Lotus japonicus ( B). This result implied that adding missing genes
to rice could cause nodules to form.
 Thus, engineering efforts
have focused on introducing
genes into
cereals to recognize the bacteria, activate the SYM pathway, and govern
organogenesis and infection. Nodulation
is initiated through the exchange of signaling factors (Nod-factors)
by Rhizobia and flavonoids by legume roots. When
exposed to Nod-factors, transgenic rice expressing nod-factor receptors
and their receptor kinases from the legume Medicago truncatula developed root hair deformities similar to those responsible for
the entrapping rhizobia in legumes. Likewise, an intracellular calcium spiking response, a signaling
step in the nodulation pathway, was observed in rice lines expressing
chimeric receptors containing Medicago nod-factor
receptors fused to receptor kinases involved in rice-AMF symbiosis.

Successfully transferring downstream
components of the legume symbiosis
pathway has proven more difficult. Eight essential rhizobia symbiosis
genes from Medicago truncatula, including NFRPs,
NFRKs, nuclear calcium channels, and nodulation-associated transcription
factors, were transformed into a variety of non-legumes, but neither
a change to root morphology nor induction of the Medicago
truncatula nodulation reporter gene MtNIN was observed.

4.2.4.2.

## Synthetic Symbiosis
Plants naturally
feed microbes in the rhizosphere by excreting a cornucopia of carbon
sources, including organic acids and sugars. Bacteria near the roots
can catabolize these molecules, some of which provide beneficial functions
to the plant. When introducing a synthetic bacterium, it would compete
with the natural consumers of these molecules. To tighten the symbiotic
relationship, the plant could be engineered to produce molecules not
normally found in the rhizosphere that can only be catabolized by
the engineered bacterium. If the bacterium
provides a benefit to the plant, such as the release of fixed nitrogen,
this completes the mutualism. A benefit is that all the carbon that
is released is only available to the engineered bacterium. A second
benefit is that the bacterium can be made reliant on that as a carbon
source, making it unable to associate with weeds or other plants and
when the crop is removed from the field, the bacteria would die.
Plants can be engineered to secrete new exudates designed to enrich
bacteria engineered to consume it. This ensures that nitrogen fixation
only occurs when close to the GMO plant roots. These systems contain
two parts: 1. a pathway introduced into the plant to make a chemical
to be excreted and 2. a genetic sensor in the bacteria that respond
the chemical and turn on nitrogen fixation. Various systems have been
developed including opines (Arabidopsis: Agrobacterium rhizogenes) and rhizopines (barley: Azorhizobium caulinodans, Rhizobium leguminosarum) ( C).
,,
 The bacteria can be engineered
to contain the catabolic pathway for the consumption of these synthetic
exudates. When Pseudomonas fluorescens was engineered
to catabolize opines, this species became enriched in the rhizosphere. Placing the catabolic genes under the control
of a sensor ensures that they only turn on in the presence of the
exuded chemical.
,

4.2.5.

## Direct
Transfer of nif to
Cereal Crops
One of the first grand challenges of genetic
engineering was to move the nitrogen fixation genes from a bacterium
to a cereal crop. Over 50 years later,
the feat remains unmet for several reasons. Nitrogenase is a dynamic
enzyme with a complex electron transport chain and high energy (ATP)
requirements. Its function is due to a complex co-factor (FeMoCo)
that is difficult to synthesize and requires precursors whose accessibility
in the plant is uncertain. FeMoCo’s insertion into the apoprotein
requires chaperones in a process that is sensitive to expression levels.
Finally, nitrogenase is stringently oxygen sensitive, thus limiting
where and under what conditions it can be expressed. There are also
many genes that need to be co-expressed that have been difficult to
do so in a plant due to the size and number of genetic parts needed
and insolubility of the proteins. Still, there have been advances
toward the goal of having a nitrogen-fixing plant that does not require
an association with bacteria to do so.
A choice that must be
made is where nitrogenase should be expressed. One option is the chloroplast,
which is desirable because it has a prokaryotic-like regulation, thereby
making it easier to express a BGC with fewer changes to the genetic
parts. It is also likely to have the electron transport machinery
and iron-sulfur co-factors required for FeMoCo biosynthesis. The challenge
is that photosynthesis occurs in chloroplasts, leading to high O2 tension, which inactivates nitrogenase. In theory, this problem
could be addressed by expressing nitrogenase at night or in non-photosynthetic
differentiated chloroplasts (e.g., amyloplasts).
Bacterial nif genes can be integrated directly
into the genome of the plastid using plastid genetic parts ( ). Homocitrate
synthase (NifV) is important for making functional FeMoCo. Klebsiella oxytoca NifV was expressed in the chloroplast
of the eukaryotic algae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. NifB is also critical for FeMoCo
production and it, along with NifU and FdxN, where expressed from
the plastic and NifU was able to insert [Fe4S4] clusters into NifB, whose activity was confirmed in vitro using a cell-free enzymatic assay. The central component of nitrogenase (NifH) was expressed in the
nucleus and targeted to tobacco chloroplasts and it was found that
it required NifM, NifU, and NifS to be co-localized for it to be soluble
and functional in vitro. In these cases, the nif genes were selected from Azotobacter vinelandii, in part because of its ability to
fix nitrogen under aerobic conditions relative to other species.
Mitochondria are also possible targets for expressing functional
nitrogenase. They are the “powerhouse” of the cell and
can produce the high concentrations of ATP and NADH required. Because
this organelle is where respiration is occurring, they have a very
low O2 concentration. They also make the essential [4Fe-4FS]
clusters needed by the nif electron transport chain.
While the mitochondria have their own genome, it is very hard to engineer
and genes have not been inserted into it in plants. Thus, the nitrogenase
components would need to be expressed in the nucleus and transported
to the mitochondria using transport tags. This step can result in
misfolding or mis-integration of co-factors, and can be more difficult
to control relative expression levels of components.
Yeast are
much easier to engineer than plants, so it has been used
as a surrogate host to test the targeting of Nif proteins to mitochondria.
It was shown that mitochondria-targeted NifH and NifM could accumulate
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and can incorporate native
mitochondrial Fe-S clusters under aerobic conditions. Expression in the cytosol required anoxic
growth conditions demonstrating the advantage of the low-O2 conditions of the mitochondrion. A combinatorial library of 96-monocistronic
expression cassettes constructed from 9 refactored Azotobacter
vinelandii nif genes and various combinations of promoters,
terminators, and mitochondrial transit tags was expressed in yeast.
Cofactor biosynthesis enzymes (NifB) from 28 species were screened
to identify a set that remained functional when co-expressed with
NifS, NifU, NifX, and fdxN from Azotobacter vinelandii. A polyprotein strategy was developed
for yeast where groups of nif proteins were expressed
as single proteins separated by recognition sites for yeast mitochondrial-processing
peptidases, which processed into monomers in the mitochondria.

Individual components of the nif pathway have
been expressed in rice and targeted to the mitochondrion, where they
have been found to be functional. NifH was fused to a mitochondrion-targeting
peptide and once in the organelle it was able to associate with its
[4Fe-4S] co-factor. However, the NifH
from Hydrogenobacter thermophilus was found to be
insoluble in this environment when targeted by itself and had to be
co-localized with NifM from Azotobacter vinelandii. The isolated NifH was found to be functional in vitro and transfer electrons to NifDK, which is where fixation takes place.
It was observed that [Fe-S] cluster availability in the mitochondrion
was limiting. NifB, which catalyzes the first step in FeMoCo biosynthesis,
has also been transferred. Archaeal NifB’s from Methanocaldococcus
infernus and Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus were found to accumulate in rice mitochondria in functional form. In tobacco, NifB from Azotobacter
vinelandii was co-expressed with NifU and FdxN and the [Fe4S4] clusters produced by NifU were found to integrate
into NifB, rendering it functional.

4.2.6.

## Artificial Leaf
A problem with
the Haber-Bosch process is that it is difficult to scale-down economically,
requiring large production facilities. It also requires an input of
natural gas. These issues are addressed by the so-called “artificial
leaf,” which combines a photovoltaic cell with an engineered
bacterium. Hydrogen is generated by
the green electricity derived from the photovoltaic cell. The bacterium Xanthobacter autotrophicus is able to take the H2 stream and use it as an energy source to fix N2 and CO2. These products accumulate as ammonia and biomass. The bacteria
can either be wild-type or engineered to make complex products, such
as vitamins, or theoretically other beneficial agrochemicals.

The bacteria can also be collected and
applied to crops, similar to the spreading of synthetic nitrogen.
One can imagine farm-scale bioreactors generating fertilizer in this
way. This approach has the potential benefit of being able to put
a lot of nitrogenous fertilizer on the ground quickly, which could
be advantageous at the end of a growth season when high levels are
needed to maximize yield and biological routes may be slow. However,
there is also the potential for nitric oxide production and run-off
if the fertilizer is used early in the growth season when the crop
has not developed sufficiently to quickly take up the nutrients.

5.

## Discussion
This review encompasses
the impact of Synthetic Biology across
the agricultural system. Considering both the crop plant as well as
the microbes holistically as part of the system, collectively they
contain over 100 gigabases of DNA.
,
 We are far
from being able to design systems at this scale, but genetic engineering
advances are moving forward in complexity, scale, and the number of
organisms simultaneously engineered as part of a project. System integration,
CAD, and AI will enable agricultural design far beyond what is currently
possible or even imaginable. It is amazing to consider that these
integrated systems could be encoded on a single treated seed, with
microbes and supporting insects emerging with the growth of the plant.
It also allows for a rational approach to engineering challenges.
For example, develop a firm quantitative basis for selecting the organism
that is the best for carrying a particular function, such as nitrogen
fixation, which is now ad hoc or based on the species
specialties of a particular lab. Agriculture is also changing, where
there is increased indoor farming, use of hydroponics, and alternative
crops, such as ocean-grown seaweed or crops specialized for space
travel.
−

Predicting the performance of a plant or microbe before field
trials
remains a challenge. This problem becomes more acute when the system
involves not only a plant, but many additional bacteria or fungi in
one system. Measurements in the laboratory or even greenhouse systems
are notorious for not being predictive of how engineered organisms
will function in the field. This problem
is similar to that observed in industrial biotechnology, where the
scale-up of microbial processes from the bench to large bioreactors
is fraught with failures.
,,
 Metabolic pathways can lead to unreliable product yields and genetic
circuits can break as the growth conditions change during scale-up.
To address these problems, there have been efforts to scale-down
soil microsystems to better replicate diverse field conditions in
the laboratory.
−

 These systems can include the effects of weather, insects, plants,
and soil types. They can be scaled down even further for high-throughput
screening. For example, the EcoFAB uses robotic systems to rapidly
visualize the impact of soil bacteria colonizing plant roots.
,
 The further development high-throughput imaging, coupled to modern
-omics techniques, could improve the reliability of prototyping complex
and highly-engineered agricultural systems before field testing. In
addition, the approvals process could be helped through the development
of new engineering approaches to control microbial persistence in
the environment and methods to prototype their performance and quantify
the risk-of-failure before field trials.
,,

Traditional land-based agriculture has reached
the maximum amount
of farmable area.
−

 While yield increases over the last hundred
years have been impressive, it is hard to imagine they will continue
to grow to match the needs of rapid population growth. Further, farming
has both an ecological impact and is a major contributor to climate
change, by releasing about 25% of human-produced greenhouse gases.
,
 Indoor agriculture will require a new generation of highly-engineered
plants as well as the engineering of microbes to obtain proteins,
fats, vitamins as well as the flavors and fragrances that make up
foods.
−

 Originally used to generate simple ingredients, cellular production
systems can produce more complex plant- and animal- derived foods,
including human milk and artificial meat.
,,
 For these products, if the
bioreactors are fed with sugar and Haber-Bosch derived ammonia, this
just pushes the problem to other sectors. Solving this issue will
require new approaches, whether they are biological or electrocatalysis,
to directly feed the bio-reactors by fixing CO2 and N2, respectively as feedstocks.
−

 Some companies are
already moving entirely to a CO2-to-food process, bypassing
land-based agriculture entirely.
,

The
coming decades are poised to bring transformative advances
in crop performance through Synthetic Biology. The crops of tomorrow
will require fewer inputs to achieve greater yields by employing complex,
engineered metabolic pathways (nitrogen fixation and improved photosynthesis)
while sensing, reporting, and responding to harsh environmental conditions,
pests, and disease. Bioenergy crops like maize and sugarcane currently
grown for bioethanol will be engineered to produce higher-value outputs,
including secondary metabolites, nutritious foods and animal feeds,
and therapeutics; this will boost the value of these crops for farmers
despite waning demand for biofuels. Plant architecture will become
optimized using engineered genetic circuits that consider environmental
conditions and grower needs. Hybrid crops that have revolutionized
agriculture in the industrialized world will reproduce asexually (apomixis),
making elite hybrid lines, and their associated increased yields,
accessible to farmers across the globe. To realize these developments, plant synthetic biologists will need
to overcome key technical obstacles bottlenecking the next generation
of these biotechnologies ( ). The long generation time of agriculturally-relevant
crops means making iterative improvements to engineered systems infeasible
and a lack of efficient genome editing tools and regeneration protocols
makes large, combinatorial engineering efforts impractical. Unlike
many microbial systems, it is not yet possible to use well-defined
design rules and CAD software to design a functional genetic system
in one go. A suite of new synthetic biology tools and strategies will
be required to accelerate plant engineering efforts that lead to novel
and complex agronomic traits.
 Synthetic Biology has progressed in microbes to the
point where
nearly any plant-derived product can be produced in the fermenter
and obtained in this way. The pathways
for complex plant-derived medicines have been moved to production
strains, including precursors to cancer chemotherapeutics (e.g., taxol), pain killers (e.g., opioids),
and antimicrobials (e.g., artemisinin).
−

 Dozens of plant genes can be combined from enzymes of other species
into one cell that converts sugars to these high-value pharmaceuticals.
,
 Complex plant-derived flavors and fragrances can also be produced,
such as sweeteners (e.g., steviol glycosides), vanillin,
and saffron.
−

 These further reduce the need to grow plants
in the field, and as feedstocks move from sugar to CO2,
even the feedstock can be derived from air.
Beyond agriculture,
there are many applications for highly-engineered
plant-microbial communities. They have already been used as bio-sensors
in the field, for example to detect landmines or to identify toxins in the soil. They have been used for bio-remediation, to sequester heavy
metals or degrade toxins. Plants have
been used to mine metals from soils.
−

 Miles-long berms protect
communities from the ocean can be stabilized. Note, however, that these examples are already being done
at some level that would be improved by the integration of engineering
tools described in this review. The potential applications are fantastical,
expanding on the most forward-thinking science fiction. At the dawn
of the Synthetic Biology era, architects and artists envisions houses
and cities being grown from seeds. While
this verges on hyperbole, it captures the fact that we do not fully
grasp what is possible when we have full engineering control over
plants and their microbial supporters.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Department of Energy
ARPA-E (grant DE-AR0001569; P.C., Q.Y., and C.A.V.), the US Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency Advanced Plant Technologies (HR0011-18-0049;
X.A.N., T.T., and C.A.V.), the DARPA CERES program (grant D24AC00001-00;
T.T. and C.A.V.), the Ministry of Defense of Israel (MIT 4441024394;
X.A.N., Y.C. and C.A.V.), the MIT Climate Grand Challenges Initiative
(K.Y. and C.A.V.), and the Army CHARMME (A.B. and C.A.V.). Research
was sponsored by the Army Research Office and was accomplished under
Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-22-2-0210. The views and conclusions
contained in this document are those of the authors and should not
be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed
or implied, of the Army Research Office or the U.S. Government. The
U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints
for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation herein.

## Biographies
Phillip Clauer earned his B.S. in Biochemistry
from the Pennsylvania
State University. He was a Ph.D. student in the Department of Biological
Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His graduate
research was focused on strategies engineer of nitrogen-fixing bacteria
to reduce synthetic nitrogenous fertilizer usage in industrial agriculture.

Angelina X. Nou has a B.S. in Bioengineering
from the University
of Maryland and a PhD in Biological Engineering from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, where she worked on soil biosensors.

Tyler Toth earned a B.S. in Biomedical Engineering
from the University
of Arizona. He completed a Ph.D. in Biological Engineering at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he built synthetic communication
systems between microbes and plants.

Qiguo
Yu obtained his BSc at Northeast Forestry University and
PhD degrees at Rutgers. For his graduate work, he performed research
with Prof. Pal Maliga. He worked as a Postdoctoral Associate at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His research focused on engineering
plants, notably chloroplasts, to to address challenges in agriculture
and environment sustainability.

Yonatan
Chemla earned a B.Sc. in Biological Engineering from Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Israel, and a B.A. in General History from
the Open University of Israel. He received a Ph.D. from Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Israel under the guidance of Prof. Lital
Alfonta and Prof. Michael Meijler. His Ph.D. research focused on the
intersection of genetic code expansion, cell-free systems, and the
fundamental mechanisms of bacterial translation. He performed a postdoctoral
fellowship at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he
is studying the design rules and environmental impact of engineered
environmental microbiomes to enhance their safety and efficacy.

Alice Boo was a Postdoctoral Associate in
the Department of Biological
Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). She
earned her MEng in Bioengineering from Imperial College London, where
her M.S., supervised by Prof. Tom Ellis, focused on developing CRISPRi-based
controllers to mitigate the metabolic burden of bacterial gene expression.
She completed her PhD at Imperial College London under the guidance
of Prof. Guy-Bart Stan and Dr. Rodrigo Ledesma Amaro. Her doctoral
research focused on developing multicellular controllers to stabilize
synthetic microbial consortia. As a postdoctoral fellow at MIT, Dr.
Boo’s work focuses on engineering plant-microbiome networks
to address challenges in sustainable agriculture.

Kwan Yoon received a B.S. in Chemical Engineering from
UMass Amherst.
As an undergraduate, he worked with Dr. Dong Wang studying nitrogen-fixing
symbiosis. At MIT, he was a graduate student in Biological Engineering.
His research focused on applying genetic sensors and circuits to combat
plant diseases.

Christopher Voigt is the
Daniel I.C. Wang Professor of Advanced
Biotechnology and the Department Head of Biological Engineering at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Prior to joining MIT, he
was a professor at the University of California – San Francisco.
He obtained his B.S.E from the University of Michigan in Chemical
Engineering, PhD from the California Institute of Technology in Bioengineering
with Frances Arnold, and was a postdoctoral fellow at the University
of California – Berkeley with Adam P. Arkin. He is a founder
of Pivot Bio, Fieldstone Bio, and Asimov Bio. His lab performs research
in synthetic biology, applied to agriculture, materials, chemicals
and other applications.

†.P.C., A.X.N., T.T., and Q.Y. contributed equally
to this work.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): C.A.V. is a
founder of Pivot Bio. C.A.V. is a founder and serves on the Scientific
Advisory Board of Fieldstone Bio. C.A.V. serves on the scientific
advisory board of Robigo. P.C., Q.Y., Y.C., C.A.V. are inventors on
patents in the space of plant or microbial genetic engineering for
applications related to agriculture.

## References