pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospathplosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC10977894PMC10977894.110977894109778943849856010.1371/journal.ppat.1012110PPATHOGENS-D-23-015921Research ArticleBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesRNA virusesOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusBiology and life sciencesMicrobiologyMedical microbiologyMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusMedicine and health sciencesPathology and laboratory medicinePathogensMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesViral pathogensOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryProteinsDNA-binding proteinsPolymerasesBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionBiology and life sciencesMolecular biologyMolecular biology techniquesDNA constructionPlasmid ConstructionResearch and analysis methodsMolecular biology techniquesDNA constructionPlasmid ConstructionBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral ReplicationBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesRNA virusesOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusH1N1Biology and life sciencesMicrobiologyMedical microbiologyMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusH1N1Medicine and health sciencesPathology and laboratory medicinePathogensMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusH1N1Biology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesViral pathogensOrthomyxovirusesInfluenza virusesInfluenza A virusH1N1Research and Analysis MethodsPrecipitation TechniquesImmunoprecipitationBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsPost-Translational ModificationUbiquitinationBAG6 inhibits influenza A virus replication by inducing viral polymerase subunit PB2 degradation and perturbing RdRp complex assembly
BAG6 inhibits influenza A virus replicationZhouYongConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyResourcesVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing LiTianData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyResources ZhangYunfanResources ZhangNianzhiFormal analysis GuoYuxinInvestigation GaoXiaoyiInvestigation PengWenjingInvestigation ShuSichengInvestigation ZhaoChuankuoInvestigation CuiDiResources SunHongleiWriting – review & editing SunYipengWriting – review & editing LiuJinhuaFunding acquisitionWriting – review & editing TangJunWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9015-0819ZhangRuiConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing PuJuanConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyWriting – review & editing 1
National Key Laboratory of Veterinary Public Health and Safety, College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China2
Key Laboratory for Prevention and Control of Avian Influenza and Other Major Poultry Diseases, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China3
Department of Preventive Veterinary, College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China4
Department of Basic Veterinary, College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, ChinaLowenAnice C.Editor .

## Data Availability
All the values behind the means and used to build graphs have been deposited to public repository at https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.25152692. All the raw images of WB and IF are uploaded as .

## Introduction
Influenza A virus (IAV) poses a significant threat to public health globally, causing seasonal epidemics and at least 500,000 deaths each year [ – ]. H1N1 and H3N2 are the predominant strains of human IAV responsible for yearly epidemics. Additionally, increasing avian-origin IAV strains, such as H5N1, H7N9 and H9N2, have acquired the ability to cross the species barrier to infect humans and cause high mortality rates of up to 50% [ – ].
IAV is enveloped negative-strand RNA viruses that contain 8 genome segments. The transcription and replication of IAV genome are catalyzed by the viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex composed of an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) and multiple copies of viral nucleoproteins (NP). The RdRp is a heterotrimeric complex containing three subunits: polymerase basic protein 2 (PB2), polymerase basic protein 1 (PB1), and polymerase acidic protein (PA). The three subunits play distinct roles within the polymerase, and are all essential for viral transcription and replication. Once an RdRp complex moves into the host cell nucleus, it initiates viral mRNA transcription by a ‘cap-snatching’ mechanism[ – ]. This process requires cleaving an mRNA cap-containing oligonucleotide from host cell pre-mRNA, and extending it using viral genomic RNA as a template. The cap-binding and endonuclease activities are activated by the signalling from the RNA-binding PB1 subunit to the cap-binding PB2 subunit, and the interface between these two subunits is essential for the polymerase activity. In addition, the viral polymerase subunits especially PB2 can influence the host range of IAVs. A specific E627K mutation in PB2 has been identified as the dominant host-adaptive mutation in most human-adapted IAVs, enable the avian-origin influenza viruses to overcome restriction barriers and replicate efficiently in human cells [ – ]. In turn, this makes the polymerase subunits interesting targets for host defense system and drug design [ ].
BAG6 (BCL2-associated athanogene 6, also known as BAT3 or Scythe) is a member of the BAG family due to a sequence homologous to the BAG domain at its C terminus and the collaboration with Heat Shock Protein 70 (Hsp70) family molecular chaperones [ ]. BAG6 was originally identified as a gene located in the human major histocompatibility complex (MHC) III locus on chromosome 6 that contains many genes essential for immune functions [ , ]. Subsequent studies discovered BAG6 participates in a variety of physiological and pathological processes, including the protein quality control [ , ], T cell response [ ], and apoptosis [ – ]. In addition, the expression of BAG6 exhibits a relatively higher levels in some tissues of multi-cellular organisms, such as testis and brain [ ], suggesting its potential function in spermatogenesis and brain development. Due to the diversity of its functions, the significance of BAG6 in disease and therapy is of particular interest. However, the role of BAG6 in virus infection has not been explored.
In this study, we identified BAG6 as an interaction partner of PB2 and thus restrict IAV replication in vitro and in vivo. BAG6 can bind to the N-terminus of viral PB2 polymerase subunit to perturb the RdRp complex formation and target PB2 for K48-linked ubiquitination degradation, thereby inhibiting viral polymerase activity and restricting IAV replication. These findings reveal a critical mechanism allowing the fast tracking of viral polymerase subunit PB2 and highlight the potential of using BAG6 for the development of novel anti-IAV therapeutics.

## Results

## The overexpression of BAG6 inhibits IAV replication
To clarify the role of BAG6 in influenza virus replication, we transfected the BAG6-HA expression plasmid into A549 cells or HeLa cells, and then infected the cells with the IAV human strain H1N1 (PR8) at an MOI of 1. At different time points post-infection, the viral proteins expressed in cells and the amount of virus released to the culture supernatant were examined by western blotting and TCID50 assay, respectively. The results showed that the expression of viral proteins (NP and M1) was significantly reduced in BAG6-overexpressing (BAG6-HA) A549 cells ( ) and HeLa cells ( ) compared with that in empty vector (EV) control cells. The virus titers, as determined by TCID50 assay, was 10- to 15-fold lower in BAG6-overexpressing cells than that in control cells (Figs and ), suggesting that BAG6 suppresses H1N1 replication. To determine if BAG6 also has antiviral activity against other subtypes of influenza viruses, we observed the viral protein and virus titers in A549 cells infected with avian H7N9 (CN0606), H9N2 (SD196) or human H5N1 (AH1) strains. Consistently, the ectopic expression of BAG6 also caused a significant decrease in viral protein expression ( ) and an up to 15-fold reduction in viral loads ( ) of H7N9, H9N2 and H5N1.
 

## Knockout of BAG6 enhances IAV replication
To further confirm the antiviral activity of BAG6 against IAV, we then generated a BAG6 knockout (BAG6-KO) A549 cell line using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing system, and verified that the knockout of BAG6 did not affect cell growth viability by CCK-8 assay ( ). We then infected BAG6-KO or WT A549 cells with the H1N1 (PR8), and examined whether BAG6 deficiency affected IAV replication. As shown in , an increased NP protein level ( ) and an up to 10-fold higher viral titers ( ) were observed in BAG6-KO cells than in BAG-WT cells. The consistent results were also observed in BAG6 knockout (BAG6-KO) HeLa cell line infected with H1N1 ( ), as well as in BAG6-KO A549 cells infected with other subtypes of influenza viruses, including avian A/H7N9 (CN0606), A/H9N2 (SD196) and human A/H5N1 (AH1) strains ( ), compared with the corresponding BAG6-WT cells. Next, to further confirm that the observed enhancement of IAV replication was indeed caused by specific depletion of BAG6 but not by off-target effects, we determined whether the phenotype could be rescued by a BAG6-HA expression plasmid in BAG6-KO A549 cells. The viral NP expression ( ) and virus titers ( ) up-regulated by BAG6-knockout were restored by BAG6-HA expression in BAG6-KO A549 cells infected with H1N1. Due to the potent antiviral activity of BAG6, we next determined whether IAV was able to regulate BAG6 expression during virus infection to evade its antiviral effects. The results showed that the transcription and expression of BAG6 was significantly suppressed by different subtypes of IAV strains ( ). Collectively, these findings suggest that BAG6 plays an important role in inhibiting the replication of different influenza virus subtypes from avian and human.
 

## BAG6 inhibits IAV replication in vivo
To investigate the role of BAG6 during IAV infection in vivo, BAG6-knockdown mice were generated using a peptide-conjugated phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomers (PPMOs) before PR8 virus (100 TCID50) or mock infection ( ). PPMOs are sequence-specific antisense agents that can be administered intranasally to elicit a transient reduction in the expression of the targeted gene product in the lungs of treated mice [ – ]. The successful depletion of BAG6 in lung by BAG6-targeting PPMO (PPMO-BAG6) was confirmed by western blotting compared with PPMO control (PPMO-NC) before and after virus infection ( ). The body weight and survival monitoring experiments showed that knocking down BAG6 alone (PPMO-BAG6-Mock) did not affect the weight and survival rate of mice ( ). However, the BAG6-knockdown mice (PPMO-BAG6-PR8) exhibited a more significant weight loss after IAV infection compared to the mice treated with PBS (PBS-PR8) or PPMO-NC (PPMO-NC-PR8) ( ). Moreover, while 40% of the PPMO-BAG6-PR8 mice succumbed to infection at 8 dpi, 100% of the PBS-PR8 or PPMO-NC-PR8-treated mice survived after infection ( ). Furthermore, the virus loads in the lungs of PPMO-BAG6-PR8 mice were up to approximate 10-fold higher than that in control mice at 3 and 5 day post infection (d.p.i.) ( ), which was consistent with the immunohistochemical staining of viral protein NP showing an increased viral antigen level in PPMO-BAG6-PR8 mice ( ). The histopathological analysis revealed more severe injury and inflammation in lung tissue of PPMO-BAG6-PR8 mice at 3 and 5 d.p.i. compared to those of control mice ( ). These results demonstrate that BAG6 plays a crucial role in inhibiting IAV replication in mice.
 

## BAG6 inhibits IAV replication independent of IFN-mediated innate immune pathways
Type I Interferon (IFN-I) plays a critical role in defending against viral infection and regulating innate immune response. A recent study reported that BAG6 was capable of regulating SeV-induced activation of IFN-I by inhibiting RIG-I/VISA-mediated innate immune response [ ]. To assess the role of IFN-I pathway in BAG6-mediated anti-IAV response, we firstly examined the expressions of several key components involved in IFN-I signaling pathways, including pattern recognition receptor RIG-I, the phosphorylated STAT1 (P-STAT1) and the IFN-stimulated gene ISG15, in both BAG6 overexpressing and knocking-out HeLa cells during PR8 infection. The results showed that the expressions of RIG-I, P-STAT1 and ISG15 were only slightly increased in BAG6-overexpressing cells ( ), and exhibited a comparatively obvious decrease in BAG6-deficient cells ( ). To further verify whether BAG6 inhibits IAV replication through IFN-I innate immune pathways, we used an IRF9-knockout HeLa cell line (HeLa-IRF9-KO), in which the IFN-I-mediated innate immune responses were disrupted by knocking out interferon regulation factor 9 (IRF9) in JAK-STAT pathway [ , ], to examine the effect of BAG6-HA on IAV replication. Interestingly, while the depletion of IRF9 completely inhibited the expression of IFN-I-induced antiviral factor ISG15 in PR8-infected cells, BAG6-HA still remained its ability to suppress the expression of viral NP protein ( ) and induced an up to 10-fold reduction in the virus titer ( ), which are equal to the reduced levels in HeLa-WT cells. In addition, we also examined the inhibitory effect of BAG6 on PR8 replication in Vero cell line, since it has been reported as a cell line with a deficient interferon-mediated antiviral response. As shown in , the overexpression of BAG6-HA could also significantly inhibit PR8 replication in Vero cells. These findings indicate that BAG6 is able to inhibit IAV replication independent of IFN-I-mediated innate immune response, and we thus speculate that the mild regulation of IFN-I immune activation presented in BAG6 overexpressing and knockout cells ( ) may be due to an indirect effect of BAG6 on virus replication, as numerous studies have shown that IAVs could escape innate antiviral response by inhibiting IFN-I activation.
 

## BAG6 inhibits the polymerase activity of IAV
To explore the mechanism by which BAG6 inhibits IAV replication, we assessed the impact of BAG6 on the polymerase activity of influenza viruses using a well-established dual-luciferase reporter assay [ , ]. The plasmids for expression of PB2, PB1, PA, and NP genes from various IAV subtype strains, including PR8 (H1N1), CN0606 (H7N9), and SD196 (H9N2), were co-transfected into HEK293T cells along with a pPoll-Luc reporter, respectively. The firefly luciferase levels in the cell lysate reflected the overall transcription and replication activities of viral polymerase complex (RdRp). The results showed that the overexpression of BAG6 inhibited the polymerase activities of H1N1, H7N9, and H9N2 in a dose-dependent manner ( ). In contrast, the enhanced polymerase activities of all IAV subtypes were observed in BAG6-KO A549 cells compared to the WT control ( ). The influenza virus polymerase complex is a key enzyme responsible for the replication and transcription of the influenza virus genome [ ]. In view of this, we performed qRT-PCR analysis of viral mRNA and vRNA in H1N1-infected cells. The results showed that the mRNA and vRNA levels of both NP and M1 genes were significantly suppressed in BAG6-overexpressing cells ( ), and were elevated in BAG6-KO cells ( ). These data demonstrate that the BAG6 can inhibit the polymerase activity of various IAV subtypes.
 Interestingly, when we examined the control expression of transfected plasmids (PB2, PB1, PA, NP and BAG6) in dual-luciferase reporter assay ( ), a remarkably decreasing expression of PB2 protein, but not other viral proteins, from different IAV subtypes were found with the increase of BAG6-HA ( right panels). Correspondingly, the expression levels of PB2 also significantly increased in BAG6-KO cells compared to those in BAG6-WT cells ( right panels). These results indicate that BAG6 may inhibits the polymerase activity of IAV through regulating PB2 expression.

## BAG6 interacts with viral polymerase subunit PB2 and prevents the assembly of the RdRp complex
To investigate the molecular mechanism by which BAG6 inhibits the polymerase activity of IAV, we examined the potential interaction between BAG6 and viral polymerase subunit proteins, including PB1, PB2, PA and NP. The A549 cells were transfected with BAG6-HA plasmid and then infected with H1N1 (PR8). At 24 h post-infection, the cells were harvested for immunoprecipitation assay with anti-HA agarose. Interestingly, we found that BAG6 was able to co-immunoprecipitated with all the components of viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex (PB1, PB2, PA and NP), but not with other viral proteins, such as M1 ( ). We next wished to verify the specific viral protein that directly interact with BAG6. To avoid that viral polymerase subunit proteins may be immunoprecipitated by BAG6-HA through indirect binding of vRNP complex, we performed immunoprecipitation assay in A549 cells co-transfected with BAG6-HA and PB1-Flag, or PB2-Flag, or PA-Flag, or NP-Flag, respectively. The M1-Flag was used as a negative control. The results showed that BAG6-HA was only able to interact with PB2-Flag ( , lane 3), but not with PB1-Flag, PA-Flag, or NP-Flag individually ( , lanes 4–6). Meanwhile, BAG6-HA was also readily pulled down by PB2-Flag-agarose in the co-IP assay ( ), confirming the interaction between BAG6 and PB2. Subsequently, we further verified the association of endogenous BAG6 and PB2 using anti-BAG6 mAb ( ). The immunofluorescence staining showed that while the PB2 alone mainly localized in the nuclei, BAG6 could co-localize with PB2 in both nuclei and cytoplasm of cells ( ).
 PB2 protein is an essential component of the influenza virus polymerase. It interacts with PB1 through its short N-terminal peptide fragment but does not directly interact with PA [ – ], forming a compact, spherical structure of RNA polymerase [ , , ]. We next investigated whether the interaction between BAG6 and PB2 would affect the binding of PB2 and PB1. The Co-IP assay revealed that BAG6 protein could bind to the N-terminus of PB2 protein (amino acids 1–247) ( , lane 3). Whereas, a reduced binding level of PB1 in PB2-Flag-agarose was observed in BAG6-HA overexpressing cells compared to that in the control cells ( , compared lane 5 and 6) and the immunoprecipitated PB1 decreased in a BAG6-dose-dependent manner ( ), suggesting that BAG6 could compete with PB1 to bind PB2, thereby inhibiting the formation of viral polymerase complex.

## BAG6 induces PB2 degradation through K48-linked ubiquitination pathway
BAG6 is reported as a proteasomal substrate associated protein and participates in the efficient proteasome targeting and ubiquitin degradation primarily mediated by E3 ligase RNF126 [ – ]. We then examined the stability and degradation of PB2 protein in BAG6-overexpressing cells. A cycloheximide chase assay showed that ectopic expression of BAG6-HA accelerated the degradation of Flag-PB2 protein in A549 cells in comparison with the vector control ( ). The reduced PB2 protein levels by BAG6-HA in both Flag-PB2-transfected cells ( ) and PR8-infected cells ( ) were restored to the control level by the treatment of proteasome inhibitor MG132, but not by lysosome inhibitor Chloroquine (CQ), indicating that BAG6 likely induces proteasome degradation of PB2. We next explored the effect of BAG6 on PB2 ubiquitination by a ubiquitination assay, and found that the polyubiquitination level of PB2 was up-regulated by BAG6 overexpression ( ).
 The type of ubiquitin chain linked to a protein determines its fate. K48- and K63-linked polyubiquitin chains are the two most abundant polyubiquitin chain types. K48 chains tag substrates for proteasomal degradation, whereas K63 chains regulate the functions of target proteins [ ]. We further characterized which type of ubiquitin chains of PB2 was regulated by BAG6 in A549 cells co-transfected with BAG6-HA and Flag-PB2, as well as K48 or K63 ubiquitin plasmids, respectively. As shown in , BAG6 promoted the K48-linked ubiquitination of PB2 but did not influence the K63-linked ubiquitination of PB2 ( ), indicating that BAG6 induced the K48-linked ubiquitination and degradation of PB2.
Ubiquitin typically couples to the internal lysine residues on substrate proteins to form an isopeptide bond. Since eighteen lysine residues have been reported to be conserved among IAV PB2 proteins [ ], we next identify the specific lysine residues on PB2 ubiquitinated by BAG6 using site-directed mutagenesis. We generated PB2 mutants containing individual lysine to arginine mutations, and assessed the ubiquitination of each lysine-mutated PB2 proteins in cells transfected with HA-BAG6. As shown in , mutation of K189R strongly reduced PB2 ubiquitination upon expression of HA-BAG6 ( , lane 11), suggesting that residue K189 is the main target for ubiquitination by BAG6. Consistently, the mutation of K189R in PB2 prevented it from being degraded by HA-BAG6 in comparison with the PB2-WT protein ( ). Since K189 is highly conserved in PB2 of different IAV subtypes ( ), these data underscore that BAG6-mediated polyubiquitination and degradation of PB2 is a common host defense mechanism against IAV infection.

## The N-terminus of BAG6 interacts with PB2 and inhibits IAV replication
BAG6 is a long multi-domain protein, consisting of an amino-terminal ubiquitin-like (UBL) domain, a central proline-rich segment, a zinc finger-like domain and a carboxyl-terminal BAG domain ( ). To identify the functional domain of BAG6 that is crucial for interacting with PB2 and restricting IAV infection, we constructed a series of truncated BAG6 mutants (as indicated in ) and measured the interaction between PB2 and these mutants in HEK293T cells. The Co-IP assay showed that the mutants 1-255aa and 1-753aa at the N-terminus of BAG6 retained the ability to interact with PB2 to the level of full-length BAG6 ( , lanes 4 and 5), whereas other truncated mutants lacking the N-terminus lost their ability to bind PB2 ( , lanes 6–8). More interestingly, the immunofluorescence staining showed that the PB2-Flag alone mainly localized in the nuclei, but the N-terminal truncation of BAG6 (BAG6 1:255-HA), which lacks a nuclear localization signal (NLS), could co-localize with PB2 and induce its accumulation in the cytoplasm ( ). These results demonstrated that the 1-255aa at the N-terminus of BAG6 is necessary and sufficient for interacting with PB2 and might be responsible for targeting it for cytoplasm accumulation. We also examined the effect of truncation mutants (BAG6 1:255-HA or 641:1132aa-HA) on IAV replication and viral polymerase activity by western blotting, TCID50 assay, and pPoll-Luc reporter assay, respectively. The result showed that the overexpression of BAG6 1:255-HA, but not BAG6 641:1132-HA, significantly suppressed the expression of PB2 and NP ( ), reduced viral titers ( ), and inhibited viral polymerase activity ( ) in H1N1-infected cells. Meanwhile, the viral protein expression ( ) and virus titers ( ) up-regulated in BAG6-KO cells were also restored to the control levels (BAG6-WT) by BAG6 1:255-HA overexpression. These results demonstrate that BAG6 blocks IAV polymerase activity and viral replication via its N-terminal 1-255aa region.
 

## The synergistic effect of UBL domain (17-92aa) and PB2-binding domain (124-186aa) of BAG6 inhibits polymerase activity and restricts IAV replication
To further determine the PB2-binding sites of BAG6, we analyzed the protein structure of BAG6 from AlphaFold2 database and predicted the corresponding interaction domain of BAG6 and PB2 using an online software ColabFold. As shown in , BAG6 associates with the N-terminus of PB2 through its 124–186 amino acids, which at least partially occupies the spatial position of PB1-PB2 interaction, whereas the Ub-like domain (17-92aa) at the N-terminus of BAG6 does not exhibit a direct interaction with PB2 in structure. According to the previous reports [ , , , ], the UBL domain is mainly responsible for recruiting ubiquitination machinery for efficient ubiquitination and degradation of various protein substrates. We, therefore, hypothesize that BAG6 may function as a transient platform that recruits the ubiquitin ligase by UBL domain and binds PB2 substrate by 124-186aa region during IAV infection, promoting PB2 degradation and IAV restriction. To verify this hypothesis, we constructed the corresponding truncation mutant plasmids, including BAG6 1:92-HA and 92:255-HA, as well as a deletion mutant lacking 124-186aa (BAG6 del 124:186-HA), as indicated in . The Co-IP assay showed that only BAG6 92:255-HA was readily immunoprecipitated with PB2-Flag, but other mutants lacking 124-186aa region (1:92-HA and del 124:186-HA) could not bind to PB2 ( ), confirming the residues 124–186 as PB2-binding region of BAG6. Interestingly, compared with BAG6 1:255-HA, the ectopic expression of BAG6 92:255-HA had an obvious but reduced inhibitory effect on viral NP protein expression ( ), viral titers ( ), and viral polymerase activity ( ) in H1N1-infected cells, whereas BAG6 1:92-HA and del 124:186-HA completely failed to inhibit IAV replication and polymerase activity. These findings indicate that the PB2-binding region of BAG6 is necessary but insufficient for efficient IAV restriction. It may exert a reduced antiviral effects through binding PB2 and disrupting RdRp complex assembly, but fail to recruit ubiquitination machinery for PB2 degradation. These data demonstrate that both the UBL domain (17-92aa) and PB2-binding region (124-186aa) are required for highly effective PB2 degradation and IAV restriction.
 

## Discussion
IAVs are among the most common contagious pathogens to cause severe respiratory infections. Host cells have developed multiple strategies to defend against IAV infection. This study identified BAG6 as a novel intrinsic antiviral factor to negatively regulate the replication of multiple IAV subtypes, including human H1N1, H5N1 and avian H7N9, H9N2. BAG6 specifically interacts with the N-terminus of viral polymerase subunit protein PB2, competitively interrupts the assembly of functional RdRp complex and induces the ubiquitination degradation of PB2, which attenuate viral polymerase activity and IAV replication in mammalian cells and pathogenicity in mouse model ( ). These findings reveal a new antagonism mechanism between pathogens and hosts, and highlight a potent antiviral activity of BAG6 by targeting the key viral protein PB2.
 PB2 protein of IAV is critical for RdRp complex to catalyze the viral transcription and replication, and acts as a key determinant for mammalian adaptation of avian influenza virus. PB2 is responsible for binding the polymerase complex to host cell RNA and initiating viral transcription. It contains a conserved N-terminal fragment that interacts with PB1 to form the polymerase complex, and a central cap-binding domain that recognizes the 5’ cap structure of host cell mRNA, allowing the polymerase to "steal" the cap and use it to prime viral transcription [ ]. Besides, the C-terminal part of PB2 contains the so-called 627 domain (residues 535–684), which participates in host adaptation and virulence by influencing the binding of NLS to importins [ ]. Multiple host proteins have been found to restrict IAV replication by targeting PB2. For instance, TRIM35 mediates the protection against influenza infection by activating TRAF3 and inducing K48-linked ubiquitination and degradation of PB2 [ ]. PIAS restricts IAV replication and virulence through mediating PB2 SUMOylation and reducing its stability [ ]. In addition, ANP32A inhibits IAV replication in mammalian cells through differential regulation of the activity of viral polymerases carrying PB2-627K (human) or PB2-627E (avian) signature [ , ]. Here, we found that BAG6 associated with PB2, thereby perturbing its interaction with PB1 and inducing its ubiquitination degradation. Notably, BAG6 recognizes the N-terminus of PB2 and promotes PB2 ubiquitination at its K189 residue, which is highly conserved among avian and human influenza strains from Global Initiative on Sharing Avian Influenza Data (GISAID, www.epicov.org) ( ), providing the mechanistic basis that BAG6 acts as a potent antiviral factor during both human- and avian-origin IAV infection.
BAG6 is a multifunctional protein in host cell and participates in a variety of physiological and pathological processes [ ]. BAG6 functions as an essential factor in ubiquitin-mediated metabolism of neo-synthesized defective polypeptides and misfolded/mislocalized proteins [ – ]. It can capture these defective or mislocalized substrates by interacting with their unprocessed or non-inserted hydrophobic domains [ ], and at the same time, recruit the E3 ligases, primarily RNF126, to its N-terminal UBL domain for efficient ubiquitination and degradation [ ]. Besides, BAG6 is necessary for DNA damage-induced apoptosis by controlling the p53 signaling pathway [ ]. It promotes p53 transactivation by stabilizing its interaction with the acetyltransferase p300 and enhancing p53 acetylation during apoptosis and autophagy [ , , ]. A recent study reported that BAG6 was capable of regulating the activation of IFN-I by inhibiting RIG-I/VISA-mediated recognition of RNA ligand [ ]. However, the role of BAG6 in virus infection remains opaque. In this study, we provide evidence that BAG6 can potently inhibit influenza virus replication in vitro and in vivo. Further investigation found that the overexpression of BAG6 neither affected cell apoptosis during IAV infection ( ), nor relied on the IFN-I antiviral response to inhibit IAV replication ( ), whereas BAG6 directly interacts with viral polymerase subunit PB2 and targets it for ubiquitination degradation. These findings reveal a novel mechanism by which BAG6 serves as an antiviral factor to specifically target viral protein through its protein quality control function.
In the recent years, there has been increased interest in harnessing targeted protein degradation (TPD) technology in the development of antiviral therapies by inducing the degradation of either viral or host-related protein targets, but the off-target side effects and toxicity greatly limit its use [ – ]. In this study, we found the N-terminus of host protein BAG6 contains a ubiquitin-like domain (UBL, 17-92aa), which was previously reported to recruit E3 ligase RNF126 and ubiquitinates BAG6-associated clients [ ], and a PB2-binding domain (124-186aa), which was proved to interact with viral polymerase subunit PB2 protein during IAV infection. Interestingly, although the BAG6:92-255aa mutant lacking the UBL domain weakened BAG6-meditated antiviral activity against IAV, it still significantly restricted viral polymerase activity and replication ( ). This mirrors the findings that BAG6 could suppress the viral polymerase activity by competing with PB1 for PB2 binding and interfering with RdRp assembly ( ), even in the situation with PB2 degradation resistance. These data indicate that both UBL and PB2-binding domains are essential for the efficient PB2 degradation and BAG6-mediated antiviral activity. This unique structure thus allows BAG6 naturally possessing a proteolysis-targeting function. By targeting viral PB2, BAG6 is more likely to become a potential candidate for antiviral drug development.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
The laboratory animal usage license number is SYXK-Beijing-2018-0038, certified by Beijing Association for Science and Technology. All animal research was performed in compliance with the Beijing Laboratory Animal Welfare and Ethics guidelines, as issued by the Beijing Administration Committee of Laboratory Animals, and the China Agricultural University (CAU) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee guidelines (ID: SKLAB-B-2010-003) approved by the Animal Welfare Committee of CAU. All experiments with live viruses were performed in Biosafety Level II laboratory (BSL-2) in CAU. All animal research involved in this study was approved by the Animal Welfare Committee of CAU (No.AW03503202-2-2).

## Cells and viruses
Human lung adenocarcinoma epithelial cells (A549), HeLa cell, Madin-Darby canine kidney cells (MDCK), Vero cell and human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293T) were purchased from ATCC. IRF9-KO HeLa cells were generated as previous indicated [ , ]. BAG6 KO A549 cells and BAG6 KO HeLa cells were generated using CRISPR/Cas 9-based knockout of BAG6 gene. In brief, the BAG6 gene target sequences, #1 5’- CACCGCGGTACTGGTACTATCATT-3’ and #2 5’- CACCAGGCTCCTCCACAGCGGTAC-3’, were inserted into the guide RNA (gRNA) expression cassette of the pUC19 vector, which also contains an expression cassette of Cas9. The pUC19 plasmid containing the BAG6 target sequence was then transfected into A549 or HeLa cells. The transfected cells were trypsinized 24 h later into single cells, which were diluted and inoculated into a 96-well plate by infinite dilution. Each colony was individually propagated in a 96-well plate, and the knockout of BAG6 expression was confirmed by western blotting. Cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% v/v heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (10099141C, Gibco, USA), 100 U mL−1 penicillin and 100 μg mL−1 streptomycin at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.
Influenza A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (PR8, H1N1, accession HA number: CY045764), A/chicken/China/0606-13/2017 (CN0606, H7N9, accession HA number: MK530478), and A/chicken/Shandong/196/2011 (SD196, H9N2, accession HA number: KR002651) and A/Anhui/1/2005 (AH1, H5N1, accession HA number: HM172104) viruses were maintained in the laboratory. All experiments using non-H5 live viruses were performed in the Biosafety Level II laboratory (BSL-2), and experiments using H5 viruses were performed in the Biosafety Level III Laboratory (BSL-3) in CAU.

## Plasmids construction and transfection
Protein expression plasmids BAG6-HA, BAG6 1:255-HA, BAG6 1:753-HA, BAG6 482:753-HA, BAG6 482:1126-HA, BAG6 642:1126-HA, PB2-Flag, N-terminal PB2-Flag, PB1-Flag, PA-Flag, NP-Flag, M1-Flag, PB2-K5R-Flag, PB2-K33R-Flag, PB2-K41R-Flag, PB2-K48R-Flag, PB2-K61R-Flag, PB2-K187R-Flag, PB2-K189R-Flag, PB2-K331R-Flag, PB2-K339R-Flag, PB2-K353R-Flag, PB2-K482R-Flag, PB2-K561R-Flag, PB2-K617R-Flag, PB2-K699R-Flag, PB2-K721R-Flag, PB2-K736R-Flag, PB2-K738R-Flag, PB2-K752R-Flag, Ub-HA, K48-Ub-HA and K63-Ub-HA were generated by subcloning the corresponding coding segment into the HA-pRK5 or Flag-pRK5 empty vector by homologous recombinase-mediated recombination ( ). Plasmid transfections in HEK293T or A549 cells were performed using jetPRIME (101000046, Polyplus, France).

## Antibodies and reagents
Antibody concentrations for immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting were determined empirically. All immunoblot antibodies were diluted as specified in 5% w/v BSA-TBST. Antibodies used as follows: anti-BAG6 (B01P, Abnova, Taiwan, China), anti-PB2 (PA5-32220, Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts, USA), anti-PB1 (PA5-34914, Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts, USA), anti-β-actin (A1978, Sigma, Shanghai, China), anti-GAPDH (ab8245, Abcam, Shanghai, China), anti-PARP (9542, Cell Signaling Technology, Massachusetts, USA), anti-Flag (F1804, Sigma, Shanghai, China and 20543-1-AP, Proteintech, Chicago, USA), anti-HA (H9658, Sigma, Shanghai, China and 51064-2-AP, Proteintech, Chicago, USA), anti-RIG-I (20566-1-AP, Proteintech, Chicago, USA), anti-p-STAT1 (9167, Cell Signaling Technology, Massachusetts, USA), anti-ISG15 (sc166755, Santa Cruz, California, USA), anti-influenza A virus NP (A01506-40, GenScript, New Jersey, USA), Mouse monoclonal anti-influenza A virus M1 antibody (Lab Homemade, Beijing, China, ZL201910912806.0). Cycloheximide (CHX, HY-12320), MG132 (HY-13259C) and Chloroquine (CQ, HY-17589A) was purchased from MCE.

## Polymerase activity assay
A dual-luciferase reporter assay system (E1960, Promega, Wisconsin, USA) was used to compare the polymerase activities of different viral RNP complexes. PB2, PB1, PA, and NP gene segments of the indicated viruses (PR8, CN0606 and SD196) were separately cloned into the pCDNA3.1 expression plasmid. PB2, PB1, PA, and NP plasmids (125 ng each plasmid) along with the pLuci luciferase reporter plasmid (10 ng) and the renilla internal control plasmid (2.5 ng) were used to transfect cells. Cell cultures were incubated at 37°C. Cell lysates were analyzed at 24 h post-transfection for firefly and renilla luciferase activities using a GloMax 96 microplate luminometer (GM2000, Promega, Wisconsin, USA). Polymerase proteins were detected by Western blotting.

## BAG6 knockdown in mice by PPMO
Six-week-old BALB/c background female mice were purchased from Beijing Vital River Co. Ltd. (Beijing, China). Animal studies were carried out in specific pathogen-free barrier facilities. Facilities were maintained at an acceptable range of 20–26°C humidity of 30–70% on a 12-h dark/12-h light cycle. Peptide-conjugated PPMO were purchased from Gene Tools (USA). PPMO targeting mouse BAG6 gene (PPMO-BAG6) was designed as CTGGCACTATCACTCGGCTCCATG. A nontargeting PPMO control sequence (PPMO-NC) (CCTCTTACCTCAGTTACAATTTATA), was used as control. Six to eight weeks BALB/c female mice were inoculated intranasally with 100 μg of PPMOs in 50 μL PBS for 2 days continuously.

## Mice experiments
Mice were anesthetized and intranasally inoculated with PR8 virus at a median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) of 100 in 50 μL of PBS. Body weight and survival were monitored daily for 14 days. Lung tissue lysates were generated by homogenizing snap-frozen lung tissues twice (20 s each time) in MEM medium and centrifuging the lung suspensions at 2000 rpm for 15 min. TCID50 assays were performed using MDCK cells and TCID50 was calculated as previously described [ ]. A portion of the lung from each euthanized mouse at 3 and 5 dpi was fixed in 10% phosphate-buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Immunohistochemical staining of viral antigen was performed as described previously [ ].

## Quantitative real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA from cells was extracted using an RNA isolation kit (Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). First-strand complementary DNA was synthesized from 1 μg of total RNA using a TransScript RT reagent kit (TransGen, Beijing, China), and oligo dT primer were used for detecting host genes. For the detection of influenza virus mRNA and vRNA, oligo dT primer and uni-12 primer (5′-AGCAAAAGCAGG-3′) [ ] were respectively used to generate cDNAs. Generated cDNA was subjected to qPCR in a 25 μL reaction volume using 2X M5 HiPer SYBR Premix EsTaq (with Tli RNaseH) (Mei5bio) ( ). Human β-actin genes were amplified for normalization of the cDNA amount used in qPCR. Reactions were conducted in triplicate, and the data were analyzed using the 2−ΔΔCt method.

## Immunoprecipitation and western blotting
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl at pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Tri-ton X-100, 1 mM DTT, 1× complete protease inhibitor cocktail, and 10% glycerol) and pre-cleared with Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose beads (sc-2003, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA) for 2 h at 4°C. The lysates were then immunoprecipitated with indicated antibodies or isotype-matched control antibodies plus protein G Sepharose beads at 4°C for 2–4 h. The beads were then washed three times and boiled. Protein samples were analyzed by Western blotting. For Western blotting, protein samples were mixed with 6× loading buffer supplemented with 10% β-mercaptoethanol, heated at 100°C for 5 min and separated on a 10% SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions. After electrophoresis, protein samples were electroblotted onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Bio-Rad, CA, USA) and blocked for 2 h in Tris-buffered saline (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, containing 150 mM NaCl) containing 5% (w/v) non-fat dry milk and 0.5‰ (v/v) Tween-20. The blots were incubated with the primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. The next day, the blots were incubated with corresponding horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature (RT). HRP antibody binding was detected using a standard enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) kit (wbluf0500, Millipore, USA).

## Protein degradation assay
HEK293T cell lines were cotransfected with PB2-Flag plasmid with empty vector or BAG6-HA plasmid. After 24 h post-transfection, CHX (50 μg/mL) was added to the medium and cells were harvested at different time points. Western blotting of cell lysates was performed to detect PB2-Flag, BAG6-HA and β-actin. To investigate the cellular pathway of BAG6-mediated PB2 degradation, at 24 h post-transfection, or infection with PR8 (H1N1), MG132 (20 μM) or CQ (150 μM) was added to the medium, and the cells were harvested 6 h after treatment. Three independent experiments were performed.

## Ubiquitination assay
HEK293T cells were transfected with HA-tagged ubiquitin (Ub-HA) plasmids, BAG6-HA or empty plasmids, and PB2-Flag or PB2-Flag with Lysine mutations. At 24 h post-transfection, the cells were treated with MG132 (20 μM) for 6 h and then lysed in 1% SDS lysis buffer. After being boiled for 10 min, the lysates were diluted 10 times with cold lysis buffer supplemented with 1× complete protease inhibitor cocktail, 10 mM DTT, and 10 mM NEM. PB2-Flag protein was then purified with anti-Flag antibody and subjected to western blotting analysis. Ubiquitinated PB2-Flag was detected by anti-HA antibody.

## Site statistics for amino acid residue 189 of the PB2 protein
We downloaded all available PB2 amino acid sequences of human and avian origin for influenza viruses of subtypes H1, H3, H5, H7, and H9 from the Global Initiative on Sharing Avian Influenza Data (GISAID, www.epicov.org) (date of access: Jan. 22, 2024), and multiple sequence alignment was performed using MAFFT v7.0 [ ], and then the amino acid categories and percentages of the 189 amino acid residues were counted.

## Confocal microscopy
Cells on coverslips were washed twice with prewarmed PBS and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature. Cells were subsequently permeabilized with immunostaining permeabilization buffer containing Triton X-100 (P0096, Beyotime, Shanghai, China) for 10 min and blocked with QuickBlock blocking buffer (P0220, Beyotime, Shanghai, China) for 20 min at room temperature. Fixed cells were incubated with indicated antibodies diluted in immunostaining primary antibody dilution buffer at 4°C overnight. Coverslips were then washed three times with PBS and incubated with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated secondary antibodies or Alexa Fluor 555-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at 37°C. Coverslips were finally washed three times and mounted onto microscope slides with DAPI staining solution (C1006, Beyotime, Shanghai, China) for 8 min and examined by confocal microscopy. Immunoassayed cells were visualized using a Nikon super-resolution laser scanning confocal microscope under a 100-time oil objective and analyzed using the Imaris 9.2 platform.

## Prediction of protein structure and complex
An online software, ColabFold, was used for the prediction of protein structures and complexes by combining the fast homology search of MMseqs2 with AlphaFold2 or RoseTTAFold. Sequence alignments/templates are generated through MMseqs2 and HHsearch [ ]. The amino acid sequences of BAG6 protein N-terminal 1-255aa and PB2 protein N-terminal 1-247aa were used for the prediction of protein complex at the open-source website ColabFold v1.5.2 (https://colab.research.google.com/github/sokrypton/ColabFold/blob/main/AlphaFold2.ipynb#scrollTo=mbaIO9pWjaN0), and the predicted results were viewed and analyzed using PyMOL v2.5.0.

## Cell viability assay
WT A549 and BAG6-KO A549 cells or WT HeLa and BAG6-KO HeLa cells were plated in 96-well plates at a density of 2000 cells in 100 μL of medium per well. The cell viability was then assayed according to the CCK8 kit instructions (C0042, Beyotime, Shanghai, China).

## Apoptosis detection
Annexin V-PE/7-AAD Apoptosis Detection Kit (A213-01, Vazyme, Nanjing, China) was used for quantifying the cell apoptosis rates. The cells were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in 100 μL of 1× binding buffer supplemented with 5 μL of phycoerythrin (PE) annexin V and 5 μL of 7-aminoactinomycin D (7-AAD). Data were analyzed in FlowJo.

## Statistical analysis
For all the bar graphs, data are shown as the mean ± SD. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software v.8.00 (GraphPad Software). Unpaired Student’s t-test was used to perform statistical analysis between the two groups. The Kaplan-Meier method was employed for survival analysis. Differences in means were considered statistically significant at P < 0.05; significance levels are as follow: *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; NS, not significant.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## BAG6 inhibits H1N1 replication in HeLa cells.
(A and B) HeLa cells were transfected with BAG6-HA or Empty vector (EV) plasmids. At 24 h post-transfection, the cells were infected with IAV H1N1 (MOI = 1.0). The viral NP expression was measured by western blotting at different time points postinfection, as indicated (A). Viral titers in the supernatants were determined by TCID50 assay at 12, 24 or 36 h post-infection (B). (C and D) BAG6-KO and BAG6-WT HeLa cells were infected with IAV H1N1 (MOI = 1.0), and the NP and M1 expression in the cell lysates (C) and viral titers in the supernatants (D) were determined by western blotting and TCID50 assay, respectively, at the indicated time points. Data presented as means ± SD and are representative of three independent experiments. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, Unpaired Student’s t test.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## BAG6 knockout did not affect cell growth viability.
Cell viability of BAG6-KO A549 and BAG6-WT A549 cells was measured using the CCK8 kit.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## The expression of BAG6 can be suppressed by IAV infection.
(A-C) A549 cells were infected with IAV H1N1 (A) or H7N9 (B) or H9N2 (C) (MOI = 1.0), and the mRNA and protein expression of BAG6 were determined by quantitative real-time PCR (left panels) and western blotting (right panels), respectively, at the indicated time points postinfection. (D) A549 cells were infected with IAV H1N1 or H7N9 or H9N2 with different MOI as indicated. The expression of BAG6 protein was determined by western blotting. Data presented as means ± SD and are representative of three independent experiments. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, Unpaired Student’s t test.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## BAG6 does not affect IAV-induced apoptosis.
(A) BAG6-HA expression plasmid or empty vector was transfected into A549 cells for 24 h and then infected with PR8 virus at 1.0 MOI. The expression of PARP, cleaved PARP, and viral NP and M1 proteins at 0, 4, 8, 12, 24 and 36 h post-infection was detected using western blotting. β-actin detection was used as loading control. (B) A549 cells were untreated, transfected with BAG6 only, infected with IAV only, or both transfected with BAG6 and infected with IAV, and the cells were collected by centrifugation and were resuspended in 100 μL of 1x binding buffer supplemented with 5 μL of PE annexin V and 5 μL 7-AAD. Fluorescence of the stained cells was then analyzed using flow cytometry. Data presented as means ± SD and are representative of three independent experiments. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, Unpaired Student’s t test.
(TIF)
S1 Table

## Amino acid residues at site 189 of the PB2 protein of different subtypes of influenza virus.
(DOCX)
S2 Table

## List of primer pairs used in this study.
(DOCX)
S1 Data

## The raw data of western blot and IF in this study.
(PDF)

 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012110.r001Decision Letter 0
LeeBenhurSection EditorLowenAnice C.Academic Editor© 2024 Lee, Lowen2024Lee, Lowenhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
4 Dec 2023

Dear Dr. Zhang,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "BAG6 inhibits influenza A virus replication by inducing viral polymerase subunit PB2 degradation and perturbing RdRp complex assembly" for consideration at PLOS Pathogens. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. In light of the reviews (below this email), we would like to invite the resubmission of a significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments.
The reviewers appreciated the attention to an interesting topic but had mixed views on the extent to which the conclusions are supported by the data. Reviewer 2 raised important considerations related to already described functions of BAG6, which could account for some of the observed effects on IAV replication via a distinct mechanism to that described. Thus, in revising the manuscript, it is important to assess the impact of BAG6 overexpression and knockout on innate antiviral responses. Revisions should also focus on increasing the rigor of the experiments through the inclusion of appropriate controls, as suggested by all three reviewers.
We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Anice C. Lowen
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Benhur Lee
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************
The reviewers appreciated the attention to an interesting topic but had mixed views on the extent to which the conclusions are supported by the data. Reviewer 2 raised important considerations related to already described functions of BAG6, which could account for some of the observed effects on IAV replication via a distinct mechanism to that described. Thus, in revising the manuscript, it is important to assess the impact of BAG6 overexpression and knockout on innate antiviral responses. Revisions should also focus on increasing the rigor of the experiments through the inclusion of appropriate controls, as suggested by all three reviewers.
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: Virus-host interaction is particularly important for the regulation of influenza A virus (IAV) replication and pathogenesis. In the present manuscript, the authors found that overexpression of BAG6 inhibited IAV replication, whereas knockout of BAG6 enhanced IAV replication. By performing luciferase reporter assay, the authors found that BAG6 inhibited the polymerase activity of IAV. Mechanistically, they found that BAG6 suppressed the RdRp activity of IAV through catalyzing the K48-linked ubiquitination and degradation of viral PB2 protein. Meanwhile, the ubiquitin-like (UBL) domain (17-92aa) and PB2-binding domain (124-186aa) of BAG6 were both required for mediating the PB2 degradation and the impairment of virus replication. Notably, BAG6 had obvious antiviral effect in mice. The manuscript can be further improved by addressing the comments below.
Reviewer #2: This is an interesting work revealing the role of BAG6 (BCL2-associated athanogene 6) in restricting Influenza A virus (IAV) replication. The IAV is a major public health concern worldwide. During infection, the viral genome is replicated and translated by the RDRP complex, which consists of PB2, PB1, PA, NP and the vRNA. These polymerases are relatively conserved across the IAV subtypes and are involved in host tropism and host adaptation. In Fig.1, both for the avian and human IAV, overexpression of BAG6 reduces viral translation and virus titer. Simultaneously, in Fig.2, BAG6 KO significantly enhanced virus replication. During this course, the authors found a decrease in BAG6 transcription and translation, and is evident that BAG6 is being downregulated. The authors propose a mechanism of antiviral activity in which the N-terminal region of BAG6 interacts with PB2 to inhibit replication and by targeting PB2 for degradation.
The manuscript is interesting and could be of interest to the field, however, there is already reports in the literature that suggests BAG6 degrades the protein aggregates by K48-linked ubiquitination (PMID: 23275523), and additionally, during RNA virus infection, it negatively regulates RLR-mediated antiviral response by inhibiting the aggregation/ complex formation of the multi-subunit protein complex, virus-induced-signaling adapter (VISA) in the RIG-I pathway, by K48-linked ubiquitination (PMID: 36045679). These manuscripts are not considered and the effects on the innate response are not addressed. Cellular factors might be contributing to the down-regulation of BAG6 so that RIG-I pathway, and this is not ruled out. It is essential that the authors connect if any of the viral proteins are involved in the down-regulation of BAG6 transcription. Mechanistically, the manuscript does not go deep enough to advance the knowledge from previous reports
Reviewer #3: The manuscript by Zhou et al describes the role of BAG6 (BCL2-associated athanogene 6) as restriction factor in influenza virus infection. Overexpression of BAG6 leads to about a log drop in viral titer, while knockout of BAG6 increase viral titers by about a log in A549 and Hela cells. The authors used morpholinos to knock down BAG6 expression in mice, and found that this led to increased viral titers, weight loss and death, whereas no effects were seen in the PBS-infected BAG6 knock down mice or the infected wt mice. Finally, the authors used pull-down assays to demonstrate that BAG6 binds to the IAV RNA polymerase subunit PB2 and that it can induce the degradation of PB2. The authors propose that BAG6 interacts with the N-terminus of PB2 and interferes with RNA polymerase assembly or induces PB2 degradation. Generally, the manuscript is well-organized, but there are many grammatical issues (e.g. line 845 “A549 cells was transfected”), and the data appear to support the conclusions. There are a couple of points that would need attention.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: 1. Lines 135-136: BAG6 plays an important role in inhibiting the replication of different influenza virus subtypes from avian and human. The authors displayed the anti-viral effect of BAG6 on the replication of H1N1, H7N9, and H9N2 viruses. It will be more informative to determine whether BAG6 also inhibits the replication of highly pathogenic H5N1 virus.
2. In Fig 5B, the expression level of viral M1 protein was very low, and the size of extra nonspecific band was nearly overlapped with that of the viral M1 protein. So it's almost impossible to identify where the actual band of M1 protein is localized?
3. In Fig 6, BAG6 induces viral PB2 degradation through K48-linked ubiquitination. It will be highly desired to determine which amino acid residue of PB2 is modified with K48-linked ubiquitination. In such case, whether the mutation of the key amino acid residue in PB2 can prevent PB2 from being degraded by BAG6?
Reviewer #2: Major issues:
1) The role of type-I IFNs and innate cytokines are not considered, especially in light of previous publications. The mechanism is not studied in depth and the conclusions may not be supported without further investigation.
2) Figure 1. overexpression of BAG6 may result in immune activation in A549 cells. Type-I IFNs needs to be measured.
3) Figure 2, the same as in point 2 above. What are the effects of knockout in cytokines, IFNs and ISGs?
4) Figure 3. PPMOs could be also inducing immune activation. Controls need to include measuring IFNs and ISGs.
5) Figure 4 needs to show control expression of all transfected proteins
6) Figure 5, all IPs are done using wrong controls. Figure 5A, the proper control for the IP is the absence of BAG6-HA in the presence of PR8 infection. This is to ensure that there is no unspecific binding of the viral proteins to the beads. The same in Figure 5B, a control is needed without BAG6-HA in the presence of overexpressed Flaf proteins (at least PB2).
7) Figure 5C lacks controls, each protein needs to be overexpressed separately. Also, additional panels with more cells need to be shown.
8) Figure 6C and D need to be compared to cells without MG132 as control. Also these two experiments need to be repeated without HA-Ub overexpression and instead immunoblotting for endogenous ubiquitin with anti-Ub specific antibodies.
9) Figure 7D needs controls with individual proteins.
10) Fig.6, it is essential to show the rescue of PB2 degradation under MG132 treatment in infection conditions. Also, check the PB1 and NP levels under MG132 treatment since it was found to pulled down with BAG6 in Fig. 5A.
11) Fig.7, It will be appropriate to verify the effect of N-terminus BAG6 (1-225 aa) in the BAG6 KO cells under H1N1 infection.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: 1. Lines 113-114: "Consistently, the ectopic expression of BAG6 also caused a significant reduction in viral NP protein expression (Fig 1C) and viral loads (Fig 1D) of H7N9 and H9N2." The authors described the role of BAG6 in virus replication as "significant". The authors had better specifically provide the magnitude of the changes in virus titer. This lack of proper quantitative description of the data obtained is further complicated by the lack of specific numeric data in the figures presented, which makes it very difficult for the reader to estimate the magnitude of the changes observed.
2. In all Figures, the abbreviation format needs to be uniform, such as dpi and d.p.i. in Fig 3.
3. Line 172, BAG-KO should be BAG6-KO.
Reviewer #2: Minor issues:
1) Figure 3 also needs additional controls with PPMOs but without infection. The same for the IHCs in E and F, needs controls without infection.
2) In Fig.1 the authors can also check the densitometry of NP/M in the western blot to see if any correlation appears between the IAV subtypes in the presence/absence of BAG6 overexpression.
3) The authors can show the expression of RIG-I in the blot (Fig. 2A, BAG6-wt and KO and H1N1 infection).
4) For H1N1 infection in the PBS, PPMO-NC, and PPMO-BAG6 treated groups (Fig. 3, panel E), we see an appreciable and statistically significant viral titer on day 3 and as expected, it goes down on day 5. It will be informative if the authors can show the expression level of BAG6 on days 3 and -5 in these tissue samples.
5) Check the nucleotide sequence of Uni-12 Primer and highlight the source/ reference.
6) Fig.5 Panel A, under PR8 infection, BAG6 interacts with the PB2, PB1 and NP. PB2 and NP are pulled down, almost in equal amounts, with BAG6. How do you explain the discrepancy with Fig.5B (where only PB2 interacts with BAG6)? It could also be possible that the association of polymerase complex (PB2, PB1, PA and NP) on the vRNA is sensing the BAG6 and hence you get an interaction in Fig.5A.
7) Lines 139-140: BAG6-deficient mice were generated using a peptide-conjugated phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomers (PPMOs)”. This sentence is incorrect. These are not deficient mice, this is a knockdown. Please correct text.
8) Lines 189-190:. The M1-Flag was used as a negative control. The results showed that BAG6-HA was only able to directly interact with PB2-Flag (Fig 5B, lane 3)…” . these experiemnst don’t whow direct interactions. Purified proteins would be needed in in vitro binding assays. Please remove ‘directly’ and discuss the potential for indirect interactions.
Reviewer #3: 1. Line 150: please clarify “extremely higher”
2. Figure 7B/C: The figure legend appears to be incorrect as it refers to the IP flag as Fig. 7C. This should be 7B, and the HA IP should be 7C.
3. Figure 7C: the IP has two Flag blots. Should the bottom one be part of the input?
4. In Fig. 7D, the 1:255-HA constructs keeps PB2 in the cytoplasm, suggesting that it affects PB2 import into the nucleus and the functioning of the PB2 NLS (which resides near the C-terminus of PB2). The authors only consider the BAG6 NLS in their discussion. In addition, it would be useful if the authors added controls to show/confirm the localization of PB2 and BAG6 alone.
5. Line 242. “Targeting for subcellcular localization” appears to be missing a word (e.g., cytoplasmic).
6. The authors claim that BAG6 binds to the PB2 N-terminus, but they provide no PB2 mutational data (e.g. PB2 truncations) to support this. The language should be adjusted.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here on PLOS Biology: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012110.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
7 Feb 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers comments.pdf
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012110.r003Decision Letter 1
LeeBenhurSection EditorLowenAnice C.Academic Editor© 2024 Lee, Lowen2024Lee, Lowenhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
9 Mar 2024

Dear Dr. Zhang,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'BAG6 inhibits influenza A virus replication by inducing viral polymerase subunit PB2 degradation and perturbing RdRp complex assembly' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Anice C. Lowen
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Benhur Lee
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: In this study, the authors identified BAG6 as a host restricting factor for the replication of IAV. Detailed investigation revealed that BAG6 mediates the K48-linked polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of viral PB2 protein, thereby inhibiting the activity of the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. In the revised version of the manuscript, the authors further found that the lysine residue at position 186 of PB2 is the targeting site of BAG6-mediated polyubiquitination. Overall, this study is well performed and the findings are interesting.
Reviewer #2: In this revision the authors perform experiments to answer most of the previous weaknesses raised, however there are still issue that need to be addressed:
Reviewer #3: The authors have done additional controls and significantly improved the manuscript. I support publication.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: My major comments for the initial version of the manuscript have been addressed. I have no further issues to point out at this stage.
Reviewer #2: Major issues:
1. Figure 7C and D need to be compared to cells without MG132 as a control. The authors did not address this issue claiming that the levels of ubiquitination are barely detectable without MG132 treatment, because the protein substrates are quickly degradated after ubiquitination modification. Whether this is true or not, the authors need to show this as control. This is exactly the point, that the authors show what happens between +/- MG132, and can demonstrate the levels of ubiquitinated proteins. This can be done with overexpressed proteins.
2. The second point is about detecting endogenous ubiquitin (without the use of overexpressed HA-Ub). In this case the author’s response was that ‘it is difficult to monitor endogenous ubiquitin due to its relatively low quantity’. This statement is simply incorrect. It is simply incorrect that endogenous ubiquitin in the cell is present in low levels. These experiments are standard in the ubiquitin field. Endogenous ubiquitin is present in highly enough levels to be able to be detected with anti-ubiquitin antibodies by immunoblot, and a simple immunoprecipitation of PB2 (overexpressed, or even better during infection), if indeed ubiquitinated, should be able to detect ubiquitinated PB2. Actually, this experiment can be done with and without MG132, if the authors are correct that ubiquitinated PB2 is degraded quickly.
Reviewer #3: N/A
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: I have no further minor comments for the revised version of the manuscript.
Reviewer #2: 1. Please look carefully at labeling. In Fig. 4C it says P-SAT1. correct the spelling to P-STAT1.
2. Line 235-237: “…BAG6 could co-localize with PB2 and promote its localization in both nuclei and cytoplasm of cells (Fig 6E)…”
Is the opinion of this reviewer that the re-localization of PB2 ‘promoted’ by BAG6 is not clear. Actually the colocalization of PB2 with BAG6 is also not very clear. They are both in the nucleus, but the overlap is not clear. If the authors want to make this statement about re-localization, then this needs to be demonstrated with a nucleo-cytoplasmic fractionation. Otherwise remove the claim.
3. The authors showed the rescue of PB2 degradation by MG132 treatment under the H1N1 (PR8) infection (Fig. 7C). I seems that from Figure 6A, there are also interactions with NP and. It would be appreciated if the authors also show the NP blot in Fig. 7C. This could open a new direction that BAG-6 interacts both with PB1, PA and NP, however, it seems that is selectively targets PB2 for degradation? Can the authors show the blot for NP in Figure 7C?
Reviewer #3: N/A
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Chengjun Li
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012110.r004Acceptance letter
LeeBenhurSection EditorLowenAnice C.Academic Editor© 2024 Lee, Lowen2024Lee, Lowenhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
13 Mar 2024

Dear Dr. Zhang,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "BAG6 inhibits influenza A virus replication by inducing viral polymerase subunit PB2 degradation and perturbing RdRp complex assembly," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens. 
Best regards,
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064