pmcChem RevChem Rev822acssd2985134RcrChemical Reviews0009-26651520-6890pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC12022999PMC12022999.112022999120229994017899210.1021/acs.chemrev.4c005541ReviewEngineered Proteins
and Chemical Tools to Probe the
Cell Surface Proteome
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2087-4974LeungKevin
K. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4825-1389SchaeferKaitlin LinZhi YaoZi https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8267-5519WellsJames A. †Department
of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University
of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158, United States‡Department
of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158, United States*jim.wells@ucsf.edu.0304202523042025125848725640694110250720240703202505022025250420252604202526042025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2025The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
The cell surface
proteome, or surfaceome, is the hub for cells
to interact and communicate with the outside world. Many disease-associated
changes are hard-wired within the surfaceome, yet approved drugs target
less than 50 cell surface proteins. In the past decade, the proteomics
community has made significant strides in developing new technologies
tailored for studying the surfaceome in all its complexity. In this
review, we first dive into the unique characteristics and functions
of the surfaceome, emphasizing the necessity for specialized labeling,
enrichment, and proteomic approaches. An overview of surfaceomics
methods is provided, detailing techniques to measure changes in protein
expression and how this leads to novel target discovery. Next, we
highlight advances in proximity labeling proteomics (PLP), showcasing
how various enzymatic and photoaffinity proximity labeling techniques
can map protein–protein interactions and membrane protein complexes
on the cell surface. We then review the role of extracellular post-translational
modifications, focusing on cell surface glycosylation, proteolytic
remodeling, and the secretome. Finally, we discuss methods for identifying
tumor-specific peptide MHC complexes and how they have shaped therapeutic
development. This emerging field of neo-protein epitopes is constantly
evolving, where targets are identified at the proteome level and encompass
defined disease-associated PTMs, complexes, and dysregulated cellular
and tissue locations. Given the functional importance of the surfaceome
for biology and therapy, we view surfaceomics as a critical piece
of this quest for neo-epitope target discovery.

National Cancer Institute10.13039/1000000541R01CA248323University of California, San Francisco10.13039/100008069NAMerck10.13039/100004334NABristol-Myers Squibb10.13039/100002491NANational Institute of General Medical Sciences10.13039/100000057R35GM122451National Institute of General Medical Sciences10.13039/1000000571F32GM149084-01pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9cr4c00554document-id-new-14cr4c00554ccc-price

## Special Issue
Published
as part of Chemical
Reviewsspecial issue “Drugging the Undruggable”.
1

## Introduction
1.1

## The Cell Surface Proteome Is Critical for
Biology and Medicine
The cell surface proteome, or surfaceome,
is the hub for cells to interact with the outside world. In metazoans,
it is broadly responsible for initiating cell signaling, metabolite
transport, cell–cell interactions, and immune surveillance.
The functional importance of the surfaceome is reflected in its tremendous
genetic commitment to it: roughly a quarter of the human genome encodes
membrane or secreted proteins. , Recent proteomics data
sets have validated that more than half of the surface proteins predicted
from coding sequences do indeed appear at the cell surface across
human cells. , Surfaceomics studies are crucial
to understanding this compartment beyond genetic annotation, as it
is well-known that steady-state transcript and protein levels are
not strongly correlated due to differences in synthesis rates, trafficking,
and stability. Given the functional importance
of the surfaceome and accessibility, it is no surprise that it is
a major target for drug discovery. About half of small molecule drugs
and virtually all protein therapeutics engage surface or extracellular
proteins. 
Despite the functional
importance of the surfaceome, we are only beginning to exploit potential
drug opportunities. For example, protein therapeutics represent about
half of the major revenues sold by pharmaceutical and biotech companies,
yet there are currently less than 50 membrane or extracellular proteins
targeted by approved drugs. There is a
tremendous need to identify new drug targets in the surfaceome. In
the past decade, the proteomics field has made significant strides
to understand how surfaceome changes from health and disease in terms
of proteins expressed and their levels, − post-translation modifications, − and dynamic and static protein complexes at high resolution that
are formed. − 

1.2

## Basic Physical Differences between the Surfaceome
and the Cytosol Mandate Different Proteomics Approaches
When
studying the surfaceome, it is important to appreciate that the relative
amount of protein in the surfaceome is about 100-fold lower than the
total protein in the cytosol ( ). This can be gleaned from a simple calculation considering
that the volume of the surfaceome (the “skin of the cell”)
is about 100-fold smaller than the volume of the cytosol yet the protein
density for both is about the same. − 
 Comprehensive quantitative
proteomics studies show that cytosolic
protein abundances range from 100s to 100s of millions of copies per
cell. Although the same comprehensive
proteomic analysis is lacking for membrane proteins, there have been
copy number estimates for specific membrane proteins that range on
the low end from 10s of copies per cell for peptide MHC complexes, up to several million copies per cell for highly
expressed signaling molecules such as constitutively activated HER2. Based on the volume calculations above for the
surfaceome, this would translate to concentrations varying about 5-log
units, from about 0.4 nM to about 40 mM. Thus, proteins in the cytosol
and surfaceome vary over similar abundance ranges and remarkably similar
concentration ranges when corrected for volume. Even though the cytosolic
proteome and surfaceome have similar concentration ranges, the fact
that the surfaceome is 100-fold smaller means that the absolute abundance
of surface proteins is, on average, 2 orders of magnitude lower than
those in the cytosol. Thus, to get the deepest proteomic coverage,
current surfaceomics methods are geared to enrich surface proteins
over the vast excess of cytosolic proteins. of this review provides an overview of current
proteomics and nonproteomics methods of probing the surfaceome and
a comparison of mainstream proteomics surfaceome enrichment strategy
is detailed in 
 When
considering proteomic approaches to understanding protein–protein
interactomes on the cell surface, it is essential to appreciate the
total protein density, how far proteins are from each other, and the
range of affinities for molecules in complexes ( ). The density of membrane-associated proteins
is estimated to be about ∼ 30,000 proteins per μm2, − which translates to an average distance between proteins
of about 60 Å ( ). This is striking as the diameter of an average single domain
protein or growth factor (∼25 kDa) is about 30 Å, and
the diameter of a common immunoglobulin such as a Fab arm of an antibody
(∼50 kDa) is ∼ 60 Å. This means that proteins are
so densely packed in the membrane that they invariably touch one another,
especially when considering the lipid coats surrounding them. This
estimate comports with other data that the mass of protein and lipid
in the membrane are roughly equal, and that of the lipid is involved
in mainly forming single-layer shells around proteins. Overall, the
protein density in the membrane is not much different than the protein
density in the cytosol (∼100 mg/mL). Crowding in the membrane and cytosol is known to slow diffusion
rates in both compartments relative to an infinitely dilute state. − 
A most significant fundamental difference between proteins
in a
two-dimensional membrane versus a three-dimensional cytosol is that
they lose three of their six degrees of freedom: proteins can only
translate in two dimensions in the plane of the membrane, and can
only rotate along the Z-axis but not flip along the
x- or y-axis without huge free energy consequences.
The lipid bilayer is well-known to undergo a phase transition around
12–15 °C. , Even in the liquid phase, it
has been estimated that diffusion in the membrane is 10–100
fold slower than in the cytosol. However,
the slower diffusion rate in the membrane is more than compensated
by the reduced degrees of freedom. Recent studies using fluorescence
correlation spectroscopy at the single molecule level show that molecules
in a lipid bilayer can associate with partners 22 to 33-fold faster
than a similar search in solution. On
a macroscopic scale, this rate differential is even greater than that
between flying and driving. In some sense, the fluidity of the membrane
represents a high-speed cellular transit system that allows membrane
proteins to rapidly rearrange and interreact unless they are anchored
to the cytoskeleton or other structures (for review see ref ( ))
The faster association
rates for membrane proteins mean that for
comparable occupancy as seen for cytosolic proteins, their intrinsic
Ka values can be proportionately lower. The intrinsically
lower affinity has implications for the evolution and design of membrane
proteins as it is “easier” to evolve or design a stable
protein assembly in the membrane; of course, this could come with
a specificity penalty, too. This also has implications for studying
complexes within the 2D membrane because when solubilized in 3D for
typical affinity pull-downs, they would more rapidly dissociate. This
highlights the importance of new proximity labeling proteomics (PLP)
that allow photographic “snap-shots” for determining
protein neighborhoods in situ, without the need to
solubilize the surfaceome where these interactions could fall apart.
The density considerations above would also strongly argue for high-resolution
PLP approaches for defining first shell interactomes as opposed to
low-resolution approaches that capture more broadly.
Another
major difference between the inside and outside of the
cell is that the outside is oxidizing, and the inside is reducing.
Virtually all cysteines in extracellular proteins are paired in disulfides. Inside the cell, almost all cysteines are reduced.
There are some notable exceptions to this rule; for example, serum
albumin has a number of free cysteines, and virtually all of them
are in reduced form. Salt and metal concentrations
also differ inside versus outside.
Another fundamental difference
between inside and outside the cell
is the complexity of post-translational modifications (PTMs). Inside
the cell, there are hundreds of types of PTM enzymes, and most PTMs
inside are reversible like phosphorylation-dephosphorylation, ubiquitination-deubiquitination,
methylation-demethylation, etc. In contrast, outside the cell, there
are fewer than a dozen established PTM types, and all are essentially
irreversible, such as glycosylation, sulfation, disulfide-bonds, glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI) anchoring, and proteolysis. Thus, once a protein emerges on
the cell membrane through the secretory process, it is essentially
done with processing except for regulated proteolysis, which is known
for selective receptor activation, growth factor shedding, and matrix
remodeling. There can also be some glycan remodeling postsecretion.
The surfaceome is a dynamic proteome that is constantly changing
in response to cellular demand and engagement with the outside. Not
only are proteins changing due to expression level and trafficking
from the ER/Golgi secretion system, but the cell surface can exchange
proteins with other organelles such as the lysosome or specialized
vesicles involved in neurotransmitter, glucose, lipid, or cholesterol
transport. All these features above make
the surfaceome a fascinating yet challenging compartment for proteomics.
The community has made significant progress in tailoring enrichment
and labeling technologies to specifically study the surfaceome in
all its complexity. This review will focus on new tools and approaches
for the study of the surfaceome.

2

## Overview
of Surfaceomics Methods to Measure
Changes in Protein Expression
2.1

## Regulation of Protein Expression
on Cell Surface
and Surface Protein Topology
The cell surfaceome encompasses
all cell surface proteins tethered to the extracellular leaflet of
the plasma membrane, as well as a portion of secreted and shed proteins
that may stay tightly associated with the cell. Surface protein synthesis
typically begins at the ribosome, where the nascent signal peptide
is recognized by the signal recognition particle (SRP) and trafficked
to the SRP receptor on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. , In most cases, the signal peptide is then cleaved, and the nascent
protein is cotranslocated into the ER lumen. A membrane protein, as
opposed to a secreted protein, is anchored on the cell membrane using
a transmembrane domain or, in some cases, by a lipid anchor, typically
a glycophophatidylinosol (GPI) anchor. Finally, ER vesicles are shuttled
to the Golgi apparatus, where luminal proteins are modified by glycosylation
and presented on the extracellular leaflet of the plasma membrane
(for review see ref ( )).
Surface proteins have four basic topologies. − Single-pass transmembrane receptors represent about 70% of the membrane
proteins and comprise two families: Type I (N-terminus out; ∼
80%) and Type II (N-terminus in ∼ 15%). These often function as signaling receptors, adhesive molecules,
and immune surveillance, either as antigen presentation or immune
cell sensing. Extracellular-facing enzymes are also a part of this
single-pass class; almost 300 of the 500 proteases encoded in the
human genome have their active sites topologically outside. Examples of intracellular facing enzymes include
membrane-bound receptor Tyr- or Ser/Thr kinases (∼70) − or receptor-type protein tyrosine phosphatases (21 PTPRs) have their active sites inside and are generally
regulated from the outside by engaging their ectodomains. Multipass
receptors represent the rest of the surfaceome topologies (∼15%)
and generally contain from 2 to 12 TM domains; these often function
as small molecule sensors such as the 7-TM GPCR family or as nutrient,
or electrolyte transporters. Beyond transmembrane
anchored surface proteins, there is a small class of ∼ 150
GPI anchored proteins that function as binding sites or present ecto-enzymes
such as NT5E (a 5′nucleotidase). It is important to note that the GPI anchors proteins by their C-termini
on the extracellular leaflet of the plasma membrane, while other protein–lipid
modifications, such as myristoylation or palmitoylation, often anchor
cytoplasmic proteins on the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane or
other organelles. Most membrane and secreted proteins have signal
peptides that can be recognized by bioinformatics, but many do not,
which further highlights the need for proteomics.

2.2

## Proteomics Techniques to Detect and Quantify
Surfaceome Abundance
To provide the deepest coverage of the
surfaceome over cytosolic contaminants, most investigators use enrichment
methods. In this section, we will review and discuss different techniques
ranging from low-resolution (e.g., membrane fractionation) to high-resolution
(e.g., membrane impermeable probes and glycoprotein enrichment) surfaceome
enrichment. We will also briefly review antibody-based surfaceome
technologies and conclude with a bioinformatic analysis of membrane
proteomes.
2.2.1

## Membrane Localization/Fractionation
Perhaps the crudest enrichment method for the surfaceome relies simply
on membrane fractionation ( A). This is typically done using a sucrose gradient
where homogenized cell lysates can be separated using differential
centrifugation in density gradients to isolate nuclear, cytosolic,
mitochondrial, and mixed microsomal fractions combined of Golgi, endoplasmic
reticulum, plasma membrane, and other vesicles. , Alternatively, membrane proteins can be extracted by permeabilizing
cells using mild detergent to release cytoplasmic proteins followed
by a second detergent-based extraction of the remainder of membrane-bound
proteins. These first-generation membrane
isolation techniques have been a mainstay in the field and are especially
useful in processing tissue samples typically analyzed by bespoke
Western blots. However, these approaches are labor intensive and do
not cleanly differentiate membrane proteins from organelles such as
ER, Golgi, and lysosome. These methods also do not differentiate between
proteins tethered on the inner and outer leaflets of membranes.
 
2.2.2

## Membrane Impermeable Probes and Membrane-Bound
Enzymes to Target the Cell Surfaceome
To increase the accuracy
of surface protein identification, techniques have been developed
that rely on the physical impermeability property of cell membranes
( B). Sulfo-N-hydroxy-succinamide ester-biotin (sulfo-NHS-biotin) was
developed as a cell-impermeable protein labeling probe that rapidly
labels amines. − This and related cleavable forms were initially popular
because of their simplicity and commercial availability. More recently,
chemical proteomics strategies such as global analysis of surface
functionality (GASF) have been developed to map the reactive lysine
residues exposed on the cell surface of living cells. Specifically,
a chemical probe OPA–S-S-alkyne can efficiently and selectively
label the solvent-exposed lysines on proteins. The resulting labeled
surfaceome can be biotinylated via click chemistries and pulled-downed
for analysis. However, all these chemical
methods suffer from significant labeling of cytosolic proteins, presumably
from a small amount of cell lysis, which significantly decreases the
sensitivity of surfaceome detection.
An alternative approach
to labeling the surfaceome is proximity labeling with cell membrane-tethered
or impermeable enzymes. Engineered ascorbate peroxidase (APEX) can
be tethered to the membrane with a genetically encoded transmembrane
domain. Upon addition of H2O2, and biotin-phenols
these enzymes will produce biotin-phenoxyl radicals that covalently
label proteins primarily at Tyr residues. Although labeling is biased
to the cell surfacome the neutral phenoxy radicals have long half-lives
in the ms range so can penetrate cells and lead to broad-scale labeling
of both membrane and cytosolic proteins (>50%). APEX has been widely
applied to probe mitochondrial compartments, and membrane-tethered HRP has been used in probing surfaceome of
synaptic clefts in drosophila and mice. − Similarly, the cell
surface can be prefunctionalized with cholesterol lipid groups, followed
by sortase-catalyzed conjugation with an improved APEX variant (APEX2)
for cell surface protein labeling. 
Recently we have applied wheat germ agglutinin conjugated to horseradish
peroxidase (WGA-HRP) as a general surfaceomic labeling tool. WGA-HRP
has long been used for histochemical labeling of tissues for neuronal
imaging. WGA-HRP binds to cell surface
glycans, so it does not require cell engineering or chemical conjugation
as typically done for APEX. Like APEX, HRP generates the broadly diffusing
biotin-phenoxy radicals that is cell permeable and can label neighboring
proteins, including those that are not glycosylated, up to 50% cytosolic
protein contaminants. WGA-HRP labeling is not significantly hindered
by variability in individual protein glycosylation status nor does it bias tryptic digest patterns as
NHS-sulfo-biotin that labels lysines. Although the popular method of cell surface capture (CSC) (described
below) allows for a higher percentage enrichment of surface vs cytosolic
proteins when compared to cell-tethered WGA peroxidase, the WGA-HRP
method requires 5-fold fewer cells for the same number of membrane
protein identifications. This has significant advantages when samples
are limited. For example, WGA-HRP was used to profile extracellular
vesicles (EV) with limited quantities, whereas CSC was not sensitive
enough. 
The engineered promiscuous
biotin ligase (BioID, TurboID, and miniTurbo)
has been developed as a proximity ligation technique to label and
enrich subcellular compartments. , While BioID
and TurboID has the advantage over peroxidases of not requiring a
toxic H2O2 as a substrate, the slower kinetics,
limited extracellular ATP, longer half-life of the probe (minutes),
and corresponding diffusion distance of the reactive biotin-AMP intermediate
compared to peroxidases make it potentially less useful for surfaceomics
work. However, recent studies using structurally defined DNA substrates
have shown that BioID and TurboID have a bimodal labeling pattern:
a small proportion that is very short-range (∼6 nm) proposed
to represent direct contact labeling and a much larger portion of
long-distance labeling reflecting diffusion of the long-lived biotin-AMP. 

2.2.3

## Targeting Glycosylation
for Enrichment
Protein glycosylation is perhaps the most
characteristic post-translational
modification for extracellular proteins and is present on >85%
of
membrane proteins ( C). Typically, glycans are linked to serine or threonine residues
(O-linked glycosylation) or to asparagine residues (N-linked glycosylation
on the N-X-S/T sequence motif). Protein glycosylation, and in particular
N-linked glycosylation, is prevalent in proteins destined for extracellular
environments on the plasma membrane and secreted proteins, making
it a ripe handle for specifically enriching the surfaceome.
2.2.3.1

## Metabolic Labeling of Glycans for Glycoprotein
Enrichment
Metabolic labeling can be used to introduce functional
groups on the cell surface, such as azide or alkynes, for bio-orthogonal
biotin labeling. For example, metabolic chemical reporters (MCRs),
such as Ac4ManNAz via Staudinger ligation, have enabled
selective labeling of glycoproteins suitable for subsequent MS analysis. − Unnatural sugar moieties, typically GlcNAc or GalNAc analogs functionalized
with azide or alkyne handles for click chemistry, can be metabolically
incorporated directly onto protein substrates. It should be noted
that GlcNAc is also a major PTM inside cells so one needs to triage
these cytosolic GlcNAc contaminants from surfaceome labeling. Metabolic
labeling is not uniform across all cell lines and requires culturing
which may alter cellular metabolism and potentially stress cells that
could alter the cell surfaceome.

2.2.3.2

## Hydrazide/Amino-oxy
Labeling for Glycoprotein
Enrichment
Sodium periodate (NaIO4) oxidizes vicinal
diols on glycans (especially terminal sialic acids) to form aldehydes.
The aldehydes readily react with hydrazide, to form stable hydrazone
linkages. The enrichment technique called
cell surface capture (CSC) developed by Wollscheid, Aebersold, and
co-workers, utilized this chemistry to capture cell surface proteins
onto hydrazide beads. The captured glycoproteins
were washed extensively and released using PNGase F, an amidase that
cleaves between the innermost GlcNAc and the N-glycan-modified
asparagine. Treatment with PNGase F leaves an aspartic acid scar that
reflects protein deaminidation (+1 Da), enabling detection using high-resolution
mass spectrometry. Subsequent modifications to the protocol by Wollscheid
and co-workers make use of commercially available biocytin hydrazide
to enable more efficient labeling followed by immobilization of glycoprotein
on avidin-based resin. Various groups
further optimized the sodium periodate treatment to be more tolerable
with cell culture conditions and lower temperature to prevent membrane
trafficking (1–2 mM NaIO4, PBS pH 6.0–6.5,
at 4 °C for 15–20 min). − The addition of aniline
as a catalyst speeds up the formation of hydrazone linkage and further
improves labeling efficiency. , , Aminooxy-biotin increased the yield of the conjugation product.
To increase the depth of coverage, many groups now analyze both the
tryptic digest from the beads as well as the PNGase F fraction. The
CSC method is very popular. Recently, the Gundry group tallied >266
published studies in the past 20 years that use some variation of CSC.
It is estimated that about
half the protein-coding genes are translated at some level in any
given cell. , Given there are about 4,000–6,000
membrane and secreted proteins, one would estimate there should be
2,000–3,000 membrane or secreted proteins from a given cell.
Current optimized CSC methods will routinely identify ∼ 1,000
membrane proteins from ∼ 5 million mammalian cells (depending
on cell size) so the limit of detection is not comprehensive at this
sample size. To this end, it is important to compare the efficiency
and quality of the enrichment methods ( ). About 10% of proteins identified using
deep proteomic coverage of whole cell lysates are membrane proteins,
but being ∼ 100-fold less abundant makes quantitative analysis
challenging. Membrane fractionation enrichment methods increase this
percentage to about 20%, and enzymatic labeling using tethered peroxidase
increases the proportion of membrane proteins to between 40 and 60%
of the total proteins. , The PNGase F release of proteolytically
digested glycopeptides remains the most stringent method of purification,
reaching up to 95% surfaceome proteins. Recent surfaceome methodology using automatic sample handling can
substantially reduce the input requirement of cells, reduce background
contamination, and increase the coverage of the surfaceome. , 
While the current state-of-the-art surfaceomic techniques
rely
on glycan-based enrichment or glycan tethering, it is becoming increasingly
clear that several factors can affect what’s truly on the cell
surface. In cancer, this could be a result of changes in glycosylation
pattern, altered endosomal trafficking, rebinding of secreted protein,
or ectopic display of intracellular proteins. We believe that other
methods of labeling the cell surface may expand the surfaceome identifications
and circumvent the dependence on the glycan handle. As new mass spectrometers
are developed, sensitivity will undoubtedly increase. The method of
choice for surfaceome enrichment will ultimately hinge on the combination
of instrument sensitivity, availability of starting sample material,
and enrichment method.

2.2.4

## Quantification
of Cell Surface Proteins
by Mass Spectrometry
Historically, robust comparative protein
quantification used techniques such as stable isotopic labeling using
amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) or
isobaric tags using tandem mass tags (TMT) for binary or multiplexed quantitative comparisons, respectively.
The development of label-free quantification with matched samples allows a facile approach to compare samples
but is prone to missing values for low-abundance proteins. Absolute
quantification has largely been limited to targeted proteomics (MRM,
PRM), where known concentrations of a protein can be made using isotope
labeling (for review see reference ( )). More recently, Data-Independent-Acquisition
(DIA) and, in particular, DIA-PASEF have been developed where precursor ions are
isolated into predefined isolation windows and fragmented, such that
all fragmented ions in each window are then analyzed and quantified.
When a spectral library of peptide fragments (using traditional Data-Dependent-Acquisition,
DDA) is well constructed, it can be used to search DIA data and quantify
even low-abundance proteins with high confidence. This emerging approach
can identify and quantify 2,000–5,300 proteins from single-cell
whole-cell lysate. , 
To date, the Human Proteome
Project (HPP) has experimental data for 18,407 (PE1 level evidence)
of the 19,750 (predicted) proteins. Of
the 18,407 proteins, 868 proteins remain undetected by means of mass
spectrometry – most of which belong to the “plasma membrane”
(GO:00005886) or “extracellular region” (GO:00005667).
A recent deep proteomics sequencing preprint further shows that hydrophobic
peptides spanning the transmembrane regions are underrepresented by
mass spectrometry-based detection methods. Surfaceome enrichment approaches have certainly extended our ability
to detect surface proteins and will play a critical role in comprehensively
detecting cell surface proteins.

2.2.5

## Nonproteomics
Based Technology of Profiling
Surfaceome
In the past decade, antibody-based approaches
to profile the surfaceome have emerged as a more bespoke surfaceome
profiling technology ( D). It has largely been enabled by multiplexed antibody-based
detection using mass spectrometry (cyTOF, MIBI ) or NGS sequencing readout (CITE-seq, CODEX, and PhaNGS ). When the antibody panels are well validated,
these technologies can reliably profile upward of 100s of surfaceome
targets in a single experiment. In addition to antibody-based surfaceome
approaches, the multiplexed DNA aptamer-based proteomics approach
(SOMAscan) is a promising technology that can detect thousands of
proteins used to profile mostly soluble proteins in solutions such
as patient serum. , 
Despite the advances in
developing these multiplexing technologies, caveats include the heterogeneity
in quality and specificity of the binders used, their broad range
of affinities, and the variable number of cell surface proteins presented
on different cells. Antibodies differing in off rates for binding
(koff) can change the final percentage
bound antigens after a given number of washes. Many antibodies that
bind to the naked target in vitro do not bind on
cells either because the target may be engaged with other proteins
(that will vary from cell type) or the target is in a different conformation.
Lastly, the dynamic range of the detection instrumentation is a limiting
factor when considering the 5-log span of abundance of membrane proteins.
Nonetheless, when a panel of cell-binding antibodies is optimized,
antibody-based approaches to surfaceome profile can provide a robust
approach for target-directed surfaceome profiling.

2.3

## Data Processing, Annotation, and Interpretation
for the Surfaceome
There is currently no consensus on a common
list of proteins that constitute the ’surfaceome.’ In
this section, we aim to shed light on why defining such a list is
inherently complex and to provide novice surfaceome researchers with
an understanding of the intricacies involved. There are ∼ 20,000
human protein entries in uniport (SWISSPROT) and annotation of membrane
and secreted proteins rely mostly on signature motifs such as secretion
signals and trans-membrane signatures. Various informatics used to
localize surface proteins range from Gene Ontology for plasma membrane
(GO:0005886, 6,019 proteins), machine learning trained on CSC data
sets and prediction tools such as SURFY (2886), and tools that integrate experimental and prediction data
to provide evidence-level of surface protein (VANEER, A). , It is also important to recognize that the surfaceome is dynamic
and is well-known to exchange proteins with other compartments, such
as the ER and Golgi, during biosynthesis (notably FTL3-ITD), endosomal recycling, signaling vesicles (notably neurotransmitter and glut-1 vesicles), lysosomal fusions during autophagy (notably
LAMP1), and exosome biogenesis. While most proteins with signal sequences are
secreted or remain in the membrane, some cytoplasmic proteins lacking
a signal peptide can be noncanonically distributed onto the cell surface
as detected by antibodies (notably heat shock proteins like HSP90,
HSP70). Given the complexity of protein
trafficking annotating the surfaceome in mass spectrometry searches
should be done rigorously ( B). At a minimum, one should search against the entire
Swiss-Prot database and report the percentage of proteins annotated
as surface protein versus the total, including the percentage of cytosolic
and background contaminating proteins identified (cross-referenced
to databases such as the CRAPome ). We
would also like to emphasize the value of depositing raw data as part
of publication – this would enable researching by investigators
and for future meta-analysis comparing different surfaceome methods.
 From a surfaceome data set, a bioinformatics triage
is typically
performed such as that in C. First, targets found to be significantly enriched
in disease samples should be annotated and filtered for high-confidence
surface proteins. One can correlate with transcriptomics data either
experimentally or bioinformatically against broadly aggregated databases
such as cBioPortal (cbioportal.org) or the Human Protein Atlas (proteinatlas.org). Lastly, to
identify disease-associated target candidates the data can be cross-referenced
for low expression in normal tissue determined experimentally using
Western blot or against humans such as GTEx (gtexportal.org) or HubMAP’s Human Reference Atlas (humanatlas.io). 
In addition to identifying significantly
enriched targets, pathway
analysis can provide tremendous biological insight into the aggregated
changes in the disease sample. In transcriptomics analysis, GeneSet
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) has been a mainstay in analyzing continuous
data and assigning pathways that are dysregulated. This simple bioinformatics analysis is powerful and offers
insight into the biology of a disease state beyond singleton target
discovery. For example, GSEA identified dysregulation of glycosylation
pathways in a panel of oncogene-driven isogenic cell lines that we
would not have otherwise recognized using proteomics alone. This led to an in-depth glycoproteomics analysis
and unraveling of highly differential glycosylation patterns in isogenic
cell lines. Software has been developed for this type of analysis
(PSEA-quant), and can also be performed
by mapping protein ID to gene ID and performing traditional GSEA. This simple analysis enables the identification
of dysregulated pathways from the surfaceome and augments target discovery
pipelines.

2.4

## Therapeutic Modalities
against Cell Surface
Proteins Are Dependent on Receptor Copy Number
For cancer
target discovery, proteomics can help to determine the absolute target
number, which guides the choice of antibody modality to use, and the
target number relative to healthy tissue to establish the therapeutic
index ( ). For
example, at a high receptor density of 100,000 – 1 million
receptor copies per cell (e.g., HER2 and CD20 ), a native antibody that
engages the immune system by antibody-directed cell cytotoxicity (ADCC)
can be sufficient. Historically, most proteins targeted by cancer
therapeutics are in this range due to their high abundance. At 10,000–100,000 copies per cell, an
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) is an attractive modality that brings
in cytotoxic drugs, but it requires
the receptor to be naturally internalized/recycled or the antibody
itself to induce internalization. , Below 10,000
receptor copies per cell, a bispecific T cell engager (TCE) or NK
cell engager (NKCE) can provide greater killing with fewer binding
events owing to avidity and cytotoxic potency when forming an immunological
synapse. Currently, most TCEs bind CD3
and the victim cell through a tumor-associated antigen. The high end
of T cell activation can lead to a toxic cytokine storm, thereby limiting
the upper limit of therapeutic window. Below 1,000 receptor copies
per cell, chimeric antigen receptor T cell (CAR-T) therapy is a promising
modality as the signaling strength of the CAR can be tuned with enhanced
potency for low antigen receptor density. , An emerging modality is radioligand therapy (RLT). Similar to ADC, RLT employs antibodies appended with a
radionuclide to elicit cytotoxicity, and it has the ability to target
cancer with a broad range of receptors, ranging from millions of copies
(in the case of HER2) to potentially 100s of receptors using α
particle emitting radionuclides targeting a single receptor. New bispecific modalities such as extracellular
targeted protein degradation (eTPD) and
cell-targeted enzymes such as surface sialidase offer novel emerging
technologies. Beyond antibody-based
modalities, smaller formats from small molecules, peptide/cyclic peptides,
and mini-binders such as knottins, have also been investigated clinically
and may have the advantage of enhanced tumor penetrance. , 
 2.4.2

## Therapeutic Targets in Cancer
The
use of surfaceomics holds great promise for the broad identification
of surface proteins that change between health and disease states.
Traditional bespoke biology studies comparing tumor and normal cells
have historically led to transformational monotherapies such as trastuzumab
(targeting HER2) in breast cancer and Rituximab (targeting CD20) in
B-cell lymphoma. However, it is rare
to identify novel singleton proteins in cancer with limited expression
in normal tissue. Using unbiased surfaceome and bioinformatics approaches,
several groups have identified panels of cell surface targets from
models of oncogenic transformations, , − loss of tumor suppressors, drug-induced
epigenetic changes, and chemotherapy
resistance. Surface proteomics has helped
to identify previously underappreciated cell surface targets such
as CDCP1 and NT5E, ENPP1, CD72. Beyond
target identification, a specific isoform (EGFRvIII), epitope (cleaved CDCP1), or conformation of a target that is differentially presented
on a tumor (Integrin β2) compared
to normal tissue substantially increases its selectivity.
Surfaceomics-based
target discovery can detect the presence of a target, where even the
most advanced informatics platforms cannot predict the fate of a cell
surface target. Examples include protein retention in the ER in the
case of FLT3 mutations in AML, protein
shedding in case of mesothelin in ovarian cancer, MICA/B shedding in case of immune checkpoint inhibition, or Trop2/Epcam2 shedding in the case of lung
cancer. There is also a class of under-studied
targets whereby dysregulated protein homeostasis leads to ectopic
expression of intracellular proteins such as HSP90. In particular,
Haystead and co-workers showed that a noncell permeable small molecule
conjugated to fluorophore or radioligand stained cells can target
ectopically expressed cell surface HSP90 in a breast cancer model. 
To increase selectivity toward cancer
targets, surfaceome discovery
enables the identification of multiple tumor-associated antigen candidates
that can be targeted using an “AND” gate approach. For
example, Agard and co-workers at Genentech recently developed a dual
targeting TCE against Ly6E and B7–H4 that is simultaneously
expressed on approximately 50% of breast cancers, whereas normal tissue
expression is limited and mostly orthogonal. Using this approach, the on-target cytotoxic of B7–H4 in
normal tissue is largely mitigated, thereby expanding the therapeutic
index. While Ly6E and B7–H4 are well-known targets of breast
cancer, one can envision an integrated surfaceome target discovery
informatics pipeline that identifies pairs of targets at similar expression
levels restricted to the tumor of interest. Engineering a dual-antigen
targeting antibody will not only circumvent the risk of on-target
toxicity but also have the potential to mitigate resistance mechanisms
where the target receptor is mutated or downregulated.

3

## Profiling Cell Surface Neighborhoods
3.1

## Recent
Advances in Proximity Labeling Proteomics
(PLP)
The surfaceome is a dynamic communication hub involving
interactions among cell surface receptors, secreted proteins, hormones,
adhesive molecules, and transporters that play crucial roles in signal
transduction, cell–cell communication, and cellular nutrition.
As described above, the two-dimensional nature of the membrane allows
proteins to associate much faster and substantially reduces the intrinsic
affinity needed to form specific complexes compared to cytosolic protein
complexes. , , While affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) is often used
to characterize stable 3D cytosolic complexes, AP-MS can easily miss
transient and weak membrane complexes in 2D once they are solubilized
in 3D lysates. − The development of proximity labeling proteomics
(PLP) that allows labeling of protein neighborhoods in situ, without
membrane solubilization.
An increasing number of PLP approaches
have been introduced over the recent years ( ). All PLP methods share some common features:
an enzyme or photocatalyst is attached to the target protein of interest
(POI). This catalyzes the activation and/or transfer of a soluble
biotinylated probe to proximal proteins, forming a covalent bond between
the probe and the target protein ( A). , The various reactive
species that researchers have used and their chemical features have
been discussed in seminal reviews in the field. − In the meantime, the nature of such approach can produce dramatically
different outputs depending on the labeling distance, a result of
both reactive intermediate half-life, its reactivity toward amino
acid side-chains, and proximity to the target ( B). For this reason, it is critical to understand
the maximal range and specificity of labeling and to have rigorous
nonspecific controls to confidently define immediate, distal and nonspecific
interactions in the crowded environment of the membrane. Given that
PLP methods for intracellular proteins have been extensively reviewed, , , − in this section, we will focus on reviewing PLP methods that can
be used to map the interactions of cell surface proteins. We will
discuss each method design, reported characterization efforts of the
techniques, as well as applications to elucidate cell surface neighborhoods.
 3.1.1

## Biotin Ligase and Other Enzymes for Proximity
Labeling
3.1.1.1

## Biotin Ligase Generating Biotin-AMP
The pioneering PLP work of BioID utilizes biotin ligases exemplified
by enzymes such as BirA*, and second-generation derivatives with faster
kinetics, TurboID or miniTurbo. Upon the addition of biotin substrate
and ATP, these enzymes catalyze the formation of a reactive biotin-AMP
species that labels nearby Lys residues. In order to perform BioID
on cell surface proteins, researchers have genetically fused the biotin
ligases to the extracellular POI. After labeling, cells are lysed
and enriched for biotinylated proteins using streptavidin or neutravidin
beads. Enriched proteins are digested and identified by MS. First
generation of biotin-ligase-based proximity labeling used a biotin
ligase variant BirA* (R118G), which required a reaction time of more
than 12 h for adequate accumulation of biotinylation. The catalytic efficiency of labeling was significantly
increased with TurboID and miniTurbo, shortening the incubation time
to 10 min which allows for probing events with faster kinetics. A recent study in 2024 from the Gingras lab
demonstrated the possibility of performing TurboID on the cell surface. This extracellular TurboID, namely ecTurboID,
identified an association between EGFR and low-density lipoprotein
receptor (LDLR) upon EGF stimulation, which also changed the LDLR
neighborhoods.
Since the first establishment of the BioID platform
in 2012, the Roux group measured the extent of labeling in the intracellular
setting using the nuclear lamina and the nuclear pore complex (NPC),
whose diameters are 15–20 nm and 33–39 nm, respectively. , Given that almost the entire NPC complex was labeled and identified
in proteomics, which is not surprising given the established half-life
for biotin-AMP hydrolysis (minutes in water), , the authors reported a practical labeling radius of labeling for
Biotin-AMP of ∼ 10 nm. This represents a minimum labeling radius
in this particular setting. Recently, the Chen and Zou groups reported
labeling patterns on both DNA origami scaffolds and rigid dsDNAs as
fine nanorulers for distance measurement of labeling in vitro. By fixing BioID or TurboID to one single site,
they found that labeling with BioID and TurboID peaked at 6–7
nm. Though they pointed out that biotin-AMP half-life at neutral pH
should be minutes, this confined labeling radius is possibly due to
contact-based mechanisms for BioID and TurboID. They additionally
noted that contact-dependent labeling will be affected by steric accessibility
of amino acids and thus may bias labeling efficiency. ( B). It is also noteworthy that
the labeling radii could depend on cellular conditions. For example,
free-radical quenching metabolites and enzymes could shorten the reactive
half-lives and thus the labeling radii of these PLP probes. It is
useful to establish labeling radii when conclusions depend upon it.
BioID and TurboID have also been appropriately used for long-distance
labeling of proteins across cell compartments, including the nuclei,
endosomes, mitochondria, ER, and plasma membrane. In 2016, the Sanyal
group fused engineered BirA* onto ubiquitin-specific peptidase 12
(USP12), a key component of the T cell receptor complex on the cell
surface. By performing proximity labeling
in both resting and activated Jurkat cells, they found several new
candidates, including LAT and TRAT1, and successfully confirmed their
interactions with USP12 during TCR signaling through functional validation.
In 2018, the Borner and Weissman groups used BioID to map the interactions
of the ER membrane protein complex (EMC) and discovered multiple membrane
proteins engaging EMC during their biosynthesis. The Gingras group has extensively used BioID for cytosolic
interactomes and when combined with AP-MS provides higher confidence
identification of dynamic cytosolic interactomes. − More recently in 2023, the Kosako and Sawasaki groups demonstrated
direct conjugation of AirID, an ancestral BirA, on antibodies or antibody
Fab fragments to achieve cell surface target biotinylation. Structural modeling showed that the Fab-based
strategy brought AirID closer to the target, thus providing enhanced
efficiency compared to that from the antibody-based strategy. In another
study in 2024, the Peeney group fused BioID and TurboID on matrisome
protein TIMP2 to study the interactome of secreted factors. 

3.1.1.2

## MiniSOG Labeling Using
Singlet Oxygen
MiniSOG, a small fluorescent flavoprotein,
was originally developed
for electron-microscopy studies by the Tsien and Shu groups. It can be genetically fused to target proteins
and has also been used for PLP. This
15 kDa protein contains a flavin mononucleotide (FMN) cofactor and
can generate singlet oxygen (1O2) allowing for
labeling using phenol-biotin without the need for exogenously added
toxic H2O2 used for peroxidases. In 2022, the
Li group developed a photoactivation-dependent proximity labeling
(PDPL) platform where POI is fused with the miniSOG protein. Upon blue light illumination, the enzyme can
generate singlet oxygen from dissolved O2 to oxidize proximal
histidine residues and allow subsequent covalent attachment of an
amine-biotin probe for organelle-specific labeling. In parallel, the
Zou group used miniSOG to establish a platform named RinID. By adding a higher concentration of amine probes,
a shorter labeling time allows RinID to label protein interactions
with higher spatiotemporal resolution including pulse-chase applications.
While the maximal labeling radius using singlet oxygen has not been
rigorously established, the half-life in water is about 3.5 μs
in water, theoretically rendering a
labeling radius between nitrene and difussive phenoxyl radicals ( B).

3.1.1.3

## LOV* Labeling via Singlet Oxygen and SET
Light-oxygen-voltage
(LOV) domains are also FMN-binding proteins.
In addition to its wide application in optogenetics and neuroscience,
these <19 kDa proteins can also generate 1O2 in cells. In 2023, the Muir group established a platform named light-induced
interactome tagging (LITag) by using an engineered LOV domain, LOV*
and phenol-biotin. By showcasing this
technique with PARP1 and MVP neighborhoods, they demonstrated rapid
labeling by LITag that can be utilized for time-resolved studies.
In this work, they also investigated the mechanism behind LOV*-induced
labeling and proved that both single electron transfer (SET) and singlet
oxygen generation mechanisms are operational in this system.

3.1.1.4

## PUP-IT Labeling with PafA Substrate
In 2014, Zhuang,
Wells and co-workers developed the NEDDylator,
which allowed for transfer of the ubiquitin homologue NEDD8 to E3
Ligase substrates that it contacted. This was later applied to label the binding partners of dasatinib. With the goal of mapping membrane protein interactions,
in 2018, the Zhuang lab introduced a new proximity labeling system
named PUP-IT by hijacking the bacterial Pup ligase, PafA. Fused to
the cell surface POI, such as CD28 in mammalian cells, PafA activates
exogenously added substrate with biotin and labels proteins in nucleophilic
proximity. They demonstrated the platform
on CD28 and identified two new membrane protein targets, RNF13 and
MUL1, as potential interactors. More recently, they used PUP-IT to
map the spatiotemporal interactions of MARCH5 during its translocation
through mitochondria and peroxisome, which further demonstrated the
wide applicability of this platform for intracellular labeling. The group also demonstrated a new generation
labeler, PUP-IT2, where the Pup ligase PafA was downsized from 55
kDa to 7kD, allowing higher resolution for organelle-specific mapping. The advantage of the PUP-IT and NEDDylator
platforms is that they require direct transfer of the PUP or NEED8,
respectively, from the POI to protein neighbors thus providing unequivocal
evidence that the two partners contact each other. This stands in
contrast to the some other PLP methods that generate diffusible reactive
intermediates. The potential limitation of PUP-IT is that it requires
genetic engineering of cells, and it is possible that spatial constraints
of the gene fusion may miss interactors even in direct contact. Reactions
with PUP-IT and PUP-IT2 are typically done over 12 h incubation, thus
limiting usage for time-resolved mapping.

3.1.1.5

## Tyrosinase
Labeling
Tyrosinase
is a bacterial enzyme that can oxidize substrates such as phenol to
ortho-quinones and label proximal protein nucleophiles. In 2024, the Hamachi and Zhu group introduced
tyrosinase to the POI and performed proximity labeling in mouse brain. In this work, they conjugated tyrosinase to
neurotransmitter receptor ligands FITM and NAPS and injected the construct
to the mouse brain for in vivo labeling. They found known interactors
at specific neuron synapses from proteomics study and validated further
by imaging. More recently, the Qin lab established TyroID where recombinant
tyrosinase was fused with a HER2-specific nanobody, which allowed
cell surface labeling. It is noteworthy
that since tyrosinase labeling radius is expected to be higher than
that of phenoxy radicals, the authors designed an alkyne-based membrane-impermeable
phenol probe, termed AxxP in this workflow, which can be more compatible
with the tandem TransitID workflow. 

3.1.1.6

## Other Contact-Based Reactions
In addition
to PUP-IT and tyrosinase, other contact-based reactions
or enzymatic processes have shown promising potential in mapping protein
interactions engaged in cell–cell communication. Pioneering platforms using an engineered sortase
were demonstrated in the workflows named labeling immune partnerships
by sortagging intercellular contacts (LIPSTIC) and LIPSTIC2 from the
Victora group, , as well as enzyme-mediated proximity
cell labeling (EXCELL) by the Peng Chen group. Alternatively, interaction-dependent
fucosyl-biotinylation (FucoID) developed by the Li and Wu groups employed
the fucosyltransferase and its substrate derivative with a biotin
tag to achieve proximal labeling of proteins or cells. , The Xing Chen lab also demonstrated endogenous enzymes can be used
to activate quinone methide (QM)-based labeling to label interacting
cells. These studies have focused mainly
on cell level labeling. With proteomics analysis, these platforms
can potentially help map protein–protein interactions as well.

3.1.2

## Engineered Peroxidase for Enzymatic Proximity
Labeling
3.1.2.1

## Peroxidase Labeling with Phenol-Biotin
(SPPLAT)
As described above, peroxidases produce phenoxyl
radicals from phenol-biotin in the presence of H2O2 and extensively used for PLP. Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)
is one of the most widely used enzymes for immunoassays, given its
high stability, broad substrate specificity, high sensitivity, and
commercial availability as an antibody conjugate. Peroxidase-induced
proximity labeling can also be achieved by attaching HRP to a target
protein using primary or secondary antibodies, which can then activate
phenol-biotin in proximity and label proteins within ∼ 300
nm. In 2014, the Perrett and Jackson laboratories developed a platform
called selective proteomic proximity labeling using tyramide (SPPLAT)
to study the interactions of B cell receptor (BCR) cluster in chicken
B cells DT40 and identified a chicken B-lymphocyte allotypic marker
chB6 that interacts with BCR following receptor clustering. 

3.1.2.2

## HRP Labeling with EMARS
HRP can
also be used to trigger reactions such as enzyme-mediated activation
of radical sources (EMARS). In 2008, the Kotani and Honke laboratories
developed an EMARS platform employing a biotin probe containing both
aryl-azide and phenol to identify protein interactions in situ. The
initial work used an HRP-labeled antibody to map the interactome of
β1 integrin on the cell surface. By performing immunoelectron microscopy, they anchored HRP on a
nickel grid and measured the distance of gold particles biotinylated
after EMARS reaction. They observed 76% of particles within 200 nm
from the anchored HRP and 94% within 300 nm, suggesting that the labeling
radius is in the range of 200–300 nm. They also discovered
known interacting proteins, such as EGFR, within a distance from the
target protein. By further applying the method to TCR complexes, they
further demonstrated the feasibility of the EMARS platform for cell
surface interactomic mapping. In 2011, by combining EMARS with the
antibody array system, the Kotani lab identified the β1 integrin
interaction with RTKs such as EGFR and ERBB4, as well as CD20 interaction
with fibroblast growth factor 3 (FGFR3) upon rituximab stimulation. More recently, the Kotani lab applied EMARS
using a phenol probe to map the interactions of the SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein. They found host proteins DPP4,
Cadherin 17, and CD133 potentially interacting with the SARS-CoV-2
spike protein during viral-host infection. In a separate work, the
group demonstrated the feasibility of mapping interactions on extracellular
vesicles (EVs) in vivo, further expanding the generalizability
of EMARS in various applications. 

3.1.2.3

## APEX Labeling with Phenol-Biotin
Engineered
ascorbate peroxidases pioneered by the Ting group, such
as APEX and APEX2, have become one of the most popular choices for
proximity labeling. The series of APEX
platforms achieves peroxidase-induced proximity labeling by genetically
fusing APEX to POI. Upon addition of
H2O2 and phenol-biotin, APEX efficiently generates
phenoxyl radicals that predominantly label Tyr and much less frequently
Trp, His and Cys. With its highly streamlined
workflow, APEX has been widely used in protein interactome studies
intracellularly, with recent efforts expanding to extracellular targets.
In 2016, the Ting lab applied an optimized APEX workflow to map the
interactions at the neuronal synaptic cleft. Instead of the traditional APEX or APEX2, they used HRP paired with
a derivatized phenol-biotin with a long and polar polyamide linker
(BxxP) for enhanced specificity for cell surface labeling. In 2018,
the Wesche lab expressed a fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF1) fusion
protein with APEX2, Upon binding to
FGF receptor on the cell surface, FGF1-APEX2 could catalyze labeling
on the neighbors, capturing novel interactors including CSPG3 and
CD44. In order to subtract nonspecific bystander labeling, they included
wild-type U2OS that did not express FGF receptor as a control. In
2022, the Sorkin and Gygi laboratories fused APEX2 to the intracellular
domain of EGFR and monitored neighbors upon ligand activation. By performing labeling at different time points,
they kinetically tracked the enrichment of each protein target. Apart
from known interactors, they found a protein located at the ER, Trk-fused
gene (TFG), that regulates the endosomal sorting of EGFR. In 2023,
the Blacklow and Kalocsay groups used a similar approach fusing APEX2
to the intracellular domain of Notch2 to capture the interactome of
Notch2 during signaling. By tracking the location at different time
points upon stimulation, several key regulators were found that bind
with Notch2 upon JAG1 ligand binding, proteolysis and internalization. More recently in 2024, the Kruse, Blacklow,
Kalocsay, and Susa groups adapted a similar workflow on the intracellular
domain of CD19, a cell surface B cell receptor and profiled the known
and novel regulators upon B cell activation with time resolution. . APEX can also be conjugated to a ligand for
cell surface labeling. In 2024, the Zhuang and Shui laboratories studied
the signaling interactome of the GLP-1 receptor in pancreatic β
cells and neuronal cells by conjugating APEX to its agonist GLP-1
peptide. Given that the GLP-1-APEX was
exogenously added, no additional cellular engineering is needed. These
examples demonstrate that APEX can provide functional neighborhoods
with spatiotemporal resolution. When interpreting the resolution of
labeling, it is critical to know the maximal labeling radii. The phenoxy
radical has a long half-life of ∼ 1 ms, and maximal labeling radii estimated to be around 300 nm
by single particle STED microscopy in aqueous solution. This large radius of labeling is very appropriate
for validating cell–cell, or organellular interactions. For
identifying immediate neighborhoods (10–30 nm), however, the
long labeling radius will include false-positives due to bystander
labeling in crowded cellular environments. APEX also requires cell
engineering and exposes cells to mildly toxic H2O2 like other peroxidase labeling methods. The Ting lab tackled this
issue of H2O2 toxicity by reporting a more recently
developed LaccID. In this work, they
engineered laccase that oxidases phenol using O2 instead
of H2O2. By fusing the engineered enzyme to
either a T cell receptor or chimeric antigen receptor against a tumor
antigen NY-ESO-1, cell surface interactomics was achieved in a H2O2-free manner. A new study from the Martell lab
also introduced an engineered version of APEX, named APOX, and demonstrated
that the kinetics using the nitrophenol probe is greatly enhanced
after directed evolution. 
When
interpreting the resolution of labeling by APEX, it is critical to
consider the labeling mechanisms and labeling environment. The phenoxy
radical has a long half-life of about 1 ms, and the MacMillan group
has recently estimated the maximal diffusive labeling radii in vitro
to be around 300 nm by single particle STED microscopy. When measuring the distance for BioID/TurboID,
the Zou and Chen groups also estimated APEX2 labeling distances on
DNA origami scaffolds and dsDNA. While
the half-life of phenol radicals is considered at ∼ 1 ms, they
observed a dual mechanism where significant labeling with APEX2 at
7–12 nm is due to contact-dependent labeling and the distal
labeling signal beyond 55 nm (or at ∼ 270 nm radius observed
by STED microscopy) is potentially contributed
by diffusive labeling of phenol radicals. Given the significant amount
of diffusive labeling, one would expect that long-range and random
diffusive labeling may be corrected with appropriate and necessary
nonspecific controls. Radical quenchers may preferentially decrease
the long-range labeling supporting this dual mechanism hypothesis. These studies highlight that enzyme-based proximity
approaches can have a significant amount of contract-dependent labeling
even when the probe is diffusible.

3.1.3

## Photoaffinity
Labeling (PAL)-Based Proximity
Labeling
Over the past decades, photoaffinity labeling has
provided a unique opportunity to capture interactions in situ in an
unbiased manner. In the 1970s the Knowles
lab and others found a series of photoactivatable warheads including
benzophenones and highly reactive diazirine warheads that when placed
on ligands were useful for photoaffinity labeling (PAL). Photoactivation allows rapid time-resolved
control that provides unbiased labeling of binding partners. PAL has
emerged as an important technology for profiling interacting proteins.
PAL relies on the selective anchoring of the PAL warheads directly
to the POI by chemical/genetic means, or by using selective ligand
or recognition motifs.
In early applications, researchers were
able to use genetic code expansion to introduce PAL groups onto proteins
selectively. By replacing amino acids with noncanonical amino acids
that contain diazirine groups such as PhotoMet or PhotoLeu, the Thiele
group successfully demonstrated metabolic incorporation of PAL groups. More recently, the Li group metabolically incorporated
2-amino-5-diazirinylnonynoic acid (PhotoANA), a bifunctional noncanonical
amino acid that contains both a diazirine and alkyne tag, to profile
the protein interactions between S. enterica and
its host during infection. At the same
time, the Kohler lab demonstrated the incorporation of diazirine-modified
ManNAz, ManNDAz, onto cell surface glycans. By monitoring interactions using sialic acid biosynthesis, they
identified CD22 and podocalyxin that can interact with sialic acids
which is associated with cancer progression. Selective introduction
of PAL groups to the POI can also be achieved through genetic code
expansion technique originally pioneered by the Schultz group. − By incorporating PAL groups on noncanonical amino acids, researchers
have been able to anchor reactive warheads to the cell surface. In
2016, the Chen lab introduced a noncanonical amino acid PABK that
contains an aryl-azide moiety to substitute Lys on EGFR. Upon UV activation, these anchored moieties
can enable biorthogonal labeling and photo-cross-linking on the cell
surface. Over the years, many different PAL groups have also been
found compatible with the genetic code expansion technique, thus enhancing
the chemical versatility of proximity labeling tools in live cells. In these cases, the labeling distances are
very short. The reactive warhead cannot diffuse freely assuming the
off-rate of the partners is higher than the half-life of the reactive
intermediate. In this case, labeling radii are solely dependent on
reactivity and the leash length of the warhead. While many have used
native amino acids as a control, it is challenging to design controls
with the same warhead at the same location for proteomics studies.
Additionally, since PAL groups may be quenched by water, protein labeling
signal is limited by the labeling efficiency and local PAL group concentration.
Even though the diffusive distance is highly constrained, the yield
of photoincorporation varies typically from 10 to 70% depending on
the warhead and binding site. − 

3.1.4

## Photocatalytic
Proximity Labeling Proteomics
(PLP)
Recently, there has been a surge of applications for
light-activated photocatalysis reactions for PLP. Researchers have
attached a variety of photocatalysts or photosensitizers to the POI
to catalytically activate nearby soluble photoreactive probes for
interactome profiling.
3.1.4.1

## Metal-Based PLP
Metal-based photocatalysts
have been widely used in organic photocatalysis and have the advantage
of high stability and high catalytic efficiency. In 2020, the MacMillan, Oslund and Fadeyi groups pioneered
using an iridium (Ir) photocatalyst to activate diazirine-biotin and
named this platform microenvironment mapping (μMap). Blue light (420 nm) can activate the Ir-catalyst
and sensitize conversion of the diazirine to highly reactive carbene
via a Dexter Energy Transfer (DET) mechanism. The Ir-catalyst was
conjugated to a secondary antibody to recognize target-specific primary
antibodies bound to the POI on the cell surface. They successfully
demonstrated the platform on T cell surfacome by identifying targets
including CD45, CD29 and CD47 on Jurkat cells, as well as PD-L1 at
the T cell/victim cell synapse. This work demonstrated the feasibility
of PLP to map interactomes on the cell surface. In 2022, the Oslund
and Fadeyi group at Merck (now at InduPro) applied μMap to study
the EGFR and c-MET interactomes on the cell surface. They used the
same secondary antibody strategy and found known and new interactors
of these receptor tyrosine kinases. 
Since the first successful demonstration of the Ir-photocatalyst,
several new metal-based photocatalysts, as well as new reactive warheads,
have been explored for their photocatalytic activity. In 2022, the
Peng Chen group used an Ir-catalyst to activate caged quinone methide
(QM) for cell surface protein PLP, which has been more adapted for
mitochondria-specific labeling. , In this platform
named Cat-Ex, they anchored the Ir-catalyst to a HER2-specific affibody,
and selective PD-L1 antibody Avelumab to map their local cell interactome. In the same year, the MacMillan group presented
μMap-red. In this work, they conjugated
a tin (Sn) photocatalyst onto antibodies and used red light to activate
aryl-azide-biotin probes for PLP. They successfully demonstrated more
than 5-fold greater tissue penetrance compared to blue light activation
and applied it to profile erythrocytes from whole blood samples, indicating
its potential application in complicated tissue samples. Red-light
activation was also achieved by the Rovis, Oslund and Fadeyi groups
by using osmium (Os) photocatalysts to activate fluorinated aryl-azide-biotin
probes. By conjugating the Os-photocatalyst
on antibodies, they demonstrated PLP on a cell-surface epithelial
cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM). More recently in 2024, two additional
studies demonstrated the possibility of using new photoprobes for
near-infrared proximity labeling. The Shah and Rovis groups demonstrated
that Os-photocatalysts can be triggered by red light to activate diazo
labeling directly, which is a reactive
species commonly considered to be generated during photoisomerization
of diazirine. Further work from the
Oslund and Fadeyi groups demonstrated that near-infrared illumination
can trigger photocatalysis with photocatalysts, TTMAPP and n-Pr-DMQA+ to activate iodoperfluoroalkyl-biotin
substrate and generate fluoroalkyl radicals for proximity labeling. By introducing a photocatalyst-conjugated CD45
antibody, iodoperfluoroalkyl-biotin probe and ascorbic acid, they
compared biotinylated proteins with or without 30 min of red light
and performed cell surface labeling both on cells and in tissue samples.
In applying PLP, it is crucial to understand the labeling radii
of the photoprobes used. In 2022, the MacMillan group reported an
elegant study examining the labeling radius of diazirine and phenol-based
photoprobes using super-resolution microscopy. This work compared the labeling radii from the Ir-catalyst/diazirine-biotin
pair to peroxidase/phenol-biotin pair. In their experiments, the Ir-catalyst
and peroxidase were anchored to a secondary antibody which bound to
the primary antibody to the POI on the cell target or by single molecule
tethering to glass slides. By measuring labeling using stimulated
emission depletion (STED) microscopy, they demonstrated that the Ir-catalyst,
conjugated to 6–10 lysine sites on a secondary antibody, labeled
proteins to a maximum range of 54 ± 12 nm compared to peroxidase-based
proximity labeling at 269 ± 41 nm. The higher resolution for
using the diazirine-biotin photoprobe is expected given it shorter
half-life but one would expect even higher resolution given the relative
difference in half-life to the phenol photoprobe of 100,000-fold ( ). It is noteworthy
that in this study, labeling radius are reflective to the measurement
of labeling in an extracellular setting in aqueous solution which
may vary due to environmental conditions. In 2024, we tested if the
labeling radius for the Ir-photocatalyst could be further enhanced
by direct attachment of the Ir-catalyst to the primary antibody and
confining labeling at a single site versus 6–10 sites on the
secondary antibody. We utilized site-specific
labeling of methionines to attach the Ir-catalyst to 8 different single
locations with a leash length of 3 nm onto a HER2 binding Fab derived
from trastuzumab. The attachment was shown not to affect binding to
the HER2 ectodomain. We observed broad labeling on all types of amino
acid residues with the maximal labeling distance of around 11 nm from
the site of Ir-photocatalyst attachment in the trastuzumab-HER2 complex.
This maximal distance for carbene labeling was consistent with labeling
sites in the structure of the known trastuzumab-HER2 complex, considering
the 3 nm leash length for the Ir-catalyst from the conjugation site,
the DET orbital overlap distance, and the diffusion expected over
the 2–4 ns half-life. Applying these same considerations in
a secondary antibody strategy predicted a maximal labeling radius
of ∼ 50 nm, consistent with the reported labeling radius. 
Given the dense packing of proteins on
the cell surface with an
average protein distance at 6 nm, it is critical to quantify antibody-directed
labeling to nonspecific labeling in order to best eliminate by-stander
false positives. In the case of μMap, this is performed by simply
omitting the primary antibody and labeling the cell surface with the
non-interacting secondary antibody in the solution. This design reduces nonspecific labeling and is used in
calculating fold-enrichment volcano plots to identify those proteins
that are in close proximity to the photocatalyst. We found it useful
to create a nonspecific membrane-tethered photocatalyst that sits
directly on the membrane like the specific antibody-bound catalyst
as opposed to nonspecific labeling from the solution. In fact, we observed higher resolution and enhanced enrichment
specificity when combining site-specific catalyst attachment and normalizing
to membrane-bound nonspecific control in our analysis.
In addition
to antibody-assisted targeting strategies, other biomolecules,
and chemical biology designs can be harnessed to introduce photocatalysts
to the protein of interest. In 2015, the Nakamura lab introduced a
ruthenium (Ru) photocatalyst to a small-molecule EGFR ligand Gefitinib. By illuminating with blue light, the Ru photocatalyst
can generate singlet oxygen (1O2) and oxidize
proximal His, Met, or Trp residues, allowing subsequent labeling with
tyrosyl radical trapper reagents such as N′-acyl-N,N-dimethyl phenylenediamine. Through
this mechanism, they achieved both EGFR-specific labeling in cells
and oxidative protein knockdown via chromophore-assisted light inactivation
similar to work from the Kodadek group. , More recently, the Ru photocatalyst was used by the Li group to
generate singlet oxygen at cell–cell synapses. With His residues oxidized with singlet oxygen,
hydrazide can label the oxidized His and the interacting cells were
tagged, allowing the identification of specific antigen presentation
patterns between T cells and antigen-presenting cells. A more recent
work from the Martell group used Ru photocatalyst to track proteins
at the intercellular contacts. By introducing
complementary DNA strands on two cells, photocatalyst become activated
only in the presence of both cells, essentially generating an AND
logic gate for labeling.
Similar small-molecule anchored designs
have been used for intracellular
studies including BRD4-binding JQ1, Src/Abl kinase inhibitor dasatinib
and GPCR binders. In 2022, the MacMillan
lab further demonstrated that the Ir-photocatalyst can be conjugated
to azide-containing ManNAz, which were metabolically incorporated
onto cell surface glycans. In this GlycoMap
platform, the Ir-photocatalyst was incorporated using click reaction
onto sialylated glycans, enabling subsequent nonspecific photocatalytic
PLP. In 2023, the Muir and MacMillan groups demonstrated an alternative
strategy to incorporate the Ir-photocatalyst using the split-intein
technique. In this work, they successfully introduced the photocatalyst
to nuclei and performed chromatin interactome profiling intracellularly. This technique was further expanded to profile
intracellular interactions during stree granule assembly, phagocytosis, as well as shown to label RNA simultaneously. 

3.1.4.2

## Dye-Based Photocatalytic
Proximity Labeling
While metal photocatalysts usually have
high biological orthogonality
in live cells, organic dye-based photocatalysts and photosensitizers
have the unique advantages of facile synthesis and high chemical versatility
while providing high catalytic efficiency. More importantly, many of these dye catalysts are readily commercially
available, providing an alternative to metal-based photocatalysts
that require up to 10-step syntheses. , , 
In 2021, the Wollscheid group discovered that
some photosensitizers, including thio-rhodamine, can directly function
as a singlet oxygen generator (SOG) for photocatalytic PLP in their
LUX-MS platform. Similar to the miniSOG
design, they used light to activate the photosensitizer and then added
hydrazide-biotin to capture the oxidized residues, primarily oxo-His.
In their study, the thio-rhodamine SOG photosensitizer was incorporated
directly into anti-CD20, a small molecule drug (CG1), or secreted
insulin and transferrin. In all four cases, LUX-MS demonstrated high
selectivity. In 2022, the Merck team reported the system named PhoTag
where a small molecule photocatalyst flavin was conjugated to antibodies
and used to produce phenoxyl radicals. By using phenol-biotin with msec half-life, they showcased the system for long-range labeling using
a tandem secondary antibody strategy and achieved on-cell biotinylation
on PBMC cells and at PD-1/PD-L1 cell synapses. However, both the photosensitized
singlet oxygen species and the phenoxy radicals have relatively long
half-lives of 3.5 μs and the latter
at 1 ms, respectively, which have lower
resolution than more reactive photoprobes such as aryl-diazirines
and aryl-azides.
More recently, we established a multiscale
photocatalytic PLP platform,
called MultiMap, using a single photocatalytic
dye, Eosin Y (EY). When EY is illuminated with blue or green light,
it is capable of triggering photoactivation of all the commonly used
photoprobes ( B). This xanthene-scaffold photocatalyst has been widely used in
polymer science and for photoredox synthesis given its low cost and
commercial availability, currently ∼ 100-fold cheaper compared
to Ir catalyst. , We discovered that EY can efficiently
activate aryl-diazirine-biotin labeling upon blue light illumination,
and also triggers labeling with three other photoprobes such as aryl-azide-biotin,
phenol-biotin and singlet oxygen/hydrazide. This allows us to use
one single photocatalyst to activate multiple photoprobes with different
labeling radii in one workflow. A facile two-step bioconjugation method
was developed to directly incorporate EY onto primary antibodies with
tunable resolution depending on the labeling radii of the photoprobe
used. We applied MultiMap PLP to probe the off-state of the EGFR neighborhood
by conjugating EY onto the therapeutic antibody cetuximab that competes
with EGF. We identified 29 high-confidence
neighbors including a phosphatase PTPRF capable of dephosphorylating
the EGFR, as well as some tumor promoters and tumor suppressors. We
also labeled some proteins known to associate with the inner leaflet
of the membrane. This was not surprising given the neutral charge
of the photoprobes used and their diffusive distance once triggered.
More than half of the 29 candidates were validated using two orthogonal
methods such as immunoprecipitation and AlphaFold-Multimer binary
protein model prediction. The MultiMap
platform, coupled with routine validation, can greatly streamline
future studies on protein neighborhoods and provide additional validation
or structural insights through complex prediction.
MultiMap
was also shown useful to identify cell–cell interactions
at immune synapses. Robust labeling was found for the longer phenol-biotin
probes but not the shorter-range aryl-diazirine or aryl-azine probes
highlighting the need for long and short-range probes. We tested the
neighborhoods for immune synapses both induced by bispecific T cell
engagers (TCE) and chimeric antigen receptor T (CAR-T) cells. The
T cell neighborhoods were remarkably similar; the strongest hits in
our PLP experiments identified the well-known intracellular kinases,
ZAP70 and LCK, as well as phosphatase PTPN6. MultiMap allows us to
monitor the cell surface and cell–cell neighborhoods on the
molecular level analogous to Google Maps at the macro-scale. We further
expanded this platform to a new set of workflows, extracellular MultiMap
(eMultiMap) and intracellular MultiMap (iMultiMap), in a new study
to visualize dynamic EGFR neighborhoods. By incorporating EY selectively to EGFR using extracellular Flag-Tag
and intracellular HaloTag, which are orthogonal to EGFR signaling,
we tracked neighborhood changes upon EGF ligand stimulation and identified
>300 EGF-dependent neighbors of EGFR during different stages of
signaling.
This work greatly expanded the targetable proteome that is independent
of antibody selectivity and intracellular permeability, which provided
an alternative method to study dynamic interactomes in live cells.
Many new organic photocatalysts have been discovered or deployed
for photocatalytic proximity labeling, including JF570 demonstrated
by the Backus lab for both surfaceome and intracellular targeted labeling. The Moellering group, for example, demonstrated
in 2024 an approach to study integrin-family interactions using lumichrome-conjugated
RGD ligands. By triggering phenol-biotin
labeling, they compared the interactome in different cell types and
cellular microenvironments, and eventually demonstrated in pre- and
post-metastasis triple negative breast cancer cells. Scaffolds such
as deazaflavin was also showcased by the Hackenberger group to trigger
the activation of diazirine, aryl-azide and phenol. During the preparation of this review, several new photocatalytic
PLP have emerged in the literature, highlighting both the urgent need
for and rapidly evolving nature of interactomics methods in this field. − 

3.2

## Outlook
3.2.1

## Remaining Challenges for Interactomics Studies
The
development of PLP methods for defining protein neighborhoods
on the cell surface is in its infancy. While these studies show what
is proximal to the POI, we have not fully addressed functional interactions.
Functional genomic screens will be very useful for defining the importance
of new and established proteins in surface neighborhoods. Proteome-wide
interactions can also be screened using genetically engineered libraries. , 
How best to validate neighborhood results? It is critical
to have good controls for PLP experiments given the highly packed
nature of the surfaceome. These ideally will have a matched nonspecific
surface labeling control, or plus/minus ligand binding to discern
what neighbors are induced by ligand binding. It is also necessary
to use orthogonal methods to validate physical interactions. This
often involves bespoke in vitro reconstitution, structural
analysis, or binding assays. However, given the number of hits from
a proteomics experiment, it can be difficult to perform this validation
workflow in high throughput. In the recent MultiMap study, we used routine (but expensive) co-immunoprecipitation
as biochemical validation and coupled with recently introduced AlphaFold-Multimer
as two orthogonal validation routes. The latter is potentially scalable
and will certainly grow in rigor and speed, but we need a more scalable
biochemical/biophysical assay for direct binding.
With ever-enhanced
profiling resolution, it has become possible
to visualize interactions in cells with higher spatial resolution
using various PLP methods. With recent and existing studies focusing
on intracellular subcellular organelles such as the ER or stimuli-triggered cellular aggregates such
as stress granules, specific regions
of the cell surface could also be targetable, including the membrane
microdomains. Often known as lipid rafts, these cell surface regions are typically enriched in cholesterol
and sphingolipids. Understanding the protein neighborhoods in this
specific region could be helpful to elucidate the complete mechanism
behind signaling transduction, cell–cell recognition, or protein
sorting. − 
So far, most interactomics studies
are using in vitro cell culture systems with large
numbers of cells (typically 5–10
million cells per sample). Cell lines are useful but do not represent
the heterogeneity or architecture of diseased tissues, tumors, or
healthy cells. A next step for more biological relevance would be
to conduct these studies in more complicated samples such as organoids,
xenografts, or even human tissue samples during various biological
processes. , , , − At the same time, single-cell proteomics is beginning to show some
advantages over traditional bulk analysis methods. However, given the surfaceome is 100-fold less abundant
than the cytosolic proteome, it may still be a while before we can
get adequate surfaceomic coverage at the single-cell level. However,
one can identify candidates in bulk and then probe by more sensitive
immunological means on those specific targets. Though RNA levels may
not be directly correlated to protein expression, single-cell RNA-seq
can also facilitate the discovery process since it can provide heterogeneous
RNA-level signatures and features. It is becoming more routine to
study intercellular interactions in heterogeneous biological systems
using single-cell transcriptomics. , We believe
future advances in mass spectrometry and single-cell proteomics may
enable closer examination of protein neighborhoods in patient samples. 

3.2.2

## Opportunities for Future
Studies
Proteomics studies produce large amounts of data
sets and information.
Thus, generating publicly accessible community resources is equally
important for a better understanding of protein interactions. Examples
such as the humancellmap.org( ) or the OpenCell system , present searchable and categorized information of protein localization
on a proteome-wide level. For protein interactions, researchers are
routinely using STRING or BioGrid to find evidence from previous studies. An
integrated platform that contains curated PLP information of direct
physical interactions of proteins will significantly help researchers
to better understand surface interactomes.
Artificial intelligence
has made a huge impact in the structural biology field with AlphaFold2
and other iterations including AlphaFold-Multimer for predicting binary
complexes, ColabFold, RoseTTAFold-All-Atom, and
introducing model parameters such as pDockQ, pDockQ2, and SPOC. Newly demonstrated AlphaFold3 can potentially bring many
new opportunities in the field with its unprecedented accuracy., along with other tools in the field. , We believe proteome-wide screening data sets such as PrePPI or Predictome can greatly assist future work studying cell surface interactome
and provide structural insights for therapeutic development.

4

## Extracellular Post-translational Modifications
in Health and Disease
In addition to changes in expression
levels and new interactomes,
the surfaceome is intricately regulated by post-translational modifications
(PTMs). Proteoform diversity across the human proteome increases exponentially
with PTMs, which represent at least 600 different reactions, and greater
than 100,000 modified amino acid sites. The vast majority of PTMs are intracellular and reversible by the
enzymatic action of writers and corresponding erasers. In contrast,
there are only about a score of extracellular PTMs and most are irreversible
due to the lack of erasers. Extracellular PTMs are dominated by glycosylation,
proteolysis, and disulfide formation, in addition to less abundant
phosphorylation, citrullination, lipidation, and sulfonation among
others. Thematically, extracellular PTMs can contribute to ligand–receptor
interactions, membrane protein complexes, small molecule recognition,
protein stability, and protein function. Upon dysregulation, extracellular
PTMs can contribute hallmark pathological characteristics in cancer,
immune disorders, inflammatory conditions, and microbial infections
which can be useful biomarkers.
The state-of-the-art proteomic
technologies are beginning to interrogate
key surfaceome PTMs under various cellular environments. This is an
expanding field where new technologies are beginning to confront the
analytical challenges of heterogeneity, low abundance, partial stoichiometry,
and sometimes poor biophysical properties of cell surface proteins
that can preclude in-depth analyses. Here we highlight important chemical
biology and engineered protein tools to identify extracellular PTMs.
We then discuss new therapeutic opportunities to target disease-associated
PTM neo-epitopes and the cell surface enzymes that modify the surfaceome.
4.1

## Cell Surface Glycosylation
Encasing
nearly all living cells, glycosylation represents the most abundant
PTM displayed on the cell surface. Protein glycosylation is a highly
complex and heterogeneous PTM that decorates 80–90% of membrane-embedded
and extracellular proteins ( A). , With hundreds of glycosylation
biosynthetic enzymes, there is an estimated ∼ 1012 possible branched carbohydrate structures that can exist among glycoconjugates. Glycans are organized into subtypes based on
the type of amino acid residues modified, and the chemical features
within glycan structures. The vast majority of extracellular protein
glycosylation falls into two categories: asparagine-linked (N-glycosylation)
and serine/threonine-linked (O-linked) glycosylation.
Other cell surface glycoproteins feature glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI) modifications. N-glycans fall into three major types that include oligomannose-,
complex-, and hybrid-type glycans linked to a common pentasaccharide
core structure and a peptide-linked N-acetyglucosamine (GlcNAc). Conversely, O-linked glycans
are attached to proteins through a variety of sugars including N-acetyl-d-galactosamine (GalNAc), GlcNAc, L-fucose (Fuc), d-glucose (Glc), D-mannose (Man), or D-xylose (Xyl) moieties (see
key, ). , , Extracellular, mucin-type O-glycosylation is the most abundant subtype, and features
several variable core structures bound to a GalNac linked sugar. Most surface proteins contain an average of
three glycosylation sites, but there are protein families that are
densely glycosylated. Heavily O-glycosylated proteins,
for instance, are called mucins, and they create a mucosal barrier
around epithelial cells. , Proteoglycans, defined
as glycoproteins that are heavily modified with O-linked glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs), are another major group of extracellular glycoproteins that
are also present in the extracellular matrix. 
 The vast majority of extracellular glycans are
assembled, modified,
and attached to proteins during the secretory pathway. This process
comprises the coordinated activities of approximately 200 glycosylation
enzymes and 173 of these are known to create complex glycan structures. Depending on environmental and cellular cues,
these enzymes introduce heterogeneity based on how often protein sequences
are glycosylated and the different carbohydrate linkages at a single
glycosite. While the vast majority of glycosylation enzymes are active
intracellularly, there are also disease- and cell- type associated
extracellular transferases and hydrolases that are capable of further
tailoring cell surface glycans. Activated platelets, for example,
release extracellular, active glycosyltransferases. In another example,
cancer cells can induce apoptosis by overexpressing and releasing
sialidases that deglycosylate and activate the Fas ligand.
Glycoproteins
constitute a major component of the dense, nanoscale
external cell structure named the glycocalyx. The surfaceome status in health and pathophysiology are
profoundly affected by alterations within the structures of glycans
and glycosylation density not only within the entire glycocalyx structure
but also individual glycoproteins. Proper protein glycosylation is
an important characteristic for protein solubility, stability, protein–protein
interactions, and protein functions within the surfaceome ( A). Cell surface
glycans can modulate cell signaling, intercellular interactions, immune
activities, and the cellular response to its surrounding environment.
Changes in protein glycosylation during synthesis is a hallmark of
many pathophysiological conditions that includes cancer, , inflammation, , infection, and neurological disorders. , Cancer cells,
for example, will hyper-sialylate their cell surfaces. , , Sialic acid, a 9-carbon monosaccharide
present on the termini of most cell surface glycans, interacts with
Sialic-acid binding immunoglobulin receptors (Siglecs) that can enable
cancer cells to evade immune checkpoints. In the EGFR/HER2 tyrosine kinase family, tumor cells will reprogram
glycosyltransferases that remodel the typical glycosylation patterns
of these receptors, which can promote aberrant signaling. − 
4.1.1

## Proteomic Approaches to Study Glycosylation
on the Surfaceome
Glycoproteomics has emerged as a powerful
analytical technique to unravel how glycoproteins diversify the surfaceome
in health and disease. For detailed perspectives of glycan and glycoprotein
characterization using different glycoproteomic techniques, we recommend
these comprehensive reviews. − Here, we will briefly discuss the advantages of using chemical,
chemical-biology, and protein-based approaches that have enabled the
enrichment of glycoproteins for proteomic identification.
As
mentioned above, to enrich and identify cell surface glycoproteins,
chemical enrichment strategies were first developed, such as hydrazide-coupled
resins to capture aldehydes generated by mild oxidation of cis-diols
present within carbohydrate chains such as sialic acids, a terminal
sugar moiety on most extracellular glycosites. Other chemical-based approaches include hydrophilic interaction
liquid chromatography (HILIC) that takes advantage of the hydrophilic
nature of glycans, , and electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic
interaction chromatography (ERLIC) that exploits the charged states
of sugars. Alternatively, glycosyl enzymes
can be leveraged to introduce chemical labels onto extracellular glycans.
Paulson and co-workers showed that galactose oxidase (GAO) generates
aldehyde-containing galactose sugars which can be further biotinylated
using oxime chemistry. In combination
with GalT1, which transfers galactose to terminal GlcNAc residues,
this approach has been widely used to enrich O-GlcNAc residues. , Sialyltransferases (e.g., St6Gal1 and St3Gal1) have also been used
to label glycans with chemical handles that include azido- or biotinylated-motifs. − 
Another conventional glycoprotein enrichment strategy entails
the
use of carbohydrate-binding proteins (lectins) and antibody resins
to pull-down glycoproteins and specific subtypes of glycoproteins.
These are typically weak interactions. By using high avidity commercial
formats, however, lectins such as concanavalin A (ConA), wheat germ
agglutinin (WGA), and Jacalin A (JAC) have been widely used to enrich
and identify cohorts of N- and O-linked glycopeptides. Due to their low affinity and promiscuous interactions
among glycan motifs, lectins are useful at broadly identifying different
carbohydrate motifs, but their poorly defined specificities may be
a disadvantage of characterizing specific glycosylation subtypes.
In recent years, Bertozzi and co-workers conjugated an inactive O-glycoprotease
(StcE) to resin, which allowed them to pulldown and identify mucin-domain-containing
glycoproteins. , Galectins and Siglecs, in other
examples, have been used in a similar manner to identify specific
glycosylated ligands. , 
Lastly, there are several
chemical biology approaches that exploit
the endogenous biosynthetic glycosylation machinery to introduce specific
unnatural sugars with chemical handles. In metabolic oligosaccharide
engineering (MOE) strategies, sugar precursor building blocks are
replaced with clickable sugar analogs using the endogenous glycosylation
machinery. , Alkyne- or azide-modified ManNAc
analogs, for example, endow terminal sialic acids with clickable chemical
handles for subsequent enrichment and pull-down experiments. MOE approaches
using a range of unnatural sugar precursors (ManNAc, GalNAc, GlcNAc,
fucose) have been developed. An important caveat to this approach,
however, is that metabolic crosstalk and enzyme tolerance of unnatural
functionalization can limit the specificity and degree of chemical
labeling over protein glycoforms. Incorporation of azido-fucose, for
instance, can inhibit or limit protein fucosylation. Due to metabolic
crosstalk, GalNAc analogs are incorporated generally into O- and N-linked
glycans. Engineered GalNAc transferases alongside a paired GalNAc
donor, however, will selectively label O-glycosylated proteins.
With an improved understanding of surfaceome glycosylation and
its role in human health, there are many promising potential therapeutic
avenues ( B).
Taking advantage of the aberrant hyper-glycosylation as a hallmark
of cancer, an area of therapeutic exploration has centered around
glycoengineering strategies to manipulate cancer-regulated neo-glyco-epitopes.
By conjugating a bacterial sialidase to trastuzumab (a HER2- targeting
antibody), Bertozzi and co-workers were able to remove sialoglycans
from the cancer cell surfaces, thereby removing the Siglec interactions
and inducing an antitumor response. , Similarly,
Paszek and co-workers displayed the mucinase StcE to NK cells by genetically
encoding a leucine zipper, and then showed that StcE-displayed NK
cells induced cytotoxicity toward cancer cells expressing high levels
of mucins. Wu and co-workers designed
sialidase-fusions onto bispecific T-cell engages (TCE) to remove sialic
acids from the T-cell tumor interface, which enhanced T-cell cytolysis. More recently, Bertozzi and co-workers engineered
antibody-lectin chimeras that contain a tumor-targeting arm and a
lectin decoy arm, which prevents tumor cells from escaping immune
checkpoints. 

4.2

## Extracellular Proteolytic Remodeling
Another widespread
cell surface modification is site-specific extracellular
proteolysis, an irreversible molecular switch generated by peptide
bond hydrolysis. Unlike the mostly static state of extracellular glycosylation,
extracellular protein function can be modified either by regulated
proteolysis at the cell surface or in transit through the secretory
process. There are approximately 600 proteases encoded in the human
genome and most comprise membrane-bound or soluble proteases. At minimum, there are 70 well-annotated extracellular
active proteases in addition to noncanonical proteases that can relocate
to the cell surface. 
Extracellular
proteases usually catalyze site-specific proteolysis of the target
as opposed to complete degradation of proteins that occurs in the
lysosome or proteasome. Extracellular proteases usually cleave cell
surface proteins at controlled positions, that can trigger changes
in protein localization, protein–protein interactions, and
protein activities ( A). The functional consequences
for most of these proteolytic events have not been studied in detail.
However, for those rare examples that have been studied, proteolysis
results in a gain-of-function phenotype.
 Proteases play essential roles
in biological signaling and upon
dysregulation, play pivotal roles in pathophysiological outcomes. , Aberrant proteolytic remodeling is a hallmark of inflammatory diseases
which includes CNS disorders and cancer. , , In contrast to most PTM-enzymes,
dozens of proteases actively tailor the surfaceome on or between cells
at the plasma membrane. Proteolysis at the plasma membrane is predominantly
responsible for the maturation, trafficking, shedding and contributes
to endocytosis of surface proteins. , , On the cell surface, regulated proteases will tailor
specific membrane proteins. Within the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi-apparatus,
signal peptidases process signal peptides and pro-protein convertases
can activate proteases by cleavage of their pro-domains on zymogen
precursors (for review see references , )
Extracellular proteolytic tailoring, both on the cell surface
and
in the extracellular space, is mediated through a highly regulated,
complex signaling network surrounding a cohort of secreted and membrane-anchored
proteases. The extracellular protease network, comprises members of
all major catalytic protease types: cysteine, metallo-, aspartic,
threonine, serine proteases which are expressed in a cell-type and
tissue-dependent manner alongside protease inhibitors and protein
interactors. Among their many and variable
biological roles include remodeling the architecture of the cell surfaceome
and the extracellular matrix (ECM). Serine- and metalloproteases are
the two major protease families, comprised of mainly endopeptidases
that discretely cleave within extracellular regions and can shed extracellular
protein domains. Classical sheddases, like the ADAMs protease family,
cleave extracellular proteins within flexible, membrane-proximal regions,
releasing large soluble protein domains from the membrane. , 
Paracrine and autocrine signaling cascades are triggered by
proteolytic
shedding. Proteases are produced as inactive zymogens that are activated
by proteolysis either in cis or trans. They then cleave and often
shed membrane-bound proteins to create biological active signals that
include cytokines (e.g., IL-1 family) and growth factor receptors (e.g., hGH, IGF-1). Transmembrane, single-pass receptors, and multipass membrane
proteins are also functionally regulated by extracellular proteases,
which tune their ligand-binding properties and complexation via proteolytic
shedding. For example, extracellular proteases cleave and activate
receptors that include single-pass receptors such as Notch and multipass
receptors such as the protease-activated receptor (PAR). , Extracellular proteolysis is also a global modification that impacts
the signaling activities of functional proteins such as transmembrane
kinases and phosphatases, cytokine receptors, and phagocytic receptors
are broadly regulated through proteolytic shedding events. − Among these transmembrane receptors, extracellular proteolysis may
also trigger a proteolytic cascade driven by intra- membrane and cellular
proteolysis, which reorganizes the locations of protein fragments
for downstream cell signaling. For example, ADisintegrin And Metalloprotease (ADAM) are sheddases that cleave membrane
proximal regions, which then trigger intramembrane cleavage by gamma-secretase
and subsequent intracellular proteolysis. Notch signaling, for example, upon mechanical or ligand activation
induces membrane-proximal cleavage followed by intracellular proteolytic
processing during signal transduction. Intriguingly, proteolytic shedding plays a dual, contrasting role
across pathologies. In cancer, sheddases including ADAM metalloproteases
and matrix metalloproteases are highly dysregulated, either down-
or up- regulated. , 
4.2.1

## Proteomic
Approaches to Study Proteolysis
on the Surfaceome
Several approaches have been developed
to characterize proteolysis outside of the cell. A powerful approach
for elucidating protease substrates has been N-terminomics, a proteomic
technology that tags and identifies neo-N-termini generated at precise
cleavage sites. To introduce chemical
tags onto N-termini for proteomic identification, several chemical
(e.g., 2PCA, TAILS, , COFRADIC ) and enzymatic (subtiligase − ) approaches have been developed. At present, chemical-based approaches
have enabled coverage of intracellular proteolysis but have rarely
identified extracellular protease substrates. In a few examples, TAILS
(Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates), a strategy developed
by Overall and co-workers which involves fractionating N-terminal
peptides from internal peptides by differential chemical modification
before and after proteolysis. For instance, TAILS N-terminomics was
employed to identify metalloprotease substrates within fibroblast
secretome samples, as well as the cell surface proteins cleaved by
secreted cathepsins in pancreatic tumor samples. , Importantly, isolating extracellular fractions and isolation of
membrane samples was necessary for TAILS-based enrichment for neo-N-termini
on extracellular proteins. Nevertheless, global characterization of
surfaceome proteolysis using these approaches has remained difficult
due to the fact the surface proteome is far less abundant than cytosol
as mentioned above.
Another widely employed N-terminomics strategy
is dependent on an engineered N-terminal ligase (subtiligase) that
will catalyzes transfer of peptide ester specifically onto the α-amine
and not ε-amine of another peptide or protein. By mixing a biotinylated and mass-tagged peptide ester
substrate in the presence of protein mixtures, subtiligase will transfer
the tagged peptides specifically onto N-terminal amines of proteins
for enrichment and proteomic analysis. Like other N-terminomics methods, subtiligase-based strategies are
widely successful at globally capturing soluble proteolytic modifications
either inside or outside the cell, such as for caspases or serum proteins. − , , Soluble subtiligase-based N-terminomics was not well-suited for
characterizing cell surface proteolysis due to inefficient labeling. However, by localizing the subtiligase to the
extracellular plasma membrane environment, we increased the extent
of N-terminal labeling by 50-fold allowing efficient enrichment of
surface proteolyzed proteins ( B). In our first cell
surface N-terminomics strategy, we generated a genetically encoded
subtiligase that when displayed on HEK293T cells, broadly labeled
hundreds of neo-N-termini.
Most recently, we developed a second-generation
of cell surface
N-terminomics that does not require cellular engineering to attach
subtiligase to the cell surface. This
approach took advantage of the glycan density on cell surfaces to
covalently tether an aminooxy-conjugated subtiligase broadly across
cell surface glycans. Glycan-tethered subtiligase allowed us to sample
and identify neo-N-termini across human cell types including cancer
cell lines and primary immune cells. To date, cell surface N-terminomics
using tethered subtiligase has revealed more than 1,500 cell surface
neo-N-termini across 500 different surface proteins for which >90%
were previously undocumented even from large N-terminomics databases. 
Using cell surface N-terminomics on isogenic
nontumorigenic cell
lines transformed with single oncogenes, we observed bidirectional
changes where some proteolytic events were up-regulated by the oncogene
and some were down-regulated. This occurs
by the oncogene inducing changes in the expressed and activated proteases.
Indeed, the cell surface N-terminomics also revealed propeptide processing
within extracellular proteases, giving clues to changes in the abundance
and activities of these enzymes.

4.2.2

## Proteomic
Approaches to Study Secreted Proteins
in the Secretome
Complementary to cell surface N-terminomics,
secretomics is another widely used proteomic approach that can identify
proteolytically shed and secreted proteins within the extracellular
milieu. To overcome the abundant contamination from serum-derived
proteins, secretomics employs specialized experimental workflows to
specifically enrich for secreted or shed proteins. There are two widely
used metabolic strategies for identifying secreted proteins within
serum-containing media. In one approach pioneered by Lichtenthaler
and co-workers, azido-functionalized sugar are metabolically incorporated
into the secreted glycoproteins for a click-chemistry based enrichment. , To identify additional nonglycosylated secreted proteins, another
strategy developed by Krijgsveld and co-workers entails the addition
of pulsed azido-homoalanine for protein enrichment. To identify secreted
proteins in vivo, Long and co-workers have encoded
secretion tags onto proximity labeling enzymes, which then allows
proteins to be labeled and enriched from blood plasma. Unlike cell surface N-terminomics, an important
caveat to secretomics is that it does not provide positional information
on proteolytic modifications without N-terminal enrichment, and may
miss small shed domains if peptide coverage is sparse. Recently, we have combined subtiligase-based
N-terminomics with secretomics to characterize how hypoxia affects
proteolytic activities and shedding relative to normoxia in pancreatic
cancer cell lines. 

4.2.3

## Targeting Cell Surface Proteolytic Events
with Engineered Antibodies
Given the fundamental roles of
proteases in surfaceome biology, there has been tremendous attention
to leveraging extracellular proteolysis for therapeutic strategies
using engineered antibodies. Protease-targeted therapeutics are increasingly
explored as anticancer agents due to the critical roles of dysregulated,
overly active proteases within the tumor microenvironment (TME). In
the past few decades, numerous groups have explored using small molecule
inhibitors, peptide substrate inhibitors, and antibody-based activity
blockers to inhibit proteases that contribute to carcinogenesis and
therapeutic resistance. Proteases can
be complicated pharmacological targets due to their semiredundant
roles in a multitude of biological signaling pathways. Most recently,
antibody-based protease blockers have garnered attention because they
offer potentially higher selectively toward specific proteases and
may have more success in circumventing off-target effects. 
Taking advantage of the high activity
of disease-regulated proteases, others are developing protease-activatable
therapeutic strategies. Specifically, these modalities serve to deliver
biologics and prodrug modalities more specifically to cancer cells
that exist in TME with enriched cleavage activities. Protease-activated
antibodies, called pro-antibodies, that are only unmasked for binding
to the target in the TME can selectively target tumors more successfully
relative to traditional antibodies. , Following
a similar logic, caged peptide therapeutics have shown success in
tumor penetration and drug delivery via proteolytic processing. These approaches offer precision-based medicine
therapeutics depending on the proteolytic expression patterns among
patients and cancer types.
Disease-regulated extracellular proteolysis
can also provide unique
proteolytic neo-epitopes for immunotherapeutic avenues ( C). One approach is to selectively
block the aberrant shedding of cell surface proteins. Wucherpfennig
and co-workers, for example, selected antibodies to selectively block
the proteolytic shedding of MICA/B, a T-cell and NK cell ligand that
is highly shed from many cancer cells so that they can avoid immune
recognition. Likewise, vaccine-generated
antibodies can also block the MICA/B shedding, and may provide a promising
approach for cancer vaccines. Our group has also recently developed
a phage display-based epitope-directed strategy (EDS) to develop antibodies
that block proteolysis. We showed the
versatility of this approach by developing proteolysis blocking antibodies
against two cancer-dysregulated cell surface receptors, CDCP1 and
EphA2, and four different metalloproteases. Furthermore, we have also developed antibodies that selectively
bind the proteolyzed, neo-epitopes that remain on cell surfaces. Lastly
it we found a poor correlation between the oncogene-induced expression
of surface proteins and the up or down-regulation of the proteolytic
events associated with them. By targeting RAS-driven cancers that
display high amounts of cleaved CDCP1 with antibody-drug conjugates,
BiTES, and radionuclide-antibody conjugates, we have shown that these
antibodies provide a greater therapeutic index. , With emerging information on precise cell surface cleavage sites
(neo-N-termini), biologics that target proteolytic neo-epitopes is
an exciting therapeutic landscape.
Finally, there is a fundamental
and complex interplay between proteolysis
and glycosylation, which are the major PTMs on the cell surface. Most
often, glycosylation sites will block cleavage events and there are
many examples of highly glycosylated protein domains within the membrane
proximal regions that prevent extracellular shedding. As an example,
O-glycosylation isoforms of TNF-alpha coregulate its proteolytic shedding
during activation. In other circumstances,
glycosylation may not interfere with proteolysis, as recently demonstrated
with the ability of the cathepsin family to cleave O-glycosylated
peptide regions. With improved coverage
of glycosylated and proteolytic modifications in the future, we can
further appreciate the balance between these extracellular modifications.

4.3

## Additional Cell Surface Post-translational
Modifications
In addition to structurally complex modifications,
transmembrane proteins and extracellular soluble proteins are also
tailored with relatively small chemical motifs. Among these are extracellular
PTMs such as disulfide bond oxidation, lipidation, phosphorylation,
and citrullination. Most PTM-enzymes
modify predestined surfaceome proteins during intracellular trafficking.
Nevertheless, there is emerging evidence that PTM-enzymes may actively
remodel proteins within the plasma membrane. For example, extracellular
kinases and phosphatases can be secreted as soluble enzymes or within
extracellular vesicles. The evidence for extracellular phosphorylation
activities is an exciting and emerging area in cancer as extracellular ATP is highly increased (10,000–100,000-fold
higher) in the TME. We have recently
shown it possible to target a known ecto-kinase (casein kinase 2,
CK2) to HER2 overexpressing cells by producing bispecific fusion,
CK2-trastuzumab. This bispecific molecule
overphosphorylates these cells, allowing the identification of new
phosphoproteins on the cell surface. The resulting modified surfaceome
also induced the production of antiphosphoprotein antibodies. In another
example, citrullination, the loss of a positive charge on arginine
residues, is catalyzed by intracellular and extracellular protein
arginine deiminases (PAD). It was recently described that the secreted
isoenzyme PAD4 catalyzes extracellular citrullination and plays an
important role in inflammatory diseases including rheumatoid arthritis. 
Although our understanding of extracellular
PTM dynamics is still nascent, emerging bioinformatic analyses and
proteomic studies are expanding our knowledge of where and how these
modifications contribute to surfaceome diversity. Whereas bioinformatic
analysis can identify potential, PTM-accessible amino acids within
extracellular domains, in silico approaches must be complemented with
cell-based proteomic approaches to identify PTM differences in healthy
and pathophysiological states. For example, Backus and co-workers
recently developed a cysteine reactivity surfaceome profiling technology. At present, there are limited proteomic approaches
tailored for globally characterizing extracellular PTMs outside of
the cell but this field is rapidly changing.

5

## Mapping the Immunopeptidome
The surfaceome
is critical for
the cell’s communication
with the immune system. T cells constantly search for clues of “self”
versus “non-self” and respond to threats such as cancer
and infection. Key to this process is
a set of peptides, collectively known as the immunopeptidome, that are displayed on the cell surface by the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC). These molecules are divided
into two classes, MHC-I and MHC-II, based on the subtypes of T cells
they interact with. − The nature of the peptidome directly impact
the decisions made by T cells. Efforts to study the principles underlying
peptide presentation have driven the development of biochemical and
analytical tools for isolating and mapping the MHC immunopeptidome.
Moreover, the potential to exploit peptide-MHC complexes (pMHC) therapeutically
has spurred investigations of disease-associated immunopeptidomes.
Below we will highlight the key developments and takeaways that shaped
our understanding of the MHC-I peptide repertoire in health and disease.
We also point the reader to excellent reviews discussing similar advancements
for studying the MHC-II peptidome can be found in references , .
5.1

## The Basics
of Immunopeptidome and MHC Presentation
MHC proteins are
unique due to their extreme polymorphism in humans
(>10,000 MHC alleles have been reported to date). Mammalian MHC-I
proteins (also known as the human leukocyte antigen or HLA) are encoded
at three genetic loci (HLA-A, -B and -C), and a given
cell can possess 3–6 alleles at a time. , The polymorphic residues are distributed across the peptide binding
groove and dictate the types of peptides that can be displayed. , Consequently, each allele displays a unique but often overlapping
peptidome. Up to 106 copies of MHC-I molecules can be found
on most cells (the exact number depends on the cell line). − It is estimated that 20,000 different peptides can be presented
at levels varying from <10 to 1,000s of copies per cell. The large difference in number raises key questions
on how peptide presentation is regulated, especially in the context
of immune surveillance of self-versus-foreign peptides. Early biochemical
and structural studies have revealed that MHC-peptide recognition
is defined by a set of anchor residues (often at positions 2 and 9)
flanking the displayed peptide sequence, typically 8–11 amino
acids in length. This observation laid important groundwork for many
analytical tools that are routinely used for analyzing MHC-I peptidome
today.
The majority of MHC-I peptides are generated from protein
turnover mediated by the proteasome ( ). Our understanding of what contributes
to the immunopeptidome continues to evolve. The early view was pMHCs
were generated when proteins reached the end of their lifetime. , It is now recognized that a significant portion of the peptide repertoire
is derived from defective ribosomal products. , Other noncanonical cellular events can also contribute to the immunopeptidome. Re-expression of retroviral elements, genomic insertions, transcript splicing, and long noncoding
RNAs have all been documented to produce
antigenic peptides. Surprisingly, novel peptides are also generated
post-translationally. Ligation between
peptides (akin to protein splicing) can occur at the proteasome to
give rise to antigens that are not genetically encoded. The percentage
of spliced peptides in the immunopeptidome remains a subject of debate. , Nonetheless, these alternative sources of MHC peptides underscore
the complexity and need for deeper understanding of antigen presentation.
 Direct sequencing of MHC-I peptides is a daunting
yet necessary
first step for studying and exploiting the immunopeptidome. Early
efforts using mass spectrometry faced serval challenges. MHC molecules
constitute only a small fraction of proteins in a cell (∼0.01%). , In diseases such as cancer, they are further downregulated for immune
evasion. Since most MHC peptides come
from highly abundant proteins, disease-associated ones are extremely
difficult to detect. The low copy number also imposes severe requirements
on the sensitivity and specificity of pMHC recovery and analysis.
Further complicating the issue, the diverse allotypes make pairing
a peptide with the presenting allele challenging. Lastly, peptides are heavily edited at their N-termini
by aminopeptidases before being transported onto a receiving MHC molecule. , This processing step remains poorly understood and hinders the matching
of a detected peptide sequence to a protein source. Despite these
limitations, advances in mass spectrometry and computational technologies
in the last 30 years have drastically changed the landscape of immunopeptidomics.
Creative solutions have been developed to isolate and enrich for pMHCs
from cultured cells and even patient samples. Many platforms are now
available for researchers to dissect unique aspects of the immunopeptidome
under specific biological contexts.

5.2

## Methods
to Isolate the Immunopeptidome
Studying the immunopeptidome
has been enabled by innovations in technologies
for extracting pMHC-I from the cell surface. These approaches can
be thematically separated into two categories: mild acid elution (MAE)
and affinity purification via antibodies. The former takes advantage
of pMHC’s biophysical instability at low pH, while the latter
requires a specialized set of reagents to capture complexes directly
from the cellular milieu. Neither approach
is perfect, and each has its own advantages and disadvantages. The
following section highlights important lessons learned using different
MHC recovery methods and areas for potential improvements.
5.2.1

## Mild-Acid Elution (MAE)
Introduced
by Sugawara and co-workers in 1987, MAE is one of the earliest and
simplest methods to isolate the immunopeptidome ( A). Treating cells with acid (pH ∼ 3, typically with citrate
buffer) causes the β2m to dissociate from folded pMHC, releasing
the bound peptides in the process. This method was instrumental in
early investigations of T cell responses to MHC peptides. MAE is rapid, and nontoxic. Consequently, it has been suggested as a method to monitor
immunopeptidome regeneration and turnover. Thibault and co-workers
used MAE to establish important features for neoplastic immunopeptidome:
(1) most peptides are derived from highly abundant transcripts, and
(2) a large portion (∼25%) of peptides found in neoplasia were
absent in normal cells. Interestingly,
unique peptides heavily reflect crucial molecules involved with pathways
leading to neoplastic transformation. Despite the valuable insights
gained, the acid eluate obtained from cells is often contaminated
with non-MHC-I peptides, which reduces the number of identifiable
pMHCs and complicates downstream analysis. For these reasons, in the last couple of decades, other recovery
methods such as immunoprecipitation have been preferred for MS-based
immunopeptidomics.
 
5.2.2

## Immunoprecipitation via Anti-MHC Antibodies
Immunoprecipitation (IP) using anti-MHC antibodies offers a more
selective approach to enrich for MHC peptides ( A). Originally pioneered by Engelhard and
Hunt, − and later by Natheson and Rammensee, , this method isolates
the peptidome by first capturing pMHCs from cell lysates followed
by acid dissociation. A handful of antibodies have been isolated for
pMHC IP; however, the pan-specific clone W6/32 (first introduced by
Hunt and co-workers ) remains the reagent
of choice. One key feature of W6/32 is its capability to isolate all
three classes of human MHC molecules (HLA-A, -B, -C). A disadvantage
of a pan-specific pull-down is it captures of all pMHC molecules without
retaining any allelic information. Researchers often rely on algorithms
to assign peptides to specific alleles, which can introduce ambiguity
and variability. In addition to W6/32, alternative antibodies with
varying degrees of allele-specificity (e.g., BB7.2) have been used
for isolating pMHCs. However, the allele coverage is neither complete
nor sufficient. Many IP protocols also suffer from poor yield with
losses up to 90% during recovery step and place demands on excessive
sample size, in some cases up to 108–109 cells. , While improvements have been
introduced, most reagents and protocols are nearly identical to those
used in Hunt’s seminal work almost three decades ago. As the
demand for immunopeptidome analysis grows, better immunoprecipitation
reagents and protocols are necessary to improve yield, bias, and robustness.

5.3

## Instrumentation for Immunopeptidomics
The introduction of Orbitrap-MS marked a paradigm shift in the field
and enabled facile identification of thousands of peptides in a single
experiment. , The sensitivity of modern MS
instruments (e.g., Q-Exactive-HF, Fusion Lumos, Orbitrap Astral, etc) , continues to lower experimental requirements for immunopeptidomics.
Thousands of endogenous peptides can be detected in a single run using
commercial mass spectrometers and standard workflows ( B). The improved sensitivity
also enabled detection of rarer peptides carrying mutations and even
PTMs. − Despite improvement in sensitivity, standard
immunopeptidomics protocols still require a large amount of cellular
input (often up to 109 cells) for reliable and compressive
peptide identification. , Recent development
in advanced ion separation techniques (e.g., TIMS) , and hybrid fragmentation (EThcD) methods , are continually lowering the demand for input material. Carr and
colleagues have reported an optimized method than enabled robust peptide
detection with <107 cells or 15 mg wet weight tissue. Combined with semiautomated and high-throughput
pipelines, large-scale immunopeptidomics comparing hundreds of clinical
samples are now feasible. , Modified immunopeptides
of noncanonical origin can be also readily identified. , As MS has become a standard analytical tool in life sciences laboratories,
immunopeptidomics has gradually transitioned from experiments performed
by a handful of experts to routine practices across the field. With
the continuous evolution of MS techniques, especially in single-cell
proteomics, we anticipate it may soon
be possible to map the disease immunopeptidome at the cellular level.
5.3.1

## Data Analysis for Immunopeptidomics
Early practices
in immunopeptidomics employed similar analysis pipelines
as traditional proteomics. The quality of analysis is determined by
how well the detected spectra match with ones generated in
silico. , However, applying this criterion
to MHC peptides raises several challenges: (i) mutant or spliced peptides
are often not included in standard database searches. (ii) Unpredictable fragmentation patterns occur
for nondigested peptides. (iii) There is often low confidence in sequence
identification. To address these challenges, several workarounds have
been developed ( B). Targeted databases (e.g., SpectMHC ) can be constructed from existing data sets or through motif-driven
predictions (e.g., MHCquant ) to improve
search accuracy. However, these approaches may be biased toward well-studied
alleles (e.g., HLA-A*02:01) due to data availability. Recently, packages
such as the PEAKS studio have employed deep-learning-based spectral
searching and de novo sequencing to enhance peptide identification,
resulting in approximately a 2-fold improvement. , Additionally, data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode has been utilized
to enhance accuracy and peptide identifications. , Using DIA, Bassani-Sternberg and co-workers identified thousands
of high-confidence MHC peptides from as few as 106 cells. This coevolution of analysis algorithms and
sensitive mass spectrometers will further enhance our ability to profile
the immunopeptidome.
In addition to peptide identification,
algorithms are also needed to assign peptides to specific MHC alleles.
Establishing the presenting allotype for detected peptides is challenging
due to the polymorphism and isolations of MHC molecules. , A popular solution is NetMHCpan, , a neural
network-based algorithm that leverages additional biochemical information
(e.g., peptide length, motif preferences, existing databases) to assign
alleles for input sequences. Researchers can also use NetMHCpan and
its successors to forecast all possible segments from a protein that
can be displayed as pMHC by a given allele. While convenient, these
analyses are not perfect. Because the algorithms rely heavily on pre-existing
data, predictions for understudied alleles are often poor. To tackle this issue, Wu and collages experimentally
profiled 95 monoallelic cell lines and generated a reference database
for training predictive algorithms. , These data
also revealed binding motifs for a large collection of MHC allotypes
across the human population. Many submotifs,
both unique and shared, exist across multiple alleles. Distinct motifs
were also found within peptides of different lengths, suggesting that
a sophisticated control mechanism underlies which peptides get presented.
Finally, the refined data set can be integrated with DDA immunopeptidomics
protocols to aid peptide identification, resulting in approximately
a 2-fold improvement. 

5.3.2

## Quantification for Immunopeptidomics
Beyond peptide
identification, quantification – estimating
copies-per-cell – is critical for studying the immunopeptidome.
Different relative and absolute quantification proteomic workflows
have been implemented for this purpose, each with its own advantages
and disadvantages due to the unique properties of MHC peptides ( C). , Label-free quantification (LFQ) has been used to study how stimulation
(e.g., IFN-γ, infection, etc.) alters the immunopeptidome and
antigen presentation. , Despite the ease of implementation,
LFQ accuracy can vary due to poor agreement in peptide identification
between samples (approximately 40% between biological replicates). Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell
culture (SILAC) can improve run-to-run viability but faces challenges
in choosing which labeled amino acids are best suited. , Common residues from tryptic digests (e.g., lysine and arginine)
are often absent in MHC peptides, leading to sparse labeling. Anchor
residues (e.g., valine for HLA-A*02:01) can be used, but this is restricted
to selected alleles. SILAC with tandem mass tags (TMT) has also been
implemented for multiplex quantification. , 
In addition to relative quantification, determining the absolute
copies-per-cell for a given pMHC is possible with internal calibration
using exogenous peptide standards. , , The timing to introduce peptide standards is crucial,
though, and many protocols often fail to account for losses during
pMHC extraction. To address this, White
and co-workers developed hipMHC, where a synthetic, UV-exchangeable
pMHC standard is used to mitigate peptide losses during processing
and labeling. , In addition to improving quantification
accuracy, hipMHC can achieve absolute determination and provide copies-per-cell
for a given pMHC when used with built-in calibration curve. This method
is also compatible with multiplexing using TMT. Application of more sensitive detection techniques (e.g.,
selected or multiple reaction monitoring) has also enabled more accurate
quantification of peptides in low-input settings. , However, with the myriad of quantification strategies available,
there is no clear consensus on the best practices for quantitative
immunopeptidomes. Establishing such
consensus will be critical for the community for future sharing and
cross-comparison of data sets.

5.3.3

## Multiomics
with Immunopeptidomics
Immunopeptidomics techniques have
been integrated with other state-of-the-art
proteogenomics to study the antigen presentation process. , The introduction of Ribo-seq has led to a paradigm shift in immunopeptidome
analysis. Ribo-seq is a technique that provides information on the
polypeptides actively transcribed by ribosomes (a more detailed review can be found in reference ( )). When paired with immunopeptidomics,
Ribo-seq can directly inform on the source of MHC peptides. , These studies have also shed light on the mysterious inconsistencies
between immunopeptidomes and transcriptomics. In a recent study from
the Wu and Regev groups, it was demonstrated that the unexpected pool
of MHC peptides is associated with novel or unannotated open reading
frames (nuORFs). Additionally, nuORF
peptides are immunologically active and potential targets of immunotherapy.
It has also been postulated that nuORFs are more likely to contribute
MHC ligands as they are more rapidly and efficiently degraded. This
suggests that there remains a large portion of the immunopeptidome
yet to be discovered via traditional MS methods. This is further reflected in a recent comprehensive study
that profiles the immunopeptidome in combination with the acetylome,
phosphoproteome, ubiquitylome, and proteome in tissue samples. Strikingly, only about 30% of sources contributing
to an MHC peptide are found in the proteome, and only 26% of ubiquitylated
proteins give rise to an MHC peptide. This mismatch further suggests
that the immunopeptidome should be treated as its own special ″ome″
within the cell, rather than as a mere extension of the intracellular
proteome.

5.4

## Discovery of Disease-Associated
Immunopeptidome
Immunopeptidomics not only reveals the basic
principles of antigen
presentation but also uncovers actionable targets for therapeutic
development. The MHC peptide repertoire conveys information on cellular
state in response to perturbations, both inside and outside the cell,
particularly in cancer. , Genomic mutations
can give rise to mutant peptides, or neo-antigens, presented by MHC
molecules on the cell surface. , Oncogenic events can
lead to dysregulation in translation and transcription, resulting
in the display of noncanonical peptides. , Many HLA molecules are also used as predictors for risk and protective
alleles in various diseases. , The clinical relevance
of the immunopeptidome strongly motivates comprehensive interrogation
under disease contexts. MS-based immunopeptidomics techniques have
catalyzed the discovery of disease-associated alterations. However,
the complexity of the peptide repertoire necessitates innovative integration
with other disciplines such as bioinformatics, proteogenomics, and
engineering. Below, we will discuss recent technologies in uncovering
disease-associated immunopeptidomes.
5.4.1

## Prediction
Algorithms for Antigen Discovery
Early studies on the immunopeptidome
hinted the possibility of
mutant epitopes displayed by MHC molecules. , This observation, coupled with the interest in personalized medicine, has spurred the development of numerous algorithms
for predicting antigenic peptides from whole exome sequencing data
( A). , Mutant sequences from cell lines and patient tumors are analyzed
with software such as NetMHCpan to generate lead pMHCs for downstream
validation using immune activity or mass spectrometry. Neo-antigens
have been identified from tumors bearing difficult-to-drug drivers
(e.g., TP53, KRAS, etc). , , , Many vaccine formulations based
on the predicted sequences are currently being evaluated in late-stage
clinical trials. Despite some success,
the “hit-rate” of prediction-based discovery remains
low, and predicted peptides are rarely found on the surface of diseased
cells. , Further complicating the issue, many of
the predicted peptides are not immunogenic. One potential explanation is the over-reliance on binding-based
models, which overlook other crucial steps in antigen presentation,
such as peptide processing and transport. Improvements have been introduced by considering complex stability
(NetMHCstab ), susceptibility to proteasome
cleavage (NetChop ), and enzyme processing
(PAProC ). By integrating one or more
filters with the binding-based models, better performance can be achieved in predicting bona fide immunogenic
peptides.
 
5.4.2

## Genetic Approaches for Antigen Discovery
Experimental methods can be combined with antigen prediction to
accelerate identification of immunogenic peptides. With advances in
genetic screenings, large pools of potential peptide sequences (generated
from prediction or sequencing data) can be introduced to cells. Any
potential non-MHC ligands are eliminated as only folded complexes
are displayed on the cell surface. , These cells
are then used in downstream functional assays and immunopeptidomics
for antigen and T cell receptors (TCR) discovery. In one recent example,
Elledge and co-workers reported an optimized cell platform (EpiScan)
that enables large scale, targeted peptide discovery with user-defined
allotype and biological context. Interestingly,
this approach could identify MHC peptides enriched with cysteines
– a severely underrepresented phenotype in existing immunopeptidome
data sets. Such approach is very powerful as it enables TCR identification
without prior knowledge of the immunogenic epitope. Rose and co-workers
have shown that it is possible to survey potential epitopes from 47
cancer drivers simultaneously using a linked polyantigen cassette
based on computation and empirical data. Using the same platform, they subsequently isolated TCRs capable
of eliciting immune response against target pMHCs shared among the
cancer mutations. This combination of neo-antigen prediction and functional
screens will further bolster our ability to uncover therapeutically
relevant pMHCs-TCR combinations.

5.4.3

## Large
Scale Immunopeptidomics for Antigen
Discovery
Performing immunopeptidomics across dozens of tumor
specimens and cell lines have also contributed many disease-associated
pMHC targets. Instead of focusing on
neo-antigens unique to individuals, these studies seek shared antigens
by comparing the immunopeptidome from large collections of healthy
and disease sources ( B). Several disease types have been investigated, including
breast and ovarian cancers, melanoma, and acute myeloid leukemia. , , , In all cases, shared antigens were identified, but the hit rate
was low. Interestingly, many peptides identified in tumor samples
were also found in healthy tissue, suggesting the need for disease-specific
controls or filters. In rare cases, shared, post-translationally modified
(PTM) peptides can be observed. , Certain PTMs,
such as phosphorylation, have been suggested to enhance stability
over unmodified peptides and are more likely to be found in the immunopeptidome
under aberrant phosphorylation. 
Quantitative immunopeptidomics can further help prioritizing targets.
Riley and co-workers recently identified a spliced peptide from collagen
COL6A3 by analyzing ∼ 1,500 tumor and normal tissue samples. Interestingly, this peptide was observed across
55 tumors with diverse tissue origins and in healthy tissue, albeit
at a much lower copies-per-cell. Conducting immunopeptidomics at scale,
however, remains limited to experts specializing in immunopeptidome
research. To address this issue, leaders in the field have launched
the Human Immunopeptidome Project (HIPP) with the goal of comprehensively
mapping the pMHC repertoire and developing robust technologies that
are easily accessible to researchers. , The HIPP
also launched the systeMHC atlas project as an open-source repository
for depositing data from different experimental settings. The growth of these community-driven efforts
will accelerate large-scale comparisons of different cell models,
disease types, and patient cohorts.

5.4.4

## Secretion
of pMHC for Antigen Discovery
on Specific MHC Alleles
Immunopeptidomics focusing on secreted
MHC molecules can also reveal disease-associated markers and targets
with allele-specific resolution. Cells can naturally shed or be engineered
to secrete pMHCs into the extracellular milieu. Continuous enrichment of soluble complexes can enable sensitive
detection of low abundance complexes ( C). The secreted method was originally adopted
by Hildebrand and co-workers to establish binding motifs for HLA-B*15:01,
as it was the only way to isolate MHC peptides on a large scale. In 2002, Admon and co-workers demonstrated
the possibility of using secreted methods to analyze antigen presentation
in breast, ovarian, and prostate cancer cell lines. A key feature of secreted immunopeptidomes is their close
resemblance to the membrane-bound counterpart. Additionally, naturally shed sMHCs can be detected from
patient serum and are present at higher concentration than tumor bound
ones. Profiling the secreted repertoire
can provide a noninvasive way to screen for patient compatibility
for HLA-targeting therapeutics. Despite the potential, methods to
engineer and profile secreted MHC remain limited. Many of the original
secreted protocols were designed to work with impractically large
amounts of input material. , , 
More recent work from the Strong laboratory and our group
have introduced biochemical tags to sMHC to facilitate ease of secretion
and purification of specific MHC alleles containing their immunopeptidomes. , Strong and co-workers generated sMHC by replacing the transmembrane
domain with a C-terminal poly histidine tag for isolation (SCD). The
SCD was stabilized by linking the MHC heavy chain and β2m as
a single fusion protein. , In our case, we developed
constructs featuring the ectodomain of only MHC heavy chain fused
to the human Fc domain. Unlike the SCD, the MHC-Fc fusion heterodimerizes
with endogenous β2m during biosynthesis. The presence of the
Fc facilitates efficient expression and purification, and also reduces
the input requirement by providing extra stability. , We demonstrated the utility of this method by profiling the immunopeptidome
of several cancer cell lines under different physiological states
including senescence and hypoxia. One caveat of sMHC is the incompatibility
with fresh tissue and primary cell lines. For this reason, we anticipate
that the secreted platform will be used alongside with traditional
immunopeptidomics to accelerate target discovery. For instance, the
secreted platform could be used to profile potential targets under
the confine of a specific disease context (e.g., oncoprotein activation,
microbial/viral infection, dysregulated cell states, etc). This will
provide a focus-list of pMHCs for further validation on clinically
relevant specimens via traditional immunopeptidomics. The merger of
these two approaches will thus will further bolster our ability to
study and identify disease-relevant pMHCs.

5.4.5

## Technology
for Capturing Dynamic Changes
within Disease Immunopeptidome
So far, efforts to map the
disease immunopeptidome have primarily focused on bulk tumor measurements,
providing only a snapshot of cancer-specific antigen presentation.
Early studies on the impact of interferon on the immunopeptidome revealed
that the peptide repertoire is dynamic and responsive to cytokine
stimulation. , Later studies on ribosomal subunits
and mTOR inhibition demonstrated that the immunopeptidome is regulated
by a multitude of biochemical networks and metabolic events. These studies provide further evidence of the
plasticity of the MHC peptide and the potential for dynamic changes
during disease development. Studying these changes is challenging,
as alterations can occur in both peptide identity and abundance levels. , For instance, White and co-workers used hipMHC to reveal that MEK
inhibition induced the display of novel sequences and upregulated
a subset of existing ones, with some sequences detected over 1,000
copies per cell. Interestingly, many of these changes are not correlated
with changes in transcripts or ubiquitylation levels. A recent study by Tyler and co-workers reported
similar observations in lung adenocarcinoma immunopeptidomes. The authors of this study also developed a
mouse model where antigen presentation can be dynamically controlled
with inducible Cre recombinase expression. This model has the potential
to enable immunopeptidome profiling across multiple stages of disease
and reveal additional opportunities for therapeutic intervention.

5.5

## Perspectives and Outlook
Since the
discovery that MHC peptides are key ligands for eliciting T cell responses,
our understanding of the immunopeptidome has evolved tremendously.
A myriad of mechanisms can contribute novel peptides to the immunopeptidome
beyond highly abundant intracellular proteins. With advances in mass
spectrometry and bioinformatics, we can now map the peptidomes of
cells and even tissues under various biological contexts. Concomitant
improvements in isolation and sample preparation protocols will be
needed in the future to push the boundary in depth and throughput
for immunopeptidomics. The search for disease-associated peptides
has also spurred the development of new tools featuring techniques
from engineering, genetic screens, and other multiomics platforms.
Such integrated platforms further reveal how the immunopeptidome can
change in response to pathological transformation. Looking ahead,
we anticipate the scope of immunopeptidomics will further expand with
the introduction of single-cell proteomics, data-independent acquisition,
and machine learning-based analysis pipelines.
Beyond profiling
the immunopeptidome, strategizing the optimal way to therapeutically
exploit disease-associated pMHCs is another major goal of the field.
Many modalities targeting pMHCs have been developed, ranging for cancer
vaccines, adoptive cell transfer, TCR- and antibody-based biologics,
and more recently, CAR-T cells (excellent reviews on these topics
can be found in references , , . These drug discovery efforts
are projected to grow exponentially in the next decade due to the
recent FDA approval of Tebentafusp, a soluble TCR mimic that recruits
T cells to attack tumors in a pMHC-dependent manner. Despite the excitement, the key determinants of efficacy
and toxicity remain poorly characterized for pMHC-targeting modalities.
Many of the rules for targeting cell surface proteins may not apply
due to the unique characteristics of the immunopeptidome and MHC molecules.
The extremely low expression levels of pMHCs present challenges for
therapy: (i) low target expression confines the options for immuno-targeting
using CAR-T or bispecific T-cell engagers (ii) the potency of these
modalities requires knowing that the target is present on disease
and not healthy tissue. (iii) the diversity of pMHC to contain closely
related peptides stresses the need to exceedingly specific antibodies
or TCR mimetics. Nonetheless, the pMHC discovery field has dramatically
expanded the target space for new therapies as evidenced by the burgeoning
number of start-up companies in this area. Overall, the rapidly improving
technologies for allele-specific and targeted pMHC discovery coupled
with new immunotherapies are making great strides in this exciting
field.

6

## Conclusions and Perspectives
The surfaceome
presents vast opportunities for technological, biological,
and therapeutic discovery. In the past decade, new engineered and
chemical tools have allowed for enrichment methods to interrogate
the surfaceome at much greater depth. Technologically, there have
been great strides in mass spectrometry to increase accuracy and sensitivity.
Additional informatics platforms are providing better annotation for
surface proteins. This allows us to interrogate how the surfaceome
changes from health and disease in terms of proteins expressed, their
neighborhoods, their PTMs, and immunopeptidomes. These new targets,
proteoforms, and complexes dramatically expand the therapeutic and
biomarker opportunities for small molecules and biologics.
6.1

## We Are Only Beginning to Scratch the Surface
Virtually
all surfaceomic studies are conducted in 2D cell culture
for the obvious advantage of material availability and reproducibility.
One of the key new horizons will be to determine surfaceomes in disease
and healthy tissues. Currently, the only validated technologies available
for discovery in tissues are antibody- or RNA-based platforms. These
have huge limitations. Antibodies generally bind to tertiary epitopes,
requiring a folded protein target, which is destroyed upon paraffin-embedding
for immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. It is rare to find IHC-compatible
antibodies; they are expensive and lack comprehensive coverage. RNA-based
hybridization for specific membrane proteins has the sensitivity and
is cheaper but transcript levels are weakly correlative with protein
levels. Importantly, most of the interesting surfaceome targets are
generated post-translationally such as PTMs, protein complexes, and
pMHCs. Thus, the onus is on the surfaceomics community to develop
robust and sensitive methods for 3D and tissue-based surfaceomics.
Tumors and healthy tissues are very heterogeneous and not renewable,
which will challenge the field to analyze these samples using cell
purification with small quantities as well as new informatics approaches
to categorizing cell types. There have been some recent advancements
in spatial proteomics on tumors to analyze specific regions of tumors
and normal tissues from the Mann group and the Zhu and Qian groups. Deeper
proteomics on whole tissue lysates can detect up to 1000 membrane
proteins even among the much more abundant cytosolic proteins. Such
studies obviate the need for surface enrichment but cannot localize
the membrane protein to the cell surface or other internal membrane
structures. Rapid progress is also being made in single-cell proteomics
that could start to reach the sensitivity to detect surface proteins.
The new PLP approaches are in their early days of development but
are already having an impact on discovering cell surface neighborhoods.
Prior to this, the classic view of growth factor or small molecule
cell signaling is that it is a vertical ‘bucket-brigade”.
In this oversimplified vertical model, the ligand binds a single transmembrane
receptor complex that ultimately causes a conformational change inside
the cell that allows cytosolic proteins to engage, leading to functional
changes inside the cell. These new surface PLP studies show there
is a world of lateral signaling in the membrane that we are only beginning
to appreciate.
Lastly, there is a tremendous interest in the
structural biology
and drug discovery community to define at atomic resolution the structure
of the cell. This is a laudable goal and one of human genome-like
importance. There are reasonable arguments that the surfaceome, the
“edge-pieces” of the cell, with half the degrees of
freedom should be a primary target for such endeavors as we are rapidly
developing our ability to define surface interactomes and model their
structures. Genome-wide sequencing led to the systematic identification
of disease targets based on human genetics. The field of neo-protein
epitopes is emerging where targets are identified, not at the gene
or transcript level, but at the proteome level encompassing defined
disease-associated PTMs, complexes, and dysregulated cellular and
tissue location. Given the functional importance of the surfaceome
for biology and therapy, we view surfaceomics as a critical piece
of this quest for neo-epitope target discovery.

## Author Contributions
# KKL,
KS, ZL, and ZY contributed equally to the manuscript.
The authors
declare the
following competing financial interest(s): JAW has received research
grants from Merck and Bristol Myers-Squibb.
Kevin Leung is an Assistant Adjunct
Professor in the Department
of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and the Associate Director of the Antibiome
Center at the University of California, San Francisco. His work specializes
in leveraging proteomics and bioinformatics to explore the cell surface
proteome and discover novel therapeutic targets. At the Antibiome
Center, Kevin and his team focus on engineering antibodies against
cell surface targets, utilizing a combination of phage display, structural
biology, computational modeling, and advanced automation. Kevin received
his B.S. in microbiology and immunology (2010) from the University
of Western Ontario, Ontario, Canada, and his Ph.D. in biochemistry
(2015) from the University of Western Ontario, Ontario, Canada with
Brian Shilton, Ph.D. He completed his postdoctoral training (2018)
at the University of California, San Francisco, with Jim Wells, Ph.D.
Zhi Lin is a postdoctoral scholar at the
University of California,
San Francisco. Her work focuses on developing new proximity labeling
proteomics platforms to map the neighborhoods of cell surface targets.
Her interests span chemistry, proteomics, chemical biology, molecular
biology, and therapeutic designs. Before UCSF, Zhi received her B.S.
in Chemistry (2017) at Peking University, working with Prof. Peng
Chen as an undergraduate researcher designing bio-orthogonal cleavage
reactions for protein activation. She received her Ph.D. in Chemistry
(2022) from Harvard University with Christina Woo, PhD., where she
investigated the mechanisms behind protein degradation using molecule
glues.
Kaitlin Schaefer is a chemical
biologist who is passionate about
developing new chemical and chemical biology approaches to understand
protein dynamics and functions with molecular resolution. She is currently
a postdoctoral scholar at the University of California, San Francisco
where she investigates cell surface proteolytic modifications and
their underlying molecular consequences on cell signaling. She worked
on enantioselective reaction development with Prof. Matthew Sigman
during her undergraduate BS degree in Chemistry (2011) at the University
of Utah. She then received her PhD in Chemistry and Chemical Biology
(2018) at Harvard University with Prof. Suzanne Walker and Prof. Daniel
Kahne. In her graduate work, Kaitlin integrated sugar synthesis with
biochemistry and structural biology to uncover new protein machinery
involved in bacterial cell wall synthesis.
Zi Yao is a postdoctoral scholar at the University of California,
San Francisco. His work focuses on how oncogenes broadly remodel the
cellular immunopeptidome, emphasizing identifying actionable targets
for therapeutic design. He is enthusiastic about engineering custom
antibodies (e.g., T-cell engagers) to redirect immune activities against
diseased cells. Prior to UCSF, Zi received his B.S. in Chemistry (2015)
at the University of California, Davis, and his Ph.D. in Chemistry
(2021) at the University of California, Irvine, with Jennifer Prescher,
Ph.D., where he developed novel bioluminescent enzymes and substrates.
Jim Wells is the Harry Wm. and Diana V. Hind
Distinguished Professor
of Pharmaceutical Sciences in the Departments of Pharmaceutical Chemistry,
and Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology at the University of California,
San Francisco. Dr Wells has spent 40 years doing mechanism-based research
in basic and therapeutic sciences: 16 years at Genentech pioneering
foundational technologies for engineering proteins, 8 years at Sunesis
Pharmaceutical developing a site-directed covalent approach for fragment-based
drug discovery called Tethering, and currently at UCSF since 2005.
His laboratory at UCSF focuses on understanding how cell surface proteomes
change in health and disease and studying novel targets with engineered
antibodies. He also founded the Small Molecule Discovery Center (SMDC)
and the Antibiome Center to generate renewable recombinant antibodies
at an industrial scale. He received his BA degrees in biochemistry
and psychology (1973) from the University of California, Berkeley,
and a Ph.D. in biochemistry (1979) from Washington State University
with Ralph Yount, Ph.D. Followed by postdoctoral training (1982) at
Stanford University School of Medicine with George Stark Ph.D.

## Acknowledgments
We are grateful to members of the Wells Lab
for
their many helpful discussions and passion for researching the surfaceome.
We also thank Professor Alice Ting at Stanford University, and Dr.
Rajat Gupta at Arena Bioworks for helpful comments on the manuscript.
We also wish to thank donors and funding agencies for their strong
financial support. J.A.W. is thankful to generous support from NIH
(R01CA248323 and R35GM122451) as well as a SEED grant from Merck,
support from Bristol Myers-Squibb and the Harry and Dianna Hind Professorship
in Pharmaceutical Chemistry. K.K.L. is thankful for many helpful discussions
on target discovery from Merck, Bristol Myers-Squibb, and the Recombinant
Antibody Network. K.S. is a Merck fellow of the Helen Hay Whitney
Foundation. Z.Y. is supported by an NIH National Institute of General
Medical Sciences F32 grant (1F32GM149084-01).