822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC1229120812291208122912084040414610.1021/acs.chemrev.5c00001Advancing Covalent
Ligand and Drug Discovery beyond
Cysteine
KimGibae GramsR Justin HsuKu-Lung 
†
Department
of Chemistry, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas
78712, United States
*
Ku-Lung
Hsu; Phone: 512-232-2146; Email: ken.hsu@utexas.edu.
22520251251466536653–66842872025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0

## Abstract
Targeting intractable proteins remains a key challenge
in drug
discovery, as these proteins often lack well-defined binding pockets
or possess shallow surfaces not readily addressed by traditional drug
design. Covalent chemistry has emerged as a powerful solution for
accessing protein sites in difficult to ligand regions. By leveraging
activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) and LC-MS/MS technologies,
academic groups and industry have identified cysteine-reactive ligands
that enable selective targeting of challenging protein sites to modulate
previously inaccessible biological pathways. Cysteines within a protein
are rare, however, and developing covalent ligands that target additional
residues hold great promise for further expanding the ligandable proteome.
This review highlights recent advancements in targeting amino acids
beyond cysteine binding with an emphasis on tyrosine- and lysine-directed
covalent ligands and their applications in chemical biology and therapeutic
development. We outline the process of developing covalent ligands
using chemical proteomic methodology, highlighting recent successful
examples and discuss considerations for future expansion to additional
amino acid sites on proteins.

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Jan 1; Accepted 2025 Apr 22; Revised 2025 Mar 13; Collection date 2025 Jul 23.

1.

## Introduction
Advancements in covalent
drug discovery have alleviated the long-standing
stigma that electrophilic compounds induce adverse drug events due
to their promiscuous reactivity in living systems, thereby limiting
their clinical applications.
−

 The recent FDA approval of Sotorasib
(Amgen, 2021) underscores the utility of covalent chemistry for developing
highly targeted therapies for historically intractable protein classes.
Sotorasib incorporates a strategically placed acrylamide moiety within
a KRAS-targeting scaffold, enabling it to react with the mutant cysteine
residue and lock KRAS G12C in its inactive state by outcompeting GTP
binding.
,
 Reversible KRAS inhibitors have proven ineffective
due to the high intracellular concentrations of GTP and GDP (submillimolar
range) and their strong affinities for KRAS (K

d
 ∼ 20 pM) under physiological conditions, which have historically rendered KRAS ″undruggable″.
−

 Covalent compounds, however, bridge this gap by targeting sites
considered undruggable by reversible ligands, thereby addressing critical
but challenging targets in medicinal chemistry and advancing precision
medicine through amino acid-selective electrophiles that enhance target
specificity.
In addition, covalent compound selectivity can
be globally evaluated
and derisked using ABPP, which quantifies on- and off-target interactions
across the proteome via chemoproteomics coupled with tandem liquid
chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).
−

 This proteome-wide assessment facilitates structure–activity
relationship (SAR) studies for optimizing drug profiles and exploring
novel or previously intractable targets using irreversible compounds.
−

 Furthermore, the identification of site of binding via chemoproteomics
provides valuable insights for optimizing small molecules through in silico studies.
−

Numerous amino acid-selective electrophiles
have been developed,
including iodoacetamide (IA) for cysteines and fluorophosphonates
for active-site serines.
−

 Cysteine has been extensively targeted for chemical probe and drug
discovery due to its high nucleophilicity, localization in functional
pockets and demonstrated ligandability with electrophilic ligands. Several cysteine-targeting covalent ligands
have been translated into drugs with Sotorasib, an FDA-approved drug
for solid tumors serving as a notable example.
,
 Ritlecitinib (Pfizer, 2023) serves as a notable example of a cysteine-targeting
covalent drug for a nononcology indication. This novel therapeutic
agent for alopecia areata exhibits exceptional selectivity for JAK3
compared to other JAK isoforms.
,
 The high selectivity
of Ritlecitinib is primarily due to its ability to form a covalent
bond with C909, a residue uniquely present in JAK3.
,
 Interestingly, this cysteine residue is conserved across TEC family
kinases, enabling Ritlecitinib to exert dual inhibitory effects on
both JAK3 and TEC family members. This
distinctive dual mechanism of action, combined with its irreversible
binding properties, offers significant advantages in terms of selectivity,
and therapeutic efficacy, particularly for alopecia areata treatment. Recognizing its potential, the FDA approved
Ritlecitinib in 2023 for the treatment of severe alopecia areata in
patients aged 12 years and older.
,

Efforts
to expand electrophiles targeting amino acids beyond cysteine
stem from the low abundance of this residue in protein (1.7% of amino
acids in the human proteome). Probes
targeting other nucleophilic amino acids such as tyrosine, lysine,
histidine, serine, threonine, aspartic-, and glutamic-acid have been
reported.
−

 Tyrosine is more abundant (3.2%) compared with cysteines and has
recently been targeted by sulfone-based electrophiles, thus expanding
the ligandable proteome.
,
 Lysine is also of high
interest due to its abundance in human proteins (6.0%) and relatively
low mutation rates compared to other residues.
,
 This highlights the potential of lysine-reactive chemistry to uncover
new biological insights.
In this review, we discuss both historical
and recent advances
(within the past 3 years) in covalent targeting of lysine and tyrosine
residues in cellular proteomes using electrophilic small molecules.
Methods involving the use of photo-, enzyme-, and transition metal-catalyzed
modification are beyond the scope of this review and will not be covered.
Instead, we direct readers to the following comprehensive reviews.
−

2.

## Development of Novel Covalent Ligands
2.1.

## Rate Constants and Mechanism of the Bond Formation
Enzyme inhibitors can function through either reversible or irreversible
mechanisms, each characterized by distinct binding dynamics and reaction
pathways ( ). Reversible noncovalent inhibitors suppress enzymatic
activity by forming a transient enzyme–inhibitor complex [P
+ L] in a single-step reaction ( A). The end point of this interaction is defined by
the equilibrium state, which reflects the balance between association
and dissociation of the inhibitor. In contrast, irreversible inhibitors
achieve complete enzymatic inactivation through covalent bond formation,
rendering dissociation negligible ( B).
 Unlike traditional fast-binding inhibitors, some
inhibitors exhibit
time-dependent or slow-binding behavior, where steady-state equilibrium
or full inactivation occurs gradually.
,
 This phenomenon
is particularly common among inhibitors employing covalent binding
modes, as the formation of a covalent adduct is not an instantaneous
process. For reversible covalent inhibitors, the binding process involves
two distinct steps: an initial rapid interaction forms a noncovalent
enzyme–inhibitor [P + L] complex, followed by a slower step
in which a covalent [P – L] adduct is formed. Importantly,
the covalent [P – L] adduct remains in equilibrium with the
noncovalent [P + L] complex due to its reversible nature ( D). The steady-state
inhibition constant captures this overall equilibrium. Optimization
of reversible covalent inhibitors typically focuses on enhancing binding
affinity by reducing dissociation rates, as slower off-rates and prolonged
residence times are associated with improved therapeutic efficacy.
−

In contrast, irreversible inhibitors form covalent [P –
L] adducts which do not revert to the starting materials. This irreversible
mechanism alters how inhibitor potency is assessed, as kinetic parameters
such as IC50 can vary depending on incubation time.
,
 Many irreversible inhibitors follow a two-step mechanism: an initial
noncovalent interaction forms a [P + L] complex, which subsequently
transitions into a covalent [P – L] adduct. The potency of
such inhibitors depends on both their noncovalent binding affinity
(K

I
) and the maximum
rate of inactivation (k
inact). The ratio k
inact/K

I
 is widely regarded as the most reliable measure of potency
for two-step irreversible inhibitors.
−

On the other hand,
highly reactive compounds such as thiol-alkylating
agents may bypass the noncovalent intermediate entirely and bind directly
in a single step ( C).
,
 For one-step mechanism, parameter
like k
chem is used to evaluate potency
and efficiency.

The strategies
for developing reversible and irreversible covalent
inhibitors can differ substantially. For reversible covalent inhibitors,
efforts focus on optimizing overall affinity and prolonging residence
time to enhance therapeutic effects. On the other hand, designing
irreversible covalent inhibitors requires balancing rapid covalent
bond formation with minimizing off-target reactivity toward undesired
proteins or endogenous nucleophiles such as glutathione (GSH). Clinically
relevant ranges for k
inact/K

I
 must account for factors such as the
nucleophilicity of the targeted amino acid residue and competition
from endogenous molecules.

For
instance, Sotorasib exhibited a k
inact value of 6.24 × 10–3 s–1, and a K

I
 value of
3.11 × 10–7 M, which is sufficient to develop
as a drug.
,
 By understanding these distinct
mechanisms and optimizing key parameters, researchers can tailor inhibitor
designs to achieve desired therapeutic outcomes while minimizing adverse
effects.

2.2.

## Covalent Ligand Discovery with LC-MS/MS
ABPP coupled with LC-MS/MS is a powerful tool for developing broad-profiling
probes and residue-directed covalent inhibitors. For example, competitive
ABPP using cysteine-reactive covalent probes such as desthiobiotin-iodoacetamide
(DBIA) and acrylamide-based ligands represent a well-established approach
for covalent targeting of cysteines in the field. These probes incorporate either reporter tags directly
or terminal alkynes that react with reporter-N3 reagents
via click chemistry (Copper­(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition
or CuAAC) for detection and quantification of modified protein sites.

Activity-based probes (ABPs) covalently
bind a wide range of proteins and are utilized in ABPP ( ). This approach can monitor changes in protein binding activity under
various activation stimuli. In drug discovery, competitive ABPP provides
invaluable insights for medicinal chemists. First, it enables
the evaluation of irreversible and reversible (under kinetically controlled
conditions) ligand affinities for proteins of interest in lysates,
cells and animals. Traditional drug discovery methods often
rely on High-Throughput Screening (HTS) to identify ligands for protein
targets; however, these approaches face significant limitations, including
high cost, challenges in validating on- and off- target engagement
of proteins in cells and the lack of assays to evaluate activity of
target proteins without prior biological insights.
−

 Collectively,
these aforementioned factors contribute to many proteins being classified
as undruggable.
,

 In contrast, LC-MS/MS facilitates the identification
of proteins
and their modified residues across entire proteomes, and selective
ABPs serve as effective tools for functional evaluation.
−

 Consequently, ABPP strategies can address a wider range of protein
classes and probe binding in some instances can serve as surrogate
activity assays for challenging targets.
Second, ABPP
provides critical information on both the
selectivity and potency of ligands for target proteins. Labeling
techniques such as Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino acids in Cell
culture (SILAC), isotopically labeled desthiobiotin azide (isoDTB),
and more recently, Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents utilize isotopic
labeling strategies in LC-MS/MS to quantify peptides modified by ABPs.
−

 These methods, combined with advanced data analysis software like
SEQUEST, Comet, MaxQuant and Byonic, play a pivotal role in interpreting complex LC-MS/MS data.
This underscores the dual importance of effective labeling strategies
and robust computational tools in ABPP experiments. Additionally,
pretreatment with potential covalent binders can block probe binding,
allowing for the assessment of binding affinities for irreversible
ligands. To maximize protein detection and minimize undetectable off-target
effects caused by irreversible ligands, highly reactive and residue-directed
probes are essential. The IA electrophile is a potent thiol alkylating
agent and thus its alkynylated probe is highly effective as a general
cysteine-reactive ABP. Counterpart ABPs are more challenging to develop
and a reason why beyond cysteine ABPP is only recently emerging.
A general workflow employed by our group and others to develop
electrophilic groups for protein and covalent ligand discovery by
ABPP consists of the following steps: 1) Chemoselective ABP Development:
Develop new global ABPs featuring tunable electrophilic warheads and
analyze their binding activity including amino acid chemoselectivity
in proteomes. Simplicity and high reactivity are prioritized to maximize
detection of modified proteins and binding sites. Overly complex ABP
structures risk fragmentation and poor LC compatibility during analysis,
leading to reduced detection efficiency. 2) Ligandability assessment
using Fragment Electrophiles and Competitive ABPP: Construct a library
of fragment-like compounds containing electrophilic warheads for evaluating
ligandability of protein sites containing residues of interest by
competitive ABPP. The use of a common electrophile for ligand and
ABP design can reduce the potential for missing liganded sites not
detected by ABPs. 3) Prioritization of liganded sites via functional
assays: Validate biochemical and cell biological effects from genetic
and pharmacological perturbation of target protein site(s). 4) Targeted
covalent modulator development: Translate ligandability findings into
highly potent and selective tool compounds for cellular and in vivo evaluation of target protein. Conduct SAR studies
to reduce off-target affinities identified in ABPP results and enhance
potency against target proteins. In silico docking
studies or molecular dynamics simulations can assist in fine-tuning
affinities for both on- and off-targets. Additionally, pharmacokinetic
optimization is required to balance intrinsic reactivity with hydrolytic
and metabolic stability.
An example from our group is the development
of a PTGR2 (Y100)
covalent inhibitor containing a Sulfonyl-Azole (SufAz) warhead, which
illustrates this workflow in practice ( ).
,
 SufAz ABPs were designed
as tyrosine/lysine-selective warheads with negligible detectable affinity
for cysteine, which we speculate is due to the inherent instability
arising from the predicted sulfonothioate (SO2–S)
adduct.
,
 Using these ABPs, quantitative ABPP methods
were employed to evaluate potency and selectivity of a library of
sulfonyl-azole fragment electrophiles for PTGR2 inactivation. Among
these compounds, HHS-0701 emerged as a lead PTGR2 inhibitor with reasonable
proteome-wide selectivity and cellular activity. Further SAR studies demonstrate that exchanging the triazole
for an imidazole leaving group could further improve selectivity against
common off-targets of this electrophile class.

 Originating from the conceptual framework of activity-based
protein
profiling (ABPP) in drug discovery, the Kelly and Sharpless groups
introduced the Inverse Drug Discovery (IDD) approach. Unlike global ABPs, which typically use broadly reactive
probes, IDD employs alkynyl-substituted probes containing latent electrophilic
warheads, such as aryl fluorosulfates and sulfuramidimidoyl fluorides.
These probes are used for the biological evaluation of their own activity,
or that of the corresponding ligand, with minimal chemical modification. Due to their weak intrinsic reactivity for covalent
binding, only a limited number of conjugated proteins are identified
via LC-MS/MS compared to the use of global ABPs. Although the complexity
of the chemical structure may pose challenges for protein identification,
this strategy can significantly reduce concerns about unexpected off-target
effects when paired with an appropriately selected adduct group.

In addition, residue-directed warhead
development enables selective
targeting of mutants and addresses limitations associated with reversible
inhibitors that exhibit short residence times due to open binding
sites. Simple incorporation of residue-reactive warheads can convert
reversible inhibitors into irreversible ones with enhanced therapeutic
potential.
,

3.

## Residue-reactive Scaffolds
3.1.

## Cysteine-reactive Scaffolds
For drug
development, cysteine is an attractive target in part because of its
high nucleophilicity and low abundance, which can facilitate increased
selectivity for the target proteins.
−

 Particularly, an acrylamide
electrophilic group has been extensively studied and now clinically
validated for development of covalent drugs. Among acrylamide-based
covalent drugs, kinases have been prominently targeted because of
the ability to ligand nonconserved cysteines within the highly conserved
ATP binding pocket to develop more selective drug compounds. Examples include Ibrutinib (Abbvie, 2013),
−

 which is an acrylamide inhibitor that binds to C481 of Bruton’s
tyrosine kinase (BTK) as well as series of covalent inhibitors which
targeted C797 of Epidermal growth factor (EGFR) to combat T790M mutation
such as Afatinib (Boehringer Ingelheim, 2013) and Osimertinib (Astrazeneca,
2015).
−

Many probes with diverse cysteine-reactive warheads have also
been developed. In addition to IA, many
α-halogenated amide and α,β-unsaturated amides were
developed as covalent probes.
−

 In addition, halogenated heteroaromatic
compounds, including simple probes and nucleoside and nucleobase mimics
for RNA binding proteins (e.g., clickable electrophilic purines),
undergo nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAr) with
cysteines.
−

 For additional information on targeting
cysteines, we direct readers to recent reviews on cysteine-reactive
electrophiles and their applications.
−

The rationale for targeting
cysteines is clear but not every protein
pocket contains an available cysteine, prompting exploration of electrophilic
groups that can ligand sites beyond cysteine. In the following sections,
we summarize recent advancements in electrophile development for beyond
cysteine targeting. We initially focus on lysine-targeting chemistry
given the high abundance of lysines and their functional roles in
protein biochemistry. We conclude the review with electrophiles for
targeting tyrosine, which lie in between cysteine and lysine in abundance
and present opportunities for disrupting protein–protein and
protein-nucleic acid recognition.
−

3.2.

## Lysine-reactive Scaffolds
3.2.1.

## Biological Features of Lysine
The
pK

a
 of the ε-NH3
+ group of lysine is 10.4 when lysine exists as
a free amino acid, meaning that most lysine residues are protonated
under physiological conditions (pH = 7.4). However, the pK

a
 of
lysine can vary significantly depending on its location within a protein.
For example, studies have shown a 5-log reduction in pK

a
 for buried vs solvent-exposed lysine
side-chain, thereby increasing its nucleophilicity and propensity
for electrophilic modification.
−

 García-Moreno et al.
,
 produced 25 variants of staphylococcal nuclease (SNase) to analyze
shifts in pK

a
 of lysine
side chains based on their environment. The side chain of the K92
(I92K) mutant is buried in SNase and was calculated to have a pK
a of 5.2, whereas solvent exposed N118K has
a pK

a
 of 10.4 ( A).
 Lysine undergoes various PTMs, which play critical
roles in cell
biology including signal transduction ( B).
−

 More than 100,000 PTM sites on lysine across
over 10,000 proteins have been mapped using mass spectrometry; however,
many PTM functions remain elusive.
,
 PTMs on lysine
include acyl substitution (e.g., acetylation, ubiquitination) with
various acyl substrates or alkylation (e.g., methyl-, dimethyl-, or
trimethylation) mediated by methyltransferases.
,
 The nucleophilicity of lysine correlates with frequency of PTMs
such as acetylation.
,

Lysine is also prone to
oxidative deamination to an aldehyde that
is well studied and commonly observed in histones. Oxidative deamination of lysine is mediated by copper-dependent
amine oxidases (CAOs).
CAOs catalyze oxidative amination using
a covalently linked quinone
cofactor 2,4,5-trihydroxyphenylalanine quinone (TPQ) or lysine tyrosylquinone
(LTQ) that subdivide the CAO family into TPQ-dependent CAOs (i.e.,
CAOs) or LTQ-dependent lysyl oxidases (LOXs).
−

 Lysine can also sequester carbon dioxide via a carboxylation process
and cyanate via carbamylation.
,
 Particularly, many
PTMs on lysine are reversibly regulated by enzyme pairs such as histone
acetylases (HACs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs), depending on physiological
conditions. Due to the functional importance
mentioned above, there are considerable research efforts focused on
developing molecules that can perform PTMs such as acetylation on
specific lysine residues.
−

 Thus, the covalent modification of lysine can be influenced by its
protonation state and interactions with various PTMs, as described
above, making lysine an attractive residue for covalent modification.

3.2.2.

## Lysine-Targeted Chemistry
3.2.2.1.

## Natural Lysine-targeted Aldehydes and
Mimetics
The formation of aldimines is commonly used in organic
chemistry such as the popular reductive amination reaction that delivers
primary, secondary, or tertiary amines. The use of aldehydes to produce
aldimines for bioconjugation to lysine on proteins is limited by the
thermodynamic instability of imines, which rapidly revert to their
aldehyde and amine precursors in aqueous solutions.
−

Efforts to stabilize the imine under aqueous conditions were
inspired by the ability of B6 vitamers PL and PLP, the latter of which
is an essential vitamin and the active B6 vitamer, to conjugate with
amines in xenobiotics and biomolecules.
−

 This topic has been comprehensively reviewed by Eliot and Kirsch
so only recent literature will be covered here. PLP is known to covalently modify lysine in various proteins, which is utilized by alanine racemase,
,
 aspartate aminotransferase,
,,
 serine hydroxymethyltransferase, aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase, and other proteins to facilitate transformations
of amino acids ( A). Using NMR, Crugeiras et al. characterized
the strength of the intramolecular hydrogen bond between the imine
and o-hydroxy proton of amine-conjugated pyridoxal
in aqueous solution to be ∼ 3 kcal/mol ( B).
,

 The pyridoxal-amine intramolecular hydrogen bond
is more stable
than i+4 hydrogen bonds in an α-helix (about 2 kcal/mol).
,
 In E. coli, PLP binds K36 in PLP Homeostasis Protein
(PLPHP or YggS) with a K

D
 of about 1 nM and has no enzymatic function, suggesting PLPHP acts
as a regulatory or PLP-transfer mechanism to modulate PLP levels or
mediate PLP-dependent enzymatic reactions, respectively; however,
more evidence is required to define the role of PLPHP. The ability of PLP to bind lysine in proteins
warrants discussion of amine- and hydrazine-containing therapeutics
that interact with PLP resulting in vitamin B6 deficiency or inactivation
of the therapeutic itself. The interaction
between isoniazid, the first-line treatment for tuberculosis, and
PLP was one of the first drug-PLP interactions to be investigated
due to induction of isoniazid neuritis in patients, i.e., isoniazid
interference in vitamin B6 metabolism that is mitigated
by coadministration with pyridoxine.
−

 However, isoniazid
interactions with other metabolites and
cofactors, such as NAD+, may
be involved in isoniazid-related toxicity issues. The kinetics of
formation of the isoniazid-PLP conjugate is the most rapid compared
to hydrazine and other hydrazine-containing drugs, such as carbidopa
and hydralazine, and correlates with the pK

a
 of the primary amine in each hydrazine moiety (e.g.,
isoniazid (pK

a
 = 11.10)
> hydrazine (pK

a
 =
8.10)
> carbidopa (pK

a
 =
7.25)
> hydralazine (pK

a
 =
7.20)).
,
 Carbidopa is used to treat Parkinson’s
disease as it mitigates degradation of dopa by inhibiting aromatic
L-amino acid decarboxylase (AAAD) in peripheral tissues, allowing
more dopa to reach the brain. Decreases
in concentration of PLP in serum (88%), liver (51%), muscle (18%),
brain (27%), and hypothalamus (18%) was observed in rats administered
100 mg/kg carbidopa; however, clinically relevant doses, such as 10–30
mg/kg, were less effective at reducing PLP concentrations. Similar
to isoniazid, coadministration of pyridoxine hydrochloride with carbidopa
mitigates reductions in PLP levels.
,
 In addition
to the examples above, there are numerous drugs (e.g., hydralazine, phenelzine, cycloserine,
−

 penicillamine, and amphetamine) capable of conjugating PLP resulting in vitamin
B6 deficiency ( C). Sieber and colleagues synthesized PLP-mimicking ABPs (1-3) to detect PLP-dependent enzymes (PLP-DE) which are
phosphorylated in situ by pyridoxal kinase and identify
off-targets of PLP-DE inhibitor such as D-cycloserine. The inactive control 4, which
lacks the electronic capability for PLP catalysis, was used to evaluate
nonspecific reactivity of the PL scaffold. Using ABPs (1-3), a significant portion of the eukaryotic cells, Gram-positive, and -negative bacteria were successfully
detected and utilized in antibiotic drug discovery ( D).
Similarly, Folkers
et al. discovered
that the sensitivity observed in individuals consuming food with high
levels of monosodium glutamate (MSG) is linked to decreased PLP levels
in the blood. Co-administration of MSG and PLP in the diet alleviated
symptoms of MSG-related toxicity compared to a placebo group, suggesting
that MSG conjugates with PLP, thereby reducing its concentration to
unhealthy levels.
In 2014, Wilde et al. reported that
hydralazine can covalently modify abasic (Ap) sites in double- and
single-stranded DNA, which exist in equilibrium between the ring-closed
hemiacetal (5) and ring-opened aldehyde (6). Hydralazine reacts with the aldehyde (6) to form
hydrazone (7), which can undergo ring closure to produce
hemiaminal (8), a structure prone to errors and potentially
mutagenic ( A). In addition, aldose sugars naturally
form advanced glycation end products (AGEs) with proteins or lipids
( B). These
AGEs can accumulate in vessel walls, leading to micro- and macrovascular
complications,
,
 and are implicated in various
aging- and alcohol-related diseases.
,
 The formation
of AGEs during aging and under hyperglycemic conditions, where they
bind to cell surface receptors, increase reactive oxygen species (ROS),
alter the extracellular matrix, modify hormone levels, and cross-link
with other proteins such as collagen. Protein-aldose sugar bioconjugates are formed between lysine or
arginine residues on a protein and an aldehyde on the sugar via mechanisms
similar to those described above. To
investigate biological events of AGE formation, Methylglyoxal (MG),
which is major reactive carbonyl species serving as a precursor to
AGEs, was employed to develop ABP for chemoproteomic profiling ( C).
,
 Aminoguanidine is a therapeutic that covalently modifies 1,2-dicarbonyl
compounds, increasing urinary excretion
of orally absorbed AGEs and reducing their accumulation in the kidney
and liver. Other AGE-related therapeutics
such as ALT-946 and pyridoxamine follow a similar mechanism as aminoguanidine,
whereas ALT-711 functions by breaking the bond between the 1,2-dicarbonyl
( D).

 
3.2.2.2.

## Synthetic Aldehyde Warheads
As
mentioned in the previous section, the inherent stability and selectivity
of salicylaldehyde for reversible covalent adduction of amines inspired
synthetic small molecules targeting catalytic lysines.
,
 ORIN1001, an inhibitor of inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), has
entered clinical trials as an antitumor agent, originating from a
salicylaldehyde screening hit compound 13 ( A).
,
 The covalent reversible Bcr-Abl kinase inhibitor 15 was derived from the reversible inhibitor PPY-A through the introduction
of aldehyde warheads ( B). The covalent reversible
inhibitors were designed to target the catalytic lysine K271, based
on the X-ray cocrystal structure of PPY-A with ABL1 kinase ( C, PDB ID: 2QOH).
,

 The reversible covalent inhibitor 14, containing a carbonyl boronic acid
capable
of stabilizing imine intermediates, demonstrated high potency in vitro; however, its activity significantly decreased
in living cells, which could be due to metabolism of the aldehyde
functional group within this scaffold.
,
 Structural
modification of carbonyl boronic acid to salicylaldehyde enhanced
antiproliferative effects in situ with increasing
inhibitory activity to ABL, and high kinase selectivity was confirmed
using ABPP with an alkynyl probe corresponding to compound 15.

Notably, solvent-exposed noncatalytic
lysine residues are generally
not preferred as targets for aldehyde electrophiles due to their reversible
nature and high possibility to exist in the protonated form.
,
 However, 2-hydroxy-1-naphthalenealdehydes (16) could
bind specifically to K720 of KRIT1 which has inherently low nucleophilicity. K720 is a surface residue located within the
HEG1 binding domain of KRIT1; thus, 16 can function as
a Protein–protein Interaction (PPI) inhibitor ( D).

Recently, Cravan et al. modified
the clinical reversible pan-AKT1 allosteric inhibitor ARQ092 into
an irreversible AKT1­(E17K) mutant selective inhibitor 17 by introducing salicylaldehyde warheads ( ). This selectivity
was achieved through the recruitment of endogenous zinc ions, which
stabilized the aldimine product formed between the E17K mutant and
the salicylaldehyde warhead. Pan-AKT1 inhibitors have been associated
with hyperglycemia as a side effect in clinical studies,
−

 but the newly developed irreversible AKT1­(E17K) mutant selective
compound 17 did not induce hyperglycemia.
 The Gao group designed boronic acids with extended
residence times
compared to 2-formyl or 2-keto aryl boronic acids.
,
 By linking a 2-formylanilino group to the o-benzylic position, they
observed a dramatic increase in the half-life (t

1/2
) for covalent modification. Lysine forms
an imine that coordinates with boron similarly to 2-formylboronic
acids; however, the anilino nitrogen also coordinates with boron,
resulting in the formation of a bicyclic ring structure ( ).
 The covalent reversible properties of salicylaldehyde
have recently
spurred exploration into diverse aldehyde-containing ABPs, which often
require reduction with agents such as NaBH4 for detection.
,
 Yang et al. developed lysine-targeted
ABPs based on residence time ( A). While benzaldehyde (18) and salicylaldehyde
probes (19-20) detected a similar number
of kinases, probe 18 exhibited a short half-life following
washout ( B). In contrast, salicylaldehydes stabilized imine covalent products, significantly increasing the half-life of reversible
covalent probes after washout ( C). Interestingly, different dissociation
rates were observed among kinases after washout, enabling ABPs to
selectively bind to kinases such as Aurora Kinase A (AURKA) K162 in
both in vitro and in vivo systems.
Screening aminophilic compounds using ABPP with LC-MS/MS identified
dicarboxaldehyde fragments, including Jensenone (21)
and 22, as potential lysine- targeted scout molecules
( D). Building on these findings, phloroglucinol
meroterpenoids and their corresponding probes were synthesized to
map lysine-phloroglucinol meroterpenoid interactions in live cells
( D).

 Recently, Chen et al. applied a 2-ethynylbenzaldehyde
(2-EBA) warhead for developing catalytic lysine-targeted ligands.
Unlike other aldehyde warheads, 2-EBA irreversibly binds to the N-terminus of peptides or lysine residues, forming a stable
isoquinolinium product ( A). Due to the low intrinsic reactivity of the 2-EBA
warhead, 27 exhibited negligible reactivity with GSH.
Based on the reported structure of a reversible inhibitor, 2-EBA and
sulfonylfluoride derivatives were investigated ( B). The study demonstrated
the superior efficacy and lysine-selectivity of 2-EBA derivatives.
Additionally, using the 2-EBA warhead, successful modification of N-terminal amines over lysine residues was achieved under
slightly acidic conditions (pH = 6.5).

 
3.2.2.3.

## Michael Acceptor Warheads
Although
Michael acceptors such as acrylamide, vinylsulfone, and vinylsulfonamide
primarily target cysteine residues, preferentially oriented Michael
acceptors can also bind to lysine residues.
,
 PX-866 (Sonolisib), an investigational drug and orally available
pan-PI3K inhibitor, is a modified derivative of the natural product
Wortmannin. The substituted-acrylamide
of PX-866 covalently binds to and inhibits catalytic K802 in p100α
and K883 in p110γ.

Through
structural drug design approaches, the reversible Cyclin D kinase
2 (CDK2) inhibitor NU6155 was converted into an irreversible inhibitor
NU6300 by introducing a vinylsulfonyl group targeting K87, a residue
not well-conserved across the protein kinase family ( A).
,
 Similarly, a reversible non-nucleoside inhibitor of HIV reverse
transcriptase (33) was converted into an irreversible
inhibitor (34-35) by introducing an acrylamide
group near catalytic residues such as K102 and Y181C ( B).
,

 Additionally, studies comparing the reactivity
of various Michael
acceptors with GSH and N-α-acetyl-l-lysine revealed that vinylsulfone and sulfonamide react more rapidly
with N-α-acetyl-l-lysine than with
GSH. This observation can be attributed
to the hard nucleophilic nature of N-α-acetyl-l-lysine, which interacts more effectively with hard electrophiles
like vinylsulfonamides compared to softer acrylamide electrophiles. These findings provide valuable insights for
optimizing lysine-targeted Michael acceptor compounds in terms of
potency and stability ( ).
 
3.2.2.4.

## Activated Ester Warheads

N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) esters are representative lysine-reactive
activated esters. One of the most widely used NHS esters, TMT reagents
effectively label N-terminal free NH2 groups
and lysine residues ( A). However, NHS esters are
highly susceptible to hydrolysis, and their residue specificity can
deteriorate due to their high reactivity.

 Numerous studies have attempted to minimize over
labeling caused
by NHS-ester-based TMT reagents, which exhibit promiscuity toward
other residues such as serine, threonine, and tyrosine.
,
 Ward et al. investigated the residue
selectivity of an NHS-ester-alkyne ABP (37) in the mouse
liver proteome using isotopic Tandem Orthogonal Proteolysis-Activity
Based Protein Profiling (isoTOP-ABPP) platform. Their study identified
3,372 modified peptides in total, with 49% of the labeled sites corresponding
to lysine residues ( B). Hacker et al. synthesized
a variety of activated ester ABPs, including NHS, nitro-substituted
phenyl, and fluoro substituted phenyl esters. Among these, the Sulfotetrafluorophenyl
(STP)-alkyne ABP (38) demonstrated strong proteomic reactivity
and high selectivity for lysine residues. The most frequently modified
alternative sites were serine residues (∼8% of labeled peptides),
with less than 5% modification observed for other residues ( C). Notably, lysine
modification can interfere with trypsin digestion at cleavage sites,
potentially leading to misinterpretation of modified sites detected
by LC-MS/MS.
Additionally, using ABP 38, more than
30 aminophilic
chemotypes were screened in cancer cell proteomes, revealing that
77% of the liganded proteins were non-DrugBank proteins. This finding suggests that the discovered aminophilic
fragments could serve as scout molecules for targeting previously
intractable proteins. Wan et al. synthesized
a series of activated esters to systematically tune reactivity using
lysine-containing peptides. Among these tested esters, triazine ester 42 exhibited the highest reactivity and lysine-selectivity in vitro ( D). Using activated ester warheads, reversible selective PI3Kδ
inhibitors GSK2292767 and GSK2269557 (∼1,000-fold selectivity
over PI3Kα, β, γ) were successfully converted into
irreversible inhibitor 46 by modification of a sulfonamide
pharmacophore interacting with K779 ( A).
,
 Additionally, ATP
and ADP-desthiobiotin probes have been widely used as ABPs to profile
protein kinases by targeting conserved lysine residues in ATP-binding
sites as well as various nucleotide-binding proteins such as ATPases
and heat shock proteins.
−

 ( B). Two
highly conserved lysine residues are commonly found across protein
kinases: one localized in subdomain II (except in the WNK family)
and another in subdomain VIB within the HRDxKxxN motif ( C).
−

 
3.2.2.5.

## N-Acyl-N-alkylsulfonamide
(NASA) Warheads
NASA moieties have been widely utilized as
reactive species in safety-catch linkers for solid-phase peptide synthesis.
−

 The NASA scaffold functions as an acyl donor that is lysine-reactive,
and the Hamachi group optimized this functional group as an electrophilic
warhead in ABPs ( A).
−

N-acyl-N-arylsulfonamide (ArNASA)
derivatives (51) demonstrated significantly prolonged
half-lives compared to NASA itself, along with increased selectivity
( B). Additionally,
ligand-directed NASA-containing inhibitors (52-53) showed improved potency compared to their parent compounds
when targeting lysine residues in proteins such as C481S Bruton’s
tyrosine kinase (BTK) and Heat Shock Protein 90 (Hsp90) in live cells
( C). Binding
of NASA warheads to N-terminal α-amines and
tyrosine residues was also observed in the human double minute 2 (HDM2)
protein, where they acted as PPI inhibitors. Tivon et al. further developed NASA-containing
aptamers to label targeted lysine residues. In this approach, oligonucleotides
facilitated proximity between the target protein and the NASA warhead,
enabling lysine residues to attack the NASA electrophile and label
the protein effectively. Ryan et al. reported N-acetyl-N-alkylsulfonamide
derivatives capable of transferring acetyl groups site-specifically
to lysine residues in human cells. Furthermore, Teng et al. developed a potential targeted degrader that
combined a CDK2 ligand with a CRBN-recruiting ligand using a NASA
warhead. Although the study confirmed the formation of a CDK2-CRBN
complex, degradation of CDK2 was not observed.
 
3.2.2.6.

## Squarate, Squaramate, and Squaramide Warheads
Squaramides are bioisosteres of ureas, thioureas, guanidines, and
cyanoguanidines that are commonly employed in medicinal chemistry.
,
 Additionally, squaramides and squaric acids have been incorporated
into nucleosides as isosteres of phosphate groups.
−

 Several methods have been developed to synthesize squarate- and
squaramide-containing building blocks such as amino acids, peptides,
−

 proteins, polymers,
−

 nucleosides, fluorescent probes, and
luminescent probes that exploit the
high reactivity of squarate esters with free amines.
Kiessling
and co-workers compared the reaction rates of squarate esters and
squaramates with other lysine-reactive electrophiles such as NHS esters. The second consecutive reaction rate for squaramates
was much slower than that for NHS esters, demonstrating their mild
reactivity (>104-fold slower than NHS esters; A). Subsequently,
a squaramate moiety was introduced at the terminal phosphate of UDP
as a substrate mimic for glycotransferase GlfT2. This compound selectively
inhibited a catalytic lysine residue while dichlorotriazine analogs
modified eight lysines in GlfT2. Ohara et al. designed a glycan-BODIPY-squaramate conjugate 59 that bound Human UGGT1 (HUGT1), an N-glycosylating
enzyme recognizing aglycons. Irreversible modification of K1424 via
reaction with squaramate 59 provided insights into the
aglycon binding site and folding-sensing mechanism of HUGT1 ( B).
 Lysine-specific squaramates were further explored
by Abbasov et
al., leading to compounds 60 and 61 as broader lysine-reactive squaramates than
other sterically hindered squaramates ( C). Notably, 61 covalently
modified K351 in Ku70 (XRCC6), inhibiting its dimerization with Ku80
(XRCC5). This process disrupts nonhomologous end-joining critical
for repairing DNA double-strand breaks in human cells.
The unique
properties of squaramates such as their two consecutive
reactive sites and mild reactivity, have made them extensively useful
in biomolecular conjugation studies. Fonvielle et al. prepared RNA-derivatized squaramates for conjugation
with peptides and proteins to identify or covalently modify tRNA-enzyme
binding sites. Ivancová et al. linked squarates to deoxycytidine nucleotides to create squaramate-linked
dCTPs (dCESQTPs, 62), which were incorporated
into DNA by DNA polymerase. These synthesized DNA probes (DNA_CESQ) efficiently reacted with DNA-binding proteins but showed
limited reactivity with peptides lacking DNA-binding affinity ( D). As demonstrated
above, lysine-specific and mild electrophilic squaramates stand out
for their versatility in discovering undruggable proteins such as
DNA-binding proteins through various bioconjugation strategies.

3.2.2.7.

## Sulfur­(VI)-Fluoride Warheads: Sulfonyl
Fluoride (-SO2F) and Fluorosulfate (-OSO2F)
Sulfonyl fluoride was historically regarded as an unsuitable electrophile
due to its combination of kinetic and thermodynamic stability, which
limited its reactivity with nucleophiles. However, Baker first demonstrated
that sulfonyl fluoride could rapidly form covalent bonds if the compound
first binds reversibly to a protein, facilitating access for covalent
bond formation. This insight has since attracted significant interest
in both drug discovery and chemoproteomics. Sulfonyl fluoride can
react with residues such as tyrosine, lysine, serine, threonine, and
histidine.
,,
 Its hydrolytic stability, which can be easily tuned, provides a
valuable alternative to many unstable irreversible ligands ( A).
,
 However, the affinity of the electrophile for proteins does not
necessarily correlate with its intrinsic reactivity because the rate
of reversible interactions between the compound and the binding site
significantly influences covalent bond formation.

 Zhao et al. developed
XO-44, a highly
selective ABP for protein kinases, which detected 133 endogenous kinases
in live Jurkat cells ( B). XO-44 also demonstrated its potential to identify off-targets
of kinase inhibitors through competitive ABPP studies with Dasatinib,
a tyrosine kinase inhibitor ( C). Furthermore, among the 375 tested purified protein
kinases, XO-44 exhibited IC50 values below 1 μM for
219 kinases ( D). XO-44 has also been utilized in studies identifying resistance
mechanisms for the multityrosine kinase inhibitor Lenvatinib. These findings suggest that XO-44 can be leveraged
to evaluate kinase inhibitor profiles and may serve as a promising
scaffold for developing kinase inhibitors.
,

The Cheeseman group designed covalent inhibitors for Hsp72
by mimicking
reversible nucleotide-competitive inhibitors such as 8-N-benzyladenosine through the introduction of electrophilic warheads.
,
 For instance, introducing an acrylamide warhead converted a reversible
inhibitor into an irreversible analog targeting K56. However, this
modification resulted in low k

inact
 due to unfavorable conformations between the warhead and proximal
residues that hindered covalent bond formation. Based on a systematic
analysis of X-ray cocrystal structures of Hsp72, a rationally designed
arylsulfonylfluoride was introduced, improving the kinetic parameter
(k

inact
/K

I
) by 108-fold compared to the acrylamide
derivative.
Recently, fluorosulfates (-OSO2F), which
are more stable
and latent aminophiles than sulfonyl fluorides, have emerged as electrophilic
warheads for developing irreversible ligands.
−

 Tang et al. introduced fluorosulfate
into the first-generation EGFR inhibitor Erlotinib to target catalytically
conserved K745 ( A). The resulting irreversible inhibitor 72 displayed
comparable cellular activity to Erlotinib while demonstrating a favorable
pharmacokinetic profile both in vitro and in vivo. Tang et al. also
synthesized fluorosulfate derivatives of XO-44 and analyzed their
profiles across the human lysine kinome while assessing their stability
and reactivity ( B). Among these derivatives, ABP 73 detected
more kinases than XO-44 and was used in combination with VX-680 to
develop irreversible Aurora kinase inhibitors. The newly synthesized
irreversible inhibitor 74 exhibited comparable potency
against AURKA but showed higher selectivity than VX-680.
 
3.2.2.8.

## Sulfonyl-Azole (SufAz) Warheads
An apparent difference between Sulfur­(IV)-fluoride and SufAz warheads
is the choice of leaving group at the sulfonyl electrophilic center,
and SufAz compounds have the advantage of additional tunability via
modification of the azole leaving groups. Particularly, our group introduced sulfur-triazole exchange (SuTEx)
chemistry for chemoproteomics and protein ligand discovery ( ).
,,
 1,2,4-sulfonyl-triazoles modify
tyrosine and lysine residues with a preference for tyrosine.
,
 Of relevance to this section, the lysine binding activity of SuTEx
chemistry can be augmented toward lysine residues by switching to
a 1,2,3-triazole leaving group or by positioning the electrophile
near catalytic lysines using kinase-binding scaffolds.
,−

 The latter was demonstrated using a SuTEx
warhead-containing XO44 derivative, KY-26, for identifying site of
binding on kinases (∼50% of the modified peptides was detected
as lysine) using a modified LC-MS/MS protocol.

 

3.3.

## Tyrosine-reactive Scaffolds
3.3.1.

## Biological Features of Tyrosine
Tyrosine, despite having a slightly lower pK

a
 (∼10) than a protonated lysine, has
been more challenging to target using covalent ligands. This can be attributed to the structural characteristics
of its side chain, which is more rigid and sterically hindered by
the phenolic hydroxyl group. These factors pose challenges in achieving
the optimal geometries required for effective covalent binding.
Nevertheless, tyrosine-targeting electrophiles have proven valuable
in studying PPIs. Tyrosine is notably
abundant at protein–protein interfaces, where its unique properties
contribute significantly to molecular recognition.
−

 Its amphipathic nature allows for diverse interactions, while its
rigidity enhances binding affinity and specificity. The limited conformational
flexibility of tyrosine reduces entropic penalties during binding,
thereby minimizing nonspecific interactions. This specificity is particularly
critical in tyrosine-rich interfaces, which are inherently less accommodating
to nonspecific binding events.
Additionally, PTMs such as phosphorylation
of tyrosine residues
plays a pivotal role in regulating PPIs that are essential for biological
processes.
−

 Targeting tyrosines subject to phosphorylation
could therefore serve as a different strategy for modulating signaling
pathways.
−

 Developing tyrosine-reactive warheads may
enable precise regulation of these critical residues and provide deeper
insights into signaling mechanisms.
−

 Thus, the development
of novel tyrosine-reactive warheads holds great potential to advance
our understanding of protein signaling networks and discover irreversible
small molecule modulators with unprecedented mechanisms.

3.3.2.

## Tyrosine-targeted Chemistry
3.3.2.1.

## Mannich Type Warheads
Francis
and co-workers developed a three-component Mannich-type tyrosine conjugation
strategy.
−

 Utilizing the Betti variant of the Mannich
reaction, they performed an in situ imine condensation
between an electron-rich aniline and formaldehyde, followed by the
formation of a C–C bond with tyrosine ( ). Although
this reaction proceeds under mild conditions, it requires an extended
reaction time and an optimal pH.
−

 Moreover, it also leads
to the formation of adducts with tryptophan and cysteine, limiting
its chemoselectivity.
 To address these limitations, Tanaka and co-workers
introduced
a two-component Mannich-type tyrosine bioconjugation strategy.
,
 In this approach, a stable cyclic imine was presynthesized and subsequently
reacted with tyrosine. This method offers several advantages: it is
versatile across a wide range of pH values, prevents enamine formation
during the reaction, and exhibits improved resistance to hydrolysis.
These features make Mannich-type conjugation more applicable in biological
systems for selective tyrosine targeting. Although the cyclic imine
showed limited activity for global tyrosine labeling, it demonstrated
significant potential for targeted covalent labeling and inhibition.

Building on this tyrosine bioconjugation
strategy, Wang et al. synthesized cyclic
imine warheads as targeted
covalent inhibitors. Among the cyclic imines evaluated, cyclohexylimino-lactones
and -lactams exhibited reactivity toward Ac-Tyr-NHMe in PBS buffer
(pH 7, 37 °C). While lactones showed high reactivity, this electrophile
was labile and subject to hydrolysis. Conversely, cyclohexyliminolactams
exhibited stability under GSH treatment and in acidic and basic conditions.
For the reversible dual CBX2 and CBX8 inhibitor SW2_110A (75), a cyclic imine was introduced to selectively target the nonconserved
Y39 of CBX8, thereby enhancing selectivity over CBX2 ( A). Design of this covalent
inhibitor was enabled by a cocrystal structure of CBX8 bound to an
oligopeptide UNC3866 (PDB ID: 5EQ0,
 B). Biochemical
assays and LC-MS/MS analysis revealed that cyclic imine 77 improved selectivity through a targeted covalent binding strategy
( C).
 
3.3.2.2.

## Triazolidione (TAD) Warheads
The tyrosine conjugation potential of cyclic TAD warheads was first
reported by Barbas and co-workers. Due
to their high selectivity for tyrosine and tryptophan, as well as
the stability of the resulting adducts, TAD warheads have been widely studied ( ).
−

 However, their poor aqueous stability poses
challenges for pharmaceutical development. Additionally, TAD hydrolysis
generates isocyanates that can nonspecifically bind to residues such
as lysine, although this can be mitigated by using Tris buffer to
scavenge isocyanate byproducts.
−

 Decoene et al. further demonstrated that the Tyr/Trp selectivity
of TAD can be modulated by pH, with acidic conditions favoring tryptophan
modification. Moinpour et al. quantified
TAD labeling on surface tyrosine residues, offering insights into
conformational changes in proteins, which are critical for understanding
PPI.
 
3.3.2.3.

## Sulfur­(VI)-Fluoride Warheads: Sulfonyl
Fluoride (-SO2F) and Fluorosulfate (-OSO2F)
As discussed in , sulfonyl fluoride warheads exhibit significant reactivity
toward tyrosine as well as lysine residues. Scammells et al. transformed a reversible A1 Adenosine Receptor
(A1AR) antagonist, DPCPX, into an irreversible antagonist,
FSCPX, through a traditional SAR study. Covalent inactivation of FSCPX
was achieved by introducing an arylsulfonyl fluoride warhead at either
the 8- or N
3-position. Next, an optimization
strategy for improving metabolic stability resulted in discovery of
DU172; X-ray cocrystal structures with
human A1AR (hA1AR) confirmed covalent binding
between the ligand and Y2657.36 of hA1AR ( A). In addition, an irreversible partial hA1AR agonist and ABPs containing sulfonyl fluoride were developed
and used to visualize the receptor in live cells, mimicking the reversible
hA1AR partial agonist, Capadenoson.
,

 Homology modeling of hA1AR with DU172
further inspired
Yang et al. to design novel irreversible
human A3 Adenosine Receptor (hA3AR) antagonists. Since
most existing hA3AR modulators are reversible ligands,
developing irreversible ligands provide additional chemical probes
to expand our understanding of hA3AR.
−

 The simple incorporation of an electrophile into DU172 resulted
in covalent interaction with Y2717.36 of hA3AR. This modification was further developed into ABPs with terminal
alkyne groups for profiling endogenous hA3AR expression
( B).

Jones and co-workers designed ABPs and
irreversible inhibitors
for RNA binding of DcpS.
,
 X-ray cocrystal structures
of DcpS with D153249 (78) identified three nucleophilic
residues (Y113, Y143, K142) near the benzyl group, motivating the
introduction of sulfonyl fluoride at ortho-, meta-, or para-positions of the benzyl
substituent. As expected, SF-p1 (79)
modified Y143, while SF-m1 (80) and
SF-o1 (81) bound with Y113 ( ). Additionally,
alkynylation of 80 facilitated its use as a tool for
evaluating DcpS target engagement.
 Chen et al. reported
arylfluorosulfate
ABPs that selectively modify conserved tyrosine residues in the substrate-binding
site of the intracellular lipid-binding protein (iLBP) family. Among
these, biphenylarylfluorosulfate exhibited selective labeling of CRABP2
in living cells. The selectivity was attributed to a lowered pK

a
 (∼7.6) of CRABP2 Y134,
influenced by adjacent arginine residues. Olsen and co-workers further
advanced the field by developing irreversible SIRT5-selective fluorosulfate
inhibitors and ABPs. Their earlier mechanism-based
reversible SIRT5 inhibitor 82, which incorporated a thiourea
moiety, suffered from issues related to cell permeability and serum
stability. To address these limitations,
bioisostere and prodrug strategies were explored but proved insufficient
for in vivo applications.
−

 By replacing the warhead with a fluorosulfate group and incorporating
a guanidine moiety to increase aqueous solubility, they successfully
developed SIRT5 ABP 83, which exhibited functionality in vivo ( ).

 
3.3.2.4.

## Sulfonyl-Azole (SufAz) Warheads
The SufAz electrophile is one of the most tyrosine-selective scaffolds
available, offering sufficient stability and tunability for chemoproteomic
applications.
,
 SuTEx ligands have been shown
to disrupt enzymatic sites by liganding catalytic and noncatalytic
tyrosines on proteins, and perturb protein–protein or protein-RNA
complexes involved in biomolecular condensate formation and dissolution.
,,
 Hahm et al. synthesized a series of SuTEx compounds, among which HHS-465
(84) and HHS-475 (85) were frequently used
in ABPP studies in lysates and live cells ( ). Notably, HHS-482 (86) exhibited
moderate reactivity but superior tyrosine selectivity (Y/K ratio ∼
5).
 Brulet et al. investigated
the tunability
of SuTEx compounds by modifying adduct groups and substituents on
leaving groups in both organic solutions and proteomes. Aryl substituents
as adduct groups demonstrated superior reactivity, whereas cyclopropyl-substituted
adduct groups reduced electrophilicity. Additionally, the reactivity
of SuTEx compounds correlated strongly with the electronic properties
of their substituents ( ).
 Huang et al. combined
the RF001 fragment
of the serotonin receptor antagonist Ritanserin with SuTEx warheads
( ). Ritanserin
exhibited secondary activity against metabolic kinases such as diacylglycerol
kinase (DGK) alpha, prompting the introduction of the RF001 binding
element for developing kinase-targeted ABPs. The ABP design installed
the structurally complex RF001 moiety in the leaving group to mediate
recognition without complicating the resulting peptide-probe adduct
to enhance LC-MS/MS detectability of modified sites. The resulting
SuTEx ABP, TH211, identified tyrosine residues located in the catalytic
or regulatory domains of over 50 protein and metabolic kinases in
live cells. Additionally, TH211 was used to capture sites in predicted
binding pockets of DGKs to guide future inhibitor development.

 

3.4.

## Stereoselective Recognition in Covalent Ligand
Design
A traditional ligand screening for evaluation of cellular
activity can be easily altered by physicochemical properties of ligands,
which can increase complexity of SAR anlaysis.
−

 Also, many proteins utilize stereochemical properties as one of
the key factors to distinguish substrates.
−

 Thus, the concept of stereoprobe pairs was proposed as an innovative
solution to conduct systemic SAR analysis, minimizing the concerns
of physicochemical properties.
−

 Stereoprobe pairs serve as ideally matched
controls to assess on-target versus nonspecific binding and cellular
activity of electrophilic ligands. The initial proteomic mapping using
enantioprobes was focused on targeting cysteines with Michael acceptor
electrophiles or to broadly target the proteome in a protein residue-independent
manner using photoreactive diazirine groups ( ).
−

 Recently, the Taunton group synthesized enantiomeric
ABP pairs
of tyrosine- and lysine- reactive sulfonyl fluorides, demonstrating
that stereochemistry influences binding preferences on protein residues
beyond cysteine ( ). By screening ten enantiomeric
pairs (96-105), the authors detected 634
stereoselectively modified sites (513 Tyr, 121 Lys) out of 2,343 total
modified sites (1,728 Tyr, 615 Lys) in living cells. These enantiomeric
pairs, which provide valuable insights into stereochemical preferences
at protein binding sites, can not only guide the design of small molecules
to target novel proteins but also serve as useful tools for connecting
on- versus off-target binding site engagement with phenotypes observed
in compound-treated cells.
 

4.

## Conclusions and Future Outlook
Most
of the human proteome (∼85%) lack well-defined binding
pockets making them challenging targets for traditional drug design.
,
 Examples of such proteins include p53 and c-Myc, which often rely
on PPIs or intrinsically disordered regions for their function.
−

 To overcome these challenges, covalent chemistry and ABPP have become
indispensable tools in drug discovery, streamlining steps from target
identification to lead optimization. The emergence of ABPP technologies
combined with LC-MS/MS has transformed drug discovery by enabling
a tractable path toward discovery of amino acid-directed covalent
warheads and subsequent optimization of highly targeted covalent ligands.
Additionally, ABPP has expanded the scope of ligandable proteins previously
considered intractable.
While numerous cysteine-directed covalent
inhibitors have been
developed, targeting cysteine alone covers only a small portion of
the proteome. Therefore, there is a growing
demand for covalent chemistries that target a broader range of amino
acids on proteins. Among these residues, lysine and tyrosine have
emerged as an attractive target for covalent modulator development.
To date, various lysine-reactive warheads have been discovered
and utilized for protein profiling and the development of covalent
inhibitors. Furthermore, some studies have focused on PTMs at lysine
residues and have applied site-selective lysine chemistry to diverse
biological applications such as antibody-drug conjugation (ADC) and
human serum albumin (HSA)-conjugated strategies.
−

 Despite the development of numerous tyrosine- and lysine-reactive
warheads, each scaffold has limited coverage when considering the
vast diversity of potential ligandable sites in the human proteome.
,,
 In fact, the proximity-driven
environment within the residues strongly influences the reactivity
of warheads, which depends on their electronic and steric properties.
−

 This underscores the need for continued development of diverse scaffolds
to target hard to ligand proteins.
In particular, tyrosine-
and lysine-reactive warheads that avoid
reactivity with cysteine such as sulfonyl electrophiles, are crucial
for achieving selective modification of novel targets. Thiols on cysteine
and GSH are primary nucleophiles in cells that readily forms covalent
bonds with electrophiles. Thus, electrophiles designed to target noncysteine
residues must avoid or minimize thiol cross-reactivity in biological
systems. The discovery of novel electrophiles and their precise integration
into noncovalent recognition scaffolds is essential for advancing
covalent inhibitors and chemoproteomic probes targeting lysine as
well as other nucleophilic residues such as tyrosine, noncatalytic
serine/threonine, and histidine. Tyrosines are particularly interesting
because they are more abundant than cysteine but not as prevalent
as lysine to expand protein targeting opportunities without compromising
selectivity. Also, tyrosines are known
to be enriched in protein binding surfaces, suggesting that targeting
tyrosine has a high potential for developing PPI inhibitors.

In recent years, the IDD approach has
emerged as an important strategy
for the discovery of novel covalent ligands, including enantiomeric
ABP pairs. While chirality is commonly incorporated into the adduct
group of enantiomeric pairs, the inclusion of chirality within the
electrophilic center itself also represents a promising and underexplored
avenue for covalent ligand development.
Progress in chemoproteomic
probe design combined with multiplexed
quantitative mass spectrometry will further expand the scope of functional
protein pockets amenable to covalent targeting. This advancement will
provide new fundamental insights into protein biochemistry and biology
and in the process drive innovation in therapeutic development.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institutes
of Health grant nos. GM144472 (K.-L.H.), DA043571 (K.-L.H.), AI169412
(K.-L.H.), the Mark Foundation for Cancer Research (Emerging Leader
Award to K.-L.H.), Recruitment of Rising Stars Award from CPRIT (RR220063
to K.-L.H.), the National Science Foundation (CHE-2422750 to K.-L.H.),
a Research Grant Award from The Welch Foundation (F-2143-20230405
to K.-L.H.), and the Basic Science Research Program through the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education
(RS-2024-00415392 to G. K.).

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
BODIPYBorondipyrromethene
CBXChromobox protein
CRABP2Cellular retinoic
acid-binding
protein 2
CRBNCereblon
protein
DBPDNA
binding protein
DcpSDecapping scavenger enzyme
DPCPXDipropylcyclopentylxanthine
FDAFood and drug administration
FSCPX8-Cyclopentyl-3-(3-((4-(fluorosulfonyl)­benzoyl)­oxy)­propyl)-1-propylxanthine
GDPGuanosine diphosphate
GTPGuanosine triphosphate
GlfT2Galactofuranosyltransferase
2
HEG1Heart development
protein with
EGF-like domains 1
HIVHuman immunodeficiency virus
JAKJanus kinase
KRIT1Krev interaction trapped protein
1
NADNicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide
PI3KPhosphatidylinositol-3 kinase
SIRT5Sirtuin 5
TECTyrosine kinase expressed in hepatocellular
carcinoma
UDPUridine
diphosphate
UGGT1UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase
WNKWith-no-lysine kinases
XRCCX-ray repair cross-complementing
protein

## Biographies
Gibae Kim graduated from Seoul
National University in 2018 and
received his Ph.D. in Medicinal Chemistry in 2024 from the College
of Pharmacy at Seoul National University. During his Ph.D. studies,
he investigated modified nucleoside chemistry and SAR studies of their
derivatives under the guidance of Professor Lak Shin Jeong. He then
joined the Hsu Lab as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Texas at Austin, where he focused on discovering
novel targets using LC-MS/MS and developing new electrophiles.

R. Justin Grams received his B.S. in Biochemistry
from Virginia
Tech in 2012 and his Ph.D. in Organic Chemistry from Virginia Tech
in 2021 under the advisorship of Prof. Webster Santos. Justin worked
as a Post-Doctoral Research Associate in the Hsu Lab at the University
of Texas at Austin and a Visiting Scholar at the University of Virginia
until 2024 and transitioned to a Research Scientist in the Hsu Lab
at UT Austin. Justin’s postdoctoral research involved designing
and synthesizing sulfonyl-triazole electrophiles that covalently modify
functional tyrosines in oncogene proteins towards oncology.

Ku-Lung (Ken) Hsu is currently a Stephen F. and
Fay Evans Martin
Endowed Associate Professor and CPRIT Scholar in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Texas at Austin. His group develops
enabling covalent chemistry and chemical proteomic technologies to
create novel molecules that drive chemical biology and therapeutic
discovery and uncover new insights into protein and lipid biology
relevant to human disease. Ken received his PhD in Chemistry and Biochemistry
from the University of Texas at Austin and pursued further training
in chemical biology at The Scripps Research Institute (TSRI) in La
Jolla as a Hewitt Foundation for Medical Research Postdoctoral Fellow.

The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript. CRediT: Gibae Kim conceptualization, visualization, writing - original
draft, writing - review & editing; Robert Justin Grams writing - review & editing; Ku-Lung Hsu conceptualization,
funding acquisition, supervision, writing - original draft, writing
- review & editing.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): K.-L.H. is
a founder and scientific advisory board member of Hyku Biosciences.

Published
as part of Chemical Reviews
special issue “Drugging the Undruggable”.

## References