J Cell BiolJ. Cell Biol482jcellbiolThe Journal of Cell Biology0021-95251540-8140The Rockefeller University PressPMC3613684PMC3613684.1361368436136842354703210.1083/jcb.2012100192012100191Research ArticlesToolsGlobal analysis of SUMO chain function reveals multiple roles in
chromatin regulation
Global analysis of SUMO chain functionSrikumarTharan LewickiMegan C. CostanzoMichael TkachJohnny M. van BakelHarm TsuiKyle JohnsonErica S. BrownGrant W. AndrewsBrenda J. BooneCharles GiaeverGuri NislowCorey RaughtBrian 
1
Ontario Cancer Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario
M5G 1L7, Canada
2Department of Medical
Biophysics, 3Terence Donnelly Center
for Cellular and Biomolecular Research,
4Department of Biochemistry,
5Banting and Best Department of Medical
Research, 6Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, and
7Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A1, Canada
8
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107
Correspondence to Brian Raught:
brian.raught@uhnres.utoronto.ca14201320112213201451633102012732013011020130110201330062024© 2013 Srikumar et al.2013https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/This article is distributed under the terms of an
Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites
license for the first six months after the publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms). After six months it is
available under a Creative Commons License
(Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported license,
as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).Multiple large-scale analyses in yeast implicate SUMO chain function in the
maintenance of higher-order chromatin structure and transcriptional repression
of environmental stress response genes.

Like ubiquitin, the small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) proteins can form
oligomeric “chains,” but the biological functions of these
superstructures are not well understood. Here, we created mutant yeast strains
unable to synthesize SUMO chains (smt3allR) and
subjected them to high-content microscopic screening, synthetic genetic array
(SGA) analysis, and high-density transcript profiling to perform the first
global analysis of SUMO chain function. This comprehensive assessment identified
144 proteins with altered localization or intensity in
smt3allR cells, 149 synthetic genetic
interactions, and 225 mRNA transcripts (primarily consisting of stress- and
nutrient-response genes) that displayed a >1.5-fold increase in
expression levels. This information-rich resource strongly implicates SUMO
chains in the regulation of chromatin. Indeed, using several different
approaches, we demonstrate that SUMO chains are required for the maintenance of
normal higher-order chromatin structure and transcriptional repression of
environmental stress response genes in budding yeast.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-SA

## Complete image-based screen data

https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201210019.dv

## Introduction
The small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) system plays important roles in many
diverse biological processes in all eukaryotes ( ; ). Like ubiquitin, SUMO modification is effected via covalent
conjugation to an epsilon amine moiety of a lysine residue in a targeted protein,
via the sequential action of SUMO-specific E1, E2, and E3 proteins. SUMO conjugation
can be reversed by a family of SUMO-specific proteases ( ; ; ).
The sole budding yeast SUMO protein is encoded by the essential SMT3
gene. Invertebrates also express a single SUMO protein, whereas vertebrates and
plants express multiple SUMO isoforms ( ; ).
Systematic proteomics screens have identified >500 putative SUMO conjugates
in budding yeast (among others, ; ;
 ) and hundreds more
in plants, insects, and mammals ( ; ; ). Ectopic
expression of the human SUMO-1 protein rescues smt3 lethality
( ), highlighting
the usefulness of Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model organism for
assessing SUMO function in eukaryotes.
The SUMO proteins interact with small hydrophobic domains referred to as
SUMO-interacting motifs (SIMs). SIMs confer low affinity binding to SUMOs, often
occur in tandem, and can confer specificity for particular SUMO isoforms ( ; ; ; ).
Sumoylation thus represents a rapid and efficient way to regulate
protein–protein interactions. SUMO–SIM interactions have been
implicated in a variety of biological functions, including transcriptional control
( ; ; ), DNA damage repair ( ; ; ), protein degradation ( ; ), and the assembly of DNA–protein superstructures such as PML
( ;
 ) and insulator
bodies ( ; ).
Notably, SUMO can be conjugated to proteins in a monomeric form, or as oligomeric
SUMO “chain” structures. In budding yeast, SUMO–SUMO linkages
are formed primarily via K15 ( ), although we and others have detected linkages at additional lysine
residues in vitro ( ;
 ). The best
characterized function of SUMO chains is as a secondary degradation signal. The
SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligases (STUbLs) are an evolutionarily conserved family of
ubiquitin E3 proteins that contain multiple SIMs. The STUbLs are thus recruited to
polysumoylated proteins and effect their ubiquitylation, marking them for 26S
proteasome-mediated destruction ( ). A few STUbL targets have been identified, including PML ( ; ), the HTLV-1 Tax protein
( ), the
Drosophila melanogaster transcriptional repressor Hairy ( ), and the budding yeast
transcriptional regulator Mot1 ( ; ).
Importantly, however, the biological functions of SUMO chains remain poorly
characterized.
Many studies have implicated the SUMO system in transcriptional regulation ( ; ). Transcription factors and
coregulators, chromatin remodeling proteins, and histones are all modified by SUMO
( ; ). Most studies have
indicated that SUMO plays a negative regulatory role in transcription, and SUMOs can
bind to SIMs in transcriptional co-repressors such as CoREST1 ( ) and Daxx, and other types of proteins
that regulate chromatin structure, including histone methyltransferases (SETDB1,
SUV4-2OH) and the chromatin remodeler Mi2 ( ; , ), possibly to effect
local heterochromatization ( ; ;
 ).
Here, using a combination of high-content microscopic screening, functional genomics
analysis, and high-density transcript profiling, we conducted the first global study
of SUMO chain function. Using this data-rich resource, we implicate the SUMO system
in the maintenance of transcriptional repression and higher-order chromatin
structure.

## Results

## smt3allR strains exhibit chromosome segregation
defects and replication-associated DNA damage
To better understand the biological roles of SUMO chains, we generated haploid
yeast strains in which the endogenous SUMO gene (SMT3) was
replaced by an ORF in which all nine lysine codons were mutated to code for
arginine (as in ).
The resulting mutant SUMO “allR” polypeptide can thus be
conjugated to other proteins as a monomer, but lacks the ability to form SUMO
chains ( ). Although
smt3 deletants arrest in G2/M with short spindles and
replicated DNA ( ;
 ; ), an earlier study
demonstrated that smt3allR strains are viable and
that the SUMO allR polypeptide is conjugated to the septin protein Cdc11 in vivo
( ). SUMO
function is thus at least partially fulfilled by the SUMO allR protein.
Consistent with these data, we found that a recombinant SUMO allR protein is
conjugated to a model substrate (a biotinylated 11-aa peptide containing the
SUMO consensus sequence) in vitro as efficiently as the wild-type (WT) protein
( ), which indicates that the
K-to-R mutations do not appreciably affect the ability of this polypeptide to be
recognized by the SUMO E1 or E2 proteins.
 Several previous studies have demonstrated that steady-state sumoylation
increases in response to stress ( ; ). To determine whether the smt3allR
strain is able to respond to environmental stresses commonly encountered by
yeast, we assessed its response to high ethanol (EtOH) concentrations. As
expected, exposure of WT cells to 10% EtOH (for 1 h) led to a dramatic increase
in high-molecular-weight SUMO conjugates ( ). Although smt3allR cells displayed a
decrease in unconjugated (free) SUMO, only a very minor increase in
high-molecular-weight SUMO conjugates in response to EtOH treatment was observed
( ; the minor high molecular
signal most likely reflects multi-monosumoylation of high-molecular-weight
targets, or could represent, e.g., proteins that are both sumoylated and
ubiquitylated in response to stress). In addition, here we tested two different
smt3allR strains: one in which the
C-terminal three amino acid extension of the SUMO protein was maintained in the
coding region (pro-smt3allR) and a second in which
this region was removed to express the mature SUMO polypeptide
(smt3allR). No differences in division time
(not depicted) or EtOH response were observed between the two strain types
( ), which indicates that SUMO
maturation activity is not limiting in these cells.
The signal strength of the unconjugated SUMO allR protein in Western blot
analysis was markedly lower than that observed for the endogenous WT SUMO
protein ( ). However, when equal
amounts of purified recombinant WT and allR SUMO polypeptides were subjected to
SDS-PAGE and Coomassie blue staining ( , top) or Western blotting analysis ( , bottom), we found that the allR SUMO protein is simply not
recognized as efficiently by the SUMO antibody (with this antibody, the allR
protein yields <20% of the signal intensity of an equivalent amount of
the WT SUMO protein). Indeed, quantification of SUMO signal intensity in
parental and smt3allR yeast strains based on these
data indicate that the SUMO allR protein is expressed at levels similar to (or
even higher than) the endogenous SUMO protein (see Materials and methods for
details).
As expected ( ), under
standard culture conditions the doubling time of
smt3allR cells is increased ∼1.5-fold
(180 ± 6.7 min) as compared with parental strains (119 ± 1.3 min;
P < 0.01; ). FACS of SYTOX
green–stained cells revealed a slight increase in a supra-G2 population,
and an approximately twofold increase in cells with >2n DNA content
( ) in the
smt3allR cell population (P < 0.01).
Consistent with observations in other SUMO pathway mutants ( ; ), DAPI staining revealed
chromosome segregation defects in a subset of the
smt3allR population (∼40% of large budded
cells; and Fig. S1
A). A lack of SUMO chain synthesis thus appears to negatively
affect the efficient segregation of chromosomes, which in turn leads to an
increase in population ploidy.
 Consistent with a role for SUMO chains in DNA replication,
smt3allR cells also displayed
hypersensitivity to the ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor hydroxyurea (HU) and
the alkylating agent methyl methanesulfonate (MMS), but did not exhibit
increased sensitivity to DNA damage induced by zeocin or 4-nitroquinoline
1-oxide (4NQO; and Fig. S1 B),
and did not display increased sensitivity to high or low temperatures, or
protein-damaging agents ( and
Fig. S1, B and C).
Strikingly, untreated smt3allR strains displayed a
>10-fold increase in the number of steady-state DNA damage foci, as
visualized via RAD52-GFP, DDC1-GFP, and RFA1-GFP (parental strain average for
all markers = 1.51 ± 0.63 foci/field;
smt3allR average = 17.1 ± 2.93
foci/field; ). To further explore
the role of SUMO chains in replication-associated DNA damage, we crossed the
smt3allR strain with 384 yeast strains
expressing GFP-tagged proteins ( ) previously linked to the DNA damage response ( ). Live cells were
imaged using automated high-throughput confocal microscopy ( ) and the resulting
images were examined for differences in localization and signal intensity in the
SUMO chain mutant ( and
Table
S1). This high content screen (HCS) highlighted changes in
localization and/or intensity in smt3allR cells for
144 proteins, most of which are involved in DNA replication, segregation, or
repair processes ( and Table
S1). These data are consistent with several earlier publications linking the
SUMO system to replication stress ( ; ), yet significantly expand the repertoire of DNA
damage–associated proteins demonstrated to be affected in response to
SUMO system defects. Most importantly, these data for the first time also
specifically implicate SUMO chains in this function.
 SMT3 was first characterized as a high-copy suppressor of
mif2, a kinetochore protein required for structural
integrity of the mitotic spindle ( ; ). Chromosomal passenger complex protein localization is
also regulated by the SUMO system, to mediate spindle disassembly ( ). Consistent
with a role for SUMO chains in mitotic spindle dynamics, the HCS highlighted
mislocalization of several additional proteins (4 of 11 proteins in the screen)
involved in spindle function ( 
and Fig.
S2).
Also of note, although a majority of cells fell within the normal size range, a
subpopulation of smt3allR cells exhibited
significant increases in volume (P < 0.001; ). The proportion of cells with a volume
>80 fl (more than two standard deviations from the mean) was 11 ±
4% for parental strains and 30 ± 6% for
smt3allR strains. Both large and normal sized
smt3allR cells successfully produced
colonies, and gave rise to a mix of normal and large cells in similar
proportions (unpublished data), which indicates that the large cell phenotype is
neither terminal nor heritable. The size increase thus likely reflects a cell
cycle delay caused by an increased DNA repair load and chromosome segregation
defects.

## smt3allR cells display characteristics of an
activated environmental stress response
The HCS also highlighted several GFP-tagged vacuolar proteins with clear changes
in localization in smt3allR cells; e.g., VPS1-GFP
and VPS41-GFP displayed more numerous puncta than parental cells (Fig. S2).
Multiple mitochondrial markers (e.g., MDM12-GFP and POR1-GFP) also displayed
markedly increased signal intensity in the smt3allR
strains (Fig. S2). Consistent with these data, electron micrographs revealed a
large subset of smt3allR cells with fragmented
vacuoles, increased mitochondrial volume, and thicker cell walls than parental
strains ( and Fig. S3
A). These defects were unexpected and were investigated
further.
 Signal intensities for a GFP bearing a mitochondrial targeting sequence ( ) and
Mitotracker red, a thiol-reactive dye that accumulates in active mitochondria,
were strikingly enhanced in cells defective for SUMO chain synthesis ( ).
smt3allR cells also exhibited a significant
increase (more than fourfold; P < 0.01) in basal oxygen consumption rates
( ), even when maintained in
glucose-containing culture media (a condition in which glycolysis is the
preferred mode of energy production). smt3allR cells
thus maintain abnormally high levels of mitochondria that are metabolically
active even in the presence of glucose.
Vacuolar fragmentation is observed in cells in a hypertonic environment ( ). Glycerol is the
primary osmoprotectant in S. cerevisiae, and is synthesized in
response to hyperosmotic conditions to maintain cell turgor ( ).
smt3allR cells grown in isosmotic media
displayed highly fragmented vacuoles and a more than twofold increase (P
< 0.01) in intracellular glycerol concentrations, as compared with
parental strains (Fig. S3, B and C). These data suggest that SUMO chain mutants
are also subject to chronic osmotic stress or exhibit aberrant osmotic stress
signaling.
Together, our data reveal that disruption of SUMO chain assembly gives rise to a
pleiotropic cell population exhibiting several different physiological defects.
We did not observe any clear correlation between, e.g., ploidy and the number of
DNA damage foci or mitochondrial mass, which suggests that these phenotypes are
largely independent of one another.
Replication-associated DNA damage is observed in other types of SUMO system
mutants ( ; ), and our analysis
implicates SUMO chains in this process. However, we also observed phenotypic
characteristics in smt3allR cells that have not
previously been described for other types of SUMO mutants. Many of these traits
are reminiscent of an inappropriately activated response to environmental stress
or nutrient-poor media conditions.

## The smt3allR phenotype is caused by a lack of
SUMO chains
To confirm that the smt3allR phenotype is caused by a
lack of SUMO chains, and not to secondary mutations that could arise in such
mutants, we transformed plasmids coding for galactose-inducible WT or allR SUMO
proteins into parental and smt3allR strains, and
assessed their effects on doubling time, ploidy, and vacuolar morphology.
Additional SUMO allR protein expression in the
smt3allR strain (induced for 16 h) had no
apparent effect on cycling time (188 ± 6 min), ploidy, or vacuole size
and number ( ; and Fig. S3
D). Similarly, overexpression of the WT SUMO protein in parental strains had no
discernible effect on these phenotypic features ( ; and Fig. S3 D). However, overexpression of the SUMO
allR protein in parental (WT) strains led to a significant increase in doubling
time (177 ± 8 min, P < 0.001; ), an increase in the number of cells with >2n DNA ploidy
( ), and an increase in
vacuolar fragmentation (Fig. S3 D). Conversely, expression of the WT SUMO
protein in smt3allR strains led to a decrease in
doubling time (121 ± 2 min, P < 0.001), a decrease in the
proportion of cells with >2n DNA ploidy, and a decrease in vacuolar
fragmentation ( ; and Fig.
S3 D). The smt3allR phenotype can thus be at least
partially rescued by expression of a SUMO protein that can form chains, and
overexpression of the SUMO allR protein in WT cells can effect changes in
cycling time, ploidy, and vacuolar morphology even in the presence of the
endogenous SUMO polypeptide. Together, these data indicate that the
smt3allR phenotype is not caused by a
limited supply of the SUMO protein for conjugation, or to secondary mutations in
these strains, but is indeed caused by a lack of SUMO chains. These data also
demonstrate that the SUMO allR protein can act in a dominant manner in the
presence of the endogenous SUMO polypeptide, presumably by preventing SUMO chain
formation.
Previous studies have indicated that SUMO chains in vivo are linked primarily via
N-terminal lysine residues (mostly through K15; ). To determine whether the
smt3allR phenotype could be recapitulated by
disrupting only the N-terminal lysine residues, we also expressed a SUMO 3KR
mutant (in which only lysines 11, 15, and 19 are mutated to arginine residues)
in WT cells. Division time and ploidy were indistinguishable from cells
expressing the SUMO allR mutant (Fig.
S4), which further suggests that the
smt3allR phenotype is caused by the disruption
of SUMO chains. In the remaining work presented here, we used
smt3allR strains to avoid any possibility of
SUMO chain synthesis via the use of alternative lysine residues (as we and
others have observed in vitro; ; ;
 ).

## A SUMO chain genetic interaction network
To identify cellular pathways that specifically compensate for disrupted SUMO
chain synthesis, the smt3allR strain was subjected
to synthetic genetic array (SGA) analysis, as in and . The
smt3allR mutant was crossed with an ordered
array of ∼4,700 viable yeast deletion mutants, and the resulting strains
were scored for colony growth ( ). To avoid the possibility of false-positive interactions
caused by secondary mutations in the SUMO chain mutant, SGA was conducted twice,
using two different smt3allR strains (one expressing
pro-SMT3allR and one expressing the mature
SMT3allR polypeptide, as in ). 149 high-confidence synthetic
genetic interactions were detected in both analyses (Table
S2). The resultant SUMO chain genetic interaction network
represents the first global genetic analysis of SUMO chain function in any
organism. Gene ontology (GO) analysis (Table S2) highlighted significant
enrichment in interactions with genes involved in DNA replication, DNA damage
repair, chromatin remodeling, cell cycle control, stress responses, protein
catabolism, nuclear transport, and meiosis.
SGA correlation analysis (i.e., the comparison of genetic interaction maps) is
useful for gaining insight into the function of a gene of interest, because
genes that share similar patterns of genetic interactions are likely to share
similar biological roles ( ). The smt3allR SGA profile was thus
compared with SGA-derived genetic interaction profiles of 4,458 mutant strains
available in the data repository of the yeast genetic interactions database
(DRYGIN; ). 194 genes
displayed a significant positive correlation with the
smt3allR genetic interaction map ( , , and Table S2). Attesting to the robustness of this
analysis, three of the four highest correlated genes were derived from
components of the SUMO system itself: ubc9
(ubc9-2), mms21
(mms21-sp), and smt3 (smt3-damp; decreased
abundance by mRNA perturbation; ). ulp1 was also a top-scoring hit
(ulp1-333). Likely reflecting a role in a subset of SUMO
functions, siz2 (nfi1) displayed a
significant, but lower, overlap with the smt3allR
interaction profile. Consistent with STUbL-mediated degradation as a major
function for SUMO chains, the second most highly correlated genetic interaction
map in our screen was slx8. The gene coding for its binding
partner slx5 was also a top-scoring hit.
 As expected, ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) components were also highlighted
in this analysis; the UPS works with Slx5-Slx8 to effect SUMO-targeted protein
degradation. We also observed overlap with the cdc48 (p97) SGA
map. This protein was recently reported to work with the Slx5-Slx8 proteins to
mediate genome stability ( ). Another set of highly correlated genes corresponded to nuclear
pore complex (NPC) components and karyopherins (nup60,
nup133, nup145-R4, nup84,
and srp1-damp). This is also not unexpected, as strains with a
loss of function in any of these genes display aberrant Ulp1 localization, which
directly impacts SUMO system function ( ; ).
Consistent with the smt3allR phenotype, several
proteins involved in DNA replication and repair shared significant similarity
with the smt3allR genetic interaction profile,
including several DNA polymerases, helicases, and exonucleases (e.g.,
rad27, cdc2-1, pol32,
pol12-ts, pol1-13, rrm3,
etc.), and genes implicated in stalled replication fork stabilization (e.g.,
tof1, mrc1, and csm3, and
the MCM helicase complex: mcm3-1, cdc47-ts,
and cdc46-1). Recent work has also demonstrated that the SUMO
E3 ligase Mms21, as part of the Smc5-6 complex, plays a critical role in
resolving recombination intermediates at damaged DNA templates ( ; ). Smc5-6 mutants
undergo aberrant mitosis, in which chromosome segregation of repetitive regions
is impaired ( ). A failure to resolve this type of DNA damage can lead to
chromosomal rearrangements and increased ploidy. Indeed, multiple components of
the Smc5-Smc6 complex (mms21-1, nse3-ts4,
nse4-ts2, kre29-ts2, etc.) were highly
correlated in our analysis. Also as observed in our HCS, genetic interaction
maps for esc2, sgs1, mus84,
and mms1, all of which play an important role in resolving
homologous recombination repair DNA intermediates in response to replication
stress ( ; ; ), were highly correlated with
the smt3allR interaction map.
Notably, SGA correlation analysis also highlighted similarity between
smt3allR and several proteins involved in
chromatin organization and remodeling. For example, significant correlations
were observed with the histone chaperone asf1, several
components of chromatin assembly factor-1 (CAF-1; cac2,
rlf2, and msi1), the histone
acetyltransferase rtt109, the histone H2A.Z exchange complex
SWR1 (swr1, vps71, arp6,
swc4-4, etc.), histone deletants (hta1,
htz1, hhf1), and spt21
(required for proper histone gene transcription).
Interestingly, we also observed similarity with genes implicated in mitochondrial
function (e.g. mrh4, msw1, and
mrp49) and osmotic stress signaling (ssk2
and pbs2). Consistent with our HCS data and several previous
publications linking the SUMO system to spindle function ( ; ; ), SGA correlation
analysis also highlighted several spindle and kinetochore genes (e.g.,
bub3, spc105-15, lte1, kar3,
clk1, stu2-11, and
stu2-12).
In sum, our genetic data implicate SUMO chains in several functions previously
ascribed to the SUMO system, such as resolving DNA replication–associated
repair structures, but also link them to some previously unsuspected biological
roles, such as osmoregulation and higher order chromatin structure.

## Derepression of stress- and nutrient-regulated gene transcription and
aberrant transcription of cryptic intergenic regions in
smt3allR strains
High-resolution whole genome nucleotide tiling arrays (see Materials and methods
for details) were next used to characterize the transcription profile of cells
defective for SUMO chain synthesis (as in ). 36 genes were repressed and 225 mRNAs were expressed
>1.5-fold higher in the smt3allR strain, as
compared with parental cells ( 
and Table
S3). The up-regulated mRNAs consisted primarily of genes
implicated in stress responses, nutrient adaptation, cell wall components,
mitochondrial proteins, sporulation, and mating; i.e., genes that are normally
repressed under standard laboratory culture conditions, where cells are
maintained in media with optimal carbon and nitrogen sources, and at optimal
growth temperature. Increased transcription of this gene set likely accounts for
many aspects of the pleiotropic smt3allR phenotype.
For example, several genes implicated in mitochondrial function (e.g.,
STF1, ALD4, and CYC7) and
cell wall integrity signaling (e.g., YGP1,
KDX1, and PRM5) are up-regulated in this
strain. These data suggest that SUMO chains are likely to be involved indirectly
in each of these biological functions, via transcriptional control.
 We also observed a notable increase in transcription from silenced mating type
and sporulation genes (e.g., MFA1, MFA2,
RIM4, and PRM1), as well as several
intergenic regions (Fig. S5
A and Table S3); e.g., 47 cryptic unstable transcripts (CUTs)
were expressed >1.5-fold higher in the
smt3allR strain than in parental cells.
Together, these data indicate that disruption of SUMO chain synthesis has a
wide-ranging negative effect on the maintenance of transcriptional repression.
(It should also be noted that, although overall changes in the expression of
individual transcripts are not extremely large in these mutants, this number
reflects a population average. Because the phenotypes of individual
smt3allR cells are pleiotropic, we suspect
that these averages reflect much larger changes in a smaller subpopulation of
cells.)

## SUMO chains are required to establish a basal transcription
“setpoint” for stress-regulated genes
The transcription of stress-response genes is rapidly increased in response to
changes in the extracellular environment ( ). To explore the role of SUMO chains in the
transcriptional stress response, we subjected parental and
smt3allR cells to hyperosmotic culture
conditions (1 M NaCl for 30 min), followed by a 120-min recovery in isosmotic
media. Using real-time qRT-PCR, expression levels of four different mRNAs that
are overexpressed in smt3allR cells, and which are
up-regulated in response to osmotic shock (HSP12,
SPS100, GRE1, and HUG1),
were monitored. As expected, in parental cells all four of the genes in the test
set displayed a rapid increase in mRNA levels in response to hyperosmotic shock
( and Fig. S5 B). After a
return to isosmotic media, a gradual decrease in mRNA abundance was observed,
returning to pre-stress levels within 60–120 min ( and Fig. S5 B). Consistent with our tiling array
data, this gene set was already expressed at higher levels in untreated
smt3allR strains ( and Fig. S5 B). In response to osmotic shock, the
four gene set was up-regulated to approximately the same expression levels (or
slightly higher in some cases) as the parental strain, and removal of the stress
resulted in a similar gradual decrease in mRNA abundance to near basal
smt3allR transcript levels ( and Fig. S5 B). Identical results
were observed in cells expressing the 3KR SUMO protein (Fig. S4 C). A deficiency
in SUMO chain function does not therefore appear to significantly affect the
activation kinetics or maximal mRNA expression levels in response to stress, but
instead influences the basal transcription setpoint of this highly regulated
group of genes.
 

## SUMO chain disruption affects multiple aspects of higher-order chromatin
organization
Aberrant mitotic chromosome condensation and segregation, transcriptional
derepression of stress- and nutrient-regulated genes, and aberrant transcription
from intergenic regions suggested that smt3allR
strains could have a chromatin condensation defect. To this end, we subjected
smt3allR and parental cells to several
different assays of higher-order chromatin structure.
 

## The lacO/lacR chromosome marker system.
To begin to assess how a lack of SUMO chains impacts chromatin structure, we
used a yeast strain bearing two lac operon repeat insertions on chromosome
IV, separated by ∼450 kb (strain AVY89; ). When the lacR-GFP protein is
bound to its cognate operon, confocal microscopy can be used to measure the
distance between the two GFP foci ( ). Plasmids encoding the gal-inducible WT or allR SUMO
proteins were transformed into this strain, cells were exposed to galactose
to induce SUMO protein expression for 16 h, and cells were treated with
α factor to synchronize them in G1. The distance between GFP signals
was then quantified, as in . In cells expressing the WT SUMO protein, the two GFP foci
were 1.19 ± 0.04 µm apart on average, the same as that
observed in the untransformed parental strain ( ) and similar to measurements
previously reported in other laboratory strains ( ). Notably, in the strain expressing
the SUMO allR protein, the mean distance between the GFP-marked chromosome
regions was significantly increased (1.45 ± 0.05; P < 0.01;
 ). Inhibition of
SUMO chain formation thus negatively affects chromosome IV compaction and/or
organization.

## Telomere clusters.
The SUMO system was also previously linked to telomere silencing and
localization ( ;
 ; ). During
interphase, budding yeast telomeres are clustered into 3–8 foci
located near the inner nuclear membrane (INM; ). To determine if SUMO chains
are important for proper telomere organization, we examined the localization
of the telomere regulatory protein SIR2 in parental and
smt3allR strains. As expected, in
parental strains, SIR2-GFP was found in a small number of foci near the INM.
However, smt3allR cells displayed an increased
number of (generally smaller) SIR2-GFP foci, and many cells possessed an
additional diffuse nuclear SIR2 signal ( ), which indicates widespread SIR2 mislocalization.

## Nucleolar chromatin organization.
The ribosomal DNA (rDNA) genes occur in a tandem array of ∼150 copies
in budding yeast laboratory strains, comprising ∼1 Mb of chromosome
XII ( ),
and are organized into a compact structure localized near the INM, the
nucleolus ( ).
Transcription of rDNA is tightly controlled, and specialized silencing
mechanisms are required to prevent homologous recombination between rDNA
repeats and to maintain rDNA copy number ( ; ). The SUMO system plays an important (but poorly
understood) role in these processes ( ; unpublished data). To better understand
the role of SUMO chains in rDNA organization and maintenance, several
different nucleolar markers were expressed and analyzed in parental and
smt3allR cells. Notably, the NOP2-GFP
protein exhibited a much more diffuse pattern in cycling
smt3allR cells (Fig. S5 C), implicating
SUMO chain function in the organization of nucleolar DNA. To confirm and
extend this result, NOP58-GFP–, NOP13-GFP–, and
NET1-GFP–expressing cells were arrested in S phase by HU treatment
(0.2 M for 90 min) and released into nocodazole-containing medium (15
µg/ml for 90 min) to synchronize them at the G2/M boundary, when
budding yeast rDNA is partially compacted in preparation for mitosis ( ; ). The
signal volume of NOP58-GFP and NOP13-GFP was much more variable in
smt3allR cells as compared with parental
strains ( ). Similarly,
although the total NET1-GFP fluorescence signal intensity was equal in both
strains, the signal volume was much more variable, and larger on average, in
smt3allR cells (P < 0.0001; ). Together, these data
indicate that nucleolar DNA organization is also altered in a budding yeast
mutant unable to synthesize SUMO chains.
Previous work has demonstrated that a loss of rDNA repeat organization or
localization can lead to changes in rDNA copy number ( ; ). Using quantitative PCR (qPCR), we
found that the rDNA repeat number is significantly increased in
smt3allR cells, as compared with their
parental counterparts ( ).
Similar to chromosome IV and telomeres, rDNA compaction and/or organization
(as judged by several different GFP markers and quantitation of rDNA repeat
number) is thus also compromised when SUMO chain function is disrupted.
 

## Discussion
Many transcription factors, coregulators, and chromatin remodeling proteins are SUMO
targets (for review see ), and
sumoylation of chromatin remodelers in yeast and mammalian cells has been suggested
to be required for the formation of a local heterochromatin-like state on some
promoters ( ). A recent
study indicated that Ubc9 inactivation in S. cerevisiae leads to
increased transcription at the inducible ARG1 gene and impaired the
ability of these cells to inactivate ARG1 transcription after
removal of the activation signal ( ). SUMO has also been reported to be enriched in heterochromatic DNA
regions ( ), and
sumoylation of the ubiquitous transcription factor Sp3 has been linked to local
heterochromatinization ( ), whereas expression of an unsumoylatable Sp3 protein leads to
derepression of several tissue-specific genes in mammalian cells ( ). Here, we find that
disruption of SUMO chains in yeast negatively affects higher-order chromatin
organization and the maintenance of transcriptional repression. We propose that a
general, widespread defect in chromatin packaging (as reflected by increased
distances between two chromosomal markers, disorganized telomere clustering, and
altered nucleolar rDNA organization) leads to transcriptional derepression
throughout the genome. In this way, SUMO chains appear to play an important role in
establishing a basal transcription setpoint. Our data also indicate that SUMO chains
are not required for stress-regulated transcriptional activation. However, the
precise role of SUMO chains in transcriptional inactivation is not yet clear:
although SUMO chains are clearly required to maintain transcriptional repression in
yeast, they do not seem to be required for at least a partial inactivation of
transcription after stress ( ).
Additional exploration of the role of SUMO chains in transcriptional inactivation
may shed further light on these findings.
The SUMO system has also been implicated in DNA replication and DNA damage repair
( ; ). Our data specifically
implicate SUMO chains in DNA replication–associated DNA damage. How might
this damage occur in smt3allR cells? DNA lesions can
block the progress of DNA replication forks. Although replication can restart via
repriming downstream of the damaged area ( ), the repriming process generates a single-stranded gap
near the lesion ( ).
To fill these gaps, the template switch (TS) pathway may be used. TS utilizes
undamaged DNA on the sister chromosome via a mechanism that shares similarities with
homologous recombination ( ; ).
The TS process gives rise to X-shaped DNA intermediates, with biochemical properties
similar to pseudodouble Holliday junctions (for review see ). A failure to resolve these structures can lead
to DNA damage and chromosomal rearrangements. The RecQ helicase Sgs1 (the budding
yeast orthologue of the human BLM protein) is required for resolution of these
structures ( ; ), and the ability of
Sgs1 to promote their dissolution is regulated by the SUMO pathway ( ). Recent work has also
demonstrated that the Smc5-6 complex, Esc2, and the Mms4-Mus81 complex (all of which
were detected in our SGA and HCS analyses) play important roles in resolving these
recombination intermediates on damaged DNA templates ( ; ). Mutant smc5-6 and smc6-9
cells are sensitive to MMS treatment, and undergo aberrant mitosis in which
chromosome segregation of repetitive regions is impaired ( ). Consistent with these data, the
SUMO mutant strain smt3-331 was isolated in a high-content screen
for cells unable to properly segregate GFP-labeled chromosomes ( ). Our
smt3allR mutant shares several similarities with
this group of strains, implicating SUMO chains in the same processes.
It is important to note that the SUMO proteins may be regulated by posttranslational
modifications such as phosphorylation, acetylation, and ubiquitylation ( ; ). However, acetylation of lysine
residues in the human SUMO proteins inhibits (or has no effect on) SUMO–SIM
interactions, and K-to-R mutations at acetylation sites do not affect their activity
in transcriptional repression and protein binding assays ( ). As reported here, the 3KR yeast SUMO
mutant has the same effect as the allR SUMO protein in assays of division time,
ploidy, and mRNA expression levels. K-to-R mutations are thus not likely to
significantly disrupt SUMO function, other than to abrogate chain synthesis.
Nevertheless, because we do not completely understand how the yeast SUMO protein may
be posttranslationally modified, we cannot rule out this possibility.
Finally, our data also have clear implications for human disease. For example, a SUMO
chain deficit could render cells more susceptible to chemotherapeutic agents because
of a heavier DNA damage load and increased chromosome missegregation. Indeed,
although the molecular details of this phenomenon are not yet understood, a recent
study linked SUMO E1 mutations to improved outcome in some (Myc
mutation–associated) breast cancers ( ). Combined with our observations, these data
suggest that targeting of the SUMO system (and in particular SUMO chain synthesis)
could have therapeutic value.

## Materials and methods

## Yeast strains and plasmids
S. cerevisiae strains used in this study were derivatives of the
BY4741/2 haploid cells, unless otherwise specified, and are listed in Table
S4. All yeast genetic manipulations were performed according to
established procedures. Unless otherwise noted, yeast strains were grown at
30°C to mid-logarithmic phase in YPD or selective minimal (SM) media
supplemented with appropriate nutrients and 2% glucose. Transformations were
performed as described previously ( ). The AVY89 strain was kindly provided by D.J. Clarke
(University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN).

## Construction of smt3allR strains
Multistep PCR was used to generate a product containing the NatMX cassette from
p4339, 207 bp of the Smt3 5′ UTR from genomic DNA, the
smt3allR coding DNA sequence from , and 273 bp of the
Smt3 3′ UTR from genomic DNA. The resulting product was used to transform
yeast strains as in . See Table
S5 for primers.

## Whole cell lysate preparation, affinity purification, SDS-PAGE, and Western
blotting
Whole cell lysates were prepared by alkaline lysis and trichloroacetic acid
protein precipitation of cell pellets derived from 10-ml cultures. Protein
pellets were resuspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer, sonicated for 10 s, and
incubated at 90°C for 5 min before SDS-PAGE. Proteins were transferred to
a nitrocellulose membrane (Pall) and probed with HA.11 (Covance), anti-Smt3
(Covance), or anti-actin (EMD Millipore). Proteins were visualized with
secondary HRP-conjugated anti–mouse or anti–rabbit antibodies
(Bio-Rad Laboratories) and ECL (Immuno-Star HRP; Bio-Rad Laboratories).

## Recombinant protein purification and quantification
pGEX-6P-1-SMT3 or pGEX-6P-1-smt3allR, encoding an N-terminal GST
moiety fused to the SMT3 or
smt3allR coding regions (1–294), was
constructed using standard cloning techniques, and verified by DNA sequencing.
The pGEX-6P-1-SUMO proteins were expressed in BL21 Escherichia
coli induced with 2 mM isopropyl-β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside
at 16°C for 16 h. Proteins were purified using MagneGST glutathione
particles (Promega), according to manufacturer’s instructions. WT and
allR SUMO proteins were cleaved free of the GST moiety using a 4% PreScission
Protease solution (GE Healthcare) at 4°C for 16 h. Proteins were assessed
for purity using SDS-PAGE and quantified with a Bradford assay.
Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE gels were digitized using a scanner (Epson), and
intensity measurements on individual bands were made on the digitized images
using Photoshop CS4 (Adobe) software.

## In vitro sumoylation
Assays were performed with 150 ng of E1 (AOS1/UBA2), 1 µg of E2 (UBC9), 2
µl of 10× sumoylation reaction buffer (200 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 50 mM
MgCl2, and 20 mM ATP), 1 µg of SUMO, and 250 ng of
biotinylated substrate (all proteins from Boston Biochem). The reaction mixture
was incubated at 30°C for 2 h, then quenched with SDS-PAGE sample buffer.
Reactions were analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by Western blotting using
streptavidin-conjugated HRP (Bio-Rad Laboratories). After transfer to a
nitrocellulose membrane (Pall), proteins were visualized using a 2% solution of
Ponceau S in 1% acetic acid.

## Electron microscopy
Samples were prepared as in , and visualized on a transmission electron microscope (H-7000;
Hitachi). In brief, cells were fixed with 4% glutaraldehyde at room temperature
for 5 min. Cells were washed and secondary fixed with 2% potassium permanganate
at room temperature for 5 min. Cells were then washed and overlayed with 1%
uranyl acetate for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were then dehydrated by
incubating in increasing amounts of ethanol over an 8-h period. Next, cells were
infiltrated in Spurr’s resin and samples were polymerized in embedding
mold at 60°C for 48 h. 90-nm-thin sections were mounted on 200 mesh
copper grids and stained with lead citrate for 5 min before observation with the
transmission electron microscope (H7000) at 75 kV. Images were captured in TIF
format.

## Oxygen consumption rate measurements
Cultures were grown overnight (O/N) in YPD media and diluted in the morning to
OD600 0.1 in fresh YPD media. 1 ml of OD600 0.3
culture was collected, washed twice with 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH
6.8, and resuspended to OD600 0.3. Resuspended cells were used to
seed XF96 plates (Seahorse Biosciences). Plates were centrifuged at 2,000 rpm
for 2 min, then allowed to rest for 30 min at 30°C. The Seahorse sensor
cartridge was rehydrated O/N as per the manufacturer’s instructions. XF96
culture plates and sensor cartridge were mated and placed in a Seahorse
instrument, set to maintain temperature at 30°C. An initial wait time of
20 min was added to allow equilibration of the culture to instrument conditions.
After 1 min of mixing, a 1-min wait time was also included to allow for cell
settling, before measuring for 2 min. Three measurements were taken for the
basal reading, before the addition of azide to a final concentration of 0.05% in
media. Three additional readings were then taken. The mean of the three readings
across the 2-min span was calculated for each well. Six wells were used for each
strain.

## High-content microscopic screen
An array consisting of 384 strains (Table S3) from the yeast GFP collection
( ) expressing
proteins previously demonstrated to display altered localization or intensity in
response to replication stress ( ) was constructed and crossed with the
smt3allR mutant
(smt3allR::NatMX NUP49-mCherry::URA3 or
pro-smt3allR::NatMX NUP49-mCherry::URA3) using SGA
( ) to yield 384
GFP-ORF strains bearing the smt3allR allele. GFP
protein localization and relative steady-state abundance for each strain in the
WT and smt3allR mutants were determined essentially
as described in . In
brief, cultures were grown to mid-log phase in low-fluorescence medium and
transferred to 384-well slides at a final density of 0.045 OD600/ml.
Four images per well in the green and red channels (800 ms exposure) were
simultaneously acquired, imaged using a high-throughput confocal microscope
system (EVOTEC Opera; PerkinElmer) with quad-band dichroic filter
(405/488/561/653). The images were blinded and scored manually for localization
and relative abundance changes versus the WT GFP-ORF ( ). A brief description was recorded for
each protein undergoing a change in the smt3allR or
pro-smt3allR strains.

## Confocal microscopy
Mid-log phase cells were collected from 1-ml cultures, washed in brief in
H2O containing 2% glucose, and mounted on a glass slide. Cells
were imaged at room temperature using a 100×/1.40 NA Plan-Apochromat lens
on an inverted microscope (IX80; Olympus) fitted with a spinning disk confocal
scanner unit (Yokogawa CSU10; Quorum Technologies, Inc.) and a 512 × 512
EM charge-coupled device (CCD) camera (Hamamatsu Photonics). Diode lasers at 561
nm (RFP), 491 nm (GFP), and 405 nm (DAPI) were used for excitation combined with
the following filter sets: 500/20 nm, 430/10 nm, and 555/28 nm. The system was
controlled with Volocity 5.5 software (PerkinElmer). The CCD camera was operated
at maximum resolution. Exposure times, gain, and sensitivity varied by protein;
however, the same settings were used in WT and
smt3allR strains. Settings were maintained for
all subsequent images of the same strain. Cropping and gamma adjustments of
images were performed using Volocity (image export) and Photoshop CS4.
For experiments requiring fluorescent labeling of vacuoles, FM4-64 was added to
culture media to a concentration of 20 µM and incubated at 30°C
for 30 min. Cultures were washed twice with media, then resuspended in fresh
media and allowed to grow for another hour before imaging. To achieve hypertonic
shock, cells were treated with 0.4 M NaCl for 10 min before imaging. To achieve
hypotonic shock, cells were treated with 20 mM MES for 10 min before imaging.
Nine z stacks 0.4 µm apart were acquired. Exposure time, sensitivity,
gain, laser power, and binning were kept constant between all strains.
For fluorescent mitochondrial labeling, the plasmid pVT100U-mtGFP ( ) was
transformed into strains using electroporation. Strains were grown O/N, diluted
to an OD600 of 0.2, and allowed to grow for 3 h. 0.1 µM
MitoTracker red CMXRos (Invitrogen) and 7.5 µg/ml DAPI (Biotium, Inc.)
were added to the culture media and incubated at 30°C for 2 h. Cells were
then washed once with 1 M sorbitol, resuspended in 0.5 ml of 1 M sorbitol with
30 µl of 37% formaldehyde, and left on the benchtop for 5 min with
occasional vortexing. Cells were then pelleted and resuspended in 50 mM Tris, pH
7.4, and stored at 4°C until they were imaged. Nine z stacks 0.4
µm apart were acquired. Exposure time, sensitivity, gain, laser power,
and binning were kept constant between all strains.
For nucleolar/rDNA condensation experiments, cells were grown O/N in CSM
His‒ media with 2% glucose at 26°C. The next morning, 1 ml of
OD600 0.3 cells were collected and resuspended in YPD containing
0.2 M HU for 90 min at 30°C. Cells were washed three times with water and
resuspended in YPD containing 15 µg/µl nocodazole for 90 min at
30°C. Cells were then washed once with 1 M sorbitol and resuspended in
0.5 mL of 1 M sorbitol. Formaldehyde was added to 2% (final) and cells were
incubated at room temperature for 5 min, with gentle vortexing every 30 s. Cells
were then pelleted and resuspended in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, and stored at
4°C until they were imaged. Nine z stacks 0.4 µm apart were
acquired. Exposure time, sensitivity, gain, laser power, and binning were kept
constant between all strains. Volocity software was used to automatically
identify cells using brightfield at 8% threshold cutoff (also a cutoff of
>2 µm3). Within objects identified as a cell, the
fluorescence intensity in the GFP channel was measured within 2 SD of the mean,
and the volume occupied by this fluorescence signal was computed. The
Mann-Whitney test was used to compare means of fluorescence volumes. To
represent data graphically, volumes were binned and shown as a percentage of the
population.

## Flow cytometry analysis
Approximately 107 mid-log phase cells were resuspended in 70% EtOH for
fixation. Flow cytometry analysis was performed with a flow cytometer
(FACSCalibur; BD) and CellQuest Pro software (BD). DNA was stained using the
fluorescent dye Sytox green (Invitrogen) at a 1:5,000 dilution. Data were
analyzed using a free version of Cyflogic (CyFlo Ltd.).

## Cellular glycerol levels
To determine total glycerol content, a 1-ml aliquot of YPD grown cells
(OD600 = 0.6) was collected by centrifugation, washed
twice with water, and resuspended in 0.5 ml of 100 mM Tris, pH 7.4. Samples were
boiled for 10 min and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 min
(4°C), and 10 µl of the supernatants were assayed for glycerol
content. Glycerol concentration was determined colorimetrically with a
commercial kit (EnzyChrom Glycerol Assay kit, EGLY-200; BioAssay Systems),
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## SGA analysis/SGA correlation analysis
SGA and correlation analyses were conducted as in and . In brief,
smt3allR query strains were crossed with
3,885 nonessential deletion mutants to generate double mutants via several
selection steps. The fitness of double mutants was evaluated by measuring colony
size in an automated fashion (see for details). Genetic interaction profile similarities
were measured for all query and array gene pairs by computing Pearson
correlation coefficients (PCC) for the complete genetic interaction matrix in
 and the SGA
with the smt3allR. SGA was conducted using two
different clones of the smt3allR mutant (one
expressing the pro-SUMO protein and one expressing the mature SUMO polypeptide)
in the Y7092 SGA parental strain. Genes identified to be synthetic sick in both
screens were considered to be true positives.

## Transcriptome analysis
WT and smt3allR strains were grown to mid-log phase
in YPD media. Samples were centrifuged and snap-frozen. Total RNA and
single-stranded cDNA were prepared according to , except that actinomycin D was added
to a final concentration of 6 µg/ml during cDNA synthesis to prevent
antisense artifacts ( ). In brief, RNA was extracted with hot phenol from mid-log phase
cultures, and total RNA was treated for 10 min at 37°C with RNase-free
DNaseI, repurified using the RNeasy Mini kit (QIAGEN) and eluted with 1×
Tris-EDTA buffer, pH 8.0. Single-stranded cDNA was synthesized in 200-µl
reactions containing 0.25 µg/µl total RNA, 12.5 ng/µl
random primers, 12.5 ng/µl oligo(dT)12-18 primer, 15 units/µl
SuperScript II (Invitrogen), 1× first strand buffer, 10 mM DTT, 6
ng/µl actinomycin D, and 10 mM dNTP. After cDNA synthesis, RNA was
degraded with 1/3 volume of 1 M NaOH incubated for 30 min, and an addition of
1/3 volume of 1 M HCl was used to neutralize the solution before cleanup with
the MinElute Reaction Cleanup kit (QIAGEN). cDNA was fragmented with 2.1
units/µl DNaseI and labeled in 50 µl reactions containing 0.3 mM
GeneChip DNA labeling reagent, 1× terminal transfer reaction buffer, and
2 µl of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (Promega) for 60 min at
37°C. Labeled cDNA was hybridized to arrays for 16 h at 45°C. Raw
data from Affymetrix GCOS software (.CEL format) was analyzed with Affymetrix
Tiling Analysis software (TAS; http://www.affymetrix.com/partners_programs/programs/developer/TilingArrayTools/index.affx).
Expression levels were mapped to the chromosomal map from the
Saccharomyces Genome Database and are available for
download as supplemental .bar files.

## qRT-PCR
Strains were grown O/N, diluted to OD600 0.2, and grown to 0.6.
Cultures were shocked with 1 M NaCl for 30 min, then allowed to recover in fresh
YPD media for 120 min. 5-ml culture aliquots were collected at the indicated
time points and snap-frozen. The MasterPure Yeast RNA Purification kit
(Epicenter) was used according to manufacturer’s instructions to prepare
purified RNA. RNA quality (RIN) was analyzed using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer
and RNA quantity was estimated with a spectrophotometer (Nanodrop 1000; Thermo
Fisher Scientific). qRT-PCR primers were designed using the cDNA for each
desired target with qPCR settings in Primer3Plus (see Table S5; ). 40 ng of
template RNA and 50 nM of each primer were used with the Power SYBR green
RNA-to-CT 1-Step kit (Applied Biosystems) in 20-µl reactions, as per the
manufacturer’s instructions, on a qPCR system (Mx3000P; Stratagene). Act1
was used as a control for ΔΔCt-based relative quantification
( ).

## qPCR
Strains were grown O/N in YPD (200 µg/ml +cloNAT or 100
µg/ml +G418 for mutants), diluted in the morning to
OD600 of 0.2. Cultures were grown to OD600 0.8, and
10-ml aliquots were snap-frozen. A MasterPure Yeast DNA Purification kit
(Epicentre) was used to isolate genomic DNA according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were incubated with DNase-free RNase
for 2 h in TE before storing at −20°C. DNA was quantified with a
spectrophotometer (Nanodrop 1000). A Power Sybr green PCR kit was used in
20-µl reactions containing 1 ng of DNA and 50 nM of each primer, as per
the manufacturer’s instructions, on a qPCR system (Mx3000P). Primers were
as follows: rDNA-F, 5′-TACTGCGAAAGCATTTGCCAAGGACG-3′; rDNA-R,
5′-TCCCCCCAGAACCCAAAGACTTTGAT-3′; act1-F,
5′-CTTTCAACGTTCCAGCCTTC-3′; and act1-R,
5′-CCAGCGTAAATTGGAACGAC-3′.

## Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows data indicating that the smt3allR
strains exhibit markedly increased chromosome segregation defects, and
additional spot assays. Fig. S2 contains representative images from the HCS
showing mislocalized spindle proteins, and highlights characteristics of an
environmental stress response in SUMO mutant strains. Fig. S3 contains
additional EM images, as well as measurements on internal glycerol content and
FM4-64 vacuole-stained images. Fig. S4 contains doubling time, FACS, and gene
expression data for strains overexpressing an
smt33KR protein. Fig. S5 displays a summarized
image of microarray data for the smt3allR strain, an
expression profile for the Gre1 mRNA during stress response, and representative
images from the HCS for NOP2-GFP. Table S1 contains localization and intensity
data from the HCS, as well as GO analysis. Table S2 contains all SGA and
correlation analysis data, as well as GO analysis. Table S3 contains expression
data for all ORFs and known CUTs. Table S4 contains details on strains used in
this study. Table S5 lists the sequences of all primers used in this study. Two
.bar files, containing expression level changes mapped to chromosome location,
are available for download. Online supplemental material is available at
http://www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.201210019/DC1.
Additional data are available in the JCB DataViewer at https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201210019.dv.

We thank Yan Chen and Dr. Paul Fraser at the University of Toronto EM facility and
Connie Danielsen for expert technical assistance, as well as A.-C. Gingras and the
Raught laboratory for critical reading of the manuscript. We are also very grateful
to D.J. Clarke for yeast strains.
T. Srikumar was funded by a Canadian Institutes of Health Research student
fellowship. Work in the G.W. Brown laboratory was supported by grant 020254 from the
Canadian Cancer Society Research Institute. C. Boone and B.J. Andrews were supported
by a grant from the National Institutes of Health (1R01HG005853-01) and by grants
from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (MOP-102629 and MOP-97939) and the
Ontario Research Fund (GL2-01-22). B. Raught holds the Canada Research Chair in
Proteomics and Molecular Medicine, and funding for work in the B. Raught laboratory
was provided by Canadian Institutes of Health Research grant MOP81268.

## Abbreviations used in this paper:
CUTcryptic unstable transcript
GOgene ontology
HCShigh content screen
HUhydroxyurea
INMinner nuclear membrane
MMSmethyl methanesulfonate
O/Novernight
qPCRquantitative PCR
rDNAribosomal DNA
SGAsynthetic genetic array
SIMSUMO-interacting motif
STUbLSUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase
SUMOsmall ubiquitin-related modifier
TStemplate switch
WTwild type