822acssdJournal of Proteome ResearchJ Proteome ResPMC9990128999012899901283672348310.1021/acs.jproteome.2c00557SUMO Proteomics
Analyses Identify Protein Inhibitor
of Activated STAT-Mediated Regulatory Networks Involved in Cell Cycle
and Cell Proliferation
LiChongyang BoutetAlison PascariuCristina Mirela NelsonTrent CourcellesMathieu WuZhaoguan Comtois-MarotteSimon EmeryGregory ThibaultPierre †Institute
for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université
de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3T 1J4, Canada‡Molecular
Biology program, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada§Department
of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada∥Department
of Pathology and Cell Biology, Université
de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada⊥Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada*Email:pierre.thibault@umontreal.ca. Phone: (514)-343-6910. Fax: (514) 343-7586.
122023223812812–825832023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Protein inhibitor
of activated STAT (PIAS) proteins are E3 SUMO
ligases playing important roles in protein stability and signaling
transduction pathways. PIAS proteins are overexpressed in the triple-negative
breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231, and PIAS knockout (KO) results
in a reduction in cell proliferation and cell arrest in the S phase.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying PIAS functions in cell
proliferation and cell cycle remain largely unknown. Here, we used
quantitative SUMO proteomics to explore the regulatory role of PIAS
SUMO E3 ligases upon CRISPR/Cas9 KO of individual PIAS. A total of
1422 sites were identified, and around 10% of SUMO sites were regulated
following KO of one or more PIAS genes. We identified protein substrates
that were either specific to individual PIAS ligase or regulated by
several PIAS ligases. Ki-67 and TOP2A, which are involved in cell
proliferation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, are SUMOylated
at several lysine residues by all PIAS ligases, suggesting a level
of redundancy between these proteins. Confocal microscopy and biochemical
experiments revealed that SUMOylation regulated TOP2A protein stability,
while this modification is involved in the recruitment of Ki-67 nucleolar
proteins containing the SUMO interacting motif. These results provide
novel insights into both the redundant and specific regulatory mechanisms
of cell proliferation and cell cycle mediated by PIAS SUMO E3 ligases.
Keywords: quantitative proteomics, protein modification, SUMOylation, E3 SUMO ligases, protein inhibitor
of activated STAT (PIAS), cell proliferation, topoisomerase
2A, Ki-67

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Sep 16; Collection date 2023 Mar 3.

## Introduction
Protein
SUMOylation is the process by which a target protein is
covalently modified by a small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) protein. Analogous to ubiquitin, SUMOylation occurs via
an enzymatic cascade consisting of SUMO E1 activating enzymes SAE1/SAE2,
E2 conjugating enzyme UBC9, and SUMO E3 ligases. The protein inhibitor of activated STAT (PIAS) proteins
are SP-RING SUMO E3 ligases that play a key role in regulating various
cellular processes, including most notably transcription, signal transduction,
cell-cycle progression, protein SUMOylation, and stabilization. PIAS proteins are also implicated in immune regulation,
DNA repair, cellular proliferation, cell survival, and the cell cycle. They were originally found to interact with and
inhibit activated signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STATs). More recently, these proteins have been shown to function
as SUMO E3 ligases that promote the SUMOylation of a number of transcription
regulators. PIAS proteins were first discovered
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Siz1/Siz2) and are evolutionarily
conserved in eukaryotes. , The family of mammalian
PIAS consists of four genes giving rise to seven proteins, namely
PIAS1, PIASxα, PIASxβ, PIAS3, PIAS3L, PIASy, and PIASyE6– (PIAS4). Sequence and
structural analysis of PIAS proteins indicate a high degree of conservation
within isoforms. , Four conserved domains and two
motifs, including the N-terminal scaffold attachment factor-A/B, acinus
and PIAS (SAP) domain, the Pro-Ile-Asn-Ile-Thr (PINIT) motif, the
central RING-finger-like zinc-binding domain (RLD), the highly acidic
domain (AD), the SUMO-interacting motif (SIM), and the C-terminal
serine/threonine-rich region (S/T), have
been identified in all PIAS proteins.
PIAS proteins have been
most frequently implicated in tumorigenesis. In human prostate cancer, PIAS1 functions as
a target gene selective androgen receptor coregulator on chromatin
and enhances proliferation through inhibition of p21. In the triple-negative breast cancer model cell line MDA-MB-231,
PIAS1 was found to regulate tumor initiating stem cells by modulating
the epigenetic status of several clinically relevant genes, including
cyclin D2 (CCND2), estrogen receptor (ESR1), and breast tumor suppressor WNT5A (WNT5A). One multiple myeloma clinical study reported
that expression levels of PIAS1 are negatively correlated with the
patient’s 6 year survival rate, indicating that PIAS1 and the
SUMO pathway may promote tumorigenesis and unfavorable prognostic. Increased PIAS3 expression was observed in a
variety of human cancers including lung, breast, prostate, colorectal,
and brain tumors. In contrast, lower
expression of PIAS3 protein was found to be correlated with poor survival
of patients with gastric cancer. Furthermore,
microRNA-21 activates the STAT3-dependent signal pathway by inhibiting
the function of PIAS3 and downregulation of PIAS3 contributes to the
oncogenic function of microRNA-21 in multiple myeloma. Several studies have highlighted the relationship
between hypoxic signaling and PIAS4 overexpression in cancers such
as ovarian and pancreatic, implicating PIAS4 as part of the shift
upon hypoxic signaling. Lastly, in acute
promyelocytic leukemia, PIAS2-α-mediated PML SUMOylation may
have a role in promoting replicative senescence. 
In addition to mediating cell proliferation and apoptosis
in various
cancers, PIAS proteins also regulate cell migration of cancer cells.
For example, PIAS4 enhances epithelial cell migration through SUMOylation
of the transcription factor C/EBPδ, leading to sequestration
at the nuclear periphery and subsequent reduction of C/EBPδ
transcriptional activity. PIAS3-mediated
GTP-Rac1 SUMOylation prolongs the Rac1-GTP activated state and further
stimulates cell migration. In MDA-MB-231
triple-negative breast cancer cells, PIAS1 and/or PIAS4 mediates PYK2
SUMOylation, subsequently triggering autophosphorylation, interaction
with tyrosine kinase SRC, phosphorylation of paxillin, activation
of ERK1/2, and promotion of cell migration. Our most recent large-scale quantitative SUMO proteomics analysis
revealed that PIAS1 SUMOylates intermediate filament protein vimentin,
enhances vimentin solubility, and accelerates intermediate filament
disassembly and reassembly, further promoting HeLa cell migration
and motility. 
Although these studies
have identified a role for protein SUMOylation
in cancer development through cell proliferation and cell cycle progression,
the molecular mechanisms by which this is achieved remain unclear.
There is thus a need to identify PIAS substrates that could be associated
with tumor cell proliferation. To date, an increasing number of potential
SUMO E3 ligase substrates have been reported, though most of these
were analyzed individually using biochemical and molecular biological
assays. , More recently, a human proteome microarray-based
activity screen has been used to identify putative substrates of specific
SUMO E3 ligases and revealed that PIAS2 SUMOylation of PYK2, a member
of focal adhesion kinase family, is essential for its activation and
interaction with SRC. , Although protein arrays provide
a valuable approach to establish target specificity of SUMO E3 ligases,
they cannot provide information on the nature and sites of modification.
To analyze the molecular components and regulatory mechanisms by which
PIAS SUMO E3 ligases exert their action on cell proliferation and
cell cycle progression, we used SUMO proteomics analyses to identify
protein substrates upon knockout (KO) of individual PIAS genes. We
identified a large subset of proteins involved in cell proliferation
and cell cycle to be differentially modified, supporting the role
of PIAS proteins on these cellular processes. To the best of our knowledge,
this work represents the first SUMO proteomics analysis of PIAS SUMO
E3 ligase regulatory networks.

## Experimental Procedures

## Cell Culture and Transfection
Human breast cancer cell
line MDA-MB-231 was purchased from American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC), and HEK293 stably expressing the 6xHis-SUMO3-Q87R/Q88N mutant
(HEK293-SUMO3m) was cultured in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (HyClone) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (Wisent), 1% l-glutamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific),
and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen) in 5% CO2 at
37 °C.
For gene knockout, the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene knockout
vectors pCRISPR were purchased from Genecopoeia, Inc. (Rockville,
MD). We ordered three different sgRNAs for each PIAS gene. The sgRNA
sequence for each gene is listed below. PIAS1-sgRNA1: 5′-TTCTGAACTCCAAGTACTGT-3′,
PIAS1-sgRNA2: 5′- GCCCTGCATTTGCTAAAGGC-3′, PIAS1-sgRNA3:
5′- ACTTGAATGTACGTTGGGGA-3′, PIAS2-sgRNA1: 5′-CAAGTATTACTAGGCTTTGC-3′,
PIAS2-sgRNA2: 5′-ATAAATGCAGCGCCCTCATC-3′, PIAS2-sgRNA3:
5′-CTCATCAAGCCCACGAGTTT-3′, PIAS3-sgRNA1: 5′-GCCCTTCTATGAAGTCTATG-3′,
PIAS3-sgRNA2: 5′- ATGGTGACATCAGGGTGCAC-3′, PIAS3-sgRNA3:
5′-GCCCTTCTATGAAGTCTATG-3′, PIAS4-sgRNA1: 5′-GGCTTCGCGCCGTAGTCTTAG-3′,
PIAS4-sgRNA2: 5′- GAAGCACGAGCTCGTCACCA-3′, PIAS4-sgRNA3:
5′-GAGCTTCACC AGGCGGACTTC-3′, and scrambled sgRNA: 5′-GGCTTCGCGCCGTAGTCTTA-3′.
MDA-MB-231 cells or HEK293-SUMO3m cells were transfected with 1 μg
of pCRISPR vector or a scrambled sgRNA vector as negative control
per million cells using JetPrime Reagent (Polyplus-transfection) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. Single-cell sorting for clonal
cell line development was achieved by fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS) based on Red Fluorescent Proteins-mCherry signals 48
h after transfection. mCherry-positive cells were cultured and expanded
for 2 weeks. PIAS knockout efficiency was confirmed by western blotting.

## Cell Proliferation Assay
The cell proliferation assay
was conducted using cell proliferation reagent WST-1 solution (Roche).
PIAS KO or CTL MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded into 96-well plates at
a density of 1000 cells/well. After 0, 2, and 4 days of cell culture,
WST-1 reagents were added to each well, and cells were further incubated
at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 1 h. Subsequently, the absorbance
of the samples was measured using a Nanoquant Infinite 200 Pro spectrophotometer
(TECAN) with an optical density (OD) at 450 nm. The background subtraction
was performed using OD630. Each experiment was performed
with three instrumental replicates and three biological replicates.
The relative numbers of viable cells for each condition were estimated
based on the absorbance of (OD450-OD630).

## Cell Cycle Analysis
The cell cycle distribution analysis
of PIAS KO and CTL MDA-MB-231 cells were performed using flow cytometry
as described previously. Briefly, cells
were trypsinized, harvested and washed three times with cold PBS,
then fixed with precooled 70% ethanol in PBS for 2 h at 4 °C.
Fixed cells were first centrifuged at 215g for 5
min and then washed twice with cold PBS. After all washes, cells were
resuspended in PBS and processed with the cell cycle kit (Abcam, ab112116).
Cellular DNA content was determined by flow cytometry with the BD
FACSCanto II system and BD FACS DIVA 8.0.2 software (BD Biosciences
Clontech). The cell cycle distribution was analyzed with FlowJo version
10.8.1 using the Watson univariate model.

## SILAC Labeling and Protein
Extraction
The parental
HEK293-SUMO3m cells were cultured in DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
supplemented with light (0Lys, 0Arg) amino acids.
HEK293-SUMO3m-KO-CTL cells were grown in DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
containing medium ( Lys, Arg) amino acids, and different PIAS KO cells were separately
grown in DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing heavy ( Lys, Arg) isotopic
forms of lysine and arginine (Silantes) for at least 6 passages to
ensure full labelling. For each triple SILAC experiment, only the
light channel was treated with 10 mM MG132 for 16 h to increase protein
SUMOylation. The MG132-treated light channel serves as a signal booster
for the other channels to trigger MS/MS of SUMOylated peptides. The
number of cells combined from each channel was using the ratio of
L:M:H = 1:4:4, and the combined cells were washed twice with ice-cold
PBS, lysed in Ni-NTA denaturing incubation buffer (6 M Guanidinium
HCl, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide,
5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 10 mM Tris–HCl pH = 8), and sonicated.
Protein quantification was performed using a micro Bradford assay
(Bio-Rad).
For proteome analysis, 100 μg of flow through
proteome samples of each biological sample from Ni-NTA purification
was collected. 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample
to make the final concentration of guanidinium HCl as 1 M. Protein
digestion was carried out using a ratio 1:50 of sequencing-grade modified
trypsin (Promega):protein extract at 37 °C overnight. The reaction
was quenched by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Sample desalting
was performed on hydrophilic–lipophilic balance (HLB) cartridges
(3 cc, 30 mg) (Waters) and eluted in low protein binding collection
tubes (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Finally, samples were dried down
by a Speed Vac prior to LC–MS/MS analysis.

## Protein Purification,
Digestion, and Desalting
For
each biological replicate, 9 mg of total cell extract (TCE) were incubated
with 360 μL of Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen) at 4 °C for 16 h.
The beads were subsequently washed once with 12 mL of Ni-NTA denaturing
incubation buffer, five times with 12 mL of Ni-NTA denaturing washing
buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 20 mM imidazole,
5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 20 mM chloroacetamide, 10 mM Tris–HCl
pH = 6.3), and twice with 10 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein
quantification on beads was conducted using micro Bradford assay (Bio-Rad).
Protein digestion on beads was carried out using a ratio 1:20 of sequencing-grade
modified trypsin (Promega):protein extract in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate
at 37 °C overnight. To quench the reaction, 1% trifluoroacetic
acid (TFA) was added. Sample desalting was performed on hydrophilic–lipophilic
balance (HLB) cartridges (3 cc, 60 mg) (Waters) and eluted in low
protein binding collection tubes (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Finally,
samples were dried down by a Speed Vac prior to LC–MS/MS analysis.

## Immunoisolation of SUMO Peptide
MagReSyn Protein A
magnetic beads (Resyn Biosciences) were equilibrated with an anti-K
(NQTGG) antibody at a ratio of 1:2 (v/w) for 1 h at 4 °C in PBS
and then washed 3 times with 200 mM triethanolamine pH = 8.3. For
antibody/bead cross-linking, 10 μL of 5 mM DMP in 200 mM triethanolamine
pH = 8.3 was added per μL of bead slurry and incubated with
inversion for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched for
30 min by adding 1 M Tris–HCl pH = 8 to a final concentration
50 mM. Prior to immunoisolation, three washes with ice-cold PBS were
applied on cross-linked beads. The desalted peptides were resuspended
in 1 mL of PBS containing cross-linked anti-K-NQTGG at a ratio of
1:2 (w/w). The peptides/beads were incubated for 1 h at 4 °C
followed with three washes of 1 mL of 1 × ice-cold PBS, once
with 1 mL of 0.1 × ice-cold PBS, and a last wash with cold MilliQ
H2O. The enriched SUMO peptides were eluted from the beads
using 200 μL of 0.2% formic acid in water three times and dried
down by a Speed Vac.

## SCX Fractionation
Strong cation
exchange (SCX) stage
tips (ThermoFisher Scientific) were conditioned with acetonitrile.
SUMO peptides were redissolved in water containing 15% acetonitrile
(ACN) and 0.2% formic acid (FA) and loaded onto the conditioned SCX
stage tip. Loaded peptides were washed once with an SCX wash buffer
(10 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN, and 0.5% FA). Sequential peptide
fractionation was performed using a series of SCX elution buffers
with increasing concentration of ammonium acetate (125, 175, 250,
350, 1500 mM ammonium acetate in 20% ACN, 0.5% FA). All the eluted
fractions were dried down by a Speed Vac and subjected to LC–MS/MS
analysis.

## Mass Spectrometry Analysis
Peptides were redissolved
in 0.2% FA solution and analyzed by LC–MS/MS using a Q Exactive
HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
coupled to a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000. Samples were injected on a 300
μm ID × 5 mm trap and separated on a 150 μm ×
20 cm nano-LC column (Jupiter C18, 3 μm, 300 A, Phenomenex).
The separation on the LC system was performed using a linear gradient
from 7 to 30% ACN, 0.2% FA over 105 min at 600 nL/min. The acquisition
parameters on the MS instrument were set as follows: For full MS scans,
the scan window was from m/z 350
to m/z 1500 with a resolution of
120,000 at m/z 200. A target AGC
of 1E6 with a maximum injection time of 200 ms was used. For MS/MS
scans, HCD mode with a normalized collision energy of 25 was enabled
and resolution of 30,000 with a TopN = 5 method, a target AGC of 5E3,
and a maximum injection time of 1000 ms was used. The MS/MS triggering
threshold was set to 1 × 105, and the dynamic exclusion
of previously acquired precursor was enabled for 20 s within a mass
range of ±0.8 Da.

## Data Processing
MS raw data were
analyzed using MaxQuant
(version 1.6.2.10 and searched against UniProt/SwissProt human proteome
database (http://www.uniprot.org/) released on June 2019). The corresponding proteome data and SUMO
proteome data of each biological sample were labeled with the same
experimental name. The maximum missed cleavage sites for trypsin was
set to 3. The fixed modification was set using carbamidomethylation
(C) and acetylation (Protein N term), and oxidation (M), deamination
(NQ), and NQTGG (K) were set as variable modifications. The “match
between runs” feature was enabled to correlate identification
and quantitation results across different runs. The false discovery
rate was set to 1% for peptide, protein, and site identification.
Only the SUMO sites with a localization probability of ≥0.75
were kept. The proteinGroups.txt file was used for proteome quantitation.
The fold change cutoff value was calculated based on 2.5% changes
on each tail of the volcano plot. The MS raw data and MaxQuant search
results have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD023841.

## Bioinformatics Analysis
Classification of identified
PIAS1 substrates was performed using PANTHER 16.0 (Protein Analysis
Through Evolutionary Relationships) (http://www.pantherdb.org), which
classifies proteins by their functions. The PIAS-regulated SUMO substrates were grouped into the biological
process, molecular function, and cellular component classes using
DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8. Regulatory
networks of PIAS-regulated SUMO substrates were built by searching
against the STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins)
database version 11.0. Visualization of regulatory networks was then
performed in Cytoscape v3.8.0 and subnetworks were grouped according
to their GO terms. Evolutionary conservation analysis of SUMOylated
lysine residues was assessed across 12 species: Mus musculus, Rattus norvegicus, Bos taurus, Gallus gallus, Xenopus laevis, Danio rerio, Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis
elegans, Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza
sativa, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and Schizosaccharomyces pombe using the ProteoConnections bioinformatics
platform. 

## Western Blot
TCE
was diluted in Laemmli buffer (10%
(w/v) glycerol, 2% SDS, 10% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol, and 62.5 mM Tris–HCl,
pH = 6.8) and then boiled for 5 min on a dry metal heating block bath
incubator at 95 °C. The protein was separated on a 4–12%
precast SDS-PAGE (Bio-rad) followed by transfer onto nitrocellulose
(NC) membranes. NC membranes were briefly stained with 0.1% Ponceau-S
in 5% acetic acid to determine total protein content prior to blocking
with 5% non-fat milk in Tris-buffered saline with Tween 20 (TBST)
at RT for 1 h. Membranes were subsequently incubated overnight with
primary antibody at a 1:1000 prepared in 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA)
in TBST at 4 °C. NC membranes were then incubated with peroxidase-conjugated
anti-mouse or anti-rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling Technology) at a 1:5000
dilution prepared in 5% BSA in TBST for 1 h at RT. Finally, the NC
membranes were subjected to three washes with TBST for 10 min each
and revealed using ECL plus (GE Healthcare) as per the manufacturer’s
instructions. Chemiluminescence was captured on Blue Ray film (VWR).
The following antibodies were used for western blot analyses: rabbit
anti-PIAS1 antibody (3550S, Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit anti-PIAS2
antibody (ab126601, Abcam), rabbit anti-PIAS3 antibody (9042S, Cell
Signaling Technology), rabbit anti-PIAS4 antibody (4392S, Cell Signaling
Technology), rabbit anti-α-tubulin antibody (2144S, Cell Signaling
Technology), rabbit anti-β-actin antibody (4970S, Cell Signaling
Technology), and rabbit anti-topoisomerase IIα (12286S, Cell
Signaling Technology).

## Fluorescence Imaging
Cells were
plated on concanavalin
A (0.5 μg/μL; C2010; Sigma-Aldrich)-coated coverslips
for 2 h. Then, cells were fixed using paraformaldehyde 4% (Alfa Aesar)
in PBS for 20 min and washed using TBS 1× (20 mM Tris–HCl
pH 7.5, 154 mM NaCl, 2 mM EGTA, 2 mM MgCl2). Cells were
permeabilized and blocked for 1 h in TBS-BSA-saponin 1× (0.02%
saponin, 2% BSA in TBS 1×). Cells were incubated with a rabbit
primary antibody against Ki-67 (1/250, D2H10, Cell Signaling) or the
rabbit anti-topoisomerase IIα (1/400, 12286S, Cell Signaling)
diluted in TBS-BSA-saponin 1× overnight at RT, washed three times
in TBS-BSA-saponin 1×, and incubated with DAPI (1/10000, D8417-10MG,
Sigma), an Alexa Fluor 555-conjugated anti-phalloidin antibody (1/1000,
A34055, Invitrogen), and an Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-rabbit
secondary antibody (1/400, A11008, Invitrogen) diluted in TBS-BSA-saponin
1× for 1 h at RT. Cells were washed two times in TBS-saponin-BSA
and a last time in TBS 1× before being mounted in Vectashield
medium (H-1000, Vector Laboratories). Images of fixed cells were acquired
using a Leica TCS SP8 microscope (Leica Microsystems) with a 63×
objective and analyzed on ImageJ (NIH).

## Quantification of Ki-67
Particles and TOP2A Mean Intensity
We quantified Ki-67 particles
and TOP2A nuclear mean intensity
using ImageJ software (NIH) on z-stacks of five 1 μm sections.
Small foci (S), medium foci (M), nucleolar associated domains (NADs),
and total particles were counted manually on 25–30 cells per
condition. TOP2A mean intensity was measured in the nucleus of 25–30
cells on three consecutive frames. The background, determined outside
the cells was systematically subtracted from the fluorescence intensities.
Only images with a signal in the linear range were considered for
quantification.

## Statistics
Statistical analysis
was carried out to
assess differences between experimental groups. Data were presented
as the means ± SD for cell proliferation assay and cell cycle
analysis. Statistical significance was analyzed by two-tailed Student’s t tests. p < 0.05 was considered to
be statistically significant; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001. For TOP2A
mean intensity and Ki-67 particle quantification, data were presented
as mean ± SEM. Statistical significance between various conditions
was assessed using Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn’s correction
for multiple comparisons. *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.

## Results
and Discussion

## PIAS KO Affects MDA-MB-231 Cell Proliferation
and Cell Cycle
As SUMO E3 ligases, the protein inhibitor
of activated STAT (PIAS)
family members have been reported to play multiple roles in regulating
several cellular processes, such as protein stability, signal transduction,
and DNA repair. Several studies have also
demonstrated that PIAS-family members participate in tumorigenesis
and cancer-related processes, specifically in the processes of cellular
proliferation and migration. , , , To understand the physiological
functions and differences between PIAS SUMO E3 ligases, knockout cell
lines for each PIAS gene were generated in the breast cancer cell
line MDA-MB-231 and used to perform phenotypic assays. All PIAS proteins
contain four conserved functional domains that are ideal targets for
sgRNA by CRISPR/Cas9 to obtain an efficient gene KO. Due to the high
degree of protein sequence identity within these functional domains,
we selected unique regions of the open reading frame (ORF) from the
different PIAS genes to avoid targeting several PIAS genes simultaneously.
Here, we utilized a CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing strategy followed
by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to efficiently select
monoclonal cell lines specific for each PIAS gene KO ( a). We designed three different
sgRNAs for each PIAS gene that targeted different sequences corresponding
to protein functional domains and inserted them into the pCRISPR vector,
which constitutively expresses sgRNA, Cas9 nuclease, and mCherry fluorescence
protein. Two days post-transfection, cells expressing the mCherry
protein were sorted using FACS and single cells were seeded into 96-well
plates for clonal cell line expansion. This workflow allows for a
rapid KO screen without antibiotic selection and resulted in a >90%
success rate among obtained clonal cell lines after 2 weeks. Next,
we verified the individual PIAS KO efficiency and specificity by western
blotting ( b)
and confirmed that each PIAS gene was successfully knocked out in
MDA-MB-231 cells without disturbing other PIAS genes. It is noteworthy
that two bands are detected for PIAS2 and PIAS3 and correspond to
their expected isoforms. 
 We previously reported that the expression of PIAS1
is positively
correlated with increased levels of cell proliferation and migration
in HeLa cells. Here, we further examined
the physiological effects of different PIAS gene KO in the breast
cancer cell line MDA-MB-231. We first evaluated changes in cell appearance
by microscopy and noted that PIAS2 and PIAS4 KO significantly altered
cell morphology ( c). PIAS2 KO cells lost their ability to form pseudopodia resulting
in a more rounded shape, whereas PIAS4 KO cells presented a similar
phenotype but to a lesser extent. Conversely, PIAS1 KO caused the
cells to stretch into a longer and narrower shape, while no significant
changes were observed for PIAS3 KO cells compared to control cells.
Next, we seeded 1000 cells of each PIAS KO cell line with four technical
and three biological replicates and measured the proliferation rate
up to 4 days using the WST-1 cell proliferation assay. The results
indicated that all PIAS KOs reduced cell proliferation of MDA-MB-231
cells to different extents. The reduced proliferation rate varied
between the PIAS KO cells, with PIAS4 KO exhibiting the greatest impact
by day 4, with more than 60% reduction compared to control cells.
PIAS1 KO had the least impact on the proliferation rate but still
resulted in a 40% decrease relative to control cells ( d). In line with a decreased
proliferation rate, we also observed that PIAS gene ablation led to
a reduction in the proportion of cells in the G1 phase and an accumulation
of cells in the S phase and G2/M, suggesting that the reduction in
cell proliferation is partly accounted for by a delay in DNA replication
and protein synthesis ( e, Figure S1). Altogether, these
results indicated that each PIAS KO reduced cell proliferation and
cell cycle progression to varying degrees, thus suggesting a role
for SUMOylation in the observed phenotypes.

## Unraveling PIAS Substrates
Using Gene Editing and SUMO Proteomics
Most of the current
studies are based on individual investigation
between a given PIAS protein and their potential targets, resulting
in a lack of understanding of PIAS regulatory mechanisms in a system-wide
manner. In addition, PIAS protein members share several conserved
domains, making it more challenging to identify and discriminate redundancy
and specificity across all PIAS members. The first global identification
of PIAS SUMO substrates was performed using the HuProt microarray-based
proteomics analysis in tandem with an in vitro SUMOylation assay. , Although this approach provided a general profile of PIAS SUMO E3
ligase substrates, the in vitro SUMO condition increases the probability
of false positive identification.
To better understand the mechanisms
responsible for regulating cell proliferation and cell cycle by different
PIAS SUMO E3 ligases, we conducted a large-scale SUMO proteomics experiment
to identify substrates that are common and unique to individual PIAS.
Here, we used a HEK293 cell line stably expressing SUMO3m and previously
characterized for system-level SUMO proteome analyses. , We generated PIAS KO cells in HEK293 SUMO3m cell lines for SUMO
proteomics using the CRISPR/Cas9 approach described in a. We obtained efficient and
specific PIAS KO in HEK293 SUMO3m cells as confirmed by western blotting
( a). Next,
we performed a triple SILAC-based SUMO proteomics analysis modified
from our previously published approach to profile the PIAS-mediated SUMO regulatory networks in a site-specific
manner. For each triple SILAC, HEK293 SUMO3m KO control cells were
grown in media containing medium isotopic forms of lysine and arginine
( Lys, Arg),
while PIAS KO cells were grown in heavy media ( Lys, Arg) under basal conditions
at 37 °C. In order to normalize quantitation results across all
12 biological replicates including 4 PIAS KO samples, we used parental
HEK293 SUMO3m cells grown in light media (0Lys, 0Arg) for all light channels as an internal standard. In this case,
the quantitation across samples can be normalized and technical variations
introduced from sample preparation can be removed. Additionally, these
cells were treated with MG132 for 16 h prior to cell collection to
boost the SUMO identification. The light channel allows the mass spectrometer
to find high intensity precursor ions of SUMO peptides presented as
the light version and further triggers MS/MS fragmentation and identification
for those ions with low intensities from medium and heavy channels.
Of note, only a quarter of protein lysate from the light channel was
combined with samples from medium and heavy channels, giving a ratio
of 1:4:4 for each sample combination. This SILAC combination strategy
prevents signal saturation from SUMO peptides in the light channel,
which could cause an inaccurate quantitation for lower abundance SUMO
peptides from medium and heavy channels.
 We took advantage of our optimized workflow to identify SUMO substrates
regulated by each PIAS SUMO E3 ligase ( c). After pooling labeled cells, samples
were subjected to Ni-NTA pulldown for SUMO protein purification prior
to tryptic digestion. Subsequently, immunoisolation was performed
on the Ni-NTA purified peptide pool to enrich the SUMO peptides containing
the NQTGG-remnant. Off-line SCX peptide fractionation was conducted
to enhance peptide coverage and the depth of SUMO proteome analysis.
Finally, all samples were injected on the Q Exactive HF LC–MS/MS
system and raw data were searched using MaxQuant software. 
To evaluate the reproducibility of our
SUMO proteome, we determined
the Pearson correlation coefficients and obtained values over 0.9
across biological triplicates, indicating a high level of reproducibility
of our analyses (Figure S2a). We examined
the similarity of individual SUMO proteomes using principal component
analysis (PCA) (Figure S2b). PCA generated
four distinct groups clustering all replicates together.
Next,
we analyzed substrates that are significantly regulated by
SUMOylation upon PIAS KO. To ensure that changes in SUMOylation patterns
were not attributed to variation of protein expression upon PIAS KO,
we also analyzed the total proteome of each PIAS triple SILAC sample.
In addition, the proteome dataset was used to define the fold change
cutoff value for SUMOylated targets. We performed one sample t test with a P value threshold of 0.05
using Benjamini–Hochberg correction on the proteome dataset
to determine the significant changes on the protein level upon each
PIAS KO. We selected 2.5% on both upregulated and downregulated proteins
and used the corresponding fold change (FC) as a cutoff value to define
the significant changes on the SUMO proteome level. The distribution
of protein abundance upon PIAS KO are presented in Figure S3. In total, we quantified 1422 SUMO peptides across
all 12 samples (Table S1). After one sample t test and FC cut-off on the x axis as
shown in a,
PIAS2 KO led to more upregulated than downregulated SUMOylation, whereas
the other three PIAS KO samples showed the opposite trend. In general,
PIAS3 KO had the greatest impact on regulation with 174 downregulated
and 82 upregulated SUMO sites. PIAS2 regulated 204 SUMOylation sites,
of which 87 were downregulated and 117 were upregulated. PIAS1 and
PIAS4 regulated similar numbers of SUMOylation sites, with PIAS1 downregulating
116 and upregulating 55 sites and PIAS4 downregulating 129 and upregulating
44 sites. While downregulation of protein SUMOylation is expected
upon PIAS KO, the observation of upregulated SUMO sites can be explained
by cross activity between E3 ligases whereby a PIAS KO can positively
or negatively regulate the activity of a different PIAS or the stability
of its substrates. Interestingly, among all regulated SUMOylation
sites, 30 sites were found to be common to all PIAS proteins and at
least 67 sites were regulated by two different PIAS proteins ( c, Figure S4). These results indicate that PIAS SUMO E3 ligases
share common and unique substrates, thus highlighting the functional
diversity within the PIAS-family members.
 To understand if PIAS regulated
protein SUMOylation on a similar
pool of candidates, we compared the differentially expressed SUMOylated
proteins (DESPs) upon PIAS KO. We also compared our data with those
observed from protein microarray-based studies. In total, 18 DESPs including SUMO1–4, UBR7, RBBP7,
ATRX, and SSRP1 were common to both studies. The low overlap observed
here reflects the variation in protein expression and sensitivity
of the different approaches used (Figure S5).

## PIAS Ligases Share Common and Distinct Protein Substrates
To gain further insight into the biological processes regulated
by different PIAS SUMO E3 ligases, we performed a PANTHER classification
analysis on DESPs (Figure S6). All identified
DESPs were grouped into categories according to their biologically
relevant functions. Proteins involved in “gene-specific transcriptional
regulator (PC00264)”, “nucleic acid metabolism protein
(PC00171)”, “chromatin/chromatin-binding, or -regulatory
protein (PC00077)”, and “translational protein (PC00263)”
regroup 87% of DESPs.
To identify biologically relevant functions
regulated by PIASs, we performed Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment
analysis of the downregulated and upregulated candidates ( ). The heatmaps ( a) show the enriched
GO terms of DESPs from each PIAS KO. The GO terms “transcription
regulation” and “protein SUMOylation” were significantly
enriched in the SUMO proteome datasets across all PIAS members, suggesting
that different PIASs may have similar regulatory mechanisms through
gene transcription by regulating substrate activity or stability through
SUMOylation. The GO term of “regulation of cell proliferation”
was enriched in DESPs for PIAS2. The results of GO term enrichment
for molecular functions, cellular compartment, and pathways are shown
in b–d,
for each PIAS.
 The phenotypic assays in Figure 1c,d showed that
PIAS KO reduced
cell proliferation of MDA-MB-231 cells to varying degrees. To further
understand the redundant and specific interactions of regulated SUMO
proteins, we generated a network incorporating the DESPs using STRING
where each node represents a SUMO substrate affected by the corresponding
PIAS ligase. We first extracted a subnetwork containing only DESPs
with commonly regulated SUMO sites as shown in a. Several highly connected interactors were
classified into different protein class terms according to their biological
processes. Surprisingly, many DESPs were found to be involved in cell
proliferation (e.g., MKI67 and TOP2A). PIAS ligases may regulate protein
stability or protein–protein interaction via their SUMOylation
and could affect cell proliferation. Aside from this group, we also
found that PIAS ligases regulated proteins involved in transcription
regulation, RNA processing, signal transduction, RNA processing, and
chromatin remodeling. In addition, we identified other SUMO and ubiquitin
ligases (e.g., RNF2, ZNF451) regulated by all PIAS proteins, which
suggest a crosstalk between SUMO and ubiquitin involving PIAS SUMO
E3 ligases.
 To better understand the regulatory specificity of protein SUMOylation,
we next extracted a subnetwork containing unique DESPs with lysine
SUMOylation associated with specific PIAS ligases ( b). Interestingly, a large
number of DESPs shared several protein classes with those from common
DESPs, such as cell proliferation, transcription regulation, Ub/Ubl
regulation, and RNA processing. Different PIAS ligases can modify
the same substrate but on different receptor lysines or on different
proteins regrouped under the same GO term. Also, several substrates
regulated by specific PIAS ligase were regrouped into unique protein
classes including nucleosome assembly, DNA damage repair, and chromosome
organization.
To establish trends between protein targets affected
upon PIAS
KO, we generated a heatmap displaying the hierarchical clustering
of differentially regulated SUMOylated proteins. In total, we identified
530 SUMOylated proteins, of which 30 were regulated by all four PIASs
(Figure S7). To extract groups of substrates
specific to each PIAS, we also used fuzzy C-means (FCM) clustering
and generate profiles of regulated clusters. We found four clusters
of SUMO peptides that displayed a specific downregulation upon individual
PIAS KO. In addition, we also identified a cluster of substrates where
PIAS1 and PIAS3 have a similar downregulation pattern while PIAS2
and PIAS4 exhibit the opposite regulation trend. Interestingly, each
cluster was found to contain unique regulated substrates involved
in cell proliferation. For example, PIAS4 may regulate cell proliferation
through the SUMOylation of CBX3 and BRD4. These results indicate the regulatory specificity of each PIAS SUMO
E3 ligase on a subpool of substrates.

## Evolutionary Conservation
Analysis of Sites Modified by PIAS
Ligases
All residues in a given protein are not equally important,
and certain lysine residues may have more significant effects on protein
function. The rate of conservation is
one of the most widely used approach to predict functionally important
residues in protein sequences by comparing its occurrence in orthologues
through evolution. Although a large number
of SUMOylated sites and their corresponding SUMO E3 ligases have been
reported in various eukaryotes by different groups, the conservation of SUMOylated lysine sites in these organisms
remains unclear. To determine the evolutionary conservation of the
modified lysine residues, we used ProteoConnections and compared all identified SUMOylated sites across 12
different species (Figure S8a, Table S2). We further classified the identified SUMO sites into three conservation
levels based on the extent to which a site is conserved across species.
Lysines conserved in more than 8 species were designated as having
a “High” conservation rate. Lysines conserved in 5 to
8 or in 4 and fewer species were defined as “Medium”
or “Low” conservation rate, respectively. As shown in Figure S8b, the identified SUMOylome comprised
approximately 23% of highly conserved SUMO sites and 60% of medium
conserved SUMO sites. In contrast, the regulated SUMO sites by PIAS1,
PIAS2, and PIAS3 showed a greater proportion of highly conserved sites.
Of note, PIAS3 regulated almost 40% of SUMO sites that had a high
conservation rate while only 45% of SUMO sites had a medium conservation
rate, indicating a contrasting trend of conservation compared to the
regulated sites of other PIAS SUMO E3 ligases. These observations
suggest that although most SUMOylated lysines have at least medium
conservation rate, they vary across different PIAS SUMO E3 ligases.
We assessed the regulatory specificity of PIAS SUMO E3 ligases
by selecting the substrates with highly conserved lysine residues
that are uniquely regulated by each PIAS ligase (Figure S8c). A closer examination of specific substrates revealed
that each PIAS ligase also regulates unique biological processes through
different substrates. For example, we identified that PIAS1 targeted
PARP1 at multiple sites (K203, K249, K331), consistent with a prior
report indicating that this modification is necessary for DNA damage
repair. Different histones were uniquely
modified by PIAS2 including H2B (K6, K21, K121), H4 (K9), and H3 (K24),
and SUMOylation of histone could play a role in the recruitment of
chromatin remodeling and the recruitment of histone-modifying enzymes. Interestingly, we also observed that PIAS3 modified
SUMO2, SUMO3, and SUMO4 on K33, a site required for polySUMO chain
formation. 
Next, we looked at substrates
of each PIAS ligase that display
a high conservation level to understand their regulation specificity
(Figure S9). Of note, each PIAS ligase
may also regulate cell proliferation through very distinct SUMOylated
substrates. We found that PIAS1 SUMOylates CDC73 at K198, a site located
on the N-terminus of its β-catenin binding domain. CDC73 was
reported to be involved in cell cycle and cell growth, while MTA2
was found to promote cell migration and invasion in gastric cancer
cells. It is worth noting that PIAS2
SUMOylated actin, tubulin, and myosin at non-consensus UBC9 sites,
a modification that may affect the cytoskeleton organization and cell
motility. PIAS3-mediated SUMOylation
of SALL1 at K1319 was reported to affect its nuclear localization
and further regulate target gene expression. We also identified CBX3 K21 as a target of PIAS4. CBX3 recognizes
methylated K9 histone H3 tails, leading to epigenetic repression,
and its SUMOylation could affect its transcriptional silencing activity.

## TOP2A Stability and Ki67-Associated Nucleoli Substructures Are
Regulated by Protein SUMOylation
Our network analysis identified
that PIAS may regulate cell proliferation and cell cycle via SUMOylation
of shared substrates, including TOP2A and Ki-67. Human TOP2A gene
encodes DNA topoisomerase IIα, which relieves topological DNA
stress during gene transcription and regulates chromosome condensation
and chromatid separation. TOP2A was reported as an indicator of proliferation
rate in many human malignancies and to
play important roles in maintaining genomic stability. In particular, SUMOylation of TOP2 is important
during DNA repair by proteases and nucleases and for proper subnuclear localization and protein–protein
interactions. Our proteomic analyses
identified that all PIAS ligases SUMOylated Lys-1238, Lys-1240, and
Lys-1370, potentially impacting protein stabilization, leading to
an inhibition of p53 and increased cell proliferation. These sites are located at the C-terminus of
TOP2A and are highly conserved across different species (Figure S10a). Upon different PIAS gene knockout,
the SUMOylation levels of these sites were reduced by 2 to 5-fold
(Figure S10b). To investigate the function
of PIAS-mediated SUMOylation of TOP2A, we evaluated the subcellular
localization of the endogenous TOP2A in HEK293 SUMO3m PIAS KO cells.
Confocal microscopy experiments revealed that PIAS1–3 KO led
to a 30% reduction of nuclear TOP2A whereas a 15% decrease was observed
upon PIAS4 KO (Figures S10c,d). Similarly, we also noted that TOP2A
abundance decreased upon PIAS gene ablation when total cell lysates
of HEK293 PIAS KO cells were analyzed by immunoblots (Figure S10e). These results suggest that PIAS-mediated
SUMOylation of TOP2A near its C-terminus may prevent protein degradation.
Interestingly, we also observed that Ki-67 was SUMOylated by all
PIASs at 10 sites primarily located at the UBC9 consensus motif within
the Ki-67 tandem repeat region ( a). Quantitative SUMO proteomic analyses revealed that
SUMOylation of these sites were reduced by 2- to 6-fold upon different
PIAS gene knockouts ( b). Ki-67 is a commonly used prognostic marker for grading
tumors as it is highly expressed in actively
dividing cells but show low expression levels in quiescent cells. Its localization pattern varies according to
the cell cycle; in early G1, it partly localizes to constitutive heterochromatin
and then associates with newly reformed nucleoli until mitosis. 
 To determine if protein SUMOylation affects the distribution
of
Ki-67 within the nucleoli, we performed confocal microscopy experiments
on HEK293 SUMO3 cells following individual PIAS knockout ( c). Subtle changes
in the nucleoli morphology were noted in the number and size of Ki-67
foci and nucleolar associated domains (NAD) upon deletion of PIAS
( d). To determine
the extent of these changes, we compared the mean number of nucleolar
substructures and regrouped them under three categories representing
small or medium foci and large NAD ( d). Each experiment was performed on three
separate biological replicates with measurements made on at least
30 separate cells and compared to those obtained on control cells.
These analyses indicated that the numbers of small and medium Ki-67
foci were reduced upon PIAS gene ablation resulting in an accumulation
of large NAD substructures ( e). It is noteworthy that the same experiments were
repeated with MDA-MB-231 cells and confirmed these findings (Figure S11). These results suggest that disassembly
of nucleoli might be delayed upon reduction in Ki-67 SUMOylation.
The assembly/disassembly of the nucleolus is regulated by reciprocal
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of the transcription machinery
and the RNA processing complexes. Ki-67
is hyperphosphorylated through the activity of different kinases during
mitosis and dephosphorylated by PP1 phosphatases during the anaphase/telophase
when it moves away from the nucleolus and localizes at the surface
of condensed mitotic chromosome to form a perichromosomal layer, PCL. Interestingly, several regulatory subunits of
PP1 contain a SIM, and SUMOylation of Ki-67 could serve as a scaffold
for the recruitment of PP1. Other proteins including the p150 subunit
of chromatin assembly factor 1 (CAF-1) contain a SIM, and this motif
is necessary to regulate Ki-67 accumulation on the mitotic PCL. A recent proteomic study reported a detailed
spatiotemporal analysis of the human nucleolar proteome using confocal
microscopy and identified 65 nucleolar proteins that localized to
PCL during mitosis. Closer examination
of these nucleolar proteins revealed that 39 of these 65 nucleolar
proteins contain one or more SIM domains. These observations suggest
that SUMOylation of nucleolar proteins could serve as a molecular
glue favoring the formation of membraneless and spatially distinct
structures through liquid–liquid phase separation. 
We also identified other PIAS-mediated
SUMO substrates including
nucleus accumbens-associated protein 1 (NACC1), Fos-related antigen 2 (FOSL2), nucleophosmin (NPM1), and pre-mRNA-processing
factor 40 homolog A (PRPF40A) that can
all play a role in either cell proliferation, cell migration/morphology,
or cytoskeleton organization. Separate functional studies would be
needed to determine the role of SUMOylation for these proteins.

## Conclusions
This work determined that PIAS knockout (KO)
in the triple-negative
breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 results in a reduction in cell
proliferation and cell arrest in the S phase. These observations suggested
that increased protein SUMOylation plays an important role in cell
proliferation and cell cycle progression. Our comprehensive analysis
of substrates from all four PIAS ligases using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing
and our SUMO proteomic method enabled the profiling of more than 1422
sites, and different subsets of SUMO sites (∼ 100–200
sites) were regulated following KO of one or more PIAS genes. We identified
protein substrates that were either specific to individual PIAS ligase
or regulated by several PIAS ligases. While several PIAS affect the
same substrates, the corresponding modification sites are different,
suggesting that apparent redundant PIAS functions are actually distinct
in their site recognition. We identified that Ki-67 and TOP2A, which
are involved in cell proliferation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition,
are SUMOylated at several lysine residues by all PIAS ligases, suggesting
a level of redundancy within the PIAS family members. Detailed confocal
microscopy and biochemical experiments revealed that SUMOylation regulated
TOP2A protein stability, while this modification is involved in the
recruitment of Ki-67 nucleolar proteins containing the SUMO interacting
motif during mitosis. Our contribution not only provides an important
resource for researchers but also highlights new roles for protein
SUMOylation in the regulation of TOP2A and Ki-67 during cell division.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. Éric
Bonneil for assistance
with MS experiments and Robin Minati for flow cytometry experiments.
This work was carried out with financial support from the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC 311598) to P.T. and
from the Canadian Institute for Health Research (CIHR, PJT - 175093)
to G.E. The IRIC proteomics facility is a Genomics Technology platform
funded in part by the Canadian Government through Genome Canada, the
Canadian Center of Excellence in Commercialization and Research, and
the Canadian Foundation for Innovation. C.L. was supported by a scholarship
from Fonds de recherche du Québec – Nature et technologies
(FRQNT).

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jproteome.2c00557.
Figure S1: Gating
strategy for cell cycle analysis upon
different PIAS gene knockouts in MDA-MB-231 cells; Figure S2: Pearson’s
correlation coefficient and principal component analysis; Figure S3:
Histograms show the fold change of proteome upon PIAS1 KO, PIAS2 KO,
PIAS3 KO, and PIAS4 KO; Figure S4: Venn diagram showing upregulated
SUMOylation sites and downregulated SUMOylation sites affected by
specific PIAS KO; Figure S5: Comparison of DESPs and PIAS substrates
identified from protein microarray; Figure S6: PANTHER classification
analysis; Figure S7: Regulatory profiling of protein SUMOylation by
different PIAS ligases; Figure S8: Evolutionary conservation analysis
of PIAS ligases and regulated SUMO sites; Figure S9: Evolutionary
conservation analysis of unique substrates of each PIAS ligase; Figure
S10: PIAS ligase regulated SUMOylation of DNA topoisomerase II-α;
Figure S11: PIAS ligases regulated SUMOylation of Ki-67 and its structural
changes during cell cycle in MDA-MB-231 cells; Figure S12: Uncropped
WB films of Figure 1b; Figure S13: Uncropped WB films of Figure 2a;
Figure S14: Uncropped WB film of Supplementary Figure 9e (PDF)
Table S1: List
of quantified SUMOylome across all 12
samples from largescale SILAC quantitative SUMO proteomics analysis
(XLS)
Table
S2: List of conserved SUMOylated lysine residue
across 12 species identified from SUMO proteomics analysis (XLS)

## Author Contributions
C.L. and P.T.
conceived of the project; C.L. performed the phenotypic assay and
proteomics analysis; C.M.P., T.N., and C.L. generated the PIAS knockout
cell lines and confirmed by western blot. C.L. performed bioinformatics
analysis with the assistance of M.C., Z.W., and S.C.M.; A.B. performed
immunofluorescence imaging and analysis; C.L. and P.T. contributed
to experimental design and analysis; C.L. wrote the manuscript. C.L.,
T.N., G.E., and P.T. edited and reviewed the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
pr2c00557_si_001.pdf
pr2c00557_si_002.xlsx
pr2c00557_si_003.xlsx

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
pr2c00557_si_001.pdf
pr2c00557_si_002.xlsx
pr2c00557_si_003.xlsx