pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpaCell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC13051315PMC13051315.11305131513051315NIHMS21201274110551210.1016/j.celrep.2025.116441NIHMS2120127NIHPA21201271ArticleMedullary stromal cells define small intestinal lymph node identity in humans and mice
FatkhullinaAliia R. KentJohnathan BrownHailey ChristiansenNathaniel LisickaWioletta MadariagaMaria Lucia EsterházyDaria 1Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA2Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA3Department of Surgery, The University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA4Present address: Cardiovascular Institute, Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA5Present address: Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA6Lead contact
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, A.R.F., M.L.M., and D.E.; methodology, A.R.F., J.K., M.L. M., and D.E.; investigation, A.R.F., J.K., H.B., N.C., W.L., and D.E.; validation, A.R.F. and D.E.; formal analysis, A.R.F., H.B., and D.E.; data curation, A.R.F.; writing – original draft, D.E.; visualization, A.R.F.; writing – review & editing, A.R.F., H.B., J.K., W.L., M.L.M., and D.E.; funding acquisition, M.L.M. and D.E.; resources, M.L.M. and D.E.; and supervision, M.L.M. and D.E.
*Correspondence: mlmadariaga@bsd.uchicago.edu (M.L.M.), desterhazy@bsd.uchicago.edu (D.E.)2810202516102025441051098811644111644128032026060420260704202607042026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)

## SUMMARY
Lymph nodes (LNs) along the murine gastrointestinal tract are immunologically distinct. Here, we investigate whether such an immune dichotomy globally defines gut LN identity and what drives the regional differences. However, we find that, transcriptionally, it is genes associated with stromal cells that define LN location along the intestine, with high conservation between human and mouse. Using LN single-cell RNA sequencing databases and imaging, we pinpoint the underlying reason for our transcriptional signature: a selective enrichment in the small intestine-draining LN medulla for fibroblastic reticular cell subpopulations implicated in extracellular matrix remodeling and stromal cell replenishment, lymphatic endothelial cells, and macrophages. In mice, the unique medullary cellular network is established around weaning age by vitamin A, while the gut microbiota regulates the effect’s amplitude. Our study implicates the LN medulla as contributing to tissue-specific immunity and uncovers privileged access to lipid-soluble vitamins as the pivotal driving force for small intestinal LN architecture.

## In brief
Fatkhullina et al. discover that in humans and mice, the dominant difference between lymph nodes draining the small intestine versus colon and other sites is their stromal cell and macrophage composition. This difference is induced by dietary vitamin A and amplified by the microbiota.

## Graphical Abstract

 

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY

## INTRODUCTION
Lymph nodes (LNs) are secondary lymphoid organs that initiate adaptive immunity in mammals and some birds. Beyond driving B cell maturation, isotype switching, and T cell fate decisions, they also serve as an innate “firewall” against the spread of local infections. Unlike centralized organs such as the spleen, LNs are strategically distributed to drain specific tissues, enabling localized immune surveillance and tailored responses. In the past decade, we have come to appreciate that in mice, the LNs draining different sites are immunologically distinct – ; however, we know comparatively little about differences between LNs across the human body. – That human LNs adapt to the environment they drain is known from studying LNs at a particular location in a healthy versus disease state. – Knowing whether all LNs are equal or if they inherently differ in the amplitude and nature of adaptive immune responses they can elicit is important to understanding tissue-specific disease etiologies and devising strategic immunization therapies.
Even less is known about how human LNs vary along the gut, despite more than 150 dedicated to this tissue. In mice, proximal gut-draining LNs (gLNs) are more tolerogenic, whereas distal LNs are more pro-inflammatory, shaped by dendritic cell (DC) profiles, T cell fates, and location-specific fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs) and lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs). , If similar in humans, this could explain why inflammatory bowel diseases arise more frequently in the distal intestine and indicate that tolerance breaks in the proximal LNs in food allergy.
In addition to these gaps of knowledge about the human LNs, previous studies in mice focused mostly on immune cells, leaving the stromal cells (SCs) understudied. The potentially important role of regional SCs is underscored by the fact that neonatal imprinting of gut-draining LNs appears to be sufficient to retain a tolerogenic potential even upon transplantation outside the gut, and that this potential is dependent on the microbiota and retinoic acid. It has also recently been reported that mesenteric LNs (mLNs) distinguish themselves from inguinal LNs by an expanded CD34+ SC population. Whether SCs differ between LNs along the gut, and what fundamentally drives regional differences between gLNs, is not fully understood, not even in mice.
We investigated whether LNs along the human gastrointestinal tract differ regionally, how these distinctions compare to mice and what drives them. Combining bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) of LNs and their deconvolution using published single-cell (sc) RNA-seq datasets, along with systematic LN section staining, and environmental and genetic interventions in mice, we uncover that in both species, the strongest regional signatures arise from medullary stromal rather than immune cells.

## RESULTS

## Human mucosal LNs are transcriptionally distinct according to the organ or gut region they drain
To identify the major transcriptional differences between human intestinal LNs, we performed bulk RNA-seq on whole LNs from organ donors ( and ). While scRNA-seq and spatial transcriptomics offer higher resolution, bulk RNA-seq avoids issues such as poor SC recovery, cell composition bias, non-representative sections of complex asymmetric tissues, or incomplete transcriptome coverage. We analyzed two representative LN stations from each, the proximal versus distal small intestine and colon ( ). We also included four lung LN stations from the same donors ( ) that reflect compartmentalized drainage of another organ and would help us understand which phenomena are unique to the gut. Principal-component analysis (PCA) of the bulk RNA-seq data ( ; and ) revealed clear segregation: small intestinal (SI) LNs from large intestinal (LI) and lung LNs (PC1 and PC2) and lung LNs from gut LNs (PC3). No major differences between alveolar and tracheal LNs were observed ( ; ), likely, in part, due to the high variation in the lung LN samples. However, pooled tracheal LNs were transcriptionally distinct from pooled colonic LNs ( ; ), and smoking status also impacted the tracheal LN expression profile ( ; ), indicating that lung LNs are, in principle, affected by the environment they drain. By contrast, intestinal LNs show strong segment-specific profiles, whereby the genes most differentially expressed between the superior central (SI) and caecal LN (LI) show an intermediate expression level in the distal small intestine ( ). The 2,170 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) ( ) represented more upregulated genes (1,495) than downregulated genes (675) in the SI versus LI LNs, which was also true for transcripts enriched by more than a log fold change (logFC) of 1.5 (120 in superior central versus 45 in cecal LN). Interestingly, the genes upregulated in the LI LNs displayed similar expression patterns in the lung LNs ( , Block 1); the transcripts enriched in the SI LNs fell into two major blocks, one where, again, the lung LNs behaved like the LI LNs ( , Block 2) and one where it resembled the distal SI ( , Block 3). Overall, this heatmap matched the PCA, whereby lung LNs were more like colonic LNs. We next wondered what biological processes these genes were involved in. Gene ontology (GO) analysis yielded that transcripts enriched in the SI LNs (superior central versus caecal LNs) fell into categories related to embryonic development, vascular development (including lymph vessel development), Wnt signaling, tissue remodeling, and retinol/lipid/fatty acid metabolism ( ; ). Genes downregulated in SI LNs and consequently enriched in LI LNs were primarily involved in T and B cell activation, differentiation, and proliferation, with genes participating in the cell cycle being particularly prominent ( ; ).
These data demonstrate that human LNs are distinct in dependence on the organ they drain and, within the gut, the particular intestinal segment.

## Human SI LN-enriched transcripts primarily map to medullary sinus stromal cells, while those of LI LNs map to germinal center B cells
To identify the cell types driving location-specific signatures, we queried the top 200 SI and LI LN enriched DEGs against the Immgen/My Geneset database ( and ). SI LN-enriched transcripts were attributed mainly to stem cells, macrophages, granulocytes, monocytes, and SCs (underrepresented in Immgen), while LI LN-enriched transcripts were also associated with B and T cells. Previous work using flow cytometry, CyTOF, – and scRNA-seq , has profiled LN immune cells, and scRNA-seq has further revealed stromal heterogeneity, , , with LEC, blood endothelial cell (BEC), and FRC subtypes mapping to distinct LN regions (sinuses, T and B cell zones, interfollicular regions, and medulla). We, therefore, next used published scRNA-seq datasets of LN SCs or including adaptive immune cells to refine the gene-to-cell type assignment. Plotting our DEGs onto a uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) plot of non-endothelial SCs (NESCs) ( – and ) showed SI LN-enriched transcripts localized to the medulla and interfollicular region, including SFRP4+ cells, adventitia (adv)SCs, and parts of C7+ and SFRP2+ clusters, while LI LN-enriched transcripts were not associated with NESCs. Similarly, SI LN-enriched transcripts were mostly assigned to LECs ( ), especially bridge LECs (bLECs) and collecting vessel LECs (collectLECs), which are both ACKR4+ ( and ). However, all LEC subtypes, except floor LECs (fLECs) and perifollicular sinus LECs (pfsLECs), displayed partial overlap with SI LN-enriched transcripts, including medullary sinus (ms) LECs (PTX3+, ). By contrast, SI LN-enriched transcripts were not strongly expressed in T or B cells ( ), whereas LI LN-enriched transcripts clustered in germinal center (GC) B cells, explaining the cell cycle gene enrichment ( ). Across the scRNA-seq datasets, most SI LN-enriched transcripts were attributed to non-hematopoietic cells: ∼one-third FRCs, ∼half LECs, and ∼15% BECs ( ). LI LN-enriched transcripts were mainly immune-derived, with ∼two-third GC B cells, whose proportion was higher in LI LNs ( and ). Neither dataset scRNA-seq included innate immune cells, but the anatomical locations of the SCs to which we attributed our genes to , , indicated that most SI LN-enriched transcripts are expressed by medullary and medullary sinus SCs ( ; ). Focusing on SI LN-defining genes, we asked whether their enrichment reflected more numerous medullary SCs in SI versus LI LNs, higher per-cell gene expression, or both. Sections of superior central SI and cecal LI LNs were stained for LYVE1 (medullary LECs) and Decorin (DCN)—a marker for medullary advSCs, SFRP4+, SFRP2+, C7+, and TNF+ SCs (all FRCs of our DEGs colocalized with this marker, )—and the stain-positive cells were quantified ( and ). SI LNs harbored more LYVE1+ and DCN+ cells, and analyzing the counts per million (CPM) of further genes indicative of FRC and LEC genes showed proximal-to-distal gradients ( and ). To answer whether our DEGs were exclusively accounted for by increased cell numbers in the SI compared to LI LNs, we normalized the CPM of our whole LN RNA-seq to the CPM of DCN (NESCs) or PROX1 (lineage-defining LEC transcription factor). Normalizing DEGs to DCN or PROX1 indicated that the FRC gene enrichment resulted from both higher cell numbers and per-cell expression, while LEC gene expression differences were mainly due to more LECs present in the SI LNs ( and ; and ). This explained our GO results: lymphangiogenic pathways reflected a denser lymphatic vasculature, developmental pathways indicated a putative FRC stem cell-like function of some medullary SCs and were likely also enriched due to increased cell numbers, and metabolic pathways reflected regional lipid-rich lymph imprinting.
Together, these analyses reveal a unique expansion of medullary LEC and FRC subsets in SI LNs, distinguishing them from LI and lung LNs.

## Mouse SI LNs are transcriptionally distinct from those draining colon and skin, and the difference is dampened but not lost in the absence of a microbiota
Bulk whole LN RNA-seq uncovered regional differences in human gut LNs not previously noted in mice. , Since the mouse model is central to mucosal immunology and gastrointestinal disease modeling, we asked whether increased medullary stromal cellularity in SI LNs is conserved or if other signatures dominate. Leveraging the genetic and environmental control when using mice, we performed bulk RNA-seq on murine gLNs from germ-free (GF) and specific pathogen-free (SPF) C57BL/6 mice, with inguinal LNs as non-gut controls. PCA showed that SI LNs clustered apart from LI and inguinal LNs in both SPF and GF mice. In SPF mice, duodenal and jejunal LNs clustered most closely among SI LNs, with LI LNs remaining distinct from inguinal LNs. In GF mice, jejunal and ileal LNs were more similar, while LI and inguinal LNs no longer separated ( ; and ). Of the 609 (SPF) and 161 (GF) DEGs between jejunal and ceco-colonic LNs, more were enriched in SI than LI LNs (454 versus 155; 119 versus 42), with many highly upregulated (logFC > 1.5) ( ). Heatmaps revealed three gene groups: SI LN-enriched transcripts largely preserved in GF (block 1), LI LN-enriched transcripts consistent across SPF/GF (block 3), and a subset shifting from LI LN-enriched (SPF) to SI LN-enriched (GF) ( , block 2). GO analysis showed a strong resemblance to human SI-versus LI LN-enriched pathways ( and ; and ): SI LN-enriched transcripts were linked to vasculature/lymph vessel development, other developmental processes, and lipid/retinoic acid metabolism, while LI LN-enriched transcripts related to immune activation, lymphocyte differentiation, and cell cycle. SPF versus GF differences were notable mainly in jejunal LNs, affecting angiogenesis, tissue remodeling, and lipid metabolism ( ; and ; and ), consistent with microbiota-driven stromal imprinting. Overall, the microbiota influenced SI LNs more than LI LNs but did not drive the SI-LI LN dichotomy, which remained largely preserved. With access to mouse LNs across the body, we tested whether the SI versus LI LN gene signatures were unique to these LNs. We chose a panel of genes whose transcripts displayed at least a logFC of >1.5 between jejunal and ceco-colonic LNs from SPF or GF mice and were not B cell-associated ( and , red, bold) and quantified their expression in LNs from different areas by qPCR. This analysis revealed three key points ( ): SI LN signature transcripts were uniquely enriched in SI LNs ( ) and de-enriched in LI LNs ( ); LI LNs partially resembled SI LNs for SI-enriched transcripts, reflecting the gut environment; and unsupervised clustering showed skin-draining LNs grouped together, SI LNs as a separate cluster, and LI LNs grouped with liver and lung LNs.
In sum, murine SI LNs are distinguished from LI and other organ-draining LNs by pathway enrichments similar to human SI LNs, a pattern maintained without microbiota.

## Murine SI LN-enriched transcripts primarily map to lymph node sinus cells, while those of LI LNs map to B cells
To identify cell types driving the SI versus LI LN signatures, we analyzed our DEGs in the mouse Immgen RNA-seq database ( and ; and ). SI LN-enriched transcripts were mainly expressed by monocytes, macrophages, and SCs, while LI LN-enriched transcripts were assigned to B cells as well as SCs. To further confirm that our DEGs came mainly from SCs, we performed RNA-seq on gut and inguinal LNs from Rag1 knockout (Rag1−/−) mice, whose LNs are de-enriched for T and B cells, two major contributors to LN cellularity. PCA showed that Rag1−/− LNs clustered similarly to SPF mice, but with greater separation ( ). DEG analysis between jejunal and colonic LNs revealed 2,948 genes, including all SI LN-enriched transcripts from SPF and GF mice plus additional genes ( and ; ). Interestingly, LI LN-enriched transcripts overlapped between SPF/GF and Rag1−/− mice (e.g., Il22r2a, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, and Mmp3), but, evidently, key B cell proliferation genes enriched in SPF LI LNs (Nuggc, Mybl1, Aicda, and Mef2b) were missing, while additional genes appeared in Rag1−/− LI LNs ( ). Thus, the findings in this mouse model are in line with the observation that SI LN identity is not primarily driven by adaptive immune cells and unveil that LI LNs also have a non-adaptive immune cell signature that is more evident when B cells are absent. To obtain higher-resolution insights into the cell types responsible for murine DEGs between LNs, we again consulted previously published scRNA-seq datasets of LN SCs and immune cells. Focusing on FRC subpopulations, SI LN-enriched transcripts were predominantly attributed to Cd34 +Cd248+, S100a4+, Mgp+PvC, Inmt+, and Nr4a1+ cells on a UMAP ( and ), all located in the medulla, adventitia, or interfollicular space ( ). All are also Dcn+, analogous to human SI LN FRCs ( ). LI LN-enriched transcripts showed some enrichment in follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) and Cd34+Cd248+ cells. Among LECs, SI LN-enriched transcripts colocalized with Marco+ and Ptx3+ LECs, which also sit in the medulla ( and ), while LI LN-enriched transcripts lacked LEC signatures. Also, similar to our finding in humans, medulla LECs were enriched for Lyve1 ( ). SI LN-enriched transcripts were also associated with DCs, whereas LI LN-enriched transcripts originated mainly from B and T cells, consistent with GO analysis ( and ). Indeed, LI LNs contained more GC B cells by flow cytometry ( ). Using SC scRNA-seq and Immgen data, we attributed the DEGs we had monitored across LNs in the body ( ) to cell types: Lum, Gpc3, Cxcl14, and Mmp3 to Inmt+, Nr4a1+, Il6+, and Cd34 +Cd248+ cells; Rspo3 to Inmt+ cells and MRCs; Aox3 to Inmt+, Ccl19hi, and Cd34+Cd248+ cells; Kcnk3 to Inmt+ cells; Aldh1a2 to Cd34+ cells; Msr1 to fLECs and msLECs; Clec4g and P2rx2 to msLECs; and Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Itih4, and Ppp1r9a were lowly expressed in all FRCs ( and ). By Immgen and literature, , 
Aldh1a2 was assigned to DCs and Thetis cells, Il22ra2 to DCs, and Hk3, C6, and Gbp2b to macrophages ( and ). We validated the localization of Lum and Clec4g to the medulla (marked by a denser lymphatic network) by RNAscope ( ) and of LYVE1+ and INMT+ cells by antibody staining ( ). To again test if SI LN transcript enrichment reflected increased cell numbers or per-cell expression, we quantified LYVE1+ and INMT+ cells in jejunal versus ceco-colonic LNs. SI LNs contained more of these cells ( ), correlating with lower CPM for several LEC and medullary SC genes ( ). Normalization to Prox1 or Inmt reduced but did not fully eliminate the SI versus LI differences ( ).
Overall, these data reveal that in mice, like humans, medullary FRCs/LECs and GC B cells are enriched populations in SI LNs and LI LNs, respectively.

## Murine medullary sinus macrophages are more abundant in SI compared to colonic LNs and transcriptionally distinct
Beyond SCs and B cells, macrophages and DCs were also populations associated with DEGs between SI and LI LNs. Differences in DCs between gLNs are well characterized, , but not macrophages. Among the human DEGs linked to macrophages were CFH, PDGFC, TNFRSF11, and HTRA3, which showed a proximal-to-distal gradient in CPM ( ). In mice, LN macrophage profiles could be examined in more depth due to the easier access to materials and genetic tools. LN macrophages occur as three major subtypes : subcapsular sinus macrophages (SSMs), medullary sinus macrophages (MSMs), and medullary cord macrophages (MCMs), distinguished in mice as CD169+F4/80–, CD169+F4/80+, and CD169–F4/80+, respectively. We first assessed whether their distribution was consistent across gLNs and compared this to inguinal LNs by flow cytometry. We found that SI LNs were dominated by MSMs, while LI LNs by SSMs, resembling inguinal LNs ( , , and ). MCM frequencies remained unchanged, and this flipped distribution was also visible on LN sections ( ). Since the transcripts of genes putatively expressed by macrophages (e.g., C6, Hk3, and Gbp2b) were enriched in SI, we predicted these were preferentially expressed by MSMs. To test this, we devised a two-pronged strategy: first, bulk RNA-seq of SSMs, MSMs, and MCMs sorted from gLNs and inguinal LNs ( and ). Despite stringent gating, this approach showed the expected variable contamination from adaptive immune cell RNA, due to natural killer, B, and T cells acquiring macrophage membrane blebs during LN digestion. Our second strategy was to pull down actively translating ribosomes from CD169+ cells by crossing CD169-Cre with Ribotag mice ( and ). This sacrificed the resolution of SSMs versus MSMs but increased the specificity to genes expressed by macrophages. While the prolonged pull-down incubation led to RNA degradation in chylous lymph-rich upper SI LNs, ileal LN CD169+ RNA was of good quality and could be compared to LI, mediastinal, deep cervical, and inguinal LNs ( and ). PCA showed that macrophages in ileal versus ceco-colonic LNs segregated ( ), with ceco-colonic LNs most similar to inguinal, while macrophages in deep cervical and mediastinal LNs were most distinct. Among the DEGs between ileal and ceco-colonic CD169+ cells ( ; ), and several transcripts previously identified as SI LN-enriched, Hk3, C6, and Gbp2b were again enriched in SI LN CD169+ cells. To assign DEGs to MSMs versus SSMs (both CD169+), we leveraged our bulk RNA-seq dataset, as background T and B cell mRNA does not interfere when testing a predefined gene list. Most DEGs were enriched in MSMs, followed by MCMs ( ). Further, Hk3, C6, and Gbp2b were not only MSM-specific but also displayed a proximal-to-distal gradient ( ), with Hk3 mRNA localizing to the medullary sinus ( ). By contrast, Prg3, enriched in ceco-colonic CD169+ cells, was preferentially expressed by SSMs ( ).
These analyses show that LN macrophage subsets also vary by LN identity. SI LNs are particularly enriched in MSMs, matching the LN region where SCs are most abundant.

## SI LN-enriched cellular and transcriptional signatures are conserved between mouse and human
Having identified medullary SC enrichment as a common feature of human and murine SI LNs, we asked how closely related these phenomena were at the cellular and predicted functional level. Human SFRP2+/SFRP4+, advSCs, C7+ SCs, msLECs, and collect-LECs and mouse counterparts Inmt+, Cd34+Cd248+, or Nr4a1+ SCs, Marco+, and Ptx3+ LECs ( ; ) were the main cells to which SI LN-enriched SC transcripts were attributed. We examined which cell types expressed the most enriched transcripts in SI LNs ( and ). In mice, ∼two-thirds were LEC-expressed, mostly by Marco+ cells, with the rest distributed across Inmt+/Nr4a1+, Cd34+Cd248+, and PvCs. In humans, half were LEC-expressed, each LEC subtype accounting for distinct transcripts. FRC-enriched transcripts were mainly shared between SFRP2+/SFRP4+ SCs, advSCs, and C7+ SCs, with the highest in advSCs; angiotensinogen (AGT+) SCs accounted for ∼one-fifth of the transcripts. SI LN-enriched transcripts were associated with similar processes in both species, including vascular development, retinol metabolism, Wnt signaling, tissue remodeling, and organ development ( ). Pathway analysis showed that multiple processes intersect with each cell type, sometimes via single genes ( and ), suggesting the entire medulla participates in these programs. The overlap of human and mouse DEGs (logFC > 0.5) between SI and LI LNs revealed 132 shared genes: ∼one-eighth of human and ∼one-third of mouse DEGs ( ), but >one-third human and half mouse GO pathways overlapped ( ). Further, analyzing which transcription factors (TFs) may be responsible for the DEGs enriched in SI LNs showed that the TFs formed networks that exhibited strong resemblance between mouse ( ) and human ( ), with most of the top 25 TFs being identical. scRNA-seq data allowed assignment of TFs to LECs or FRCs ( and ), and most of the top 50 TFs were themselves DEGs ( and ), confirming they are part of active networks in the LNs.
Therefore, these data suggest that human and mouse SI LN identity is governed by the enrichment of functionally similar cell types in the LN medulla and programmed by conserved TF networks.

## Differences between murine LNs along the gut manifest at weaning age, irrespective of the microbiota, but in dependence on dietary vitamin A
We asked what drives the distinct medullary niche of SI LNs. Strong embryonic signatures suggested a developmental program, while lipid-related pathways indicated external influences, as SI LNs uniquely encounter lymph rich in chylomicrons, lipid-soluble vitamins, and bacterial products. In mice, natural environmental shifts coincide with weaning (days 14–21), when solid food intake rises, microbial biomass expands, and gut closure completes. We therefore analyzed the SI and LI LNs from newborn, 11-, 14-, 21-, 42-, and 56-day-old SPF and GF mice for our surrogate gene panel ( ). Newborn SI and LI LNs were indistinguishable ( ), but postnatal development differentially modulated transcripts, with some adult SI/ LI-enriched transcripts initially low in newborns. By postnatal (P)11–14, trends began resembling adult patterns, though not for all transcripts; inguinal LNs were already distinct from gut LNs. By P21, LNs matched adult patterns in both SPF and GF mice ( ), consistent with reports that postnatal LNs change cellular composition, with Inmt+ and Nr4a1+ cells expanding by P28. Having confirmed the microbiota was not the main driver, we next asked whether dietary exposure influences the SI versus LI LN dichotomy. While suckling provides lipid-rich milk, access to lipid-soluble vitamins can be experimentally controlled via the mother’s diet. We observed an RA pathway enrichment ( and ), and vitamin A exposure is known to support the tolerogenic potential of mLN SCs, which can also generate RA. We therefore asked whether vitamin A, to which SI LNs are more exposed than any other LNs through exposure to chylomicron-rich lymph, was involved. To test its role, dams were fed a vitamin A-deficient or -sufficient but otherwise isonutritional diet 3 weeks before breeding, and LNs of their first and second litters were compared at 8 weeks by NanoString ( ; and ). The first, and even more so the second litter, lost the SI LN-enriched gene expression, except for Lum, Clec4g, and Hk3 ( ), while LI LN transcripts remained unchanged. To estimate how this correlated with changes in SC composition, we also designed a panel of SC subpopulation-specific marker transcripts and measured their expression ( , bottom). SC marker analysis revealed the loss of Inmt and reductions in Flt4, Prox1, and Tnfsf11, indicating fewer Inmt+ SCs, LECs, and MRCs. Staining confirmed strongly reduced INMT+ areas in SI LNs, while LYVE+ areas were unaffected ( ). Diet swaps at 3 weeks or lowering vitamin A exposure postnatally restored SI LN gene expression and SC markers within 5 weeks ( and ), demonstrating plasticity. In all these scenarios, vitamin A exposure overcame vitamin A deficiency, both as measured by the gain of the SI LN-enriched transcripts and the transcripts marking the SC populations. Since the gene panel analyzed under vitamin A deficiency was limited, we asked what fraction of all SI versus LI LN DEGs in SPF mice depended on vitamin A. To this end, we performed bulk RNA-seq of LNs from vitamin A-deficient versus sufficient mice ( and ). Of the 108 top DEGs between jejunal and colonic LNs in SPF mice, 76 (∼75%) overlapped with vitamin A-regulated DEGs; 15 more trended down, and the rest increased in colonic LNs of deficient mice ( ; – ). Gene ontology biological process (GOBP) analysis of these DEGs ( ; ) resembled pathways enriched in human and mouse SI LNs ( and ), and the associated TF network ( ) overlapped with the SI LN governing TFs. Of the top 50 TFs potentially regulated by vitamin A, 17 matched the human/mouse SI versus LI LN TFs ( ). Thus, vitamin A exposure explains most of the SI versus LI LN DEGs.
Taken together, these data identify dietary vitamin A as a powerful driving force for the development of the SI LN medulla.

## DISCUSSION
In this study, we uncover that human LNs are distinct depending on the organ they drain. Further, we describe that, within the gastrointestinal system, the most prominent characteristic of the SI LNs is an expanded medullary SC niche, while that of the LI LNs is active GCs. Furthermore, through systematically using similar approaches in mice, we discovered that these features are highly conserved between humans and mice. That LNs draining different organs possess a distinct architecture based on their SC composition has not been well characterized before in either species, but raises intriguing and important questions ranging from how this may influence adaptive immune outcomes, , pathogen dissemination, , or metastatic cell spread through the lymphatic system. , The parallels also validate the mouse model as one suitable for predicting driving forces and consequences of immunologically distinct LNs in the digestive system of humans. As such, we identified dietary vitamin A as a major orchestrator for murine SI LN identity that, based on transcriptional network conservation, is likely also a factor shaping human SI LN composition.
Our technical approach to perform bulk RNA-seq on undisturbed tissue revealed an aspect of LN identity, essentially different SC architecture, that would probably have escaped approaches relying on prior tissue digest. It also permitted the least biased comparison between human and murine LNs. We were initially surprised by the signatures that distinguished SI and LI LNs, as we had expected profiles linked more directly to immune cell functions and a tolerogenic versus more pro-inflammatory and active signature. Our strategy also highlights the merit of using published scRNA-seq datasets as a resource. Further, we established a framework for the quantification of cells based on tissue sections of asymmetric organs like an LN, whereby it is crucial to aim for mounting a sample along any symmetry axis it may have and stain multiple sections coming from throughout the tissue to avoid biases and false conclusions. Finally, in the advent of global spatial transcriptomics, including LNs, our whole LN RNA-seq datasets provide a crucial reference point to verify if cellular distributions found are true or biased by the cuts analyzed.
The LN medulla has several ascribed roles, ranging from DC maturation, plasma cell survival, and a source of structural and matrix-producing cells to lymphocyte imprinting during exit. The existence of multiple SC subsets in LNs has only recently been discovered, and while roles for SCs in the T and B cell zones have been more defined, – the medullary SC subsets still lack clear functional assignments. The conservation of a medulla enriched in SCs in SI LNs suggests that this niche has a similar and important purpose in humans and mice. Of the medullary SC populations we found responsible for the SI LN signature, Cd34+Cd248+ cells originate from Cd34+, while Inmt+ and Nr4a1+ cells from FRC precursors and S100a4+ cells from both. 
Cd34+ SCs have been ascribed a stem cell-like role that may serve in situ to replace and expand SCs, , found to be responsible for maintaining LN capsule integrity and to support (lymph) angiogenesis and tissue repair. , A subset of CD34+ cells enriched in mLNs versus skin LNs also expresses Aldh1a213 and has been proposed to contribute to the tolerogenic environment of gut LNs. Of note, the reference dataset we used did not recover this subset. Based on the pathways and transcripts enriched in Inmt+ and Nr4a1+ cells, they seem to be involved in the generation of and composition of the extracellular matrix (e.g., Dcn, Lum, Itih4, and Ppp1r9a among our SI versus LI LN DEGs) or promote differentiation and proliferation (e.g., Gpc3 and Rspo3). However, with the field so young, none of these roles have been confirmed by ablation of medullary SCs. Medullary LECs have been shown to act as a firewall for viruses, attract neutrophils, together with subcapsular LECs act as a reservoir for lymph-borne antigen, and, overall, guide lymphocytes out of the LN through the generation of a sphingosine 1 phosphate gradient. Among the LN macrophages, more is known about SSMs, which are thought to catch and present soluble antigens to B cells in underlying B cell follicles and act as first responders for lymph-borne pathogens. , MSMs distinguish themselves by being highly phagocytic, based on their fluorescent antigen capture, and likely have at least a similar capacity to SSMs to target pathogens. C6 and Gbp2b, which are confirmed to be enriched in MSMs, are involved in bacterial containment. More specific targeting of SSMs versus MSMs will inform whether they serve similar roles, just in different niches, or have distinct functions. Remarkably, medullary LECs and macrophages share some hallmark genes, such as Marco and Lyve1, suggesting they are either imprinted as a niche or act in concert using similar pathways.
The co-enrichment of FRCs, LECs, and MSM in the SI LN medulla raises two fundamental, intriguing questions: do these cell types communicate with each other to coordinate the niche’s function, and if so, which signaling axes are most important for this? What is the purpose of the seemingly unique expansion of these cells in the SI LNs? As to the latter, we can only speculate, but unique challenges to the SI LNs are high lymph flow rates (the majority of consumed water is absorbed in the small intestine, the postprandial flow rate is elevated, and intestinal lymph accounts for about 80% of thoracic duct lymph ), exposure to highly concentrated chylomicrons and other lipid-soluble molecules, and exposure to dietary antigens. They are also the first LNs to see orally ingested pathogens that make it beyond the mucosa. An extensive medullary network may thus allow for easing fluid pressure, stem cell-like cells allow for faster replenishment of cells damaged by chyle exposure, and dietary antigen retention ensures efficient tolerance induction.
That all these functions may be in part orchestrated by vitamin A, itself a molecule carried by lymph and often chylomicrons, is compatible with such a proposal. The dependence on a vitamin may seem risky, but the vitamin A metabolite retinoic acid (RA) is a generic morphogen, and within the mucosal immune system has pleiotropic functions such as induction of peripheral regulatory T cells and IgA+ B cells. – In the future, it will be interesting to decipher to what extent changes in the immune compartment are mediated through direct RA signaling in hematopoietic cells or indirectly via RA’s effects on SCs, using cell-type-specific interference with the RA receptors. Our finding that the microbiota largely played no role in setting up the difference between the SI and LI LNs is in line with reports showing that Cd34+ cells are enriched in mLNs, and they and Inmt+ and Nr4a1+ cells are independent of the microbiota in their relative abundance. The tuning of the amplitude of the DEGs between SI and LI LN in GF mice seen in our RNA-seq dataset could indirectly be caused by the SI microbiota’s role in lipid absorption, which by extension could also affect vitamin A absorption.
In sum, our data identify the LN medulla as a niche that warrants regionally aware investigation. Since LNs expand and contract during infection and disease, understanding how medullary cell types adapt could open opportunities for targeted manipulation.

## Limitations of the study
Our analysis focused on features unique to SI LNs and their drivers, leaving open questions about differences between lung and gut LNs or drivers of LI LN profiles. Whole LN bulk RNA-seq captures the largest differences, favoring transcripts reflecting cell number, while subtle per-cell expression differences or differences originating from less abundant cells are harder to detect. Gene-to-cell type assignments were limited by the coverage and resolution of existing scRNA-seq datasets. Notably, the strong neuronal gene signature in SI LNs suggests differences in LN innervation, but scRNA-seq of LN neurons is only available for mice. 

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the , Daria Esterhá zy (desterhazy@bsd.uchicago.edu).

## Materials availability
No new material was generated in this study.

## Data and code availability
Bulk RNA-seq data are available in the GEO database under the following accession numbers: Human lung/gut lymph nodes: GEO: GSE281776; SPF/GF mouse lymph nodes: GEO: GSE281824; Rag1−/− mouse intestinal lymph nodes: GEO: GSE282128; vitamin A-deficient diet-fed B6 mouse intestinal lymph nodes: GEO: GSE281117; LN CD169 macrophages: GEO: GSE281209; and LN-sorted macrophages: GEO: GSE282129.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this work paper is available from the upon request.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Animals
All mouse studies were approved by The University of Chicago Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Mice were maintained at the University of Chicago animal facilities under SFB-free specific pathogen-free (SPF) conditions. B6 (C57BL/6J), Rag1−/− (B6.129S7-Rag1tm1Mom/J), RiboTag (B6J.129(Cg)-Rpl22tm1.1Psam/SjJ) mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratories and maintained in-house. Germ-free (GF) mice were purchased from Taconic and maintained in isolators in the gnotobiotic facility at the University of Chicago. In this study, ex-GF (SPF) mice are the offspring of GF mice taken out of isolators and colonized with a microbiome from JAX mice with the same bedding and food. CD169-Cre, B6-Siglec1/Cre KI mice were obtained from Dr. Masato Tanaka, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, School of Life Science. Male and female mice were used for this study, and the animals were 0–8 weeks of age. All mice were on the C57BL/6J background and were bred in-house.

## Human specimens
Human gut and lung-draining lymph node samples were obtained through the Gift of Hope organ donor program (Drs. Jonathan Kent and Lucia Madariaga). The study was approved under IRB 22–0501.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Human lymph node isolation
To study the regionalization of human gut-, and lung-draining lymph nodes, the following lymph nodes were isolated ( ). Intestine-draining: superior central, mesenteric, juxta-intestinal, ileocolic, caecum, ascending colon; lung-draining: right lower paratracheal (4R), subcarinal (7), right hilar (10R), right subsegmental (14R).

## Mouse lymph node isolation
Gut (duodenum, jejunum, ileum, caecum-colon, iliac), celiac, liver, mediastinal (lung), inguinal, popliteal, axillary, deep cervical, superficial cervical lymph nodes were excised, places in ice-cold PBS, and any remaining afferent or efferent lymphatic vessels and epinodal fat were removed prior to subsequent analyses.

## Dietary interventions
To study the role of Vitamin A on gut-draining lymph nodes regionalization, 7–8 weeks old C57BL/6J females were placed on a Vitamin A deficient (TD.86143, Inotiv) or ingredient matched control with Vitamin A added back at 20 IU/g (TD.91280, Inotiv) 3 weeks before breeding set up. First and second litters were sacrificed at age 3 or 8 weeks old. 8-week-old mice were placed on different diets at the weaning stage (week of 3): pups from the female and male fed with vitamin A deficient or sufficient diet were put on vitamin A sufficient or deficient diet respectively or stayed on the same diet they were on before weaning or fed with no fat diet (TD.180890, Inotiv, 0.5% of calories from fat, which come from the grain shells), or no fat diet control (CHOW, Inotiv, 16% of calories from fat) ( scheme).

## Flow cytometry analysis of lymph node macrophages
Lymph nodes were isolated and placed into 200 μL cold RPMI, supplemented with 5% FCS and 1% HEPES (dissection medium). Tissues were chopped and digested using 2.5 mg/mL Collagenase D for 30 min at 37◦C. The reaction was stopped by placing the digest on ice. Cells were spun down at 700g for 5 min at 4◦C, topped up with medium again, and then subjected to staining. Cells were first stained for viability using Near Red Dead stain (1:500, Invitrogen) followed by surface markers staining In FACS buffer (PBS, 1% BSA, 2 mM EDTA, 0.02% NaN3) for CD11b (BV421), CD8a (BV605), TCRb (BV711), B220 (BV711), F4/80 (FITC), MHCII (PercpCy5.5), CD11c (AF647), NK1.1 (Cy7APC), CD90 (Cy7APC), CD103 (PE), and CD169 (Cy7PE) (all at 1:200, except for MHCII, which was at 1:8000). Flow cytometry was conducted on an LSRII (BD Biosciences) and analyzed using FlowJo Software.

## Lymph node macrophages sorting
To sort macrophages from SPF B6 (C57BL/6J) mice, cells were pregated as live, CD45+TCRb–B220–NK1.1–IL7R–CD90–CD11cintMHCIIintCD11b+ and then gated as CD169+F4/80–(subscapular sinus (SSM)), CD169+F4/80+ (medullary sinus (MSM)), and CD169–F4/80+ (medullary cord (MCM)) macrophages from duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum-colonic, inguinal LNs at the University of Chicago Flow Cytometry Core using a BD FACSAria Fusion Cell Sorter. Cells were sorted into TCL buffer containing 1% of 2-mercaptoethanol, spun down, and frozen on dry ice. Samples were stored at −80◦C until the processing.

## Flow cytometry analysis of human/mouse lymph nodes GC B cells
Human lymph nodes were isolated and placed in 1000 μL cold RPMI supplemented with 5% FCS and 1% HEPES (dissection medium). Tissues were chopped and digested using 2.5 mg/mL Collagenase D for 40 min at 37◦C. Cells were filtered using the 70 μl cell strainer into 15mL tubes, spun down at 700g for 5 min at 4◦C, topped up with medium again, and then subjected to staining. Cells were first stained for viability using Live/dead Fixable Blue Dead cell stain kit (1:500, Invitrogen) followed by surface markers staining in FACS buffer (PBS, 1% BSA, 2 mM EDTA, 0.02% NaN3) for CD95 (BB515), CD3 (BV480), CD45RA (BV570), and CD19 (eFluor506) (all at 1:100).
Mouse lymph nodes were isolated and placed into 200 μL cold RPMI (described above). Tissues were homogenized by mechanical disruption between two frosted microscopy slides to obtain a single-cell suspension and filtered through a 70 μm mesh into the 96-well plate. Cells were spun down at 700 g for 5 min at 4◦C, topped up with medium again, and then subjected to staining. Cells were first stained for viability followed by surface markers staining in FACS buffer (PBS, 1% BSA, 2 mM EDTA, 0.02% NaN3) for CD95 (BV421), B220/CD45RA (BV711), CD3−, CD4−, CD8−, NK1.1 (BV785/BV786 to exclude non-B cells populations (all at 1:200). Flow cytometry was conducted on a Cytek Aurora (Cytek Biosciences) for both human and mouse and analyzed using FlowJo Software.

## Mouse/human tissue (lymph node) immunofluorescent staining
Mouse intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ileum, caecum-colon) draining lymph nodes and skin draining inguinal lymph nodes were excised, frozen in an Optimal Cutting Temperature (O.C.T.) compound (Tissue Tek (Sakura)) on dry ice and stored at −80◦C. Ten-micrometer frozen tissue sections were cut in intervals of 50–100 μm using a cryostat.
Human lymph nodes were fixed in 4% freshly prepared PFA in 1× PBS overnight in a cold room and transferred to 70% ethanol. They were then submitted to the University of Chicago Human Tissue Resource Center for paraffin embedding and cutting of 10 μm sections.
Mouse frozen 10 μm lymph node sections were fixed for 15 min in 4% PFA at RT and incubated for 1h in 0.1% Triton X-100 (Thermo Fisher) in PBS (PBS-T) followed by incubation with blocking buffer (1% BSA, 5% donkey serum in PBS-T).
Human paraffin-embedded sections were melted at 70◦C and rehydrated in xylene for 10 min x 2 and the following ethanol series: 100%, 95%, 85%, 70%, and 50%–2 times for 3 min each. Slides were washed in ddH2O, followed by 1× PBS, and incubated in permeabilization/blocking buffers for 30 min each.
The following primary antibodies were used for immunofluorescence staining of mouse tissue: goat polyclonal anti-Lyve-1 (1:200), rat monoclonal anti-CD45R (B220) (1:100), rabbit anti-CD3 (1:100), rabbit monoclonal anti-TEMT (INMT) (1:100), anti-HA(1:200), antiF4/80 (1:100), anti-CD169 (1:100) and for human tissue: goat polyclonal anti-human LYVE1 (1:100), rabbit monoclonal anti-human DCN (1:100). Alexa Fluor secondary antibodies donkey anti-goat 488, donkey anti-goat 568, donkey anti-rabbit 488, and donkey anti-goat 568 (1:500) were used for visualization. Whole slide images were taken with an Olympus VS200 Research Slide Scanner (Olympus/Evident, Center Valley, PA) with a Hamamatsu ORca-Fusion camera (Hamamatsu Photonics, Skokie, IL). Individual images were visualized using the QuPath software v0.5.1.

## RNAscope analysis in combination with antibody staining
RNAscope analysis of fresh-frozen 10 μm lymph node sections was performed using the RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent Detection Reagents v2 kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Advanced Cell Diagnostics). The RNAscope probes used targeted Inmt (486371-C2), Lum (480361-C3), Clec4g (503371-C2), and Hk3 (1055121-C2). After mRNA staining, slides were washed in 1× PBS and incubated in permeabilization buffer (0.1% Triton in PBS), followed by blocking buffer (1% BSA, 5% normal donkey serum in permeabilization buffer). The primary antibodies against Lyve-1 and CD3 cells were used to co-stain with mRNA.

## Histological analysis of human/mouse whole LN sections
Digital whole-slide z stack.vsi image files were imported and analyzed using QuPath v0.5.1. For LEC and FRC quantification in human and mouse lymph nodes, regions of interest were manually outlined using the freehand selection tool. LYVE1+ DAPI+ cells (LECs in both human and mouse), DCN+ DAPI+ cells (human FRCs), and INMT+ DAPI+ cells (mouse FRCs) were identified and quantified using the ‘Positive Cell Detection’ function. Cell density (cells/mm2) was calculated and used for comparison. Quantification was based on an average (mean) of 4–6 sections per human lymph node (spaced 500–600 μm apart) and 3–4 sections per mouse lymph node (spaced 100–200 μm apart).
For each human lymph node, 4–6 sections were analyzed at ∼500–600 μm intervals. Samples were obtained from four human donors. For DCN analysis, one small intestine (SI) and one large intestine (LI) lymph node were collected from each donor (total = 4 LNs per group). For LYVE1 analysis, two SI and two LI lymph nodes were collected from one donor, and one SI and one LI lymph node from the remaining donors (total = 5 LNs per group). Donor information is provided in .

## RNA extraction (exGF, GF, and Rag1−/− mice LNs) for sequencing
Lymph nodes were isolated, snap-frozen on dry ice in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes with 0.3–0.5 mL of RNAlater (Sigma) and stored at −80◦C until processing. Samples were defrosted and transferred into 2 mL Bead Mill Tubes pre-filled with ceramic beads and 1 mL cold TRIzol Reagent (Thermo Fisher) followed by lysis using Omni Bead Ruptor (speed – 2.90–3.10, cycles – 2, time per cycle – 30 s). Samples were transferred to a new tube and processed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the samples were incubated at RT and then spun down at 4◦C, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube with chloroform to extract the RNA and spin down again. The RNA was precipitated by adding equal volumes of 70% EtOH and continuing the RNA purification process with the PicoPure RNA Isolation Kit (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and eluting in 20–30 μL of the elution buffer. RNA samples were purified using RNAclean XP beads (Beckman Coulter), and RNA concentration was measured with a NanoDrop Microvolume Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher).

## RNA extraction (human, vitamin A-deficient diet-fed mice LNs) for sequencing
Lymph nodes were isolated and placed into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes with 0.3–0.5 mL of RNAlater and stored at − 80◦C until processing. Samples were defrosted and homogenized with RNAse/DNase-free 2.8 mm Ceramic Beads using Omni Bead Ruptor (speed – 2.90 (mouse), 4.00 (human), cycles – 2, time per cycle – 30 s) in 1 mL of TRIzol. Homogenized samples were transferred into the new Eppendorf tubes, and 200 μL of Chloroform was added, tubes were shaken by hand and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min, 4◦C. The aqueous phase was transferred to the new tubes, and an equal volume of isopropanol was added and resuspended. Samples were incubated overnight at 80◦C. On the second day, samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 20 min, 4◦C, washed in 500 μL of 75%-fresh-prepared ethanol, and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 5 min, 4◦C. Pellets were air-dried for ∼5 min and resuspended in 20 μL (mouse LNs) and 50 μL (human LNs) in Ultrapure DNase/RNase Free Distilled Water. RNA samples were purified using RNAclean XP beads (Beckman Coulter), and RNA concentration was measured with a NanoDrop Microvolume Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher).

## RNA extraction and gene expression analysis by quantitative real-time PCR
Lymph nodes were isolated and placed into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes with 0.3–0.5 mL of RNAlater and stored at − 80◦C until processing. Samples were defrosted and homogenized with RNAse/DNase-free 2.8 mm Ceramic Beads using Omni Bead Ruptor (speed – 3.10, cycles – 2, time per cycle – 30 s). RNA was extracted using TRIzol manufacturer’s protocol. 500–1000 ng of RNA was used as an input and cDNA was prepared with the SuperScript IV Reverse Transcriptase system according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After completion, cDNA was diluted with RNase-free water (1:5 (for ∼500 ng input) or 1:10 (for 1000 ng input). Gene expression was analyzed by qPCR master mix using Power Sybr Green (Invitrogen) containing 10 ng cDNA, 7.5 μL Sybr Green, 1.5 μL 10 μM forward and reverse primer mix, and water up to 15 μL. Gene expression analysis was performed using the Applied Biosystems QuantStudio 6 Flex system. Duplicate samples were loaded into 384-well plates, and relative gene expression levels were normalized to 38b4 housekeeping gene expression using the 2^–ΔCT method, with gene expression values displayed representing the POWER (2^–ΔCT) × 10,000.

## Lymph node CD169-macrophages mRNA isolation (immunoprecipitation)
RiboTag mice were crossed to a CD169-Cre recombinase-expressing mouse to activate the Rpl22HA allele in all tissues. Homozygous CD169RPL22HA mice lymph nodes were collected and used for the RiboTag immunoprecipitation according to the protocol (http://depts.washington.edu/mcklab/RiboTagIPprotocol2014.pdf) with the following modifications: samples were homogenized using Omni Bead Ruptor (speed – 3.50, cycles – 2, time per cycle – 30 s) in 0.5 mL supplemented homogenization buffer and processed with modifications described before by Paul A. Muller et al. (2020). RNA was extracted using the Arcturus PicoPure RNA isolation kit (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## RNAseq library preparation (exGF, GF, Rag1−/−, vitamin A deficient diet-fed mice, human LNs, CD169RPL22HA macrophages)
1000–1500 μg of RNA was used as the starting material for cDNA library synthesis and tagmentation using the NEBNext Poly A kit (NEB) per the manufacturer’s instructions. The concentration of the eluted samples was measured using a Qubit Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher) and the average fragment length of 300–400 bp was confirmed with a Bioanalyzer (Agilent). Samples were pooled at 10 nM and sequenced using paired-end 50 bp reads on a Novaseq S2 flowcell at the University of Chicago Functional Genomics Core. Vitamin A deficient diet fed mice lymph nodes, and CD169RPL22HA macrophages RNA libraries were sequenced on a NextSeq2000 at the University of Chicago Single Cell Immunophenotyping Core.

## RNAseq library preparation (sorted LN macrophages)
Following RNA extraction and purification with Clean XP beads (Beckman Coulter) reverse transcription was performed using following primers: P1-RNA-TSO: Biot-rArArUrGrArUrArCrGrGrCrGrArCrCrArCrCrGrArUrNrNrNrNrNrNrGrGrG, P1-T31: BiotAATGATACGGCGACCACCGATCG31T, P1-PCR: Biot-GAATGATACGGCGACCACCGAT. RNA was eluted for 1 min in RT-cDNA synthesis mix containing (0.5 μL P1-T31 (20 μM), 0.3 mL RNasinplus (Promega), 1.5 μL 10 μM dNTP, 3.5 μL 10 μM Tris pH 7.5–0.5% IGEPAL CA-630 (Sigma) and 1.7 μL RNase free ddH2O). The eluted RNA was incubated for 3 min at 72◦C, then combined with 7.5 μL of reverse transcription mix (3 μL 5× RT Buffer, 0.375 μL 100 mM DTT, 0.375 μL RNasin plus, 0.5 μL P1-RNA-TSO (40 μM), 0.75 μL Maxima RT Minus H (Thermo Scientific), 1.8 μL 5M Betaine (Sigma), 0.9 μL 50 mM MgCl2 and 0.175 μL RNase free ddH2O). Samples were subjected to the following PCR reaction protocol: 42◦C for 90 s, (50◦C for 2 min, 42◦C for 2 min) ×10 cycles, 70◦C for 15 min. The cDNA was then amplified using 13.5 μL cDNA, 20 μL KAPA HiFi 2× Mix, 1.5 μL P1-PCR, and 5 μL H2O. Samples were subjected to the following protocol: 98◦C for 3 min, (98◦C for 15 s, 67◦C for 20 s, 72◦C for 6 min) for ×12 cycles, and 72◦C for 5 min cDNA was cleaned using RNA Clean XP beads and eluted in nuclease-free water. Qubit fluorometer was used to measure the concentration and the average fragment length of 1500–1800 was determined by Bioanalyzer. Samples were normalized using ddH2O, and 2.5 μL cDNA was tagmented using Nextera XT Index Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol, except that all volumes were used at 0.5× of the indicated volumes. Samples were pooled and sequenced using paired-end 50 bp reads on a Novaseq S2 flowcell at the University of Chicago Functional Genomics Core.

## RNA sequencing analysis
Raw FastQ files were pseudo-aligned to the mouse or human reference transcriptome (GRCm39 or GRCh38.p13, respectively) using Kallisto. The gene counts were input to R and transcripts per million (tpm) were scaled by gene length. Initial filtering removed transcripts with expression under 1 count per million (cpm). Filtered gene counts were used as an input for differential expression analysis using limma/voom (edgeR). Genes with an adjusted p-value (adj_pval) < 0.05 were considered significant for downstream analysis. ImmGen analysis was performed using https://rstats.immgen.org/MyGeneSet_New/index.html databrowser and the top 200 upregulated or down-regulated transcripts between SI and LI LNs were taken for the analysis of expression across ImmGen cell types. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed using normalized counts per million (cpm) values using pca3d v0.10.2 and rgl v1.3.12 packages. Heatmaps were generated using the total DEG list (log2 fold changes (logFC) greater than 1.5 or less than − 1.5 for human LNs, 1.5 < logFC < − 1.5 for SPF or GF mice LNs, 1.45 < logFC < − 1.45 for Rag1− /− mice LNs, 1.2 < logFC < − 1.2 for Vitamin A deficient/sufficient fed mice and CD169RPL22HA) using the R package pheatmap v1.0.12.
Gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed using clusterProfiler v4.12.0 (DEG list: log2 fold changes greater than 0.5 for up-regulated or less than − 0.4 for down-regulated pathways for human superior central versus caecal and SPF mouse jejunum versus colon LNs, all DEGs with adjusted p value less than 0.05 for SPF versus GF mice jejunum LN and Vitamin A sufficient versus deficient dietfed mice jejunum LN). GOplot v1.0.2 GOchord function was used to visualize selected GO biological process (BP) and molecular function (MF) pathways. The transcription factor (TF) network and associated analysis were performed by putting all DEGs with an adjusted p-value <0.05 into the ChEA3 search database. The top 50 TFs were taken for downstream analysis (comparison between humans, exGF mice, and mice fed with Vitamin A deficient diet). Venn diagrams comparing differentially expressed gene (DEG) lists and TFs between datasets were generated using the R package Venn Diagram v1.7.3. For human and mouse DEG comparison, mouse transcripts were converted to their human equivalent using getLDS() function in biomaRt v2.60.1 package. To show the percentage of cells expressing DEG (pie charts, and ), up-and down-regulated transcripts with the logFC greater than 1.4 and lower than − 0.4, respectively, were used for the DotPlot visualization with the following extraction of input file with the average expression and cell type ID info. Genes with an average expression scaled greater or equal to 0.5 and an average expression ≥0.1 were used to count the number of transcripts corresponding to a particular cell type ID.
For CD169RPL22HA analysis, initial filtering removed transcripts with expression higher than 3 count per million (cpm) in isotype control (to filter out non-CD169 transcripts), and the rest of the transcripts were filtered by removing transcripts under 3 cpm. To show the macrophage-expressing transcripts across three different LN macrophage cell types (SSM, MSM, MCM), the transcripts after CD169RPL22HA filtering were taken for boxplot generation ( ).

## Analysis of single-cell datasets
A published single-cell RNA sequencing data was re-analyzed, UMAP plots were generated according to the author’s provided method description, and the expression analysis of DEG in human and mouse lymph node cell populations was performed using publicly available scRNAseq from Y. Abe et al. (2022), A. Takeda et al. (2019), De Martin and Stanossek et al. (2023), Lenti et al. (2022), and Tong and Mang et al. (2023). Specific gene expression was plotted using FeaturePlot, using a blend to overlay two transcripts. Gene set (DEG) expression analysis was performed using addModuleScore function followed by FeaturePlot. To show cellular and functional similarities between human and mouse lymph nodes DEG (mouse: Inmt+, Cd34+Cd248+, Mgp+ PvC, Nr4a1+, Marco+, Ptx3+ cells; human: advSC, AGT, SFRP2/SFRP4+, C7+, bLEC, cLEC, collectLEC, fLEC & pfsLEC, msLEC), with the average expression scaled (avg.exp.scaled) ≥ 0.5 and average expression ≥0.1 per scRNAseq data was taken out for the DotPlot visualization ( and ) and associated common GOBP pathways were indicated.

## NanoString (nCounter) gene expression analysis
mRNA from Vitamin A deficient/sufficient diet-fed mice LNs was analyzed using NanoString nCounter Gene Expression Assay to detect the expression of 35 transcripts in a single reaction. Expression analysis was conducted at the Human Immunologic Monitoring (HIM) facility at the University of Chicago. 100ng RNA input was used per sample, and the analysis was performed according to the manufacturer’s recommended protocol (NanoString Technologies; Seattle, WA). mRNA was quantified using the nCounter Digital Analyzer as counts and data were normalized to the following housekeeping transcripts Actb, Polr1b, Rpl19, Rplp0, Tbp using the nSolver software (NanoString Technologies, Seattle, WA).

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
RNA sequencing data were analyzed using R software, including statistical analysis. For human DEG normalization to LEC and FRC marker transcripts, human DEG counts per million (CPM) between small and large intestine draining LNs were normalized to PROX1 and DCN, respectively, and adjusted or non-adjusted p values were calculated using stats (v. 3.6.2) t test function. Other data were analyzed using Prism software (GraphPad). Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. A two-way ANOVA, paired t test, or unpaired t test was used for comparisons. Numeric p-values or “ns” are noted when the value is greater than 0.05 and considered non-significant; asterisks indicate p-values are noted when differences are less than or equal to 0.05 and are considered significant. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001).

## Supplementary Material
1234567 can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116441.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the University of Chicago Animal Resource Center and microscopy, flow cytometry, functional genomics, and human immune monitoring cores, and organ donors to the Gift of Hope, as well as Joseph Joy Sifakis and Sam Riesenfeld for assistance with the alignment of the LN macrophage bulk RNA-seq dataset. This study was supported by a Duchossois Family Institute multidisciplinary grant (D.E. and M.L.M.), NIH R01 DK133393, A DDRCC pilot and feasibility grant (NIDDK P30 DK042086), the Searle Scholars Program, the Pew Charitable Trusts, and University of Chicago start-up funds (D.E.). Additional support was provided by NIH T32 AI007090 (W.L.) and a Duchossois Family Institute at the University of Chicago postdoctoral fellowship (A.R.F.).
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
 

## Highlights
Gut lymph nodes differ most in their stromal cell composition
This is true in humans and mice
This difference is induced by vitamin A and amplified by the microbiota