3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1138779411387794113877943926277610.1016/j.isci.2024.110635Cancer cell – Fibroblast crosstalk via HB-EGF, EGFR, and MAPK signaling promotes the expression of macrophage chemo-attractants in squamous cell carcinoma
GiangrecoGiovanni RullanAntonio NaitoYutaka BiswasDhruva LiuYun-Hsin HooperSteven NenclaresPablo BhideShreerang Chon U CheangMaggie ChakravartyProbir HirataEishu SwantonCharles MelcherAlan HarringtonKevin SahaiErik 1Tumour Cell Biology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, UK2Department of Radiotherapy and Imaging, The Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK3Head and Neck Unit, The Royal Marsden Hospital, 203 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JJ, UK4Cancer Research UK Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence, University College London Cancer Institute, London, 72 Huntley Street, London WC1E 6DD, UK5Cancer Evolution and Genome Instability Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, UK6Bill Lyons Informatics Centre, University College London Cancer Institute, 72 Huntley Street, London WC1E 6DD, UK7Bioinformatics Platform, Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 1AT, UK8Department of Oncology, University College London Hospitals, London, UK∗Corresponding author giovanni.giangreco@crick.ac.uk
∗∗Corresponding author erik.sahai@crick.ac.uk
9Present address: Department of Bioregulation, Institute for Advanced Medical Sciences, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan
10Present address: Division of Tumor Cell Biology and Bioimaging, Cancer Research Institute of Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan
11These authors contributed equally
12Lead contact
3820242791106351106351192024© 2024 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Summary
Interactions between cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME) shape cancer progression and patient prognosis. To gain insights into how the TME influences cancer outcomes, we derive gene expression signatures indicative of signaling between stromal fibroblasts and cancer cells, and demonstrate their prognostic significance in multiple and independent squamous cell carcinoma cohorts. By leveraging information within the signatures, we discover that the HB-EGF/EGFR/MAPK axis represents a hub of tumor-stroma crosstalk, promoting the expression of CSF2 and LIF and favoring the recruitment of macrophages. Together, these analyses demonstrate the utility of our approach for interrogating the extent and consequences of TME crosstalk.
Subject areas: Microenvironment, Cancer, Transcriptomics

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Cancer cell – fibroblast crosstalk signatures are associated with worse survival
•Crosstalk is activated via direct contact through HB-EGF/EGFR/MEK/AP-1 axis
•Tumor HB-EGF and stromal EGFR regulate GM-CSF and LIF expression
•High cancer cell – fibroblast crosstalk correlates with a macrophage-rich environment

Microenvironment; Cancer; Transcriptomics

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Jul 7; Revised 2024 Apr 9; Accepted 2024 Jul 30; Collection date 2024 Sep 20.

## Introduction
Cross-talk between cancer cells and non-malignant cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME) influences tumor growth, metastasis, and therapy resistance through multiple signaling pathways and feedback mechanisms such as growth factors (TGFβ, PDGF, FGF), contact molecules (Notch, Ephrins), and inflammatory molecules (IL1, IL6, CXCL12). , Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) promote the invasion of cancer cells, reduce the efficacy of both targeted and cytotoxic therapies, and modulate immune cell recruitment and functionality. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) dependent crosstalk between cancer cells and CAFs has been demonstrated in multiple tumors, such as oncogenic KRAS in colorectal cancer, EGFR in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). In addition, CAFs are correlated with a pro-tumorigenic immune landscape, including a higher number of tumor-promoting myeloid cells, lower numbers of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and a worse prognosis. , Of note, CAFs are linked to poor outcomes in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) arising at multiple anatomical locations, including the lungs (LUSC), cervix (CESC), and head and neck (HNSCC). , , , Together, these different SCC account for over 800,000 deaths per year, highlighting the need for better understanding of the disease, new therapeutic strategies, and improved tools for clinical decision making. 
The development of advanced sequencing techniques allows multiple inferences about the type and abundance of different TME components, including CAFs, both from bulk transcriptome and genomic methylation data. , , , , Both methods rely on the identification of cell-type-specific genes and the application of deconvolution strategies to ultimately infer the abundance of a particular population in a bulk dataset. However, these methods struggle to identify the functionally relevant interactions between cell types, such as signaling events , and the biological mechanisms associated with cell type crosstalk that are linked to patient outcomes remain incompletely understood.
Here, we propose an alternative approach to identify key players involved in tumor-stroma interaction. Instead of focusing on the abundance of CAFs or specific CAF subpopulations, we identify a signature indicative of signaling between cancer cells and CAFs. This signature is associated with worse overall survival in multiple types of SCC, pancreatic cancer, and kidney cancer. Moreover, we leverage information within the signature to identify a novel mechanism of interaction between cancer cells and CAFs. In co-culture, the RAS/MAPK pathway is strongly activated in both cell types, converging on the upregulation of Activator Protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factor (TF) components. We identify heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor (HB-EGF) as a key mediator of cancer cell – CAF cross-talk, primarily expressed by cancer cells and able to upregulate the expression of cytokines through cross-talk with CAFs. In turn, we demonstrate that this upregulation can drive the attraction of macrophages, ultimately leading to worse overall survival in SCC patients ( A).

## Results

## Meta-analysis of transcriptomic data of cancer cell and cancer-associated fibroblast co-cultures identifies gene signatures with prognostic value
To identify functionally and clinically relevant gene signatures based on cancer cell – CAF cross-talk, we performed a meta-analysis of transcriptomic datasets that compare co-cultures and mono-cultures of cancer cells and CAFs. The datasets were generated under similar direct co-culture conditions using cells derived from different cancer types. , We applied two strategies to derive gene signatures indicative of upregulated cancer cell – CAF signaling: i) selection of the most significantly enriched pathways via gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) in co-culture for each transcriptomic dataset, followed by the selection of the up-regulated genes most frequently present in each enriched pathway ( A); ii) selection of the most up-regulated genes in co-culture for each transcriptomic dataset ( B). Using the first approach, we obtained a list of 5 genes upregulated in cancer cells and of 4 genes upregulated in CAFs upon co-culture, with one present in both. Therefore, this gene signature comprised of 8 genes (named CoCu8) ( B). The second approach led to a list of 2 genes upregulated in cancer cells and of 29 genes upregulated in CAFs upon co-culture, with one gene in common. Therefore, this gene signature consisted of 30 genes (named CoCu30) ( C).
 We tested CoCu8 and CoCu30 on a publicly available dataset of breast cancer – fibroblast co-cultures confirming their relevance ( D). We also tested whether CoCu8 and CoCu30 are also upregulated when cancer cells are co-cultured with other stromal cell types and for this reason, we analyzed a dataset of co-culture between 1205Lu cancer cells and HUVEC endothelial cells : CoCu8 is neither enriched in cancer cells nor in endothelial cells when co-cultured, while CoCu30 shows only a weak correlation with co-culture conditions both in 1205Lu and HUVEC cells ( E). Thus, we established that our new gene signatures were specifically indicative of cancer cell - CAF communication.
We next sought to determine the clinical relevance of these signatures by testing their effect on patient survival for common cancer types in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We found that high expression (Q4 vs. Q1) of both gene signatures correlated with worse overall survival (OS) in most of the tested datasets ( A). Among them, all tested SCC datasets presented the largest effect: cervical squamous cell carcinoma (CESC, CoCu8 HR:2.79, CoCu30 HR: 2.08), HNSCC (CoCu8 Hazard Ratio (HR): 1.95, CoCu30 HR: 1.57) and lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC, CoCu8 HR: 1.85, CoCu30 HR: 1.78) ( C and B), with CoCu8 consistently showing a slightly higher hazard ratio (HR) compared to CoCu30 in all three tumor types. A multivariate analysis including relevant clinical variables such as age, sex, and clinical stage to evaluate the co-culture signatures effect as a continuous variable, confirmed the relevance of the signatures in these tumor types ( for CoCu8; for CoCu30). Our signature was also associated with worse survival in pancreatic and clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) ( A). No significant link to outcome was observed in lung adenocarcinoma, breast, colorectal, bladder, or prostate cancer. Of note, given the clinical and biological differences between HPV positive and negative tumors, which warrant a different staging classification and treatment indications, we stratified HNSCC patients according to HPV status, observing that the strongest prognostic effect was visible in HPV positive samples both for CoCu8 ( D) and CoCu30 (HR: 5.47) ( C).
We validated the association between CoCu8/CoCu30 and outcome in a second independent cohort of LUSC patients from the TRACERx study ( E and D). The multi-regional biopsies performed in the study enabled us to ask if the expression of the CoCu8 signature was uniform across tumors. Of the 117 tumors analyzed, 93 of them had at least 2 regions. Of these, 62 (66%) showed concordant expression of CoCu8 in all regions, which is significantly greater than would be expected based on chance (29 patients, p < 0.0001, two-sided Fisher’s exact test). Similar results were observed with CoCu30 ( D). This indicates that cancer cell-fibroblast crosstalk is typically occurring across the whole tumor. Crucially, this analysis showed that the concordant up-regulation of CoCu8 or CoCu30 across tumor regions is associated with worse prognosis. Overall, these data indicate that CoCu8 and CoCu30 signatures are associated with worse overall survival in all SCC datasets tested; therefore, we decided to focus our attention on the effect of this crosstalk signature in SCC.

## The crosstalk gene signature has greater prognostic power than fibroblast abundance
Given that CoCu8/CoCu30 reflects cancer cell-fibroblast crosstalk, the signature might be predicted to correlate with fibroblast abundance. We performed a correlation analysis of CoCu8/CoCu30 and methylCIBERSORT signatures in TCGA datasets, revealing that there is a statistically significant correlation between CAFs presence and CoCu8 signature ( A–S5B). Similar results were observed with the CoCu30 signature ( C–S5D). We validated these results in the TRACERx LUSC cohort and in a second independent UK_HPV positive cohort ( E–S5J). As methylome data was not available for these cohorts, we used fibroblast subtype gene signatures defined in a pan-cancer analysis by Galbo et al. Strong positive correlations were observed between CoCu8/CoCu30 signature and all of the fibroblast subtypes defined both in LUSC and UK_HPV positive HNSCC ( E–S5J).
We speculated that our signatures of active cancer cell-fibroblast crosstalk might have better prognostic power than simply CAF abundance. To test this, we analyzed the abundance of CAFs using the methylCIBERSORT deconvolution strategy in TCGA cohorts and probed links with overall survival. This analysis indicated worse OS for HNSCC patients with higher CAF presence, but no significant differences were observed in CESC or LUSC ( A and S6B). Of note, both CoCu8 and CoCu30 signatures were prognostic in CESC and LUSC. Overall, these data indicate that CoCu8/CoCu30 signatures correlates with CAF abundance but have prognostic value in a wider range of contexts than gene signatures used to infer CAF abundance.

## Pathway enrichment analysis of cancer-associated fibroblast and cancer cell co-culture reveals a consistent upregulation of AP-1 transcription factor genes
To obtain insight in the molecular basis of the cancer cell-CAF interactions, we analyzed the pathways that were enriched in all the transcriptomic datasets used to generate CoCu8 and CoCu30. This revealed the upregulation of multiple pathways linked to immune regulation, stress response, and signaling ( A). Multiple genes belonging to the AP-1 transcription factor complex: JUNB, FOS, and FOSB were strongly enriched ( B). Moreover, PLAUR is regulated by AP-1 factors. As our meta-analysis showed the strongest impact in the stratification of OS patients from HPV positive HNSCC, we decided to explore JUNB, FOS, and FOSB expression levels in 4 different co-culture combinations of human HPV positive HNSCC cell lines, SCC154, and SCC47, and human oral CAFs, OCAF1, and OCAF2. Our results confirmed that these three AP-1 TFs are upregulated when cancer cells and CAFs are in direct co-culture, as compared to mono-culture (pooled RNA from both cell lines) ( C). Analysis of indirect co-cultures separated by a 0.4 μm filter indicated that CoCu8/CoCu30 are strongly enriched with direct co-culture when compared with indirect co-culture, implying that direct contact is required for increased AP-1 TF expression ( A).
 

## Interaction between cancer cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts is linked to increased RAS activity
We next investigated possible mechanisms underlying the upregulation of the multifunctional AP-1 TFs both in cancer cells and CAFs. RAS signaling via MAPK is known to be a major driver of AP-1 gene expression. , Accordingly, we found that RAS signaling was strongly up-regulated upon direct co-culture, as indicated by the enrichment of the KRAS_SIGNALLING_UP signature ( A) and of the curated RAS84 gene signature, in all our cancer cell-CAF datasets ( A and B).
 To interrogate further the linkage between CAFs, the CoCu8 signature, and RAS signaling in HPV positive patients from the TCGA cohort, we stratified them according to RAS activity. We split the patient data into three groups (RAS84_0, RAS84_1 and RAS84max) according to the levels of RAS activity as performed by East et al. This analysis shows that higher RAS activity (group RAS84_max) correlates with worse OS, in a similar fashion to the effect observed with CoCu8 stratification ( B). Indeed, we observed a strong, positive correlation between RAS84 activity and CoCu8 expression in both HPV positive HNSCC cohorts (TCGA - R = 0.79, C and UK_HPV positive cohort - R = 0.84; A). We also observed a statistically significant enrichment in the extent of fibroblasts present when RAS activity was higher in both cohorts ( D and B).
Activation of the RAS pathway upon cancer cell-CAF co-culture was experimentally validated by co-culturing SCC154 – OCAF1, which resulted in a strong increase in RAS-MAPK signaling, as determined by phosphorylated ERK1/2 levels ( E). To test whether the RAS-MAPK pathway is responsible for the upregulation of JUNB, FOS, and FOSB genes, we used the MEK inhibitor, trametinib, in the SCC154-OCAF1 co-culture. We confirmed that MEK inhibition downregulates ERK1/2 activation upon co-culture ( F) and observed a significant downregulation of JUNB, FOS, and FOSB genes ( G). Thus, multiple genes belonging to the AP-1 TF complex are upregulated when cancer cells and CAFs are co-cultured and this is mechanistically linked to the activation of RAS-MAPK kinase signaling.

## HB-EGF activation is crucial to triggering RAS pathway signaling
To explain why AP-1 TFs get upregulated in co-culture, we looked for possible activators of RAS-MAPK signaling. We noted that HB-EGF was among the genes upregulated in all 6 transcriptomic datasets together with JUNB, FOS, and FOSB ( B). HB-EGF is an EGFR ligand and therefore can activate the RAS-MAPK pathway. , We evaluated the expression levels of all seven EGFR ligands. Importantly, HB-EGF showed a strong and specific activation upon cancer cell - CAF co-culture ( A). Moreover, HB-EGF expression strongly correlates with CoCu8 in HPV positive HNSCC patients’ data from both TCGA (R = 0.6, p-value = 2.2e-16) and UK_HPV positive (R = 0.58, p-value = 1e-8) datasets ( B).
 HB-EGF can activate EGFR/MAPK as an un-cleaved pro-molecule at the plasma membrane , and, as such, signaling by membrane-bound HB-EGF could explain the need for direct cell contact to trigger the pathway. As membrane-bound HB-EGF should be expressed at about 20–25 kDa, we evaluated the cellular levels of HB-EGF in OCAF1-SCC154 co-culture and found that it was strongly upregulated at the protein level at a molecular weight previously reported as un-cleaved protein ( C). We also observed that EGFR phosphorylation was increased upon direct co-culture ( C); importantly, both these effects were abrogated by MEK inhibition ( D), suggesting the presence of a positive feedback loop involving HB-EGF/EGFR/MAPK/AP-1 upon direct co-culture. Furthermore, the EGFR inhibitor afatinib blocked AP-1 activation upon co-culture of SCC154-OCAF1 ( E).
These results suggest that HB-EGF might be the link that activates EGFR upon cancer cell – CAF co-culture. Therefore, we evaluated the basal expression level of EGFR and HB-EGF in SCC154 and OCAF1 mono-cultures. Interestingly, SCC154 expressed HB-EGF at much higher levels than OCAF1, while both cell types expressed similar levels of EGFR ( F). Moreover, we observed that at basal state, HBEGF is more expressed in cancer cells than in CAFs also in the different pairs of cancer cells – CAFs transcriptional data ( C). This suggests that both cell types can be reactive to EGF ligands, but the activation of the positive feedback loop upon direct contact requires higher levels of HB-EGF, expressed at the membrane of cancer cells. Thus, we expect both cancer cells and CAFs should be responsive to HB-EGF treatment, albeit with potentially different downstream effects. To test this hypothesis, we incubated OCAF1 and SCC154 in mono-cultures with different concentrations of HB-EGF. Firstly, HB-EGF caused an increase in proliferation in both cell types, as shown by a higher proportion of EdU positive nuclei ( G). Moreover, SCC154 – but not OCAF1 – showed a scattered phenotype when treated with high doses of HB-EGF, suggesting an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Consistent with this, HB-EGF treatment reduced E-Cadherin staining ( D). We then tested the effect of HB-EGF treatment on known CAF markers: after treatment of OCAF1 with HB-EGF for 48 h, we noticed a slight but significant downregulation of ACTA2, a CAF and myofibroblast marker ( E). However, no effect was observed for other widely used CAF markers (FAP, LRRC15, FN1) ( E).
Given these data, we asked whether HB-EGF expression in cancer cells is enough to induce upregulation of AP-1 genes when cancer cells and CAFs are in co-culture. We, therefore, performed knock down of HB-EGF in SCC154 ( F) and then co-cultured them with OCAF1. Importantly, the downregulation of HB-EGF in SCC154 is enough to block the upregulation of JUNB, FOS and FOSB when cancer cells and CAFs are co-cultured ( H). These results point to an axis involving HB-EGF in cancer cells and EGFR in CAFs that activates MAPK/AP-1, inducing a positive feedback loop when cancer cells and CAFs are co-cultured.

## A paracrine HB-EGF / EGFR axis regulates cytokine expression and macrophage recruitment
To focus on the downstream effects of this crosstalk between cancer cells and CAFs and how HB-EGF could affect CAF functions and lead to unfavorable biology, we analyzed the scRNAseq dataset of HNSCC with both malignant and non-malignant samples published by Choi et al.. Interestingly, by using myofibroblast and inflammatory markers ( G), we found that EGFR is mainly expressed by inflammatory fibroblasts (iFibroblasts), but not myofibroblastic CAFs (myoFibroblasts), while HB-EGF is mainly expressed by endothelial and epithelial cells ( A).
 Having observed that high expression of EGFR is linked to iCAFs, we performed a cytokine array of conditioned medium from pooled mono-cultures and co-cultures ( B). Interestingly, we found a strong upregulation of macrophage attraction and differentiation factors (LIF and GM-CSF – gene name CSF2 –). We validated by qPCR that LIF and CSF2 are transcriptionally upregulated in co-culture ( C) and that trametinib, MEK inhibitor, treatment is enough to downregulate their expression ( D). To further investigate the involvement of EGFR in this crosstalk pathway, we performed Afatinib treatment in co-culture and observed that both LIF and CSF2 are strongly downregulated by EGFR inhibition ( E). Moreover, by reducing HB-EGF expression in cancer cells and then co-culturing the cells with CAFs, we also observed strong downregulation of both LIF and CSF2 expression ( F). Importantly, HB-EGF treatment in cancer cells and CAFs mono-cultures shows that: LIF is strongly upregulated only by CAFs, indicating that these are the cells responsible for its production when in co-culture ( A); CSF2 was upregulated by HB-EGF treatment both in cancer cells and in CAFs ( A). In line with these, transcriptomic data of HPV positive HNSCC patients from TCGA show that there is a strong positive correlation between both LIF and CSF2 mRNA and HBEGF mRNA expression ( B). These data establish that HB-EGF/EGFR signaling is required for the up-regulation of cytokines and that EGFR is most highly expressed in human iCAFs.
Given the established literature behind CSF2/GM-CSF and LIF involvement in macrophage biology, , we isolated primary monocytes from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from healthy donors, differentiated them into macrophages and then performed a migration assay using conditioned medium (CM) to ask if cancer cell - CAF direct CM was sufficient to increase macrophage attraction. Importantly, CM derived from the co-culture of OCAF1 and SCC154 increased the numbers of migrating macrophages, compared with pooled CM derived from each cell in monoculture ( G). We next tested if the attraction of macrophages depended on the activation of EGFR or MEK upon cancer cell-fibroblast interaction. When cancer cells and CAFs are co-cultured in the presence of trametinib, there was clear decrease in the number of migrating macrophages attracted by the CM ( H). Crucially, this was not the case when MEK inhibitor is freshly added to CM after it is harvested from the cancer cell-CAF co-culture, indicating that any residual inhibitor in the CM is not the cause of reduced macrophage attraction ( H). Moreover, blockade of EGFR using the inhibitor afatinib during the co-culture phase significantly reduced the attraction of macrophages ( H).
These data suggest that cancer cell – CAF crosstalk is sufficient to promote macrophage recruitment; therefore, we asked whether CoCu8 high patients showed higher levels of macrophages. Of note, when TCGA patients’ data are separated according to CoCu8 expression, we observe a strong enrichment for cells defined by a CD14-related methylation signature (monocytes/macrophages) ( I). We found a similar pattern when patients were separated by fibroblast abundance and by RAS activity ( C). Importantly, we also observed enrichment for monocyte/macrophage lineages in our second cohort of 84 HPV positive HNSCC patients when separated for CoCu8 expression levels ( I). We also tested whether separating patients according to HBEGF expression was enough to observe enrichment for monocytes/macrophages. We found a positive association between HBEGF expression and macrophages inferred using MethylCIBERSORT in the HPV positive TCGA cohort ( D), whilst a second cohort revealed a similar trend; however, it should be noted that for technical reasons we were unable to employ the same methylation-based inference.
To conclude, we demonstrate that cancer cell – CAF cross-talk increases the expression of different cytokines and recruit higher numbers of macrophages. This loop is established by HB-EGF expression in cancer cells that induces a paracrine cross-talk with CAFs via EGFR and downstream MAPK activity. Activation of this pathway in both CAFs and cancer cells is needed to increase the expression of both LIF and GM-CSF. MEK inhibitor and EGFR inhibitors are sufficient to reduce macrophage attraction.

## Discussion
The presence of CAFs in tumors correlates with worse patient survival and an immune suppressive TME in multiple tumor types, , , , , , with recent studies linking different CAF subpopulations to prognosis. However, analysis based on the presence or absence of CAFs does not account for variability in the extent of functional crosstalk between cancer cells and CAFs. Moreover, the use of single genes to stratify patients can be sensitive to expression differences that might not be associated with the phenotype of interest. The approach we develop here is based on the selection of genes that are commonly upregulated in both cancer cells and CAFs upon direct cell-to-cell contact, thus focusing on the functional cancer cell-CAF interactions rather than just on the presence of CAFs in the tumor. We applied two different strategies to select genes indicative of cancer cell-CAF interactions. The approach to define CoCu30 enriches genes that are strongly up-regulated, which has been employed previously. To define the CoCu8 signature, we used a new approach based on the selection of a coherent set of genes linked by function. Strikingly, this method generates a signature with prognostic power in all types of SCC investigated, including pancreatic and ccRCC, with particularly strong links to outcome in HPV positive SCC. Our signature did not signify a poor prognosis for breast, colorectal, or prostate cancer. We speculate that the different relevance of the signature in cancer arising in different tissues might reflect varying roles for fibroblasts in the tissue in coordinating wound healing responses, including engagement with myeloid cells.
Comparative analysis of CoCu8 and CoCu30 with annotated gene sets (KRAS SIGNALING UP and RAS84 signature ) suggested a mechanism of cross-talk between cancer cells and CAFs based on the activation of the MAPK/AP-1 pathway ( ). Consistent with this, the upregulation of CoCu30 genes – FOS, FOSB, JUNB, and HBEGF – required MEK activity. These data extend previous literature showing that KRAS mutation is associated with higher stromal presence and with higher cancer cell – stromal interaction. We hypothesize that our signatures are highly prognostic in HPV positive HNSCC because they lack the oncogenic activation of EGFR or RAS, which frequently occurs in HPV negative disease. We speculate that the magnitude of the changes is greater in HPV positive disease without mutations in EGFR or RAS; it will be interesting to test this in future studies. Thus, in a subset of HPV positive diseases, RAS pathway activation and unfavorable downstream biology are triggered by cancer cell – fibroblast interaction.
Our analyses indicate that HB-EGF is central to the activation of MAPK signaling upon cancer cell – CAF contact. HB-EGF is the only EGF ligand to be consistently upregulated in co-culture across diverse models. Accordingly, EGFR activation is upregulated in co-culture, suggesting the presence of a positive feedback loop, including HB-EGF/EGFR/MAPK/AP-1. HB-EGF stimulation allowed us to decipher the cell type-dependent consequences of the activation of the pathway. While both cancer cells and CAFs respond to HB-EGF by activating MAPK and inducing changes in AP-1 TF expression, we observed different downstream activation mechanisms depending on the cell type. These data are consistent with the finding that AP-1 activation leads to diverse molecular and phenotypic consequences, depending on the cell type studied. In mono-culture conditions, HB-EGF is more highly expressed by cancer cells; however, the modest level of HB-EGF expression by cancer cells is not sufficient to initiate these events. We propose that the presence of CAFs acts as a mechanism to amplify the expression of HB-EGF, enabling a threshold for productive signaling to be exceeded. CAFs also up-regulate inflammatory cytokines more strongly than cancer cells, meaning that co-culture is required for HB-EGF to drive high levels of expression and subsequent macrophage recruitment. The mechanism through which HB-EGF is upregulated could be associated with proteolytic processing of HB-EGF at the interface between cancer cells and CAFs and will be interesting to test in further studies.
Ultimately, we link increased MAPK and EGFR activity to the chemo-attraction of macrophages. Our data provide insights into the molecular mechanism behind the correlation of CAFs and macrophages in tumors and, more generally, for links between CAFs and a pro-tumorigenic and immune-suppressive milieu. Indeed, CSF2/GM-CSF is known to be associated with tumor-associated macrophage recruitment and polarization in cancer and LIF can promote macrophage recruitment and induce a more pro-tumorigenic polarization to alter the immune response during anti PD-1 therapy. CSF2/GM-CSF is produced both by cancer cells and CAFs when stimulated with HB-EGF, while LIF is specifically produced by CAFs. Distinct from our work, Mucciolo and colleagues reported that in pancreatic cancer, stromal EGFR activated by AREG is involved in the acquisition of pro-tumorigenic properties that favor cancer cells via myofibroblast activation. This difference may reflect either the difference between SCC, which is the experimental model in our work, and pancreatic cancer, or that AREG and HB-EGF may trigger different patterns of gene expression. Thus, EGFR is a critical determinant of CAF functions, with further studies required to disentangle tissue- and ligand-specific biology, possibly with the use of syngeneic murine models, and target specifically EGFR in the stromal compartment.
Our findings have clinical implications for patient stratification and treatment. Although HPV positive HNSCC patients typically have a better prognosis than HPV negative HNSCC patients, about 25% of these patients still have poor overall survival. , CoCu8/CoCu30 signatures and CAF abundance could help stratify those patients with a worse prognosis within the HPV positive SCC. This improved patient stratification would be especially relevant in the context of the recent unsatisfactory efforts to de-escalate and de-intensify treatment for patients with HPV positive tumors and could help reduce toxicity without compromising outcomes. Moreover, our results suggest that this subset of patients could benefit from a targeted approach, for example, re-purposing the use of MEK or EGFR inhibitors. Indeed, trametinib – MEK inhibitor – is already used in the treatment of melanoma and non-small-cell lung cancer and it has been tested in phase I/II oral cavity SCC patients, showing some reduction in RAS/MAPK activity as a neoadjuvant treatment. Our data argue that trametinib or EGFR inhibitors may be beneficial for HPV positive HNSCC patients with high stromal content.
In conclusion, our results demonstrate a new approach to detecting biologically meaningful stromal signatures. We show that signatures based on crosstalk in the TME have the potential to both improve patient stratification and identify new mechanisms of cross-talk between cancer cells and CAFs.

## Limitations of the study

i)We provide extensive evidence of the HB-EGF, EGFR, and MAPK pathway activation across multiple pairs of cancer cells and fibroblasts. However, it should be noted that we have not tested matched patients derived cancer cell – fibroblast pairs and it will be interesting to test it in the future.
ii)In this work, we have specifically linked the effect of cancer cell – CAF crosstalk to macrophage attraction. However, we have not tested whether this crosstalk changes macrophage polarization and/or activity. Moreover, we have also not tested whether the secretome of cancer cell – CAF co-culture has any effect on other immune cells, i.e., CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T helper cells, T regulatory cells. Further studies will be needed to test the consequences of tumor-stroma crosstalk on other macrophage polarization and other immune cell recruitment.
iii)Our data provide extensive in vitro evidence that EGFR/MAPK signaling is associated with HB-EGF expression and that trametinib treatment reduces its expression. We also demonstrate that targeting the EGFR/MAPK axis with afatinib/trametinib is sufficient to reduce macrophage migration. Specifically interrogating the effect HB-EGF on macrophage recruitment and polarization in vivo will require the use of syngeneic murine models combined with genetic strategies to remove HB-EGF expression in squamous cell carcinoma cells.
iv)The strategy to estimate monocytes/macrophages differs between the TCGA HPV positive cohort and the UK cohort. While we had methylome data available for the TCGA cohort that was used to perform MethylCIBERSORT analysis, these data were not available for the UK cohort. Therefore, it should be noted that the method performed to estimate monocytes/macrophages differs between the two cohorts.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and request for resources, reagents and source data should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact Erik Sahai erik.sahai@crick.ac.uk.

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability

## Data

•RNAseq data from A431/VCAF2b under conditions of mono-cultures, co-cultures in direct contact and indirect contact are available at the Gene Expression Omnibus under record GSE121058.
•Microarray data of MAF2 under conditions of mono-culture and co-culture in direct contact is available at the Gene Expression Omnibus under record GSE274333.
•Microarray data of 5555 under conditions of mono-culture and co-culture in direct contact is available at the Gene Expression Omnibus under record GSE270933.
•RNAseq data of PC9/CRUK0764 under conditions of mono-cultures and co-cultures in direct contact have been deposited at the European Genome–phenome Archive, which is hosted by the European Bioinformatics Institute and the Center for Genomic Regulation, under the accession codes EGAS00001007857. Access is controlled by the TRACERx data access committee. Details on how to apply for access are available at the linked page.
•Microarray data used for HUVEC – 1205Lu analysis is available at Gene Expression Omnibus under record GSE8699.
•Microarray data used for breast cancer cell lines co-culture with fibroblasts analysis is available at Gene Expression Omnibus under record GSE41678.
•RNA-seq data from the TRACERx study used during this study have been deposited at the European Genome–phenome Archive, which is hosted by the European Bioinformatics Institute and the Center for Genomic Regulation, under the accession codes EGAS00001006517. Access is controlled by the TRACERx data access committee. Details on how to apply for access are available at the linked page.
•Clinical and RNAseq data for UK_HPV positive cohort is part of ongoing clinical trials, therefore the data cannot be deposited in a public repository until the trial is finalized. Data can be shared upon reasonable request following corresponding Ethical Research Committee approval following the ICR-Clinical Trials and Statistics Unit policy.
•scRNAseq data from Choi et al. was downloaded from GEO (GSE181919).

## Code

•This paper does not report original code.

## Other items

•Any additional information required is available from the upon request.

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Cell lines
OCAF1 and OCAF2 human fibroblasts were isolated from patient tissues of oral cancer and immortalized with lentiviral HTERT as described in Gaggioli et al. These patient samples were collected under the ethical approval (REC ref. 06/Q0403/125). CRUK0764 were derived from patients with lung adenocarcinoma. These fibroblasts were established from the tumor tissue. The primary CRUK0764 was immortalized by the following infection with retroviruses expressing human telomerase reverse transcriptase. PC9 is a human lung adenocarcinoma cell line, obtained from the Crick Institute Central Cell Services facility. SCC154 (UPCI-SCC154) and SCC47 (UM-SCC47) were donated from Karin Harrington lab, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.

## Peripheral blood mononuclear cell and monocytes selection
Donations of healthy blood donors were received from the Francis Crick Institute, according to approved protocols of the ethics board of the Francis Crick Institute and the Human Tissue act. Every donor received a Participant Information Sheet and a Consent Form. We do not have access to participant data, including age, sex/gender, ancestry and ethnicity.
Isolated PBMCs were then used to isolate monocytes.

## TCGA analysis
Clinical data, RSEM (RNA-Seq by Expectation Maximization) normalized expression data (Illumina RNASEQ platform) and Methylation data (Illumina Human Methylation 450 platform) for TCGA cohorts were downloaded from the Firebrowse website hosed by Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard. [http://firebrowse.org/]. Data downloads were all version 2016012800.0.0.
De-convolution strategies:
MethylCIBERSORT: signature matrix and mixture files were obtained using MethylCIBERSORT R package, hosted on Zenodo. The detailed origin of the signatures and the procedure to create the deconvolution strategy is explained in Chakravarthy et al. 
Absolute-CIBERSORT: To calculate the immune infiltrate per sample, the library ‘CIBERSORT’ (version 1.04 ) was run within R version 3.4.3 on the RSEM normalized data and the LM22 signature using the parameters absolute = TRUE and abs_method = ”no.sumto1”.
A summary of patients’ information is available in .

## UK_HPV positive cohort
FFPE tumor samples from 2 studies formed this cohort.
1INOVATE (MR/R015589/1 ISRCTN32335415), a prospective sample collection study in patients with T1-T2/N1-3 or T3-T4/N0-3 oropharyngeal cancer (AJCC TNM classification 7.0) receiving treatment with radical radiotherapy with or without additional platin-based chemotherapy.
2INSIGHT-2 (C7224/A23275 NCT04242459), a prospective study of optimizing radiation therapy in head and neck cancers using functional image-guided radiotherapy and novel biomarkers.
INOVATE was approved by the London -Bloomsbury Research Ethics Committee (19/LO/1558) and INSIGHT-2 was approved by London – Queen Square Research Ethics Committee (19/LO/0638). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to any study procedure.

## UK_HPV positive cohort RNAseq and data analysis
Baseline diagnostic biopsies embedded in paraffin blocks were obtained from the above-mentioned cohort. Relevant tumor sections were selected and RNA was extracted from 3 to 4 slides using the Qiagen AllPrep DNA/RNA FFPE kit (#80234). Ribosomal RNA was depleted using QIAGEN FastSelect rRNA H/M/R kit (#334375). RNA sequencing libraries were prepared using the NEBNext Ultra II RNA Library Prep Kit (#E770) for Illumina following manufacturer’s instructions. The sequencing libraries were multiplexed and loaded on the flow cell on the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 instrument according to manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were sequenced using a 2 × 150 Pair-End (PE) configuration v1.5 for an estimated output of ∼50M paired-end reads per sample. Image analysis and base calling were conducted by the NovaSeq Control Software v1.7 on the NovaSeq instrument. Raw sequence data (.bcl files) generated from Illumina NovaSeq was converted into fastq files and de-multiplexed using Illumina bcl2fastq program version 2.20. One mismatch was allowed for index sequence identification. Sample adequacy was confirmed using FASTQC, low quality bases and reads were trimmed using Trimmomatic, we run Hisat2-Stringtie for alignment.
RNAseq was performed on 103 patient samples, of which 7 were from the INSIGHT2 and 96 from INOVATE. The data from RNAseq was analyzed to identify samples with presence of HPV (by aligning the unmapped sequences to the whole HPV16 genome sequence obtained from GEO using HISAT2 and StingTie) and these samples were classed as HPV positive. 84 samples (77 INOVATE and 7 INSIGHT2) were classified at HPV positive and RNAseq data from these was used for analysis in this study.

## TRACERx cohort
Tumor samples used in this study were collected from LUSC patients enrolled as a part of TRACERx study (accession code: NCT01888601) which is sponsored by University College London (UCL/12/0279) and has been approved by an independent research ethics committee (13/LO/1546). Multiple regions were sampled per tumor and processed as described by Frankell et al. yielding whole-RNA sequencing data for 295 regions from 117 LUSC patients. Expression count and transcript per million (TPM) were quantified by the RSEM package. Genes with expression level of at least 1 TPM in at least 20% of the samples were included. A variance stabilizing transformation (VST) was then applied to filtered count using the DESeq2 package. 
In order to calculate whether a patient was concordant or discordant, we pulled together the 295 regions observed according to the 117 patients. 93 of these had at least 2 regions. For these: if a patient showed same pattern of expression (always high or always low) for all analyzed regions, it was considered as concordant, otherwise as discordant.
A summary of patients’ information is available in .

## Method details

## Cell lines and reagents
PC9 were stably transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, PC9 cell line was seeded at 50–70% confluence in a six-well plate and transfected 2 μg of Piggybac transposase (pPBase-piggyBac) and 2 μg of mEGFP (pPBbsr2-mEGFP) plasmid DNAs. After 24 h of incubation, the medium with Lipofectamine/plasmid DNA mix was replaced with a fresh medium. Cells were selected using 2 μg mL −1 blasticidin.
PC9 were cultured in RPMI-1640 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, #10270-106), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen, #15140122) and kept at 37°C in 5% CO2.
OCAF1, OCAF2, SCC154, SCC47 and CRUK0764 cells were cultured in DMEM (ThermoFisher, #41966052) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, #10270-106), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen, #15140122), 1% insulin–transferrin–selenium (Invitrogen, #41400045) and kept at 37°C and 5% CO2.
Cells were not allowed to reach more than 90% confluency for routine cell culture cultivation. Cell lines that are not commercially obtainable are available from the authors upon reasonable request.
Routine screening for Mycoplasma testing was performed for all cell lines with negative results. STR profiles of human non-commercially available cell lines are included in .

## Cell cultures conditions and treatments
Co-cultures and mono-cultures were performed with a ratio of 1:2, typically plating 5.5 × 105 CAFs and 2.75 × 105 cancer cells for a single well of a 6 well plate for the specified time point. When co-cultures were compared to pooled mono-cultures, for the mono-culture condition, same number of cells was plated but in two separated wells and then lysed together (pooled condition).
When cancer cells and CAFs mono-culture were compared among themselves, 1 × 106 OCAF1 and 1 × 106 SCC154 cells were plated in a 10 cm dish.
For PC9 and CRUK0764 cells monocultures and co-cultures used for RNAseq, following 24 h co-cultures, the culture media was replaced with fresh medium with DMSO, then harvested after an additional 24 h. PC9 – CRUK0764 co-cultures were performed in a mixture of RPMI-1640 and DMEM (1:1) containing 1% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, #10270-106).
For macrophage cultivation, please see “ ” section.
For cell culture treatments: drugs/factors were added when cells were plated and then added fresh after 24 h. Drugs/factors used: trametinib (Selleckchem, #GSK1120212), afatinib (Selleckchem, #BIBW2992), human recombinant HB-EGF (Peprotech, #100-47).
For trametinib treatment to collect conditioned medium (CM), in order to control the effect of the drug presence regardless of its effect on secreted factors, we added fresh trametinib treatment to DMSO co-culture CM at the same concentration used for the cell co-culture treatment.
All concentrations used are specified in the figures.
RNA interference was performed with Lipofectamine RNAimax reagent from Invitrogen, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For transient knock down of HB-EGF, cells were subjected to reverse transfection with 20 nM RNAi oligos plus forward transfection the day after, then analyzed 4 days after reverse transfection. The following RNAi oligo (Dharmacon) was used: siHB-EGF A (Cat # D-019624-02), siHB-EGF B (Cat # D-019624-03), as control the following non-targeting siRNA oligo (All Stars Negative, Quiagen, Cat # 1027281).

## Fluorescence-activated cell sorting
For PC9 – CRUK0764 RNAseq experiment, CRUK0764 were labeled with CellVue Red Mini Kit for Membrane Labeling (Polysciences, 25567-1) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 1 × 107 cells of CRUK0764 were resuspended in the Diluent C and mixed with CellVue Red working dye solutions (final concentration: 5 × 106 cells/mL, 2 × 106 M dye) and then incubated for 5 min at RT. Cells were washed twice with DMEM, 10% FBS medium to ensure removal of unbound fluorescence dye.
For fluorescence-activated cell sorting, cells were sorted using a flow cytometer–cell sorter BD FACSAria II. PC9-GFP and CRUK0764 -CellVue Red were sorted by FACS 48 h after seeding them in monoculture or direct co-culture. The cells were then trypsinised and resuspended in 3% FBS in PBS, 1 mM EDTA in preparation for sorting. Cells were separated into two populations: PC9-GFP and CRUK0764 with CellVue Red using a 488 nm laser with collection filter 530 nm/30 nm for GFP and 561 nm laser with collection filter 582 nm/20 nm for CellVue Red. Gates were designed on the basis of negative and single-color controls. All cell populations were tested for purity, and data were analyzed using FlowJo software (version 8).

## RNA sequencing analysis for co-cultures
PC9 and CRUK0764 cells were immediately centrifuged at 300 × g for 4 min to remove supernatant and add 350 μL RLT buffer (Qiagen, 79216) containing 1% β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma, M6250) and total RNA was extracted using the RNAeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, 74104; n = 3 independent experiments). Prior to library construction, the quality of total RNA was assessed by Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies Inc).
For RNAseq analysis: biological replicates libraries were prepared using the polyA KAPA mRNA HyperPrep Kit and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 4000 platform generating ∼28 million 75 bp single end reads per sample. FASTQ_files were quality trimmed and adaptor removed using Trimmomatic (version 0.36). The RSEM package (version 1.3.30) in conjunction with the STAR alignment software (version 2.5.2a) was used for the mapping and subsequent gene level counting of the mapped reads with respect to the Ensembl human GRCh38 (release 89) transcriptome. Normalization of raw count data was performed with the DESeq2 package (version 1. 18.1). All the analysis was done (version 1. 18.1) within the R programming environment (version 3. 4. 3).
To check the purity of the samples, we analyzed the resulting transcriptomic data for the expression of ‘lineage markers’. CDH1, EPCAM, CD24, and KRT genes were used as markers of carcinoma cells and for fibroblasts we used COL1A1, COL1A2, DCN, CD248, and PDGFR genes. This revealed high sample purity for all transcriptomic data, except in the PC9 – CRUK0764 experiment that had variable purity between samples. Therefore, we estimated the impurity in each sample based on the expression of the lineage marker genes and calculated the expected level of transcript if the two mono-cultures (cancer cells alone and CAFs alone) were mixed in proportion with the impurity estimate. The observed transcript in the co-culture condition was then normalized to account for the effect of contamination.

## EdU proliferation assay
The Click-iT Plus EdU Imaging Kit (Invitrogen #c10640) was used to perform the assay. Briefly, 48 h after mono-cultures of OCAF1 and SCC154 were seeding, a solution with Edu 20 μM was prepared and then diluted 1:1 with cell media to add EdU 10 μM final concentration. After 90 min incubation, cells were washes twice in PBS, then fixed for 15 min with paraformaldehyde 3.7% and then washed twice in BSA 3%. Following this step, cells were incubated for 20 min with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS. After two BSA 3% washes, the Click-iT reaction buffer was added for 30 min, followed by one wash in BSA 3% and one wash in PBS. Subsequently, nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 at 5 μg/mL in PBS incubation for 30 min, followed by two PBS washes.
Samples were imaged with Zeiss 980 microscope.

## Immunofluorescence assay
The samples used to perform EdU proliferation assay have been then stained for E-Cadherin. Briefly, samples were washes twice in PBS, followed by incubation for 30 min in BSA 3%. Then samples were incubated over night at 4°C. After two washes in BSA 3% of 5 min each, samples were incubated with secondary antibody Alexa Fluor 555 in BSA 3% for 45 min. Following this step, samples were washed with PBS twice. Subsequently, nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 at 5 μg/mL in PBS incubation for 30 min, followed by two PBS washes. Samples were imaged with Zeiss 980 microscope.

## Peripheral blood mononuclear cell extraction and monocytes selection
Donations of healthy blood donors were received from the Francis Crick Institute. PBMCs were isolated from whole blood using Lymphoprep (Stemcell Technologies #7811) with SepMate density centrifugation tubes in line with manufacturer’s instructions (Stemcell Technologies #85450). Freshly isolated PBMCs were then counted before isolation of monocytes (Miltenyi Biotec #130-096-537). Monocytes were then counted for plated in normal plastic dishes.

## Macrophage migration assay
Monocytes were plated into 12-well plates (1 × 105 cells/well) in RPMI 1640 media (ThermoFisher #12633-012) containing 10% FBS, 1% streptomycin/penicillin and 50 ng/mL of M-CSF (Peprotech #300-25) and kept at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 5 days to allow macrophage differentiation. During incubation period, OCAF1 – SCC154 mono- and co-cultures were set-up for 48 h. Conditioned media was isolated and filtered through a 0.4 μm low protein binding PVDF Miltex syringe-driven filter (Millipore #SLHV033RS) to remove cellular debris. Media was then concentrated to 4× using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter units (Millipore #UFC901024) and frozen into aliquots until needed. Conditioned media was added to 24-well plates, 8 μm hanging cell culture inserts (Millipore #MCEP12H48) were placed on top of each well. The now differentiated macrophages were seeded inside the hanging cell culture insert and left to settle for 10 min before topping up media. Plates were left in the incubator for 5 h to allow macrophages to migrate through membrane pores. After this time, the inserts were removed and the macrophages sat on top of the membrane were wiped off with a cotton bud, leaving behind the migrated macrophages at the bottom. Inserts were stained with 0.05% crystal violet for 30 min before washing and then imaged. Inserts were imaged using Zeiss Observer Z1 mounted with a QImaging Color camera. Quantification of crystal violet staining was carried out using ImageJ through ‘Cell Counter’ function.

## Gene set enrichment analysis
Gene set enrichment analysis was performed with GSEA software v4.1.0. The dataset used to perform the comparative analysis are: RAS84 derived from, CoCu8 derived from our own analysis, Hallmarks (h.all.v7.5.symbols.gmt) for all the other analysis. All the parameters have been used as defaults except: permutation type (gene set) and metric for ranking genes (Student’s t test). Gene signatures with a false discovery rate <0.05 were considered as statistically significant.

## Co-culture gene signature generation
CoCu8 gene signature generation: the A431/VCAF2b, 5555/MAF2, PC9/CRUK0764 co-cultures vs. mono-cultures transcriptional datasets have been analyzed with GSEA (see method) to obtain a list of enriched pathways in co-culture with FDR <0.05 for each condition.
For each cell type, all the genes statistically upregulated have been pulled together. From this list, genes that were present in 20% or more of the enriched pathways have been selected. The results obtained for each sample have been merged according to the cell type: the three cancer cells in co-culture have been pulled together, same for the three CAFs. To select the final list, only genes present in the three different cancer cells or in the three different CAFs have been selected to generate CoCu8.
CoCu30 gene signature generation: the genes with a fold change upregulation of 1.5 or higher have been selected for each cell type upon co-culture. The results of the three cancer cells in co-culture have been pulled together, same for the three CAFs in co-culture. To select the final list, only genes present in the three different cancer cells or in the three different CAFs have been selected to generate CoCu30.

## RNA extraction and RT-qPCR
Cells were collected and lysed with RLT buffer and total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, #74104), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
The cDNA was prepared using M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Promega, #M3682), and quantitative PCR was performed using PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix (ThermoFisher, #A25778), using the QuantStudio 3 and 7 Real-Time PCR systems (Applied Biosystems).
Custom primers were acquired from Sigma; sequences are available in . RNA levels were normalized using three house-keeping genes using the ΔΔC method and reported as relative fold change compared with Ctr/not treated cells/mono-culture. For each sample, technical triplicates were obtained performed and, if one of the three technical replicates was an outlier, it has been excluded. Samples with expression levels below 37 or undetected have been considered as not expressed and – in order to perform statistics – a Ct value of 40 has been assigned.

## scRNAseq analysis
scRNAseq data from Choi et al. was downloaded from GEO (GSE181919) and analyzed using Seurat package (version 4). 

## Protein extraction, quantification and western blot analysis
Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM TrisHCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS), supplemented with a protease and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP tablet Roche #04906837001, cOmplete EDTA-free Roche #11873580001, 50 mM NaF). Lysis was performed directly in the cell culture plates using a cell scraper, lysates were kept for 10 min on ice and then clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 30 min at 4°C.
Total protein was quantified using the bicinchoninic acid method in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher, 23225). Following protein quantification, 20 μg of sample was loaded on a 4–15% gradient Mini-PROTEAN TGX Gels (Biorad, #4561084) and transferred to a Trans-Blot Turbo Mini 0.2 μm PVDF membrane (Biorad, 1704156) for blotting. The membrane was blocked for 1 h in 5% BSA or 5% milk in TBST and then incubated overnight at 4°C or 1 h at room temperature with antibodies. The membrane was then washed before adding the horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (ThermoFisher), and incubating for 1 h at room temperature. The membrane was washed again before developing with Luminata Classico Western HRP substrate (Millipore, #WBLUR0100) Luminata Classico Western HRP substrate (Millipore, # WBLUF0100) and imaging. Antibody information are listed in . All original blots are provided as source data.

## Cytokine array
Cytokine array used is “Proteome Profiler Human XL Cytokine Array Kit” (R&D Systems, # ARY022B) following manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, conditioned media was isolated and filtered through a 0.4 μm low protein binding PVDF Miltex syringe-driven filter (Millipore #SLHV033RS) to remove cellular debris. Media was then concentrated to 4× using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter units (Millipore #UFC901024) and used for subsequent incubation with array. provides the list of all tested cytokines.

## Software and visualization
Graphs were generated with Prism software (Graphpad Software v9.4.0) and R (version 4.0)/R studio (version 4.2.1) using package ‘ggplot’ except for correlation plot in B that was generated with cBioportal. scRNAseq data were analyzed with Seurat package (version 4). FACS data were analyzed with FlowJo software (version 8). References have been organized with Mendeley Reference Manager (version 2.116.0, Elsevier Ltd).

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using Prism software (Graphpad Software v9.4.0), Excel software (Microsoft Corporation v16.0) and R (version 4.2.1).
All Student’s t-tests, ANOVA Tukey’s multiple comparison test, paired mixed effects model corrected for Holm-Sidak multiple comparison test have been performed with two tailed strategy. When comparing siC- control, we performed specific comparison siC- vs. siHBEGF A/siC- vs. siHBEGF B.
P-value information: ∗ is p-value<0.05; ∗∗ is p-value<0.01, ∗∗∗ is p-value<0.001, ∗∗∗∗ is p-value<0.0001.
For GSEA, we used FDR with a threshold below 0.05 to definite the significance.
Kaplan-Meier, Log Rank and Cox regression on survival data was calculated using the R package ‘survminer’ using univariable analysis. Correlations were calculated using the Spearman method in R and the package ‘corplot’ was used to generate the graphs.
For TRACERx concordant/discordant statistical analysis, we calculated the expected number of discordant patients that we would have observed by chance if CoCu8/CoCu30 signatures vary randomly between different tumor regions, and then compared with the observed number. We then performed a two-sided Fisher’s exact test.

## Acknowledgments
We thank the Crick healthy donors’ program and donators for blood donations from the Francis Crick Institute. We thank Sophie de Carne and Phil East for useful discussions around RAS signature and RAS signaling. G.G. is funded by Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp, New Jersey, USA (LKR190557). A.R. acknowledges funding from the Spanish Society for Medical Oncology (Beca Fundación SEOM), a CRUK accelerator grant to The Francis Crick Institute, and the Royal Marsden NIHR/BRC Bridge funding program. E.H. is supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Kakenhi Grant [20H03510]. Y.N was supported by a Grant-in-aid for JSPS Overseas Research Fellowship (No. 201860634). K.H. and A.M. acknowledge funding by the Wellcome Trust, ICR/RM NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer Research/Royal Marsden Hospital Centre for Translational Immunotherapy, CRUK Head and Neck Programme Grant (C7224/A23275) and ICR/RM CRUK RadNet Centre of Excellence (C7224/A28724). S.B. declares funding support from ICR/RM NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, CRUK Head and Neck Programme Grant (C7224/A23275), ICR/RM CRUK RadNet Centre of Excellence (C7224/A28724) and the Medical Research Council Developmental Pathway Funding Scheme [MR/R015589/1]. D.B. was supported by funding from a Cancer Research UK (CRUK) Early Detection and Diagnosis Project award, the Idea to Innovation (i2i) Crick translation scheme supported by the Medical Research Council, the National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre and the Breast Cancer Research Foundation (BCRF). C.S. acknowledges grant support from AstraZeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Pfizer, Roche-Ventana, Invitae (previously Archer Dx Inc - collaboration in minimal residual disease sequencing technologies), and Ono Pharmaceutical. C.S. work was supported by the Francis Crick Institute that receives its core funding from Cancer Research UK (CC2041), the UK Medical Research Council (CC2041), and the Wellcome Trust (CC2041). For the purpose of Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission. C.S. is funded by Cancer Research UK (TRACERx (C11496/A17786), PEACE (C416/A21999) and CRUK Cancer Immunotherapy Catalyst Network); Cancer Research UK Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence (C11496/A30025); the Rosetrees Trust, Butterfield and Stoneygate Trusts; Novo Nordisk Foundation (ID16584); Royal Society Professorship Enhancement Award (RP/EA/180007); National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Center; the Cancer Research UK-University College London Centre; Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre; the Breast Cancer Research Foundation (US) BCRF-22-157; Cancer Research UK Early Detection an Diagnosis Primer Award (Grant EDDPMA-Nov21/100034); and The Mark Foundation for Cancer Research Aspire Award (Grant 21-029-ASP). This work was supported by a Stand Up To Cancer-LUNGevity-American Lung Association Lung Cancer Interception Dream Team Translational Research Grant (Grant Number: SU2C-AACR-DT23-17 to S.M. Dubinett and A.E. Spira). Stand Up To Cancer is a division of the Entertainment Industry Foundation. Research grants are administered by the American Association for Cancer Research, the Scientific Partner of SU2C. C.S. is in receipt of an ERC Advanced Grant (PROTEUS) from the European Research Council under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement no. 835297). E.S. is supported by the Francis Crick Institute which receives its core funding from Cancer Research UK (CC2040), the UK Medical Research Council (CC2040), and the Wellcome Trust (CC2040). E.S. is additionally funded by the European Research Council ERCAdG CAN_ORGANISE 101019366. For the purpose of Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright license to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission. RNA sequencing of the UK_HPV positive cohort was funded by the NIHR through the RMH BRC Pump Priming theme (grant B140). The INOVATE study was funded by the Medical Research Council Developmental Pathway Funding Scheme [MR/R015589/1]. The INSIGHT-2 trial was supported by CRUK Head and Neck Programme Grant (C7224/A23275). This study represents independent research supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Center at the Royal Marsden National Health Service Foundation Trust and the Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.

## Author contributions
G.G. and A.R. conceptualized and designed the research, with guidance from E.S. GG performed the experimental analysis and identified the cancer cell – CAF crosstalk gene signature strategy. A.R. performed the clinical data analysis on TCGA and UK_HPV positive cohorts and performed the deconvolution strategies. G.G., A.R., S.H., E.H., Y.N., P.N., and P.C. acquired and analyzed the data, except for TRACERx data that were analyzed by D.B. and UH.L. C.S., A.M., K.H., S.B., M.C. and E.S. provided funding and access to samples and reagents. G.G., A.R., and E.S. wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors authorized the final version.

## Declaration of interests
We confirm that all affiliations are listed on the title page of the manuscript, in the "declaration of interests" form and section of the manuscript. The funding sources for this study are listed in the “Acknowledgments” section of the manuscript. We, the authors, have noted any financial interest in this section below and in the “declaration of interests” form and we have noted the interests of our immediate family members. The authors and/or their immediate family members have management/advisory or consulting relationships noted in this section below and in the “declaration of interests” form. We, the authors, have a patent related to this work, which is noted in this section below and in the “declaration of interests” form, and we have noted the patents of immediate family members. G.G., A.R., Y.N., YH.L., S.H., P.N., S.B., MCU.C., P.C., and E.H. declares no conflict of Interest. K.H. and A.M. disclosures: Honoraria: Arch Oncology (Inst), AstraZeneca (Inst), BMS (Inst), Boehringer Ingelheim (Inst), Codiak Biosciences (Inst), F-Star Therapeutics (Inst), Inzen Therapeutics (Inst), Merck Serono (Inst), MSD (Inst), Oncolys Biopharma (Inst), Pfizer (Inst), Replimune (Inst), VacV Biotherapeutics (Inst); Consulting or Advisory Role: Arch Oncology (Inst), AstraZeneca (Inst), BMS (Inst), Boehringer Ingelheim (Inst), Inzen Therapeutics (Inst), Merck Serono (Inst), MSD (Inst), Oncolys BioPharma (Inst), Replimune (Inst); Speakers’ Bureau: BMS (Inst), Merck Serono (Inst), MSD (Inst); Research Funding: AstraZeneca (Inst), Boehringer Ingelheim (Inst), Merck Sharp & Dohme (Inst), Replimune (Inst). D.B. reports personal fees from NanoString and AstraZeneca, and has a patent PCT/GB2020/050221 issued on methods for cancer prognostication. C.S. is an AstraZeneca Advisory Board member and Chief Investigator for the AZ MeRmaiD 1 and 2 clinical trials and is also Co-Chief Investigator of the NHS Galleri trial funded by GRAIL and a paid member of GRAIL’s Scientific Advisory Board. He receives consultant fees from Achilles Therapeutics (also an SAB member), Bicycle Therapeutics (also a SAB member), Genentech, Medicxi, Roche Innovation Center – Shanghai, Metabomed (until July 2022), and the Sarah Cannon Research Institute. C.S has received honoraria from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, MSD, Bristol Myers Squibb, Illumina, and Roche-Ventana. C.S. had stock options in Apogen Biotechnologies and GRAIL until June 2021, and currently has stock options in Epic Bioscience, Bicycle Therapeutics, and has stock options and is a co-founder of Achilles Therapeutics. C.S. holds patents relating to assay technology to detect tumor recurrence (PCT/GB2017/053289); to targeting neoantigens (PCT/EP2016/059401), identifying patent response to immune checkpoint blockade (PCT/EP2016/071471), determining HLA LOH (PCT/GB2018/052004), predicting survival rates of patients with cancer (PCT/GB2020/050221), identifying patients who respond to cancer treatment (PCT/GB2018/051912), US patent relating to detecting tumor mutations (PCT/US2017/28013), methods for lung cancer detection (US20190106751A1) and both a European and US patent related to identifying insertion/deletion mutation targets (PCT/GB2018/051892). C.S. is a Royal Society Napier Research Professor (RSRP\R\210001). E.S. declares research funding from Merck Sharp & Dohme and Astrazeneca and consultancy work for Phenomic AI and Theolytics.

Published: August 3, 2024

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2024.110635.

## Contributor Information
Giovanni Giangreco, Email: giovanni.giangreco@crick.ac.uk.
Erik Sahai, Email: erik.sahai@crick.ac.uk.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S10 and Tables S1–S5

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S10 and Tables S1–S5

## Data Availability Statement

## Data

•RNAseq data from A431/VCAF2b under conditions of mono-cultures, co-cultures in direct contact and indirect contact are available at the Gene Expression Omnibus under record GSE121058.
•Microarray data of MAF2 under conditions of mono-culture and co-culture in direct contact is available at the Gene Expression Omnibus under record GSE274333.
•Microarray data of 5555 under conditions of mono-culture and co-culture in direct contact is available at the Gene Expression Omnibus under record GSE270933.
•RNAseq data of PC9/CRUK0764 under conditions of mono-cultures and co-cultures in direct contact have been deposited at the European Genome–phenome Archive, which is hosted by the European Bioinformatics Institute and the Center for Genomic Regulation, under the accession codes EGAS00001007857. Access is controlled by the TRACERx data access committee. Details on how to apply for access are available at the linked page.
•Microarray data used for HUVEC – 1205Lu analysis is available at Gene Expression Omnibus under record GSE8699.
•Microarray data used for breast cancer cell lines co-culture with fibroblasts analysis is available at Gene Expression Omnibus under record GSE41678.
•RNA-seq data from the TRACERx study used during this study have been deposited at the European Genome–phenome Archive, which is hosted by the European Bioinformatics Institute and the Center for Genomic Regulation, under the accession codes EGAS00001006517. Access is controlled by the TRACERx data access committee. Details on how to apply for access are available at the linked page.
•Clinical and RNAseq data for UK_HPV positive cohort is part of ongoing clinical trials, therefore the data cannot be deposited in a public repository until the trial is finalized. Data can be shared upon reasonable request following corresponding Ethical Research Committee approval following the ICR-Clinical Trials and Statistics Unit policy.
•scRNAseq data from Choi et al. was downloaded from GEO (GSE181919).

## Code

•This paper does not report original code.

## Other items

•Any additional information required is available from the upon request.