pmcPlant PhysiolPlant Physiol69plntphysplphysPlant Physiology0032-08891532-2548Oxford University PressPMC12501976PMC12501976.112501976125019764097747610.1093/plphys/kiaf409kiaf4091Research ArticleGenes and DevelopmentAcademicSubjects/SCI01270AcademicSubjects/SCI01280AcademicSubjects/SCI02286AcademicSubjects/SCI02287AcademicSubjects/SCI02288The ethylene response factor ERF1A regulates UV-C-induced delayed ripening in peach fruit
https://orcid.org/0009-0003-3287-6170NasiopoulouElpida
Laboratory of Pomology, Department of Horticulture, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki-Thermi 57001, Greecehttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8184-0711MichailidisMichail
Laboratory of Pomology, Department of Horticulture, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki-Thermi 57001, Greecehttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3134-5274SkodraChristina
Laboratory of Pomology, Department of Horticulture, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki-Thermi 57001, GreeceAdamakisIoannis-Dimosthenis S
Department of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens 15784, Greecehttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9952-0636SamiotakiMartina
Biomedical Sciences Research Center “Alexander Fleming”, Institute for Bioinnovation, Vari 16672, GreeceTanouGeorgia
Institute of Soil and Water Resources, ELGO-DIMITRA, Thessaloniki-Thermi 57001, Greece
Joint Laboratory of Horticulture, ELGO-DIMITRA, Thessaloniki-Thermi 57001, Greecehttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9536-9147BazakosChristos
Joint Laboratory of Horticulture, ELGO-DIMITRA, Thessaloniki-Thermi 57001, Greece
Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources, ELGO-DIMITRA, Thessaloniki-Thermi 57001, Greece
Department of Comparative Development and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Cologne 50829, Germanyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4446-1808DalakourasAthanasios
ELGO-DIMITRA, Institute of Industrial and Forage Crops, Larissa 41335, Greecehttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-5118-2244MolassiotisAthanassios
Laboratory of Pomology, Department of Horticulture, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki-Thermi 57001, Greece ). In climacteric fruits, ripening follows a classic linear model driven by the spatiotemporal expression of ethylene biosynthesis and signaling genes ( ). Accordingly, techniques manipulating ethylene biosynthesis, perception, or signal transduction are important strategies for fruit quality modulation ( ). Functional characterization of genes encoding ripening-related transcriptional regulators, such as RIPENING-INHIBITOR (RIN), MADS-box S1 (MADS1), APETALA2a (AP2a), Ethylene Response Factor 6 (ERF6), and B3 (ERFB3), indicates that transcription factors (TFs) play key roles in transmitting ripening signals and regulating ethylene biosynthesis and signaling ( ). Moreover, epigenetic modifications, such as DNA and RNA methylation, are also highly involved in fruit ripening ( ). Importantly, both TF activity and epigenetic modifications mostly regulate fruit ripening in an ethylene-dependent manner ( ), further emphasizing the importance of ethylene in climacteric ripening.
Ethylene Response Factors (ERFs) belong to the APETALA2 (AP2)/ERF superfamily and are considered direct regulators of ethylene-responsive gene expression ( ). Some ERFs function as activators of GCC-box-dependent transcription, while others serve as active repressors of basal transcription levels of reporter genes but also transactivate other TFs ( ). Many ERFs regulate ethylene signaling and fruit ripening by directly binding to the GCC-box (with the core sequence AGCCGCC) or the dehydration-responsive element motif in the promoters of downstream target genes, such as 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthase (ACS) and 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase (ACO3) in model fruit species like tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) and apple (Malus domestica Borkh.) ( ; ). In peach fruit (Prunus persica L. Batsch), several ERFs, including ERF1, may also function as either activators or repressors of ethylene biosynthesis genes, such as ACS and ACO, influencing their expression ( ). Furthermore, a link was observed between ERF1A expression and carotenoid accumulation in apricot fruit during ripening ( ), whereas ERF1 identified in plum fruit (Prunus domestica) appeared to be ethylene inducible and exhibited a ripening-related expression pattern ( ). Although these studies highlight that certain ERF members, including ERF1, are involved in fruit ripening across various Prunus species, it remains largely unknown whether different ERF family members play specific roles in mediating ethylene-dependent ripening and if they are regulated by external signals.
Ultraviolet-C (UV-C) irradiation is an important environmental signal that can affect fruit ripening ( ). However, knowledge of the molecular shifts in response to UV-C stimuli during postharvest fruit ripening is still limited ( ), despite its substantial impact on ethylene signaling. As a stressor, UV-C can accelerate ethylene production and, consequently, induce ERF gene expression ( ), such as ERF1 upregulation in banana (Musa nana Laur.; ). It has been hypothesized that the delay in tomato ripening induced by UV-C treatment may result from the activation of ERFs, which may function as regulators of key metabolic pathways involved in the ripening process ( ). Notably, most studies on the effects of UV-C treatment during ripening have focused primarily on the fruit flesh, likely due to the ability of UV-C to inhibit the activity of cell wall-degrading enzymes associated with softening ( ). However, this emphasis overlooks the outer peel, a self-regulating protective barrier tissue with sensory and signaling capabilities that remains metabolically active throughout peach fruit ripening ( ). Previous studies have shown that UV-C treatment in peach peel triggers events associated with the initiation of ripening ( ), thereby highlighting the important role of the peel, alongside the flesh, in regulating the UV-C-dependent ripening process.
This work aims to enrich the current knowledge regarding the impact of UV-C in fruit ripening biology. To address this, we conducted a comprehensive analysis to elucidate physiological and transcriptomic events in response to postharvest UV-C application in peach, a climacteric fruit with a short storage capability due to its fast ripening or softening process ( ). Given the lack of tissue-specific data on UV-C ripening responses, our study investigates exocarp (peel) and mesocarp (flesh) tissues separately to uncover potential differences and shifts in the local and systemic dynamics of UV-C-induced ripening reprogramming between these 2 tissues. We report that UV-C can delay fruit ripening processes in concert with previously known ripening-related TFs, notably ERF1A. We found that silencing PpERF1A via RNAi in peach fruit led to significant alterations in several ripening parameters, particularly affecting hormone signaling and the volatile profile associated with the fruit's transition to ripening. This work provides a useful insight into the mechanisms of UV-C function not yet deciphered in fruit ripening biology.

## Results

## UV-C exposure delays the transition to ripening in peach fruit
To characterize the ripening process, several parameters were assessed during fruit exposure to room temperature following UV-C application in the absence or presence of cold treatment. In UV-C-exposed fruit, the peel color parameter a* decreased at 4, 6, and 8 d of ripening, as well as at 2 d of post-cold ripening ( ; ). Similarly, C* declined at 6 and 8 d ( ), while H° increased at 4 d of ripening and at 2 d following cold storage ( ; ). The most prominent effect of UV-C was the reduced water loss of treated fruit at all ripening stages and conditions examined ( ; ). UV-C-treated flesh firmness remained at higher levels during post-cold ripening ( ). Εthylene production rate was 5 times higher in UV-C-treated fruit at 6 d, while respiration was elevated at both 2 and 6 d of ripening following UV-C ( ). Ion leakage was increased in UV-C-exposed peels at 2 and 4 d of ripening, as well as at 0 and 2 d of post-cold ripening, indicating that a short UV-C exposure induces long-term stress conditions in peel tissues ( ).
 The reduction in fruit softening by UV-C ( ) was linked to changes in arabinogalactan, pectin, and xyloglucan epitopes ( ) through immunolocalization and fluorescent microscopy at 8 h of ripening (referred to as “short-term UV-C effect”), as well as 3 d after UV-C treatment (referred to as “long-term UV-C effect”) ( ). As a long-term UV-C effect, hypodermal cells of treated fruit were increased in number but reduced in size ( ). The use of 2 monoclonal antibodies directed to differing methylesterification states of pectic homogalacturonan (HG) indicated that both unmethylesterified HG epitope (LM19) and highly methylesterified HGs detected by LM20 antibody were generally reduced 8 h after UV-C ( ). Localization of arabinogalactan protein (AGP) epitopes reveals that JIM13 signal was more abundant in UV-C-exposed fruit at 3 d of ripening ( ). UV-C-treated fruit were highly labeled with LM14 regardless of the ripening time. Signals of LM30 decreased after both short and long UV-C periods. In response to the long-term UV-C effect, the fluorescence of the xyloglucan-specific antibody LM25 was highly abundant ( ).

## Transcript profiling reveals aspects of the tissue-specific function of UV-C
RNA-seq analysis was conducted to examine the effect of UV-C on the peel and flesh tissues 8 h after application ( ). The transcriptomic impact of UV-C in the peel was stronger than in the flesh tissue, as shown by the 1,440 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) identified in peel (1,020 up- and 420 downregulated) compared to 629 DEGs found in the flesh (194 up- and 435 downregulated) ( ). The present data showed that gene induction is a general response of the peel to UV-C exposure, since an extensive upregulation of several DEGs was detected. In contrast, the UV-C-treated flesh displayed a general downregulatory trend for several DEGs, indicating the existence of a tissue-dependent regulation of UV-C ( ). The top 10 up- and downregulated DEGs (control vs UV-C) in the peel and flesh separately are shown ( ). Distinct genes, such as cytochrome P450 (PpCYP450.1 and PpCYP450.2) and choline-phosphate cytidylyltransferase 2 (PpCCT2) were strongly upregulated in the peel and flesh tissues, respectively, due to UV-C, while the expression of genes encoding GDSL esterase/lipase (peel tissue; PpGDSL.14 and PpGDSL.15) and expansin B15 (flesh tissue; PpEXP15) was decreased ( ). Markedly, 39 DEGs (30 and 9 genes up/downregulated, respectively), including desiccation-related protein PCC13-62 (PpPCC13-62) and ethylene-responsive TF ERF109 (PpERF109), were affected by UV-C in both tissues ( ) and could be considered hallmarks of UV-C signaling. RNA-seq expression dynamics were validated by RT-qPCR (R2 = 0.9263; ).
 Transcriptomic analysis revealed numerous cell wall-related genes affected by UV-C that belong to several categories, including arabinogalactans, expansins, pectinesterases, etc. ( ). As an example, PpAGP1.2, PpAGP18, and PpAGP31 were downregulated in the flesh, while PpAGP1.1, PpAGP16.1, and PpAGP16.2 were downregulated in the UV-C-treated peel ( ; ). Besides, UV-C regulated several genes in both tissues that participate in ethylene biosynthesis, such as PpACS.1, PpACS.2, PpACO, PpACO1, PpACO2, PpACO11, and S-adenosylmethionine synthase (PpSAMS), the latter showing >1.5 log2(fold change) upregulation in both tissues ( ). Additionally, we analyzed the impact of UV-C on the expression of all DEGs annotated as putative TFs ( ). Several UV-C-responsive TFs were identified, most of them belong to AP2/ERF, bHLH, HSF, GATA, MYB, NAC, WRKY, and bZIP families ( ).

## Changes of primary and secondary metabolites elicited by UV-C
To define the biological process, molecular function, and cellular component associated with UV-C, we performed a Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of all DEGs in the peel and flesh separately. The analysis revealed an enrichment in the “Secondary metabolite biosynthesis” bin among the identified DEGs ( ). Metabolomic analysis disclosed several tissue-metabolic changes after UV-C treatment ( ; ; ). For instance, both catechin and procyanidin B1 levels were lower in the flesh but higher in the peel tissue of UV-C fruit ( ). Rutin and quercetin-3-O-glucoside were only detected in the peel, exhibiting a UV-C-inducible increase. Cyanidin levels were increased in the flesh during ripening after UV-C but decreased during post-cold ripening, while delphinidin was induced by UV-C in the peel during most ripening conditions ( ). Regarding central metabolism, oxoproline increased in the flesh and decreased in the peel during ripening, while its abundance was reduced in both tissues during post-cold ripening ( ).
 Since the functional enrichment analysis highlighted the category of secondary metabolite biosynthesis ( ) and a substantial alteration of phenolic compounds was observed in UV-C fruit ( ), we focused on polyphenolic metabolism, including transcriptomic and metabolomic data ( ). Several genes involved in flavone and flavonol biosynthesis, including trans-cinnamate 4-monooxygenase (PpC4H), chalcone synthase (PpCHS.1 and PpCHS.2), flavanone 3-hydroxylase (PpF3H), and flavonol synthase (PpFLS) were affected in the peel by UV-C. Various UV-C-related polyphenolic pathways were affected either by the tissue or cold treatment. For example, leucoanthocyanidin reductase (PpLAR) expression and catechin accumulation were increased in the peel compared to the opposite trends found in the flesh. The accumulation of cyanidin and delphinidin with a coordinated increase in anthocyanidin 3-O-glucosyltransferase 2 (PpGT2.1, PpGT2.2, and PpGT2.3) expression in UV-C flesh during ripening, accounted for the enhanced cyanidin 3-O-glucoside accumulation; however, this metabolite route was suppressed by cold ( ). The present data also showed that sugar regulation was altered by UV-C ( ). UV-C led to a reduction in D-galactose during ripening, while it stimulated sucrose and maltose in both tissues. D-fructose was found at higher levels in both tissues during post-cold ripening ( ; ). Consistent with this, genes involved in the biosynthesis of sucrose (i.e. aldose 1-epimerase, PpALEP and galactinol-sucrose galactosyltransferase 2, PpRFS2), maltose (alpha amylase, PpAMY; >2 log2 (fc)), and D-fructose (i.e. beta-fructofuranosidases, PpBFRUCT.1 and PpBFRUCT.2) were provoked by UV-C ( ).

## UV-C induces global epigenetic and epitranscriptomic changes in peach fruit
Given that UV may lead to epigenetic modifications in plants ( ; ), we examined whether UV-C could induce epigenetic (DNA methylation) and epitranscriptomic (RNA methylation) modifications in the peel directly exposed to UV-C. By measuring levels of DNA 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and RNA N6-methyladenosine (m6A), we observed that both global DNA and RNA methylation were stimulated in the peel 8 h after UV-C ( ), proposing that DNA 5mC and RNA m6A represent epigenetic markers of UV-C functions in plants.
 

## The expression patterns of ERF1A TF were considerably affected by UV-C
Because any transcriptomic reprogramming requires the intervention of TFs ( ), we performed a TF analysis. Strikingly, the family with the highest number of differentially expressed TFs was AP2/ERF, while ERF1A in this family displayed the greatest (−log10  q-value 12.7) upregulation levels in UV-C peel (>2.5 log2 (fc); ; ), highlighting it as a candidate gene that underpins the observed UV-C ripening signaling and response. Previous studies have established that ERF1 regulates the expression of ACS and ACO by directly binding to the GCC-box and contributes to ethylene and climacteric ripening signaling ( ). Therefore, we investigate the functional significance of ERF1A in UV-C ripening signaling.

## UV-C treatment did not induce epigenetic or genetic changes in ERF1A
Given (i) the observed UV-C-induced methylation in peel samples ( ) and the reported sensitivity of ERF binding sites to methylation ( ; ) and (ii) UV-C's potential to cause mutations that affect TF binding ( ), along with evidence that ERF-related mutations can alter gene expression and stress responses ( ), we examined whether UV-C induces methylation and/or mutation of ERF1A to clarify its functional role in UV-C-driven ripening. Bisulfite sequencing showed no cytosine methylation in ERF1A, and coding region sequencing revealed no UV-C-induced mutations ( ).

## Phylogenetic analysis of P. persica ERF family and ERF1A across Prunus species
Phylogenetic analysis was performed to investigate the evolutionary relationship between PpERF1A and other members of the AP2/ERF family in P. persica ( ; ). Based on their coding sequences (CDS), PpERF1A clustered with ethylene-responsive TF CRF4 (PpCRF4), AP2/ERF and B3 domain-containing transcription repressor TEM1 (PpTEM1), PpERF12.2, PpERF4.1, PpERF2, PpCRF2, PpERF3.3, and PpERF3.4. The evolutionary relationship of ERF1A across different Prunus species was also examined ( ; ). This analysis showed that P. persica ERF1A (PpERF1A) grouped with its homolog from P. ferganensis and showed similarity to the ERF1A-like gene from P. kansuensis. Other closely related species based on ERF1A homologs included P. mira, P. mongolica, and P. davidiana ( ).

## ERF1A silencing reveals its key role in peach fruit ripening
To characterize the potential role of ERF1A in UV-C-associated ripening, we sought to silence ERF1A expression in the peel. To do that, we performed an RNAi assay through vacuum agro-infiltration, which leads to transient silencing of the target gene (ERF1A; ). Thus, we performed the vacuum agroinfiltration RNAi assay 3 d before UV-C treatment in nectarine “Morsiani 90,” since interference is usually initiated 3 d post-agroinfiltration ( ). It is worth noting that UV-C treatment also postpones ripening in “Morsiani 90” fruit ( ) and strongly upregulates ERF1A expression in their peel (almost 5 times higher; ). To evaluate the silencing efficiency of agroinfiltrated tissue, ERF1A expression levels were measured by RT-qPCR at 1, 2, 3, and 4 d of ripening after UV-C (4, 5, 6, and 7 d following ERF1A silencing, respectively) in the ERF1A-RNAi peel (hpERF1A) compared to the control (hpGFP). ERF1A downregulation was observed in infiltrated peel samples at all time points of the examined period, signifying successful ERF1A silencing ( ).
 We next examined how ERF1A silencing affects peach fruit ripening. ERF1A-silenced fruit had lower ethylene production at 3 and 4 d of ripening after UV-C but higher respiration activity at 4 d ( ). As arose from the peach phenotype, the ERF1A silencing alters color development, particularly at 4 d of ripening following UV-C treatment ( ). Indeed, L*, b*, C*, and H° were reduced, while indicator a* was increased ( ). The analysis of fruit ripening also showed that ERF1A-RNAi fruit exhibited higher weight loss at 2 and 3 d of ripening ( ). Since weight loss may be associated with changes in fruit cell size ( ), histological analysis was performed to analyze the cell size characteristics of ERF1A-silenced tissue. We found that ERF1A-RNAi fruits exhibited lower cell height and cell width ( ). In parallel, significant metabolic changes in response to ERF1A silencing were detected at 4 d of ripening after UV-C. The content of several sugars, such as maltose and sucrose, as well as organic acids, like pyruvic and succinic acid, were reduced in ERF1A-silenced peel ( ). Silenced fruit also had increased epicatechin and procyanidin B1 levels, while the opposite was noticed for several polyphenols (e.g. quercetin 3-D-galactoside and delphinidin; ). Meanwhile, ERF1A-silenced fruit showed consistently lower flesh firmness, especially at 4 d of ripening, with hpERF1A fruit measuring ∼10 N versus ∼35 N in hpGFP controls ( ). The immunofluorescent labeling of LM19 and LM25 epitopes was more intense in ERF1A-silenced fruit, following ERF1A suppression ( ). Nonetheless, the detection levels of AGPs were lower in ERF1A fruits, since all AGP-related antibodies, namely LM14, LM30, and JIM13 had a reduced presence ( ). Collectively, the ripening acceleration and the metabolic and anatomical changes detected in ERF1A-silenced fruit signify that ERF1A broadly impacts peach fruit ripening following UV-C treatment.

## ERF1A silencing altered protein shifts and partially reversed UV-C ripening outcome
Given that the proteome is closer to the fruit phenotype than the genome or the transcriptome ( ), we performed proteomic analysis in ERF1A-silenced peel at 1 and 4 d of ripening after UV-C ( ). The number of differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) between ERF1A-silenced and control samples was 4 and 271 DAPs after 1 and 4 d, respectively ( ). We postulated that the 4-d proteomic data, rather than the 1-d ones, reflect a strong proteomic effect of ERF1A silencing on ripening. Therefore, we focused our study on the 4-d samples to gain insight into the altered ripening processes of ERF1A-silenced fruit ( ). Intriguingly, the 4 DAPs detected at 1 d (10 kDa chaperonin mitochondrial PpCPN10, acyl-CoA-binding protein PpACBP, cationic peroxidase 1 PpCP1, and target of Myb protein 1 PpTOM1) were also found at the 4-d data ( ), proposing that these proteins could represent targets of ERF1A. Among the identified DAPs (271 proteins), 196 proteins were overaccumulated and 75 were underaccumulated ( ). The most enriched GO categories of the DAPs are provided in , among which were chloroplast membrane for CC, copper ion and ferric ion binding for MF, and response to oxidative stress for BP. The abundance of the top 10 over- and underaccumulated proteins in ERF1A-silenced fruit is shown in , including stress-response A/B barrel domain-containing protein (PpHS1) and heat shock proteins (PpHSP18.1A, PpHSP18.5.1, PpHSP18.5.2, and PpHSP17.8). Consistent with ethylene and softening changes ( ), the abundance of PpSAMS.1 was decreased ( ), while the accumulation of several cell wall proteins, such as 2 expansin proteins (PpEXPA1 and PpEXPA4.3), was increased by ERF1A silencing ( ).
 This work aims to enrich the knowledge regarding the interaction of UV-C and ERF1A during ripening. Thus, data from the proteomic experiment performed under UV-C (hpERF1A vs unsilenced control) were compared with the RNA-seq dataset concerning the peel (UV-C vs untreated control) ( ). This approach, despite the different experimental conditions of each data set, revealed numerous UV-C-responsive genes whose corresponding proteins displayed different accumulation trends following ERF1A suppression. For example, the abundance of 8 proteins, including methionine sulfoxide reductase B5 (PpMSRB5), was increased in ERF1A fruit, while the corresponding genes were downregulated in UV-C-exposed ones. Also, 27 proteins, including carboxylesterase 13 (PpCXE13), salicylic acid-binding protein 2 (PpSABP2), and 2-hydroxyisoflavanone dehydratase (PpHIDH), were underaccumulated in ERF1A fruit, while their genes were upregulated by UV-C ( ). These results indicate that ERF1A silencing before UV-C treatment, apart from altering ripening, may reverse a large part of UV-C signaling.

## Identification of the target candidate genes of ERF1A
Based on the ERF1A binding sites in the promoter region, 22 genes were selected as putative ERF1A target genes ( ). The expression of these target genes during ripening was examined in ERF1A-silenced fruit ( ). Data indicated that the expression of putative target genes was influenced by ERF1A silencing in a time-dependent manner ( ), leading us to assume that most of the selected genes may be potential ERF1A targets. Motivated by the ripening changes observed in UV-C-treated peach fruit following ERF1A silencing ( ), we also identified candidate genes associated with fruit firmness (cellulose synthase-like protein E1, PpCLSE1; galactoside 2-alpha-L-fucosyltransferase isoform X1, PpFUT1; PpPME3; and GDSL-like lipase/acylhydrolase superfamily protein, PpGDSL3), ethylene biosynthesis/signaling (ethylene-responsive TF 1B, PpERF1B and PpACO11), and color development (MYB-related protein MYB4, PpMYB4 and probable WRKY TF 40, PpWRKY40). Based on the metabolic changes observed in the silenced fruit ( ), we also analyzed the expression of PpAMY, 2-hydroxyisoflavanone dehydratase (PpHIDH), cytochrome P450 (PpCYP450), UDP-glycosyltransferase 76F1 (PpUGT76F1), and 2-alkenal reductase (NADP(+)-dependent) (PpP2), due to their established roles in ripening-related metabolic pathways ( ; ; ; ). We found that the expressions of PpCLSE1, PpFUT1, PpGDSL3, PpACO11, PpMYB4, PpWRKY40, PpHIDH, and PpCYP450 were lower in ERF1A-silenced fruit 4 d following UV-C ( ; ).
 Considering the high number of ERF1A putative target genes related to hormones (viz. PpCRK, PpFMO, PpZRK, PpPIP2, PpCEP14, PpAATP, and PpSABP2) ( ; ), we further explore the role of ERF1A in hormone homeostasis. Levels of auxin and salicylic acid (SA) increased, while ABA appeared to decrease in ERF1A-silenced peels ( ). Because the ERF1A silencing affected several proteins related to fatty acid biosynthesis (i.e. long chain acyl-CoA synthetase 1, PpLACS1 and biotin carboxyl carrier protein of acetyl-CoA carboxylase 2, PpBCCP2) ( ) and also triggers both PpCXE11 and PpCXE13 expression as well as PpCXE13 abundance ( ; ), and considering the important role of these genes/proteins in volatile compound biosynthesis ( ), we analyzed the peel-derived volatiles ( ; ). ERF1A-silenced fruit accumulated greater amounts of various volatiles, including 2-hexenal, heptanal, and 2-heptenal, whereas other volatile compounds such as benzaldehyde, decanal, and ethylbenzene were less abundant ( ), proposing the involvement of ERF1A in their regulation.
To determine whether some of the putative target genes are transcriptionally regulated by ERF1A, we performed a GUS reporter assay on PpCXE11, PpCXE13, and PpSABP2. The results revealed that all 3 genes exhibited increased fluorescence when co-introduced into protoplasts with the ERF1A overexpression plasmid ( ), suggesting that ERF1A enhances the promoter activity of these genes. The transformation efficiency of the protoplasts was verified by the fluorescent microscopy using a GFP-containing vector ( ), while the accumulation of ERF1A protein was confirmed through Western blot analysis ( ).

## Discussion
The use of UV-C radiation as a ripening regulator has emerged as a key area of interest ( ; ; ; ); however, the underlying mechanisms through which UV-C influences fruit biology remain unclear. As a starting point for our study, we demonstrated that UV-C influences key traits associated with peach ripening. Particularly, UV-C may temporarily induce respiration and ethylene production ( ), accompanied by a rise in the expression of ethylene-associated genes, such as PpACS.1 and PpACO11 ( ). This observation supports previous reports ( ; ) indicating that UV-C enhances ethylene accumulation and induces ethylene biosynthetic gene expression in various climacteric fruits. The analysis through post-cold fruit ripening indicates that fruit softening, a major ripening-associated phenomenon in peaches ( ), was reduced by UV-C treatment ( ), consistent with previous findings ( ). Immunolocalization using anti-AGP antibodies revealed that UV-C increased AGPs, as indicated by JIM13, LM14, and LM30 distribution. Given the adhesive role of AGPs in the cell-wall structure during fruit softening ( ), the observed increase in AGPs in UV-C-treated fruit, along with their altered firmness, supports a role for AGPs in the delayed softening of peach fruit. Additionally, UV-C stimulated the presence of xyloglucan-specific epitopes recognized by LM25 antibody (XLLG, XXLG, and XXXG oligosaccharides of xyloglucan) and upregulated xyloglucan-related genes, including xyloglucan galactosyltransferase GT14 (PpGT14.1, PpGT14.2, and PpGT14.3) ( ; ). Moreover, UV-C reduced unmethylesterified HGs, as detected by the LM19 antibody ( ). During peach fruit softening, the action of pectin methylesterases reduces pectin methylation, facilitating further cleavage by pectic and pectate lyases, as well as polygalacturonases ( ). However, the reduced demethylesterification observed in UV-C-treated fruit suggests a suppression in softening due to the limited accessibility of these enzymes. Overall, our findings support the role of UV-C in cell-wall reprogramming, as demonstrated by the broad modulation of cell-wall-related genes in UV-C-treated fruit ( ).
While comprehensive transcriptome investigation of UV-C in fruit ripening is limited ( ), our study identifies genes regulated by UV-C within a few hours after application, providing insights into the initial molecular events that might be triggered by UV-C. A key aspect of our study was the separate sampling of peel and flesh to reveal UV-C-induced changes driving the ripening transition in each tissue. The highest number of unique DEGs was found in the peel ( ), suggesting that UV-C mainly affects the outer layer of the peel rather than the mesocarp cells of the peaches. This is probably linked to the presence of UV filtering compounds, blocking the in-depth penetration of UV-C irradiation ( ). Hence, a challenging question is how UV-C regulates many genes in the flesh ( ) and postpones the flesh-softening process ( ). Peach fruit peel is empowered with a sensory mechanism to counteract various environmental stressors ( ). Therefore, it is probable that high-energy UV-C levels may be sensed by the peel and then transformed into organized local and systemic responses, leading to the whole fruit's metabolism reset. Consequently, UV-C reception in peel not only activated gene expression but also induced systemic suppressive effects in the flesh, which resulted in an extended biologically relevant ripening effect, as indicated by the softening inhibition that lasted for at least 9 d ( ).
Our data also support the establishment of a UV-C-associated reprogramming of central and secondary metabolism. Fruit treated with UV-C displayed alterations in the expression of genes involved in polyphenol biosynthesis that were accompanied by higher levels of anthocyanin, such as delphinidin in the peel ( ), consistent with the changes in peel color indicators and fruit phenotype ( ). These findings altogether could be linked to UV-C-accelerated fruit coloring ( ). Data also revealed an accumulation of several sugars, such as sucrose and maltose, in both UV-C-treated tissues ( ) and the activation of their biosynthetic genes ( ), confirming previous findings ( ). Genes involved in abscisic acid (ABA), jasmonic acid, and brassinosteroid metabolism were affected by UV-C treatment ( ), indicating a regulation in phytohormone signaling.
Emerging evidence indicates that fruit ripening is epigenetically regulated, with gene expression closely linked to DNA methylation status ( ). Consistent with previous studies ( ; ), our data show that UV-C induces both DNA N6-methyldeoxyadenosine (6mA) and RNA m6A methylation ( ). While further research is needed to fully characterize the epigenetic (DNA) and epitranscriptomic (RNA) impacts of UV-C in peach ripening, our findings suggest that it may reprogram gene expression by promoting adenine methylation, potentially reshaping ripening signals. Given the UV-C-stimulated DNA methylation observed during peach ripening ( ), the known sensitivity of ERFs to methylation during fruit ripening ( ) and reports of UV-C-induced mutations ( ; ), we investigated whether ERF1A undergoes targeted methylation and/or mutation to clarify its role in UV-C-mediated ripening. Bisulfite sequencing showed no UV-C-inducible cytosine methylation in ERF1A, and coding region analysis confirmed the absence of UV-C-induced mutations ( ). Overall, our findings show that ERF1A function remains largely unaffected by UV-C at the epigenetic or genetic level, supporting its use in further studies.
This study shows that UV-C induces transcriptomic reprogramming in peach fruit ( ), delaying ripening ( ) alongside the upregulation of ripening-related TFs, notably ERF1A ( ). Other UV-C-responsive TFs, PpERF2 and PpERF4.1 ( ), clustered closely with ERF1A in the phylogenetic tree ( ). Early studies in tomatoes show that ERF regulates fruit ripening ( ), while UV-C modifies the expression of numerous ERFs ( ; ). Studies of ERF genes and their expression profiles have been reported in peach fruit ( ), although there is a lack of functional assessment. Given also the recent findings linking ERF1A to ethylene production and anthocyanin biosynthesis during climacteric fruit ripening ( ), we selected it as a primary target to investigate the role of UV-C in peach ripening. Thus, we transiently knocked down ERF1A expression through RNAi and analyzed its effects on peach ripening following UV-C exposure. Silencing ERF1A led to its downregulation ( ), suppressed ethylene biosynthesis ( ), and reduced PpSAMS.1 protein accumulation ( ), suggesting ERF1A as a key regulator of the UV-C ripening response and its link to ethylene signaling. We further present several lines of evidence substantiating that the ERF1A silencing before UV-C exposure reversed a large part of the UV-C-delayed ripening responses. Fruit softening in ERF1A-silenced (hpERF1A) peaches was significantly greater than in GFP controls ( ). This enhanced softening aligns with the upregulation of multiple cell-wall-degrading enzymes ( ), which drive the observed changes in pectin, xyloglucan, and AGPs (JIM13, LM14, and LM30) composition ( ). In particular, hpERF1A fruit accumulated higher levels of demethylesterified HGs (LM19 signal), indicating that pectin de-esterification and subsequent cleavage proceed unimpeded in these samples. Demethylesterified HGs are inherently more susceptible to attack by polygalacturonases and pectate lyases, thereby facilitating the solubilization phase of ripening ( ). Finally, the detection of LM25 epitopes confirms that xyloglucan breakdown and pectin solubilization occur in their characteristic sequential order, first xyloglucan loosening, then pectin dissolution ( ), demonstrating that ERF1A silencing does not block the normal progression of cell-wall remodeling during softening. Meanwhile, the loss of firmness, despite the decrease in ethylene production in silenced fruit ( ), denotes that ERF1A could regulate softening through ethylene-independent pathways, possibly through the activation of specific genes and proteins ( ). The reversed effect of ERF1A in UV-C ripening outcome was further illustrated by the increase in water loss ( ), which was accompanied by changes in aquaporin (PpPIP2-2) and desiccation-related protein (PpPCC13-62) in silenced fruit ( ; ). ERF1A-silenced fruit displayed greater proportional weight loss, possibly due to the change in fruit cell size ( ), which may be linked to the softening of silenced fruit, as previously suggested in peach fruit ( ). Impairing the expression of ERF1A was also effective in reversing the effect of UV-C in the peel central metabolism. In contrast with the accumulation of sugars observed above in UV-C-exposed fruit ( ), lower concentrations of most sugars, such as maltose, sucrose, and trehalose, were recorded in ERF1A-RNAi peels ( ). Current data also indicated that silenced fruit had faint pigmentation ( ), as demonstrated by the reduction of color indicators, consistent with the lower levels of quercetin (a yellow-colored pigment flavonol) and delphinidin (a purple-colored anthocyanin pigment) ( ; ). These data provide evidence that the UV-C ripening outcome was disrupted by transient ERF1A silencing and support the pleiotropic effect of ERF1A on peach ripening, as well as its potential role in other Prunus species with homologous ERF1A-like sequences ( ).
Another major target of interest in this study was the alteration of the peel proteomic profile in response to ERF1A silencing. It is worth emphasizing not only the relatively high number of proteins whose accumulation altered in ERF1A-RNAi fruit ( ) but also the functional categories to which they can be assigned, with most of the overaccumulated proteins being associated with oxidative stress and ROS metabolism ( ), including various heat shock proteins, such as PpHSP18.1A, PpHSP18.5.2, and PpHSP17.8 ( ). These findings indicate an earlier onset of ripening in ERF1A-silenced fruit and are consistent with the generation of oxidative stress conditions ( ). A meta-analysis comparison between the RNA-seq data of UV-C-exposed peel ( ) with the proteomic dataset of UV-C-treated ERF1A-silenced samples ( ) identified 41 UV-C-responsive genes whose corresponding proteins were also affected in ERF1A-silenced peel tissue ( ) and therefore could be considered putative ERF1A targets. Interestingly, ERF1A silencing induced strong differences between mRNA expression and their protein quantities (85.4%; 35 gene-to-protein pairs exhibited different trends), suggesting that the UV-C-responsive transcriptome and proteome can be shaped differently depending on ERF1A expression levels. It should be noted that, although these 2 datasets were derived from different experimental conditions, and the association between mRNA abundance and protein levels may be influenced by posttranscriptional regulation, their integration proved highly informative for identifying candidate ERF1A targets. Another notable finding from this proteogenomic analysis was the increase of abscisic stress-ripening protein 2 (PpASR2) in silenced fruit, while the corresponding genes were downregulated in UV-C-exposed fruit ( ). Also, various SA-binding proteins, such as PpSABP2 and PpSABP2.1, were underaccumulated in RNAi-ERF1A fruit, while UV-C upregulated the expression of their genes. Consistent with this, enriched groups of genes related to hormone signaling, including response to ABA, were affected by UV-C ( ). This regulation pattern raises the hypothesis that a fundamental shift in hormone signaling and/or interplay occurs in ERF1A-silenced fruit.
Another insight brought by our study is related to the characterization of the putative targets of ERF1A in peach fruit. Using information about the genomic positions of the ERF1A binding sites, we identified 22 genes as potential targets of this TF. RT-qPCR analysis in ERF1A-silenced peel revealed that a great number of these genes were downregulated for at least one of the ripening stages examined ( ), proposing that these genes might serve as possible targets of ERF1A. In addition to identifying potential ERF1A target genes based on binding sites, we examined a group of ripening-related genes involved in fruit firmness, color development, and ethylene production. Silencing ERF1A reduced the expression of firmness-related genes PpCSLE1 ( ), PpFUT1 ( ), and PpGDSL.3 ( ) ( ; ), supporting its role in delaying ripening. PpACO11 expression also declined in silenced fruit ( ; ), consistent with reduced ethylene production ( ) and previous findings ( ). Additionally, color differences between silenced and control fruit ( ) likely result from downregulation of PpMYB4 and PpWRKY40 ( ; ), both associated with anthocyanin accumulation ( ). Our study also shows that impairment of ERF1A results in downregulation of the PpHIDH and PpCYP450 ( ; ), known to control the isoflavonoid biosynthesis ( ), further supporting the observed link between ERF1A and secondary metabolism ( ).
An interesting outcome in this study was the observation that the ERF1A candidate target genes whose expression was decreased by silencing ( , ) are involved in hormone signaling, including ABA (PpFMO, ) and auxin (PpPIP2, ; PpCEP14, ). This observation is aligned with the role of auxin and ABA in AP2/ERF ripening function ( ) and peach ripening ( ; ). Further evidence for the impact of ERF1A in hormone reconfigurations arose from the observation that auxin levels were increased, while ABA was decreased in the silenced peel ( ; ). These results are consistent with a pattern in which peach fruit ripening ( ) is associated with changes in auxin and ABA levels ( ; ). PpERF3 has been shown to function as a transcriptional activator by binding to ERF response elements in the promoters of ABA biosynthesis genes in peach fruit during ripening, thereby increasing ABA levels ( ). Although our peel-based hormone data do not allow us to draw a general conclusion about the ripening process of the whole fruit, they clearly suggest that impairing ERF1A expression results in hormone reprogramming, which could explain the distinct ripening behavior of the silenced fruit ( ).
There is evidence, although still not extensive, that several ERF genes are SA inducible ( ). Herein, we provide evidence for a link between the repressor ERF1A and SA during peach ripening. First, several presently identified as putative ERF1A targets, including PpAATP and PpCRK ( ; ), have been recognized as key components of SA signaling ( ). Second, our data show that the salicylic acid-binding protein 2 (PpSABP2), a receptor for SA, was decreased in ERF1A-RNAi fruit at all conditions assessed ( ; ). In support, GUS experiments indicated that ERF1A acts as a transcriptional activator of PpSABP2 by enhancing its promoter activity ( ). Additionally, we detected a strong reduction of PpSABP2, PpSABP2.1, and PpSABP2.2 proteins in ERF1A silencing fruit, confirming that not only this gene but also the gene products are affected by ERF1A ( ; ). To this end, SA content was induced in silenced fruit ( ; ). These findings suggest that ERF1A regulates SA signaling via both transcriptional and posttranscriptional activation of PpSABP2 ( ).
Carboxylesterases (CXEs) catalyze the hydrolysis of a carboxylic ester to alcohol and carboxylic acid anion. Previous studies in peach fruit ( ) reported that CXEs are associated with the catabolism of volatile esters, such as hexyl acetate, E-hexenyl acetate, and Z-3-hexenyl acetate. Our study uncovers a link between ERF1A and CXEs during peach ripening. Indeed, a strong downregulation of PpCXE11 and PpCXE13 expression, in conjunction with underaccumulation of PpCXE13 protein in ERF1A-silenced peaches, indicates that PpCXE11 and PpCXE13 represent putative targets of ERF1A ( ; ; ). This was further validated by the GUS assay, showing that ERF1A positively regulates the promoting activity of the 2 CXEs ( ). Our study also shows that ERF1A silencing induced proteins related to fatty acid biosynthesis, such as PpLACS1 and PpBCCP2 ( ), suggesting that ERF1A may modulate fatty acid metabolism to produce volatile compounds ( ). Our chromatographic analysis of volatiles revealed that ERF1A suppression decreased 4-hexen-1-ol acetate (z) ester and increased aldehydes/alcohols, such as 2-hexenal, heptanal, 2-heptenal, and octanal ( ), proposing that the decreased levels of CXEs in ERF1A-RNAi fruit provoke alcohol accumulation by hydrolyzing esters ( ). Although we cannot exclude the possibility that some of these volatiles may be affected by the accelerated ripening of silenced fruit ( ), the above evidence highlights the contribution of ERF1A to volatile regulation in peach fruit ( ).

## Conclusions
This study reveals the tissue-specific factors linking UV-C treatment to ripening delay in peach fruit. Our findings demonstrate that ERF1A is responsive to UV-C and contributes to ripening inhibition by regulating target genes (PpCXE11, PpCXE13, and PpSABP2), protein abundance, metabolite production (sugars, phenolics, and volatiles) and key ripening traits such as softening, coloration, and hormone metabolism, particularly involving indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), ABA, SA, and ethylene signaling. Building on these results, we propose a model illustrating the interaction between UV-C and ERF1A in peach fruit ripening ( ). Overall, our study identifies key molecular components and mechanistic pathways through which UV-C and ERF1A modulate the ripening transition in peach fruit. However, further research is required to clarify the regulatory role of ERF1A under physiological (non-UV-C) conditions. In addition, it remains to be determined whether the UV- and ERF1A-mediated regulatory network is conserved across other climacteric fruit species. These findings contribute to a deeper understanding of ripening control and support targeted breeding strategies aimed at improving fruit quality.

## Materials and methods

## Fruit material and UV-C treatment
Nectarine (P. persica L. Batsch, cv. Luciana) fruit was harvested from a commercial orchard in North Greece (Velventos, Kozani region). Uniform fruits were immediately transferred to the Pomology Laboratory of Aristotle University of Thessaloniki and randomly divided into 2 groups of 150 fruits each. The first group was exposed to UV-C irradiation for 10 min (5 min—6 kJ m−2 on each side) in a modified machine with 4 UV-C lamps attached (OSRAM HNS 55W OFR G13, 26 mm diameter, and 895 mm length) while the second group remained untreated (control). The selection of the parameters regarding the UV-C application was based on preliminary experiments and our previous work ( ). Each treatment/group (UV-C and control) was divided into 2 subgroups, of which the first subgroup remained at room temperature (20 °C) for 8 d (herein defined as “ripening”), while the second subgroup was cold stored (0 °C, 95% RH) for 7 d and then allowed to ripen at room temperature (20 °C) for 2 d (defined as “post-cold ripening”). Fruit ripening characterization was conducted at 1, 2, 4, 6, and 8 d of ripening (20 °C) for the first subgroup, and for the second subgroup (i) 8 h after UV-C application (8 h, before cold storage), (ii) after cold storage (0 °C) following the stabilization of fruit temperature (0 d), as well as (iii) after 2 d of post-cold ripening (20 °C, 2 d). Samples of the mesocarp (flesh) and exocarp (peel) were collected, frozen with liquid nitrogen, and stored (−80 °C). A schematic illustration of the overall experimental design is provided in .

## Evaluation of fruit ripening progress
Fruit weight loss (%) (18 fruits for each subgroup) was determined during various ripening times and conditions as the decrease in fruit weight compared to harvest. Peel color indicators L*, a*, and b* were measured using a colorimeter (Minolta CR-200 Minolta, Japan), and the indicators Chroma (C*) and Hue angle (H°) were calculated ( ). A texture analyzer (TA.XT plusC, Stable Micro Systems, UK) was used to determine fruit firmness ( ). Respiration and ethylene production were analyzed by a gas chromatographer (Shimadzu GC-2014, Kyoto, Japan), as described in . Soluble solids concentration (SSC, %) and titratable acidity (% malic acid) were determined ( ). All ripening analyses were performed using 9 fruits per treatment (3 fruits × 3 replicates).

## Electrical conductivity estimation
Electrical conductivity was measured as described by using 9 fruits (3 fruits × 3 replicates) for each treatment.

## Cell wall epitope immunolocalization and specimen visualization
Semi-thin sections (0.5 to 2 μm thick) of fruit were prepared according to . Sections were mounted onto glass slides and subjected to either staining with 0.5% (w/v) toluidine blue or immunostaining for pectin and AGPs detection. The localization of pectins was achieved using the LM19 primary antibody, a rat IgM monoclonal antibody that specifically binds to pectic epitopes, and the LM20 antibody ( ). For AGP detection, 3 primary antibodies were employed: JIM13, which is a rat IgM monoclonal antibody binding to the β-GlcA-(1 → 3)-α-GalA-(1 → 2)-α-Rha motif of AGPs and recognizing the AGP2 epitope found in various plant exudates (PlantProbes, University of Leeds, UK; ), LM14, which is an antibody recognizing arabinose- and galactose-enriched carbohydrate chains present in AGPs or rhamnogalacturonans (RGs-I) side chains ( ); and LM30, another rat IgM monoclonal antibody that targets AGP epitopes ( ; ). Xyloglucan-specific epitopes were recognized by the LM25 antibody (XLLG, XXLG, and XXXG oligosaccharides of xyloglucan; ). The immunolocalization procedure was performed as described by . To detect cellulose, a subset of sections was also stained with Calcofluor-white (Calco). Microscopy and image acquisition were performed using a Zeiss Axioplan microscope with LSM780 confocal laser scanning microscopy capabilities (Carl Zeiss AG). FITC was excited at 488 nm, and emission was collected using a 525/50 nm bandpass filter, with laser power and detector gain adjusted to avoid saturation while maintaining signals within the linear range. Calcofluor White was excited using a 405 nm laser (UV 355 nm where available), and emission was collected with a 450/50 nm bandpass filter under reduced laser power due to the brightness of the dye. Single-stained controls were used to optimize photomultiplier tube voltages and to confirm minimal spectral overlap between the 2 fluorophores ( ). Fluorescence intensity was calculated according to . For each treatment, fluorescence intensity was measured in 5 sections from 3 different fruits, and the mean values were calculated accordingly.

## Transcriptome analysis by RNA-seq
Total RNA was extracted using Monarch Total RNA Miniprep Kit (New England BioLabs Inc., Ipswich, MA, USA) ( ) from flesh and peel tissue, which were sampled in triplicate (3 fruits per biological replicate) at 8 h following UV-C treatment. Poly-A-enriched libraries were prepared from the isolated RNA using the Illumina TruSeq Stranded RNA Library Prep Kit. Quantification and qualification of the sample library were performed using an Agilent 5300 Fragment Analyzer. An Illumina Novaseq 6000 platform was used for library sequencing and Trim Galore for trimming sequences for adaptors and filtering low-quality reads and unknown sequences. P. persica Zhongyoutao 14 Genome v1.0 ( ) was used as the reference genome for paired-end reads alignment. HTSeq v0.11.1 was used for the quantification of the raw read counts using the “-s reverse–type=gene” option. “Transcripts Per Million (TPM)” was used to normalize raw data. The normalized data were filtered to leave only the always-above-0 genes, and then it was log2 transformed and scaled using z-score. Differential expressions between samples were determined as described ( ) using the edgeR. DEGs were considered those with a q-value < 0.01. RT-qPCR was performed to support RNA-seq expression dynamics ( ).

## Gene expression analysis by RT-qPCR
Monarch Total RNA Miniprep Kit (New England Biolabs) was used to extract total RNA from samples 8 h after UV-C treatment. LunaScript RT SuperMix Kit (New England Biolabs) was used for cDNA synthesis through reverse RNA transcription in a PCR system (ProFlex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analysis was performed in a QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as described in .

## Analysis of primary and secondary metabolites
The analysis of primary metabolites was conducted using a GC-MS (PerkinElmer Clarus SQ 8S) in peel and flesh samples at 4 and 8 d of ripening and at 0 and 2 d of post-cold ripening after UV-C treatment. The extraction procedure, GC/MS program, and analysis were described in detail by . Results were expressed as a relative abundance of adonitol. Secondary metabolite analysis was performed using Agilent 1260 Infinity II (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Phenol extraction, LC-MS program, and analysis were performed according to , while the procedures for anthocyanins were described by . OpenLab LC-MS software (Agilent Technologies) was used for data acquisition and processing, while standard compounds were used for identification. Three biological repeats were conducted; each one consisted of 3 fruits per treatment.

## DNA 6mA and RNA m6A assays
Genomic DNA (100 ng) was extracted from peel tissue at 8 h after UV-C treatment as well as at 0 d of post-cold ripening. To quantify DNA 5mC and m6A RNA methylation, the MethylFlash Global DNA Methylation ELISA Easy Kit and the EpiQuik m6A RNA Methylation Quantification kit were used, respectively, according to the manufacturer's instructions, using a Varioskan LUX microplate reader.

## Targeted bisulfite sequencing experiment of ERF1A
Genomic DNA was extracted from peel tissue at 1 d following UV-C treatment according to . Approximately 500 ng was used for bisulfite treatment using the EZ DNA Methylation-Gold Kit according to the manufacturer's instructions and as described before ( ) using the primers 5′-ATG TTY GGA YAG AGT GGA AYA GA-3′ and 5′-TCC TCC TTR ARC RRC AAA TCR CCC C-3′. The amplicons were cloned into pGEM-T Easy and sequenced. Sequencing data were analyzed with Cymate software ( ).

## Phylogenetic analysis of P. persica ERFs and ERF1A among Prunus species
The evolutionary relationship among the members of the P. persica AP2/ERF superfamily was studied. The genes were selected based on the analysis of and by the identification of the AP2 domain in the CDS of other P. persica genes through the NCBI Conserved Domain Database. The CDS of ERF1A (1287 bp—Sanger sequencing) were retrieved through the Genome Database for Rosaceae (GDR) ( ). Moreover, the evolutionary relationship of ERF1A among different Prunus species was studied. The genome of each Prunus species and the CDS of ERF1A were also retrieved through GDR ( ). The analysis and design of the phylogenetic trees were performed using the software MEGA (v12) by selecting the model Maximum Likelihood. The trees are displayed as cladograms, with branch lengths normalized for visualization; the figures are intended to illustrate the topology of sequence relationships.

## Vector construction and RNAi silencing of ERF1A in peach fruit
For the generation of pCambia-hpERF1A ( ), a 269 bp ERF1A CDS fragment (specifically designed on Pp05G018230 sequence) was inserted into the pCambia1300 vector (Addgene, www.addgene.org) in sense and antisense orientation. Agroinfiltration of nectarine fruit cv. Morsiani 90 was performed using a vacuum pump (Electric Aspirator VE-11, Jeio Tech) set to −90 kPa. For control treatment, a pCambia 1300 vector carrying a GFP hairpin construct was used ( ; ). Three days after RNAi application, all infiltrated fruit (hpERF1A, hpGFP) were subjected to UV-C treatment, as described above, and then allowed to ripen at room temperature for 4 d ( ). Fruit ripening characterization and sampling of ERF1A-silenced peel were conducted at 1, 2, 3, and 4 d after UV-C treatment C (4, 5, 6, and 7 d following ERF1A silencing, respectively). To validate the silencing efficiency, we assessed the expression levels of ERF1A by RT-qPCR in ERF1A-silenced peel tissue, compared to the peel tissue of control fruits (hpGFP), using primers located outside the RNAi target region (ERF-off), at the same time points used for ripening characterization. RNAi metabolomic analysis was performed for the peel tissue of the latter time point, as described previously.

## Protein identification in ERF1A-silenced fruit
Proteins of ERF1A-silenced peel at 1 and 4 d after UV-C treatment were extracted and processed for proteomic analysis according to the sp3 tryptic digestion protocol ( ). Samples were run on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex UltimateRSLC online with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) ( ). Orbitrap raw data were analyzed in DIA-NN v1.8.1 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) ( ) through searching against the P. persica CN14 protein database containing 35,355 proteins ( ) using the library-free mode of the software and allowing up to 2 tryptic missed cleavages. A spectral library was created by the DIA runs and used to reanalyze them. DIA-NN default settings have been used with oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification. N-terminal methionine excision was also enabled. The match between runs feature was used for all analyses, and the output (precursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR. Finally, the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides. Results were processed statistically and visualized by Perseus software (1.6.15.0).

## Analysis of ERF1A target genes in ERF1A-silenced fruit
The identification of genes targeted by ERF1A was determined using the Plant Promoter Analysis Network v3.0 ( ). Briefly, the accession number of ERF1A and the binding site “GCCGC” were used to search cis-regulatory elements in the promoter using the Arabidopsis thaliana weight matrix. The expression of ERF1A and its candidate target genes was assayed in peel samples by RT-qPCR at 1, 2, 3, and 4 d of ripening following UV-C treatment, after ERF1A silencing.

## IAA, ABA, and SA determination
Estimation of IAA, ABA, and SA content was performed at 4 d of ripening after UV-C treatment following ERF1A silencing, by using 0.2 g of freeze-dried skin tissue. Determination was conducted in a Tecan Infinite M200PRO microplate reader (Tecan, Switzerland) using the Plant IAA ELISA Kit (ELK 8753), Plant ABA ELISA Kit (ELK 8563), and Plant SA ELISA Kit (ELK 8702) (ELK Biotechnology), according to the instructions of the manufacturer.

## Volatile organic compound analysis
For volatile compound analysis, peach skin tissue sampled (3 fruits × 3 replicates) at 4 d of ripening after UV-C treatment, following ERF1A silencing) was extracted as previously reported by . The analysis was carried out using a Trace GC Ultra 299 equipped with an ISQ MS and a TriPlus RSH autosampler (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Switzerland), coupled with In-Tube Extraction Dynamic Headspace (ITEX-DHS), following the method previously described by .

## GUS reporter assay and western blot analysis
Approximately 500 to 1,000 bp of the candidate ERF1A-targeted genes (Carboxylesterase 11; PpCXE11, carboxylesterase 13; PpCXE13, and SA binding protein 2; PpSABP2) promoter sequences were inserted into pRT-GUS vectors using the primers described in (GUS vectors). The coding sequence of ERF1A was inserted into a pRT vector containing an in-frame 3xHA-tag sequence under the control of CaMV35S promoter (OE_ERF1A vector). A pRT plasmid carrying the neomycin phosphotransferase gene was used as a mock control (Neo vector). Vector sequences are shown in . Protoplasts of A. thaliana leaves were isolated and transformed using the polyethylene glycol)-mediated transformation. A total of 50,000 protoplasts were transformed with a 10 μg of plasmid DNA per sample, consisting of either 1 μg of OE_ERF1A vector, 1 μg of the GUS vectors, and 8 μg of Neo vector or 1 μg of OE_ERF1A vector and 9 μg of Neo vector. Transformed protoplasts were determined by fluorescence ( ).
Western blot analysis was conducted by transforming 100,000 protoplasts with 10 μg of OE_ERF1A vector and 10 μg of Neo vector or 20 μg of Neo vector (control). Following overnight incubation, protoplasts were observed by microscopy (Nikon C2+ Confocal Microscope), while a GFP-containing vector was transformed into the protoplasts to test the transformation efficiency. Protoplast proteins were extracted ( ), and electrophoresed proteins were transferred by semi-dry blotting to PVDF membranes using eBlot L1 (L00686C, GenScript). Membranes were incubated with primary antibodies Anti-HA (4F6, ABT2040-50UL, Abbkine Scientific) and Anti-Actin (3T3, ABL1050-50UL, Abbkine Scientific), and peroxidase-conjugated second antibody (Abclonal, AS003). Signals were detected by Pro-light HRP chemiluminescence detection, and images were taken using the Tanon5200 Tanon.

## Statistical analysis
SPSS (v25.0., Chicago, USA) was used for the statistical analysis, and significant statistical differences were detected based on Student's t-test (P ≤ 0.05). Principal component analysis and GO enrichment analysis were also performed. Visualization of enrichment plots was performed using SRplot.

## Accession numbers
The sequence data generated in this study are available in the GenBank/EMBL databases under the accession numbers listed in .

## Supplementary Material
kiaf409_Supplementary_Data

## Acknowledgments
The authors sincerely thank Dr Ioannis Ganopoulos for providing the hormone ELISA kit. We are also grateful to Eleni Giannoutsou for her contributions to the cell wall experiments. The authors acknowledge the School of Agriculture, Laboratory of Agricultural Chemistry, and the Interdisciplinary Agrifood Center (KEAGRO) of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (AUTH) for access to the GC-MS research unit infrastructure. We also acknowledge the support of this work by the project “The Greek Research Infrastructure for Personalised Medicine (pMED-GR)” (MIS 5002802), which is implemented under the Action “Reinforcement of the Research and Innovation Infrastructure,” funded by the Operational Programme “Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation” (NSRF 2014-2020) and co-financed by Greece and the European Union (European Regional Development Fund).

## Author contributions
E.N., M.M., C.S., I.-D.S.A., M.S., G.T., C.B., and A.D. performed the experiments and data analysis; E.N. wrote the article with the revision from all authors. A.M. designed and directed the project. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

## Supplementary data
The following materials are available in the online version of this article.

 . Primary monoclonal antibodies used for immunolocalization of the different cell wall epitopes.

 . Tissue-specific RNA-seq analysis after UV-C treatment.

 . Abbreviations and accession numbers for genes expressed in peach fruit tissues.

 . Primary metabolites in peach fruit tissues during ripening.

 . Secondary metabolites in peach fruit tissues during ripening.

 . Phylogenetic analysis among members of AP2/ERF superfamily. ERF1A phylogenetic analysis among different Prunus species.

 . Proteomic analysis of UV-C-treated peel tissue in response to ERF1A silencing.

 . ERF1A-targeted genes.

 . Analysis of peel volatile compounds in ERF1A-silenced fruit.

 . List of primers used.

 . Ripening traits and electrolyte leakage of peach fruit tissues during ripening.

 . Validation of RNA-seq data by RT-qPCR.

 . Primary and secondary metabolites in peach fruit tissues.

 
. Ripening features of “Morsiani 90” fruit in the absence or presence of cold storage following UV-C treatment.

 . Relative expression of ERF1A in “Morsiani 90” peel after UV-C exposure (3 fruits × 3 replicates).

 . Color indicators between hpERF1A and control peaches, represented as fold change (log2).

 . Comparison of volatile organic compounds between hpERF1A and control peaches, represented as fold change (log2).

 . A schematic representation of the experimental procedure.

 . Sequences of vectors used.

## Funding
This research project is implemented under the framework of the Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation (HFRI) through the National Recovery and Resilience Plan ‘Greece 2.0,’ co-funded by the European Union – NextGenerationEU (Implementation Institution: HFRI, Project code: HFRI-15455).

## Conflict of interest statement
All the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

## Data availability
The data underlying this article are available in the article and in its online .
The transcriptome data from this article have been deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive in the Bio-Project PRJNA1180494. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD060506 ( ).

## Dive Curated Terms
The following phenotypic, genotypic, and functional terms are of significance to the work described in this paper:

AGT Gramene: AT2G13360

AGT Araport: AT2G13360

MYB4 Gramene: AT4G38620

MYB4 Araport: AT4G38620

fruit AmiGo: PO:0009001

ACS Gramene: AT5G36880

ACS Araport: AT5G36880

ERF1 Gramene: Acc25620

ERF1 Araport: Acc25620

AGP2 Gramene: GRMZM2G027955

AGP2 Araport: GRMZM2G027955

GDR Gramene: https://www.rosaceae.org/

GDR Araport: https://www.rosaceae.org/

NCBI Gramene: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

NCBI Araport: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

fruit weight Planteome: TO:0002746