pmcRedox BiolRedox Biol2171redoxRedox Biology2213-2317ElsevierPMC13217503PMC13217503.113217503132175034217272310.1016/j.redox.2026.104225S2213-2317(26)00223-51042251Research PaperInflammation-driven mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS accumulation orchestrate pulmonary fibrotic remodeling in sepsis
ZhongZhaoqian WuKan WangJunhao ChenGuiming LuoHaihua ChenGuangqin SunChang GuoDanyan LiLeyi LiLeililei747667911@163.com JiangYongjiang48231@163.com aState Key Laboratory of Metabolic Dysregulation & Prevention and Treatment of Esophageal Cancer, Henan Key Laboratory of Critical Care Medicine, Henan International Joint Laboratory of Infection and Immunology, Department of Emergency Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450001, ChinabInstitute of Infection and Immunity, Henan Academy of Innovations in Medical Science, Zhengzhou, 451163, ChinacDepartment of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The Tenth Affiliated Hospital, Southern Medical University, Dongguan, 523058, ChinadGuangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Proteomics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515, China⁎Corresponding author. Institute of Infection and Immunity, Henan Academy of Innovations in Medical Science, Zhengzhou, 451163, China. lilei747667911@163.com⁎⁎Corresponding author. Institute of Infection and Immunity, Henan Academy of Innovations in Medical Science, Zhengzhou, 451163, China. jiang48231@163.com1These authors equally contributed to this work.
2Current address: Department of Medicine, Section of Epidemiology and Population Sciences, Dan L Duncan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX, USA.
72026165202694512928104225154202614520261552026160520262905202629052026© 2026 The Authors2026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Inflammation-induced pulmonary fibrosis is an irreversible and severe complication that leads to persistent decline in lung function and increased mortality; however, its early pathogenesis is still unclear. This study aimed to systematically elucidate the initiation mechanism of pulmonary fibrosis in the early stages of inflammation. By integrating multi-omics data and animal models, we found that lung exhibits stronger immune amplification and more severe mitochondrial dysfunction in comparison with other organs during inflammation, consequently fibrotic signaling is initiated in the acute phase. Mitochondria-related gene analysis identified six key genes (Bcl2l1, Gsr, Msrb3, AA467197, Stom, and Sod2) involved in the regulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) metabolism, which were closely associated with clinical outcomes in sepsis. Temporal data and TNF-α/IL-1β intervention experiments revealed that these cytokines are persistently overexpressed in septic lungs, serving as critical drivers of ROS activation. In vitro assays further confirmed that ROS overload directly induces cellular damage and functional reprogramming of fibroblasts. Through bulk and single-cell transcriptomic analyses, we elucidated the alteration of intercellular communication between immune and parenchymal cells, and identified Col13a1+ fibroblasts as a key subpopulation with the capability to drive fibrotic remodeling. In conclusion, sustained TNF-α/IL-1β signaling in septic lungs exacerbates ROS accumulation, thereby driving aberrant fibroblast repair and initiating pulmonary fibrosis, in which Col13a1+ fibroblasts represent the major profibrotic subpopulation. Thus, the early inhibition of TNF-α/IL-1β expression, suppression of ROS accumulation, and regulation of Col13a1+ fibroblast activation may provide an effective therapeutic strategy for sepsis.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Septic lungs show stronger myeloid activation and early fibrotic signaling.
•Persistent TNF-α/IL-1β signaling drives ROS overproduction by neutrophils.
•ROS overload induces functional reprogramming of fibroblasts.
•Col13a1+ fibroblasts are the key profibrotic subpopulation in septic lungs.
•Early targeting of TNF-α/IL-1β, ROS and Col13a1+ fibroblasts may prevent fibrosis.

## Keywords
SepsisPulmonary fibrosisMitochondrial disfunctionReactive oxygen speciesMulti-omics analysispmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Sepsis, a common and highly fatal condition, is a life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection; survivors of sepsis have a significantly increased risk of mortality within three years after discharge from hospital, compared to the patients with other inflammatory conditions [ , , ]. The lung is the earliest and most susceptible target organ in sepsis, and its injury can progress rapidly to acute lung injury (ALI) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) [ , ]. Notably, some survivors continue to experience respiratory problems after hospital discharge, accompanied by pulmonary dysfunction resulting from the long-term sequelae of ALI and ARDS, including dyspnea, cough, impaired diffusion capacity, reduced exercise tolerance, and fibrosis [ , , ].
As the central hub of cellular energy metabolism, mitochondria also play a key role in maintaining redox balance by regulating the production and clearance of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In sepsis, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) depletion and ROS accumulation caused by mitochondrial damage are fundamental molecular events driving the development of ALI [ , , ]. Moreover, acute inflammation induces excessive ROS production, which affects the progression of pulmonary fibrosis [ , , ]. Although the link between acute inflammation and pulmonary fibrosis has attracted widespread attention [ ], the mechanisms for ROS to initiate fibrosis remains poorly elucidated.
Pulmonary fibrosis has long been considered as a consequence of recurrent chronic inflammation. However, the observation of long-term sequelae of lung injury caused by acute inflammation has suggested that fibrotic processes might be initiated at the peak of inflammation. Sepsis-induced pulmonary fibrosis usually occurs after lung injury driven by an intense inflammatory response [ ]. Pro-fibrotic signaling is activated at the early stage of sepsis, including the upregulation of fibrosis-related genes, enhanced collagen synthesis, and activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway [ , ]. However, the pathogenesis of sepsis-induced pulmonary fibrosis, particularly the factors and mechanisms involved in this pathological process remains poorly understood.
In this study, we aimed to systematically elucidate the pathological processes of sepsis-associated lung injury and the mechanism of pulmonary fibrosis in the early stages of inflammation. We investigated the connections among inflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction, ROS accumulation, and fibrotic remodeling by using septic mouse models. We further revealed the potential mechanisms of pulmonary fibrosis initiated by inflammation from the perspectives of immune regulation and cellular remodeling, thus to provide some novel insights for early intervention in the clinic.

2

## Methods
2.1

## Data acquisition
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data for transcriptome of different tissues, including heart, liver, spleen, lung and kidney, from the cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) mice model were downloaded from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) dataset GSE224127 [ ]. Microarray data for the tissue samples of patients who died of sepsis or non-inflammatory causes were obtained from GSE141864 [ ]. Gene expression data and 28-d survival outcomes for patients with sepsis were downloaded from GSE65682 for prognostic analysis [ ]. RNA-seq data and Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) scores were obtained from GSE185263 for 348 patients with sepsis, to determine the correlations between gene expression and clinical evaluation [ ]. Spatial transcriptomic data of lung tissues from mouse models of pulmonary bacterial infection were accessed from GSE242471 [ ]. STOmicsBD [ ] was used to obtain spatial transcriptomic data from healthy mouse lung tissues (STDS0000062) [ ] and normal human lungs, including the proximal airway (STSP0004672) and distal airway and alveolar regions (STSP0004673) [ ].
Time-series lung transcriptomic data from mice challenged with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were downloaded from GSE224127 [ ]. Lung transcriptomic data from mice subjected to intravenous injection with recombinant tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α or interleukin (IL)-1β, as well as those treated with neutralizing antibodies against TNF-α and IL-1β following pretreatment with LPS were obtained from GSE224146 [ ]. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data of lung tissues from CLP mice were acquired from GSE207651 [ ], and scRNA-seq data of immune cells of mice subjected to intravenous injection with recombinant TNF or IL-1β were obtained from GSE202186 [ ].

2.2

## Animals
Male and female C57BL/6 mice aged 8–10 weeks were obtained from the Animal Center of Southern Medical University in Guangzhou, China. Mice were housed under standard laboratory conditions in well-ventilated cages with a 12-h light/dark cycle and provided with ad libitum access to food and water. All experiments were performed in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH), and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

2.3

## Mouse models of endotoxemia and sepsis
Two different sepsis models, including LPS-induced endotoxemia and CLP-mimicked polymicrobial infection were used in the experiment. To prepare endotoxemia model, the mice were intraperitoneally injected with LPS (isotype O111:B4; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at a dose of 10 mg/kg body weight, that were dissolved in Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS; #C14190500BT; Gibco, Billings, MT, USA). The mice of control group only received intraperitoneal injection with DPBS. All mice were euthanized at the end point of experiment for tissue collection. CLP was performed according to a previously published protocol [ ]. Briefly, mice were anesthetized and subjected to a midline laparotomy of 1 cm length to expose the cecum. Approximately 50% of the cecum was ligated and punctured once with a 21-gauge needle, followed by gentle extrusion of a small amount of fecal matter from the puncture site. The cecum was then returned to the peritoneal cavity, and the abdominal incision was closed with sutures. To facilitate recovery, the mice were subcutaneously injected with 1 mL of normal saline and temporarily placed on a heating pad, while the sham group mice underwent the same surgical procedure, but without CLP.

2.4

## Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR)
Total RNA was extracted from the mouse lung using the TRIzol reagent (#AAPR390-3, Pythonbio) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Reverse transcription was performed using HiScript III RT SuperMix for qPCR (#R323-01, Vazyme). qPCR was performed using Power Green qPCR Mix (#P2101a, GDSBio) under standard cycling conditions. The primer sequences are listed in . To assess fibrosis-related gene expression, the Mouse Targets of Fibrosis Related Gene qPCR Array (#WC-MRNA0062-M, Wcgene Biotech) was used according to the manufacturer's protocol. The list of genes included in the array is provided in . Relative expression levels were calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method.

2.5

## Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) quantification
Genomic DNA was extracted from mouse tissues using the TIANamp Genomic DNA Kit (#DP304-02, TIANGEN) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Quantification of mtDNA was performed using qPCR and normalized to the nuclear gene Rbm15, as previously described by Ignatenko et al. [ ]. Primer sequences are listed in .

2.6

## ROS detection using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
ROS levels in mouse tissue homogenates were measured using a commercial ROS ELISA kit (#JM-11706M1, Jingmei Biotechnology), following the manufacturer's instructions. Absorbance was measured at 450 nm using a microplate reader (Molecular Devices), and ROS concentrations were determined based on a standard curve.

2.7

## Cytokine detection
Fresh mouse lung tissues were excised and immediately placed in ice-cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (#E121-01; GenStar, Beijing, China), containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (#4693159001; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), and disrupted using sonication. Cytokine levels in the lung homogenates were analyzed using the Mouse XL Cytokine Array Kit (#ARY028; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) following the manufacturer's guidelines. For each group (Ctrl or LPS), six biological replicates were pooled and analyzed separately, with 100 μL of homogenate (containing 200 μg of total protein) loaded per array membrane.

2.8

## Primary fibroblast cell cultures
Primary lung fibroblasts were isolated from 8-week-old mice. Briefly, lung tissues were minced and digested at 37 °C for 30 min with gentle agitation in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; #C11995500BT, Gibco) supplemented with 1% penicillin/streptomycin (#15140-122, Gibco) and 1 mg/mL Liberase (#10269638001, Roche). The cell suspension was cultured in the complete DMEM containing 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS; #A5669701, Gibco) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin, in a humidified incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Culture medium was refreshed every 2 to 3 days and the cells at passages 4 to 7 were used in the experiments.
To induce cellular inflammatory response, fibroblasts were treated with either 1 μg/mL LPS, 10 ng/mL recombinant IL-1β (#HZ-1164, PeproTech), or 20 ng/mL recombinant TNF-α (#HZ-1014, PeproTech) for 24 h. To mimic oxidative damage, a superoxide-generating system [ ], consisting of 10 mU/mL xanthine oxidase (XOD; X2252, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.3 mM hypoxanthine (HPX; H9377, Sigma-Aldrich), was added to the culture medium for incubation with the cells for 24 h. Then, the cells were collected for RNA extraction.

2.9

## Isolation of mouse lung single cells
Single-cell suspensions from mouse lung tissue were prepared using the Lung Dissociation Kit (#130-095-927, Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, lungs were rinsed with DPBS to remove residual blood, connective tissue was excised, and the tissue was finely minced. Tissues were then transferred to gentleMACS™ C Tubes (#130-093-237, Miltenyi Biotec) containing 2.5 mL enzyme mixtures per sample, composed of 2.4 mL of 1× Buffer S, 100 μL of Enzyme D, and 15 μL of Enzyme A. Mechanical dissociation was performed using the MACS Tissue Dissociator with the pre-programmed protocol m_lung_01, followed by enzymatic digestion for 30 min at 37 °C with gentle agitation. After incubation, the second dissociation program m_lung_02 was run. Subsequently, the cell suspension was filtered through 70 μm cell strainers and centrifuged at 300 ×g for 10 min at 4 °C. The pellet was resuspended in 2 mL Red Blood Cell Lysis Solution (#130-094-183, Miltenyi Biotec), incubated for 2 min, and centrifuged again under the same conditions. The final cell pellet was resuspended in 1 mL Staining Buffer (#554656, BD Pharmingen™) for cell counting.

2.10

## Fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis
A total of 106 lung cells were resuspended in 45 μL DPBS and incubated with 5 μL FcR Blocking Reagent (#103-092-575, Miltenyi Biotec; 1:10, v/v) at 4 °C for 10 min. Subsequently, cells were stained at 4 °C for 30 min with the following fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies, each used at 1 μg per test, including PE–anti-CD45 (#553081, BD Pharmingen™, clone 30-F11), FITC–anti-CD11b (#557396, BD Pharmingen™, clone M1/70), PerCP-cy7–anti-F4/80 (#569223, BD Pharmingen™, clone T45-2342), BV421–anti-Ly6G (#562737, BD Pharmingen™, clone 1AB), and BV605–anti-Ly6C (#563011, BD Pharmingen™, clone AL-21), in a total volume of 100 μL. Staining was stopped by adding 2 mL Stain Buffer (#554656, BD Pharmingen™). To assess intracellular ROS levels, CellROX™ Deep Red reagent (#C10491, Thermo) was added at a final concentration of 1000 nM. Cells were incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 30 min in the dark. Stained cells were analyzed using a BD LSRFortessa X-20 flow cytometer (BD Biosciences), and data were analyzed using the FlowJo software (BD Biosciences, v10.8.1).

2.11

## Subcellular fractionation
Subcellular fractionation of lung tissues was performed to assess inflammation-induced mitochondrial alterations. Briefly, at least 50 mg of lung tissue from each group was collected and processed on ice. Mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions were isolated using a Mitochondria Isolation Kit (#HY-K1061, MedChemExpress) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Tissues were homogenized in 2 mL of isolation buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor (PMSF) using a pre-chilled homogenizer. The homogenate was first centrifuged at 1000 ×g for 10 min at 4 °C to remove nuclei and debris. The resulting supernatant was then centrifuged at 3500 ×g for 10 min at 4 °C to obtain the mitochondrial pellet and cytosolic supernatant. The mitochondrial fraction (pellet) and cytosolic fraction (supernatant) were collected for subsequent analyses.

2.12

## Detection of ATP concentration
ATP levels in mouse tissues were measured using an ATP assay kit (#S0027, Beyotime), according to the manufacturer's protocol. The heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney tissues were homogenized and lysed using the ATP lysis buffer provided in the kit. Total protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (#23228; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for normalizing ATP levels. Luminescence values were measured using a chemiluminescence reader. In addition, ATP levels in isolated mitochondrial fractions were measured using the same assay kit following the manufacturer's protocol.

2.13

## Enzymatic activities of mitochondrial respiratory complex V
The enzymatic activity of mitochondrial complex V (ATP synthase) in lung tissues was measured using a Mitochondrial Complex V/ATP Synthase Activity Assay Kit (#BC1440, Solarbio) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, lung tissues were homogenized in reagent 1 provided in the kit to prepare samples for enzyme activity and protein quantification. The activity of mitochondrial complex V was determined by measuring changes in absorbance at the specified wavelength using a UV–visible spectrophotometer, following the kit protocol. Enzyme activity was normalized to protein concentration. Three independent biological replicates were analyzed for each group.

2.14

## Immunoblotting
Western blotting was performed using standard procedures. Lung tissues were lysed in RIPA buffer, and the lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 ×g for 10 min at 4 °C. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA assay (#23228; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of protein (25 μg per lane) were separated by 12.5% SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) and transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. Membranes were blocked and incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies (1:1000 dilution) against p53 (#2524T), phospho-p53 (#9284T), PI3K (#4257T), phospho-PI3K (#4228T), Akt (#4691T), phospho-Akt (#4060T), Serpine1 (#A00637), Timp1 (#E1Y10), Caveolin-1 (#D46G3), and GAPDH (#MB001). After washing, membranes were incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies, including anti-rabbit IgG (#BS13278, Bioworld; 1:5000 dilution) and anti-mouse IgG (#BS12478, Bioworld; 1:5000 dilution). Protein bands were visualized using enhanced chemiluminescence reagents and detected with a gel imaging system (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc. USA). Band intensities were quantified using ImageJ software (1.53e).
For mitochondrial protein analysis, mitochondria were isolated from lung tissues, and proteins were separated by 12.5% SDS–PAGE and transferred onto PVDF membranes. Membranes were stained with Ponceau S for loading normalization and incubated with an OXPHOS antibody cocktail (#45-8099, Thermo Fisher Scientific; 1:1000 dilution), followed by an HRP-conjugated anti-mouse secondary antibody (#BS12478, Bioworld; 1:5000 dilution).

2.15

## Measurement of pulmonary function
Pulmonary function in mice was evaluated using a small-animal lung function analysis system. Briefly, mice were anesthetized, tracheostomized, and mechanically ventilated according to the manufacturer's instructions. Respiratory mechanics were assessed using the forced oscillation technique to determine respiratory system resistance (Rrs), elastance (Ers), compliance (Crs), Newtonian resistance (Rn), tissue damping (G), and tissue elastance (H). Pressure–volume loop analysis was further performed to measure inspiratory capacity (IC), static compliance (Cst), and hysteresis. Forced expiratory measurements, including forced vital capacity (FVC), peak expiratory flow (PEF), and time to peak expiratory flow (TPEF), were also recorded. At least three acceptable measurements were obtained from each mouse.

2.16

## Neutralizing antibody and ROS inhibition treatment
For in
vivo cytokine neutralization, C57BL/6J mice were intraperitoneally injected with a combination of anti-TNF-α antibody (50 μg; #BE0058, Bio X Cell) and anti-IL-1β antibody (50 μg; #BE0246, Bio X Cell), diluted in 100 μL of InVivoPure dilution buffer (#IP0072, Bio X Cell), 1 h prior to LPS challenge. Control group received an equivalent combination of isotype control antibodies, including rat IgG1 (50 μg; #BE0088, Bio X Cell, clone HRPN) and Armenian hamster IgG (50 μg; #BE0091, Bio X Cell), administered under the same conditions.
For ROS inhibition, mice were treated with ROS scavengers according to the experimental design. N-acetylcysteine (NAC; #HY-B0215, MedChemExpress) was administered at 150 mg/kg body weight, while Apocynin (#HY-N0088, MedChemExpress) and Mito-TEMPO (#HY-112879, MedChemExpress) were administered at 20 mg/kg body weight. All reagents were delivered via intraperitoneal injection. To ensure sustained ROS inhibition, mice received two injections at 1 h before and 8 h after LPS administration. Mice were sacrificed at 24 h after LPS challenge for subsequent analyses.

2.17

## Assessment of mitochondrial function in primary neutrophils
Primary neutrophils were isolated from mice using a density gradient centrifugation method with a neutrophil isolation kit (#P8550, Solarbio) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were assigned to four groups: control, TNF-α, IL-1β, and TNF-α + IL-1β. For in
vitro stimulation, neutrophils were seeded at a density of 1 × 105 cells per well (96-well plate) or 5 × 105 cells per well (24-well plate) and allowed to adhere for 30 min. Cells were then treated with recombinant TNF-α (#HZ-1014, Proteintech), IL-1β (#HZ-1164, Proteintech), or their combination at a final concentration of 10 ng/mL for 3 h.
Cellular metabolic function was assessed using the Seahorse extracellular flux analyzer by measuring oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation was assessed by Mouse NETs ELISA kit (#ml105862, mlbio). The assay was performed strictly in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, and absorbance at 450 nm was measured. The OD450 value was used to reflect the relative level of NETs.
Mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) levels were measured using the MitoSOX™ Red mitochondrial superoxide indicator kit (#S0061S, Beyotime). Total intracellular ROS levels were detected using a DCFH-DA probe (#S0033S, Beyotime). Mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) and apoptosis were evaluated using a mitochondrial membrane potential and apoptosis detection kit (#C1071 M, Beyotime), in which cells were stained with MitoTracker Red CMXRos and Annexin V-FITC according to the manufacturer's instructions. NET formation was visualized using SYTOX Green staining (#AP6325, Alphabio). After stimulation, cells were incubated with SYTOX Green working solution (1:1000 dilution) at 37 °C for 20 min. All fluorescence images were captured using an ECHO fluorescence microscope (RVL-100-G) and saved in JPG format.

2.18

## Statistical analyses
Data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). All statistical analyses, except for RNA-seq data, were performed using GraphPad Prism version 9 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). The sample sizes and statistical testing methods used in each experiment are described in the figure legends.
Additional methods are provided in the Supporting Methods.

3

## Results
3.1

## Lung tissue-specific immune response, mitochondrial dysfunction, and fibrosis signaling activation
We analyzed the gene expression microarray data of multiple organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) in a group of patients who died of sepsis ( ). Differential expression analysis revealed the significant upregulation of genes such as IL1RL1, CCL2, CXCL8, S100A10, and TNFAIP3 in multiple tissues, whereas SOD2 was significantly upregulated only in the lung tissue, suggesting elevated pulmonary oxidation levels during the intense immune response and indicating that lung mitochondria may be experiencing strong oxidative damage ( ). Cellular metabolism and mitochondrial function were widely affected in multiple tissues ( ), particularly mitochondria-related biological processes in the lung tissue were significantly enriched after sepsis ( ). The gene set variation analysis (GSVA) revealed that sepsis induced widespread alterations across multiple organs, characterized by suppressed mitochondrial metabolism and enhanced inflammatory and oxidative responses, consistent with a potential impairment of mitochondrial function in multiple tissues ( A). In addition, we combined and analyzed the multi-tissue RNA-seq data of CLP model mice and found that widespread transcriptional changes were observed across all examined tissues ( ). The GSVA results revealed significantly downregulated mitochondrial energy metabolism pathways, whereas the immune response and ROS generation pathways were upregulated ( ). mtDNA transcription levels were reduced in the CLP group compared to those in sham controls across all tissues, indicating mitochondrial dysfunction ( B). 
To evaluate the effect of sepsis on mitochondria, we determined the mtDNA content in the heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney tissues of mice following LPS injection. In male mice, mtDNA levels were significantly decreased in all examined organs except the heart, suggesting that systemic inflammation induces multi-organ mtDNA depletion ( C). Importantly, similar reductions in mtDNA levels were also observed in female mice across multiple organs, indicating that LPS-induced mitochondrial impairment is not restricted to a single sex ( ). Immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated markedly enhanced ROS signals in multiple tissues following LPS challenge in both male and female mice ( D, ), indicating a generalized ROS-mediated oxidative stress response to systemic inflammation. Consistently, ELISA demonstrated significantly increased ROS levels in all organs, except the liver ( E). In addition, we monitored the dynamic changes in ATP content within 24 h of LPS injection. The ATP content decreased significantly within 2 h, and the heart, lung, and spleen exhibited lower than normal ATP levels for a prolonged duration ( F). A similar temporal reduction in ATP content was also observed in the lungs of female mice following LPS challenge ( ).
To further explore the specific transcriptional response of each organ after sepsis, we identified a total of 972 tissue-specific differentially expressed genes (DEGs) across the heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney, and performed clustering analysis according to their expression patterns ( G). The results revealed that the genes commonly upregulated in multiple tissues were mainly related to inflammatory response processes, such as cytokine signaling, leukocyte migration, and the TNF signaling pathway, reflecting the common response characteristics under systemic inflammatory conditions. Notably, although Mmp9, Tnf, Il1b, and S100a9 are typical markers of systemic inflammation, their expression was significantly upregulated mainly in the lung tissue. The enrichment results revealed that the lung tissue not only activated inflammatory and ROS metabolism pathways in sepsis, but also induced early tissue remodeling and fibrosis-related processes. Concurrently, the downregulation of Wnt3a [ ], which promotes alveolar epithelial regeneration, and Tgfb3 [ ], which has anti-fibrosis and normal tissue reconstruction functions, indicates that sepsis-induced ALI may impair physiological tissue repair mechanisms and favor pathological fibrosis development. Consistently, transcriptomic data from patients with sepsis revealed that “inflammatory response” exhibited the highest and significant enrichment score in the lung tissue ( H). Moreover, fibrosis-related pathway was also significantly enriched in the septic lungs ( I).
Additionally, GSVA in CLP model mice revealed that the lung tissue exhibited stronger myeloid immune pathway activation than that in other tissues ( ). Myeloid cell deconvolution analysis further demonstrated significantly increased proportions of activated dendritic cells, monocytes, and neutrophils in the lung tissue of CLP model mice ( ). Notably, the proportion of M1 macrophages decreased while that of M2 macrophages increased markedly in the lung tissue. Although M2 macrophages are generally considered anti-inflammatory, their excessive accumulation may promote extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition and fibrotic progression [ ]. To further clarify the tissue specificity of myeloid immune activation in the lung tissue following sepsis, we performed an intersection analysis among the enriched genes identified in and DEGs of the five tissues; 37 lung-specific DEGs were identified ( ). Protein–protein interaction (PPI) network analysis revealed that these genes were closely interconnected, forming a regulatory module centered on Tnf and Il1b ( ). Heatmap of expression further confirmed the upregulation of these genes in the lung tissue of CLP mice ( ). Thus, Tnf and Il1b are uniquely and constitutively expressed in septic lungs; they occupy key nodes in the regulatory network, and may play an important role in septic lung injury.

3.2

## Expression features of key mitochondrial genes reveal the clinical status of sepsis
To evaluate the effect of sepsis on pulmonary function, we performed GSVA on the lung tissues of CLP model mice ( A). Mitochondrial damage and ROS metabolism were activated, whereas functions related to tissue regeneration and repair were suppressed. Further pathway analysis indicated significantly altered mitochondria-mediated apoptosis and energy metabolism, suggesting mitochondrial dysfunction and metabolic disorders ( ). Concurrently, oxidation-related processes were significantly upregulated in the CLP group, further validating the stressed state of the mitochondria ( ). In addition, the CLP group exhibited reduced mtDNA expression in the lung tissue ( B), accompanied by a significant decrease in ATP content ( C). Subsequently, we used MEGENA to construct a co-expression network of DEGs in septic lungs and identified three major modules ( D, ). Functional enrichment analysis revealed that the C2 module was primarily associated with immune response and oxidation-related pathways, the C3 module involved mitochondrial regulation and pattern recognition receptor signaling pathways, while the C4 module was related to cell migration and protein polymerization ( ). Further functional annotation of C3 module genes revealed significantly enriched mitochondria-related biological processes ( E). Thus, we performed an intersection analysis between C3 module genes and mitochondria-related genes, identifying 17 mitochondria-related DEGs ( F, ). 
To further explore the potential clinical significance of mitochondria-related core genes, we performed survival analysis on the expression of 17 mitochondria-related DEGs ( G, ). The analysis revealed that only Bcl2l1, Gsr, Msrb3, AA467197, Stom, and Sod2 were remarkably associated with patient survival (log-rank p < 0.1), thus identifying them as mitochondria-sensitive DEGs (msDEGs) in sepsis and indicating their crucial predictive value in patients with sepsis. Notably, high Bcl2l1, Gsr, Msrb3, AA467197, and Stom expression was associated with poor prognosis, whereas elevated Sod2 expression improved survival rates, indicating a potential protective role.
We next analyzed the spatial expression patterns of msDEGs in both human and mouse lung tissues. Spatial transcriptomic profiling of normal mice revealed broad and diffuse distribution of msDEGs in the lung tissue ( ). Further analysis of normal lung tissues in humans showed distinct regional expression patterns. In the proximal airway ( ), Bcl2l1, Stom, and Sod2 were widely expressed across various non-cartilaginous structures with a relatively uniform distribution. Gsr and AA467197 were mainly enriched in the airway basal and airway luminal regions, while Msrb3 expression was concentrated in smooth muscle cells. In the distal airway and alveoli ( ), msDEGs showed a diffuse expression pattern without clear cell-type specificity. Moreover, in mouse models of pulmonary bacterial infection, the msDEGs expression was significantly altered and widely distributed across different lung regions ( H). Further, qPCR revealed significant upregulation of Bcl2l1, Gsr, AA467197, Stom, and Sod2 in the CLP male mice, whereas Msrb3 was significantly downregulated ( I). Similar expression pattern of these genes was also observed in female mice following LPS injection ( ). However, Stom expression did not show a significant change in female mice, suggesting that its responses may exhibit context- or sex-dependent variability.
To evaluate the clinical relevance of msDEGs, we used Restricted Cubic Spline to analyze the association between their expression levels and SOFA scores in patients with sepsis ( J). The expression of all msDEGs was significantly associated with the SOFA scores (p-overall < 0.05). Specifically, Bcl2l1, Gsr, and Stom expressions showed a linear positive correlation with SOFA scores, suggesting that elevated expressions of these genes may reflect aggravated organ dysfunction. In contrast, Msrb3, AA467197, and Sod2 exhibited nonlinear associations with SOFA scores (p-nonlinear < 0.05), indicating that they may have different pathological significance or regulatory mechanisms in different expression ranges.

3.3

## ROS accumulation mediates fibroblast dysfunction and promotes fibrotic remodeling
The functional annotation of msDEGs revealed significant enrichment of functions related to mitochondrial oxidative responses ( A). Further, fibrosis-related functions such as collagen synthesis, wound healing, and ECM constituent secretion were significantly activated in the CLP model ( B). Therefore, we assessed the ROS levels in lung tissues via immunofluorescence. After LPS administration, ROS accumulation gradually increased, peaking at 6 h ( C). Quantitative analysis of fluorescence intensity confirmed significantly elevated ROS levels at 6 h following LPS challenge, which decreased slightly, but remained significantly higher than the normal level ( D). Histopathological evaluation demonstrated disordered alveolar structure and interstitial thickening following LPS challenge in male mice ( E, black arrows). Masson and Sirius red staining demonstrated significantly increased collagen deposition in the lung tissue at day 1 post-LPS, which alleviated by day 7 but remained significantly elevated relative to that of the control ( E and F). The Ashcroft score continuously increased over this period ( F). Consistently, similar histopathological alterations, including alveolar structural disruption and enhanced collagen deposition, were observed in the lungs of LPS-challenged female mice ( ). Thus, ROS accumulation during acute inflammation may initiate irreversible fibrotic response in the lung tissue. 
In addition, the analysis of DEGs related to pulmonary fibrosis revealed the upregulation of pro-fibrosis genes in the CLP group, whereas TGF-β signal inhibitors such as Tgfb3, Cav1, and Smad7 were significantly downregulated ( ). PPI network analysis revealed that these genes were closely interconnected. In particular, Tnf and Il1b occupied central positions in the network, suggesting their key role in regulating pulmonary fibrosis ( ). qPCR validation confirmed significant upregulation of genes involved in ECM remodeling, TGF-β signaling, fibrosis, and inflammation in the LPS group, while Tgfb3, Smad7, and Cav1 expressions were significantly downregulated, consistent with the findings of transcriptome analysis ( G, , ). Notably, Itga1, Itga2, and Itgb5 expression were significantly decreased in the LPS group, indicating that acute inflammation may also impair cell adhesion in lung tissues ( ). GSVA of lung transcriptomic data from LPS-challenged mice showed significant enrichment of TGF-β-related processes ( ). Consistently, normalized enrichment scores for TGF-β1 production and TGFBR1 binding were significantly increased in the CLP model ( ), indicating enhanced TGF-β signaling activity. At the protein level, immunohistochemical staining revealed that TGF-β1 expression was significantly increased in lung tissues at both 1 day and 1 week after LPS challenge ( ). Similarly, TGFBR1 expression was significantly elevated at day 1 and remained higher than baseline at day 7 despite a partial reduction ( ).
We found that treatment with ROS scavengers (NAC, Apocynin, and Mito-TEMPO) significantly reduced ROS levels in lung tissues following LPS challenge ( H). Therefore, to specifically assess mitochondrial bioenergetics, mitochondria were isolated from lung tissues. Measurement of mitochondrial ATP levels revealed a significant decrease after LPS challenge, which was partially restored upon ROS inhibition ( I). Similarly, the activity of ATP synthase was significantly reduced in the LPS group but significantly recovered following ROS scavenger treatment ( J). Furthermore, we examined the protein expression of respiratory chain complexes I–V and found that LPS injection resulted in altered expression of multiple complexes, with a notable reduction in Complex V (ATP synthase) and partial changes in other complexes ( K and L). However, these alterations were partially reversed upon ROS inhibition.
Additionally, to evaluate the impact of ROS on fibrosis-related outcomes, LPS-challenged mice were administered ROS scavengers. The results showed that ROS inhibition alleviated lung injury, as evidenced by improved alveolar structure, reduced interstitial thickening, and decreased collagen deposition, accompanied by lower Ashcroft scores ( ). Consistently, the upregulation of α-SMA and vimentin was attenuated ( ), levels of fibrosis-associated proteins (Serpine1 and Timp1) were reduced, and Caveolin-1 was partially restored ( ). These findings suggest an association between ROS and fibrosis-related alterations.
Pulmonary function results showed that LPS challenge significantly increased respiratory system resistance (Rrs) and elastance (Ers), accompanied by reduced compliance (Crs), indicating impaired lung mechanics ( ). Parameters reflecting tissue stiffness and damping (G and H) were also significantly elevated. However, NAC treatment partially improved these alterations, as evidenced by reduced Rrs and Ers, restored Crs, and concomitant decreases in G and H values. These changes are consistent with fibrosis-associated lung remodeling and suggest that ROS contributes to functional impairment during LPS-induced lung injury.
To identify key factors regulating fibrosis, we isolated and cultured primary fibroblasts from mouse lung tissue and stimulated them with ROS, LPS, IL-1β, and TNF-α. The results revealed that LPS, IL-1β, and TNF-α primarily activated the NF-κB and TNF signaling pathways. However, only ROS stimulation resulted in significant activation of the p53 signaling pathway and significant inhibition of the PI3K signaling pathway ( ). To further evaluate the involvement of ROS in these pathways in
vivo, we examined the effects of ROS scavengers in LPS-challenged mice. The results showed that LPS increased p53 phosphorylation while decreasing PI3K and AKT phosphorylation, whereas ROS inhibition partially restored these changes ( M and N). Consistently, the expression of p53 target genes, including Cdkn1a and Bax, was significantly elevated following LPS challenge and reduced upon ROS scavenger treatment, while Pmaip1 showed a similar but less pronounced trend ( O). Furthermore, GSVA confirmed that ROS exposure significantly suppressed fibroblast proliferation and migration functions ( P). Thus, ROS is a key factor in damaging fibroblasts, which increases cell apoptosis and inhibits normal cell regeneration via p53 activation and PI3K inhibition, thereby causing functional reprogramming of fibroblasts and driving fibrotic remodeling.

3.4

## Temporal data revealed the sequential activation of inflammatory and tissue repair programs
To reveal the dynamic changes associated with pulmonary responses to acute inflammation, we analyzed the temporal transcriptomic data of mouse lung tissues following LPS challenge. Expression analysis of msDEGs revealed that Bcl2l1, Gsr, Stom, AA467197, and Sod2 expressions peaked after 12 h of LPS challenge and then gradually decreased; Msrb3 expression showed a gradual recovery trend after transient initial downregulation ( A). Thus, in the inflammatory state, mitochondrial regulatory genes exhibit a significant time-dependent and stage-specific transcriptional response. To further explore the dynamic changes in inflammatory regulation, we used DeconvCellLink [ ] to investigate potential changes in intercellular communication within the lung tissues. 
During early inflammation (0.25–1 d), the expressions of multiple pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-17, IL-1β, TNF-α, and IL-6 increased, and classical inflammatory signaling pathways such as TNF-α, NF-κB, and JAK-STAT were remarkably activated ( B). In addition, the proportion of myeloid immune cells such as neutrophils, macrophages, mast cells, and dendritic cells increased substantially, indicating a robust innate immune response ( B). Ligand-receptor interaction analysis revealed significant interactions among neutrophils, adipocytes, fibroblasts, macrophages, endothelial cells, dendritic cells, and mast cells, suggesting the crucial role of intercellular communication between myeloid immune cells and pulmonary parenchymal cells in the early inflammatory response ( ). These cell types exhibited significant interaction patterns during the early inflammatory stage ( C and D). Notably, several significant ligand–receptor interactions, such as Serpine1–Plaur between adipocytes and neutrophils, Efemp2–Plscr4 between fibroblasts and mast cells, and Tgfb2–Tgfbr1 between endothelial and mast cells, suggest that communication between myeloid cells and non-immune cells is involved in fibrinolytic regulation [ ], ECM remodeling [ ], and activation of profibrotic signals [ ] ( ).
During the transition phase (1–2 d), pro-inflammatory cytokine levels began to decline, while those of Activin A, IL-4, BMP4, and BMP6 gradually recovered. In particular, WNT3A expression was recovered and the Wnt signaling pathway was activated, indicating that the body gradually shifted from an inflammatory response to a tissue repair process ( B). On day 1, the intercellular communication network was more complex, with multiple strong interaction links among neutrophils, monocytes, macrophages, fibroblasts, adipocytes, and endothelial cells, indicating that pulmonary immune and structural cells still maintained active signal exchange ( E). On day 2, both the number of network connections and communication strength were reduced ( F). At this stage, matrix remodeling-related interactions (such as Vcan–Cd44) and immune surveillance-related interactions (such as Cfp–Ncr1) were significantly enriched ( ).
In the resolution and repair stage (2–5 d), inflammation subsided and the repair process was predominant. During this phase, pro-inflammatory cytokine levels and inflammatory signaling pathways returned to baseline, whereas BMP4 and BMP6 expression resumed; the Wnt signaling pathway remained activated ( B). Moreover, the gradual recovery of fibroblast and endothelial cell numbers indicated continuous tissue repair ( B). Notably, until day 3, the number of monocyte_1, neutrophil_1, and macrophage_1 cells remained markedly elevated, relative to those in the controls, and there was a robust intercellular communication among these cells ( B and G). Interactions such as Ccl9–Fpr2 and Ccl9–Ccr1 indicated that, despite inflammatory resolution, some myeloid immune cells continued to influence tissue repair ( ). By day 5, no significant alterations in the cell interaction network were observed, indicating the restoration of cellular homeostasis.
Notably, 2 d post-LPS challenge, TNF-α and IL-1β levels in mouse lung tissues remained significantly higher than the normal levels ( H and I). To investigate the cell types that sustained TNF-α and IL-1β expression in sepsis, we analyzed the scRNA-seq data of immune cells in mouse lung tissues 2 d post-CLP ( ). The results revealed significantly increased number of neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages ( ); their specific subpopulations contributed to the sustained TNF-α and IL-1β expression ( J, ). Further investigation revealed that injecting recombinant TNF-α or IL-1β significantly activated ROS-related functions in mouse lung tissues ( ). Conversely, in the LPS-induced endotoxemia model, the simultaneous application of TNF-α and IL-1β neutralizing antibodies markedly inhibited the activation of ROS-related functions ( ). Consistently, flow cytometric analysis of lung tissues demonstrated that neutralization of TNF-α and IL-1β significantly reduced ROS levels in LPS-challenged mice ( ).
To further evaluate the contribution of TNF-α and IL-1β to fibrosis-related alterations, neutralizing antibodies were administered in the LPS-challenged mice. Antibody treatment alleviated lung injury, as evidenced by improved alveolar structure, reduced collagen deposition, and lower Ashcroft scores ( ). In addition, the LPS-induced upregulation of α-SMA and vimentin was attenuated ( ). These findings suggest that TNF-α and IL-1β are associated with fibrosis-related changes during LPS-induced lung injury.

3.5

## Immune and parenchymal cells coordinately regulate inflammation and tissue remodeling
We integrated and analyzed the scRNA-seq data of mouse lung tissues in the Sham and CLP groups, and identified 15 cell types based on Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) analysis and marker gene expression ( A, ). The proportions of monocytes, neutrophils, alveolar macrophages (Alv_mac), and mesothelial cells increased in the CLP group, while those of pericytes, T cells, B cells, and natural killer (NK) cells decreased ( B, ). Further analysis revealed that smooth muscle cells, pericytes, T cells, B cells, and NK cells were widely distributed in the Sham group ( ). Using CellChat, we observed closer cell-cell communication in the CLP group, particularly among monocytes, neutrophils, Alv_mac, and mesothelial cells ( C). Cytokine signaling activity inferred by CytoSig revealed that TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-17A were activated in immune cells, whereas TGF-β1, BMP4, BMP6, and Activin A exhibited strong activity in non-immune cells ( ). 
To further explore the regulatory relationship between immune and non-immune cells in septic lung tissues, we classified the 15 identified cell types into immune and parenchymal cells ( D). Compared with the Sham group, immune cells in the CLP group showed stronger signal sending and receiving capabilities, while parenchymal cells mainly exhibited enhanced output signals ( E). Analysis of the information flow between immune and parenchymal cells revealed that immune signals such as IL6, TNF, CXCL, CCL, and COMPLEMENT, as well as tissue repair signals such as BMP, EGF, and TGF-β, were enhanced in the CLP group ( F). Although CLP-specific signals were not significant, IL6, CXCL, and COMPLEMENT signals were primarily produced by parenchymal cells and acted on immune cells, suggesting that, in addition to structural damage, parenchymal cells also participate in immune regulation ( G, ). Notably, immune cells send and receive TGF-β signals, whereas parenchymal cells primarily receive these signals after CLP, indicating that parenchymal cells respond to signals released by immune cells to initiate repair or fibrosis ( G, ).
In the CLP group, ATP biosynthesis in parenchymal cells was significantly inhibited, while fibrotic remodeling was significantly enhanced. However, immune cells exhibited significant activation of ROS biosynthesis and TGF-β1 production ( H, ). Cytokine activity profiling revealed upregulated IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α activity in both parenchymal and immune cells of the CLP group, while CXCL12, TGF-β1, TGF-β3, and VEGFA were activated only in parenchymal cells ( I). Further pathway analysis revealed that TGF-β and Hypoxia pathways were mainly activated in parenchymal cells, while the VEGF and TNF-α pathways were distributed in immune cells ( ).
Considering the dual role of parenchymal cells in inflammatory responses, we further investigated their functional alterations. Except for mesothelial cells, ATP synthesis and respiratory chain activity were inhibited in parenchymal cells. Concurrently, the activation of mitochondrial mRNA/tRNA processing and transcriptional regulation indicated that parenchymal cells attempted to maintain mitochondrial homeostasis through compensatory mechanisms ( ). In addition, TGF-β receptor activity and hypoxic response were enriched primarily in fibroblasts ( ). Fibrosis-associated biological processes were also mainly activated in fibroblasts ( J). Activation of the p53 signaling pathway and inhibition of the PI3K signaling pathway were observed only in fibroblasts ( K). Thus, fibroblasts play a central role in driving fibrotic remodeling.

3.6

## Functional reprogramming and heterogeneous differentiation of fibroblasts regulate pulmonary fibrosis in sepsis
To further explore the specific alterations of lung fibroblasts (LFs) in sepsis, we performed gene expression analysis ( ). In the CLP group, genes related to inflammation and immune responses (e.g., Saa1, Saa3, Lcn2, Lif, and Il6), as well as tissue remodeling and fibrosis (e.g., Serpine1, Mmp14, Col4a2, and Sphk1), were significantly upregulated. Conversely, genes involved in mitochondrial energy metabolism (e.g., Ndufa3, Ndufa13, Ndufv3, Cox7a2, Cox20, and Coa3) and oxidative defense (e.g., Prdx2 and Prdx4) were significantly downregulated. Enrichment analysis demonstrated that LFs in the CLP group significantly upregulated fibrosis-related functions and downregulated mitochondrial energy metabolism and oxidative response ( A, ). Pathway ranking revealed that “Collagen-containing extracellular matrix” and “Response to ROS” were highly ranked, indicating their importance for LFs following sepsis ( ). Transcription factor (TF) activity analysis revealed significantly activated pro-fibrotic TFs (e.g., Cebpb, Jun, Fos, Hif1a, and Stat3) [ , , ] in the CLP group, while antioxidant or anti-fibrotic TFs (e.g., Zeb2, Bach2, Hif3a, and Foxg1) [ , , ] were inhibited ( B). Thus, LFs in sepsis exhibit features of oxidative injury and fibrotic remodeling. 
We grouped LFs into five sub-clusters and named each cluster based on their top three marker genes ( C, ). Cell proportion analysis revealed increased Col13a1+ LFs and decreased Adgrf
+ LFs in the CLP group ( D). Col13a1+ LFs specifically expressed pro-fibrotic genes such as Col13a1 and Serpine2, and were associated with cell adhesion and migration, suggesting that this subpopulation may play a predominant role in fibrosis progression. Mmp23+ LFs highly expressed Mmp23, Cd248, and Sulf2, which were related to collagen and ECM degradation, indicating their key role in regulating matrix homeostasis and tissue remodeling ( ). Notably, pathway analysis revealed that Col13a1+ LFs exhibited activation of the p53 signaling pathway and inhibition of the PI3K signaling pathway, whereas Mmp23+ LFs showed no significant differences ( ). The activation of TGF-β-related signals was mainly observed in Col13a1+ LFs, whereas the Mmp23+ LFs were related to collagen fibril organization and ECM signal transduction ( E). Thus, Col13a1+ LFs were the core drivers of fibrosis, while Mmp23+ LFs may assume a regulatory role. Furthermore, Adgrf
+ LFs highly expressed Adgrf5 and Hpgd, and were significantly associated with the major histocompatibility complex, suggesting their involvement in antigen processing and immune regulation ( ).
Immunofluorescence examination demonstrated increased expression of α-SMA and vimentin in the LPS group, indicating the activation of fibroblast and mesenchymal cells ( F). In normal tissues, Col13a1 is localized around alveolar structures, whereas in the LPS group, Col13a1 is diffusely distributed throughout the tissue, accompanied by alveolar destruction and increased cellular density. Notably, under steady-state conditions, Mmp23 was co-localized with α-SMA around perivascular regions, suggesting a role in maintaining vascular matrix homeostasis. However, Mmp23 in the LPS group was diffusely distributed in fibrotic regions, demonstrating its involvement in ECM regulation and tissue remodeling. This shift from vascular homeostasis to fibrotic matrix regulation supports a potential regulatory role of Mmp23+ LFs in pulmonary fibrosis progression.
To investigate the transcriptomic dynamics of LFs, we reconstructed the trajectory of fibroblast differentiation using pseudo-time analysis and found that Wif1+ LFs were expressed at a relatively earlier pseudo-time, with two branch trajectories differentiating from branch node 1 along the pseudo-time sequence. The terminal stage of one branch was mainly composed of Col13a1+ LFs, whereas the other branch was dominated by Adgrf
+ LFs ( G). Therefore, we defined three distinct states as Pre-state, State 1, and State 2, representing the origin and two divergent differentiation directions, respectively ( H). Next, genes with significantly different expression patterns along the trajectory between the two branches were identified and clustered into the following three gene clusters: Cluster 1, 2, and 3 where genes were expressed in the Pre-state, upregulated in State 1, and upregulated in State 2, respectively ( I). Functional enrichment analysis revealed that Cluster 1 genes were associated with angiogenesis and oxidative response; Cluster 2 genes were enriched in fibrosis-related functions; and Cluster 3 genes were significantly enriched in inflammation and immune response ( J). These findings further support that LFs undergo functional differentiation into distinct subtypes, which contribute to fibrosis (Col13a1+ LFs) or immune regulation (Adgrf
+ LFs), highlighting their crucial role in the pathological remodeling of septic lung tissue.

3.7

## Neutrophils and monocytes drive ROS accumulation in the lung tissue of sepsis
Furthermore, we assessed the cell–cell communication between fibroblasts and immune cells. Although the number of interactions was reduced, the interaction strength between fibroblasts and myeloid immune cells was enhanced in sepsis ( A). Cell proportion analysis demonstrated increased proportions of neutrophils, monocytes, and Alv_mac, along with decreased proportions of T, B, and NK cells in the CLP group ( B). To validate this finding, we performed the single-cell dissociation of lung tissues from LPS-challenged mice, and then assessed immune cell alterations using flow cytometry ( ). The proportions of neutrophils and Ly6Chi inflammatory monocytes increased significantly in the LPS group, consistent with the single-cell transcriptomic data ( C and D). However, the number of F4/80+ macrophages was significantly reduced, which was inconsistent with the number of Alv_mac identified in single cells. This discrepancy may be attributed to the phenotypic plasticity of macrophages under inflammatory stress, downregulating surface markers, F4/80. Additionally, Ly6Clow patrolling monocytes tended to decreased in the LPS group, indicating the dysregulation of tissue regeneration and repair ( C and D). 
Notably, myeloid cells showed markedly higher ROS metabolic regulation activity than that of adaptive immune cells ( E). Specifically, in the CLP group, ROS metabolic activity was significantly enhanced in monocytes and neutrophils, whereas it was significantly suppressed in Alv_mac, suggesting monocytes and neutrophils as the primary sources of excessive ROS accumulation in septic lungs ( E). Flow cytometry analysis confirmed significantly elevated ROS levels in the lungs of LPS-challenged mice ( F and G). CD11b and CD45 staining of ROShi cells showed a significant increase in CD45hiCD11bhi cells in the LPS group, further validating that myeloid cells primarily contribute to ROS production following inflammation ( H and I). To further identify the source of ROS, we analyzed the CD45hiCD11bhi and ROShi cells and identified that most of these cells expressed low F4/80 levels ( J). Subsequent staining with Ly6C and Ly6G revealed that ROShi cells were primarily Ly6G+ neutrophils, followed by Ly6C+ monocytes ( J). These results indicate that excess neutrophils and inflammatory monocytes were mobilized and recruited in septic lung tissues, leading to excessive ROS production and oxidative damage.
Consistently, immunofluorescence staining for NETs, as indicated by the co-localization of neutrophil elastase (NE), myeloperoxidase (MPO), and citrullinated histone H3 (CitH3), revealed a significant increase in NET formation in the lungs following LPS challenge ( K and L). These results indicate enhanced neutrophil activation in septic lungs and are consistent with the presence of an ROS-enriched inflammatory microenvironment.

3.8

## TNF-α and IL-1β are associated with neutrophil activation and metabolic alterations
Septic lung tissue exhibits pronounced oxidative injury and fibrotic remodeling, accompanied by sustained elevation of TNF-α and IL-1β. We hypothesize that these pathological changes may be associated with persistent stimulation of neutrophils by these cytokines. Therefore, we analyzed scRNA-seq data from immune cells stimulated with PBS, TNF-α, or IL-1β ( ). Compared with the PBS group, both TNF-α and IL-1β stimulation increased the proportions of macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils ( ). Functional analysis revealed that TNF-α robustly enhanced ROS activity in macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils. Although the effect of IL-1β was weaker than that of TNF-α, it still promoted ROS activity in monocytes and neutrophils to some extent, but substantially suppressing ROS activity in macrophages ( ). Moreover, both TNF-α and IL-1β markedly inhibited mitochondrial energy metabolism and mitochondrial structural integrity in neutrophils ( ).
To validate these observations in
vivo, TNF-α and IL-1β neutralizing antibodies were co-administered in the LPS-induced endotoxemia model. Flow cytometric analysis showed that combined neutralization significantly reduced ROS levels in lung-infiltrating neutrophils. Concurrently, the expression of CD11b and Ly6G was decreased compared with the LPS group ( A), consistent with the transcriptomic findings. 
To further assess the direct effects of TNF-α and IL-1β, primary neutrophils were isolated and stimulated in
vitro. Fluorescence imaging demonstrated a marked increase in mtROS accumulation following TNF-α and IL-1β stimulation ( B and C). Meanwhile, NET formation was enhanced, as indicated by increased fluorescence signals and further confirmed by ELISA-based quantification ( D and E). In addition, intracellular ROS levels were globally elevated ( F; ), while ΔΨm was significantly reduced ( G; ), indicating altered mitochondrial functional status under inflammatory conditions. Seahorse analysis further demonstrated that TNF-α and IL-1β stimulation increased ECAR and decreased OCR ( H and I; ), suggesting a metabolic shift toward glycolysis and reduced mitochondrial respiratory capacity in neutrophils.
Collectively, these findings suggest that TNF-α and IL-1β are associated with neutrophil activation, ROS accumulation, and metabolic reprogramming, which may contribute to neutrophil functional alterations under inflammatory conditions.

4

## Discussion
This study focused on the mechanism of sepsis-induced lung injury, revealing a continuous pathological process from mitochondrial dysfunction and immune dysregulation to fibrotic remodeling. Sepsis decreased mtDNA levels in multiple organs, particularly in the lungs, suggesting more severe mitochondrial damage in lung tissues. Transcriptomic analysis further confirmed that the lungs not only exhibited the most intense inflammatory response and myeloid immune cell activation but also significantly enhanced ROS-mediated oxidative stress signaling. Consistently, the lungs are known as one of the earliest and most vulnerable organs affected in sepsis, functioning as an “inflammatory amplifier” that may propagate injury to distal organs [ , ]. This may be related to the lung's unique anatomical structure, the enrichment of myeloid immune cells, and heightened sensitivity to inflammatory signals. Notably, although inflammatory pathway activation was detected in multiple organs, the lungs exhibited more significant immune response and ROS accumulation, and initiated tissue remodeling and fibrosis-related signaling. Thus, the lungs are not only the first organ to be damaged in sepsis but also more prone to progression into irreversible chronic pathological states.
As an immune barrier constantly exposed to the external environment, the lungs are abundant in resident immune cells under homeostatic conditions. Their extensive and dense capillary network enables rapid recruitment of large numbers of myeloid immune cells in response to danger signals. Consequently, during systemic inflammation responses, the lungs often initiate the earliest and most robust immune response. However, non-specific immune activation mediated by myeloid cells, although beneficial for pathogen clearance, carries a substantial risk of tissue injury. Previous studies have demonstrated that excessive ROS accumulation is a major driver of inflammation-induced lung injury [ ]. Although ROS are key effector molecules in pathogen defense, their overproduction can impair endothelial barrier integrity and induce oxidative damage to DNA, lipids, and proteins, ultimately promoting ALI [ , ]. Here, we identified that excessive ROS in septic lungs was released by myeloid immune cells, particularly neutrophils and monocytes. Moreover, significantly reduced ATP production and mtDNA expression in septic lungs indicates pulmonary dysfunction. These findings indicate that ALI results from mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS accumulation imbalance caused by excessive myeloid immune activation.
The dynamic balance between adaptive and innate immunity is critical for tissue repair following inflammation. Regulatory T cells [ ], B cells [ ], and NK cells [ ] not only participate in immune regulation but also contribute to tissue protection, regeneration, and anti-fibrotic processes. Impaired number or function of these cells hampers the lung's reparative ability, thereby facilitating the transition of inflammatory responses toward pathological tissue remodeling. Consistently, our results revealed significantly activated myeloid immune cells in septic lungs, whereas the number of adaptive immune cells such as T, B, and NK cells was reduced. Thus, under acute inflammatory conditions, pulmonary immune regulation shifts from adaptive immunity toward myeloid immunity, reflecting immune dysregulation which may exacerbate ROS accumulation and mitochondrial dysfunction, ultimately accelerating the onset and progression of fibrosis.
We identified that the fibrotic process is already initiated at the peak of inflammation. This includes the activation of fibrosis-related signaling pathways in the acute phase, increased collagen deposition, elevated Ashcroft scores, and upregulation of pro-fibrotic gene expression. Notably, downregulated Wnt3a and Tgfb3 expression in lung tissues reflects impaired regenerative capacity, predisposing repair to fibrosis rather than restoration of healthy structure. Mechanistically, compared with LPS or pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α and IL-1β, ROS stimulation alone significantly induced apoptosis and inhibited fibroblast proliferation, which was mediated by activation of the p53 pathway and suppression of PI3K signaling. Thus, excessive ROS reprograms the signaling network and function of fibroblasts to shift the repair process from regenerative repair to pathological fibrotic remodeling. This highlights that pulmonary fibrosis development does not necessarily rely on long-term chronic stimulation. ROS exposure caused by a single event of acute inflammation is sufficient to induce fibroblast phenotypic transformation and functional reprogramming, laying the foundation for pathological remodeling.
Traditionally, pulmonary fibrosis is primarily due to the cumulative damage of chronic inflammation. For example, in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), recurrent, small-scale injuries gradually disrupt alveolar structure, leading to an imbalance in repair mechanisms and ultimately irreversible structural remodeling. Although the exact etiology of IPF remains unclear, its development is possibly closely linked to inflammation and immune responses, including impaired adaptive immunity and elevated expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α and IL-1β [ , , , ]. Recently, it has been proposed that acute inflammation may prematurely activate the fibrosis program, primarily driven by the dysregulation of critical cells and cytokine effectors in the inflammatory peak, resulting in early fibrotic changes already detectable in the acute phase [ , ]. Consistently, we observed that in systemic inflammation, lung tissue rapidly activates fibrosis-related signaling pathways, accompanied by fibroblast phenotypic remodeling, upregulation of ECM synthesis genes, and downregulation of anti-fibrotic factors (Tgfb3, Smad7, and Cav1). This suggests that pulmonary fibrosis development does not necessarily require long-term inflammation; intense acute injury may be sufficient to disrupt functional regenerative repair programs. From the perspective of tissue repair, inflammation and regeneration are not strictly separate phases but instead overlap as a continuum. Thus, after sepsis, early clinical interventions may be needed to prevent the initiation of fibrosis by controlling ROS, protecting mitochondrial function, and regulating fibroblast activation.
TNF-α and IL-1β, as classical markers of inflammation, are typically upregulated immediately after sepsis and then rapidly decline. However, our study found that, unlike other organs, the lungs exhibited significantly elevated transcriptional levels of TNF-α and IL-1β for up to two days after sepsis, indicating that the lungs are more sensitive to inflammation and suffer sustained damage. Moreover, TNF-α and IL-1β are central to the gene regulatory network of pulmonary fibrosis. Previous studies have highlighted the importance of cytokines in driving fibrotic responses, with TNF-α and IL-1β being closely associated with pulmonary fibrosis [ , , ]. Temporal analysis revealed that persistent activation of TNF-α and IL-1β in septic lungs coincides with the activation of tissue repair programs. Enhanced TNF signaling in immune cells and hypoxia pathway activation in parenchymal cells suggest that TNF-α and IL-1β may act as pivotal mediators bridging immune responses and parenchymal cell injury.
Although neutrophils primarily rely on glycolysis for energy production, emerging evidence suggests that mitochondrial function contributes to redox regulation and signaling [ , ]. We provide in
vivo evidence that TNF-α and IL-1β activate ROS-related pathways in lung tissue, while dual antibody neutralization suppresses ROS activity. Single-cell analysis revealed that TNF-α and IL-1β impair mitochondrial structural integrity, inhibit energy metabolism, and enhance ROS activity in neutrophils and monocytes. Our findings from in
vitro experiments further demonstrate that TNF-α and IL-1β impair mitochondrial respiratory capacity and increase ROS production in neutrophils. Considering that ROS serve as core drivers of pathological remodeling in fibroblasts, sustained activation of TNF-α/IL-1β acts as a molecular switch to initiate pro-fibrotic repair through ROS-mediated oxidative stress during acute inflammation. The fibrosis programs may be triggered in the acute phase via the upstream amplification axis of “myeloid cells – TNF-α/IL-1β – ROS” and the downstream response of “fibroblasts – TGF-β – ECM remodeling.” However, although targeting TNF-α and IL-1β can alleviate experimental pulmonary fibrosis [ , ], clinical trials (NCT00063869 and NCT00650091) involving anti-inflammatory drugs such as etanercept, prednisone, azathioprine, and NAC have failed to achieve the expected benefits and even produced adverse effects [ , , ]. These discrepancies highlight the importance of therapeutic timing. Blocking cytokine signaling after fibrosis may surpass the optimal intervention timing. Therefore, during early sepsis treatment, targeted inhibition of the amplification loop between TNF-α/IL-1β and ROS in the lungs, as well as the suppression of ROS accumulation-driven abnormal repair in fibroblasts, may potentially prevent fibrotic remodeling.
This study reveals a sequential pathological process in septic lung injury, characterized by myeloid cell-driven ROS accumulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and fibroblast function reprogramming. Acute inflammation can initiate pulmonary fibrosis programs within hours to days. The core mechanism is sustained activation of TNF-α and IL-1β signaling in septic lungs, which induces mitochondrial metabolic alterations and ROS release in neutrophils; the resulting ROS accumulation affects Col13a1+ fibroblasts, modulating PI3K and p53 pathways and contributing to their profibrotic activation during early fibrotic remodeling ( J). These findings provide new pathological insights for understanding pulmonary fibrosis.

5

## Conclusion
In summary, this study indicates that pulmonary fibrosis following sepsis is not solely dependent on chronic inflammation, but is associated with acute inflammatory responses characterized by mitochondrial dysfunction and increased ROS levels. These changes may contribute to the transition of fibroblasts from regenerative repair toward fibrotic remodeling. Sustained activation of TNF-α and IL-1β signaling in septic lungs induced mitochondrial metabolic alterations and ROS release in neutrophils, while the ensuing ROS-mediated oxidative stress affects the PI3K and p53 signaling pathways and contributes to the initiation of fibrotic remodeling. Our findings confirm that ROS released by neutrophils in response to TNF-α and IL-1β is the central driver of fibroblast reprogramming and early fibrotic remodeling in septic lungs. These results highlight the potential of targeting TNF-α/IL-1β signaling, ROS accumulation, and Col13a1+ fibroblast activation as therapeutic strategies for early intervention.

## Funding
This study was supported by grants from the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (82130063, U25A20101 and 82272194), Natural Science Foundation of Henan (252300421133), Joint Fund of Science and Technology R&D Plan of Henan Province (245200810105), Basic Scientific Research Operating Expenses Project of Henan Academy of Innovations in Medical Science (JBKY250210), Henan Provincial Science and Technology Key Project (262102310024).

## Availability of data and materials
The RNA-seq data used during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
All experimental procedures were in accordance with National Institute of Health (NIH) guidelines and were approved by the local Animal Care and Use Committee of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

## Consent for publication
Not applicable.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Zhaoqian Zhong: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft. Kan Wu: Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft. Junhao Wang: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Supervision, Writing – original draft. Guiming Chen: Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Visualization. Haihua Luo: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Supervision. Guangqin Chen: Methodology, Validation, Visualization. Chang Sun: Methodology, Validation. Danyan Guo: Validation, Visualization. Leyi Li: Visualization. Lei Li: Funding acquisition, Project administration, Resources, Writing – review & editing. Yong Jiang: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article.

## Multimedia component 1

## Acknowledgements
We would like to express our gratitude to Ms. Wan Zhao (Guangzhou PaperBiotec, China) and Ms. Jiayun Gong (Central Laboratory of Southern Medical University, China) for their kind assistance and support during the flow cytometry experiments. We are also grateful to the Servicebio core facility for their guidance and assistance with tissue immunofluorescence experiments, and to the GENOM Biotech team for their support with neutrophil fluorescence staining and ECAR/OCR assays.
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2026.104225.