pmcPlant CommunPlant Commun3970plantcommsPlant Communications2590-3462ElsevierPMC13261677PMC13261677.113261677132616774202148810.1016/j.xplc.2026.101869S2590-3462(26)00177-X1018691Research ArticleThe chromatin reader MBD4 regulates temperature- and flowering-responsive transcription by recognizing histone arginine methylation
AbelendaJosé A.ja.abelenda@mbg.csic.es Carrera-CastañoGerardo CallejaJulián OlmoIván del PozasJenifer Alonso-PérezElisa PiñeiroManuelpineiro@inia.csic.es JarilloJosé A.jarillo@inia.csic.es 1Centro de Biotecnología y Genómica de Plantas, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (UPM) - Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria INIA/CSIC, Campus Montegancedo UPM, 28223 Pozuelo de Alarcón, Madrid, Spain2Misión Biolóxica de Galicia (CSIC), Avda de Vigo s/n. Campus Vida, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain∗Corresponding author ja.abelenda@mbg.csic.es∗∗Corresponding author pineiro@inia.csic.es∗∗∗Corresponding author jarillo@inia.csic.es3These authors contributed equally
4Present address: Cell and Developmental Biology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
0862026214202676515496101869158202522220261342026210420261306202618062026© 2026 The Author(s)2026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Precise regulation of flowering time in plants is achieved through tight transcriptional control of master regulators, which is fine-tuned by dynamic histone modifications and changes in chromatin structure. In our search for flowering-related regulatory networks, we identified METHYL-BINDING DOMAIN PROTEIN 4 (MBD4) as a key hub controlling flowering and responses to high ambient temperature in Brassica napus and Arabidopsis. While MBD4 was previously described as a DNA methylation reader, our findings reveal that MBD4 recognizes histone arginine methylation. The MBD4 genome-wide distribution and its coordinated expression with histone methylation writers coincide with global patterns of arginine methylation. Although histone lysine methylation is well understood, the role of arginine methylation remains largely unexplored. Our results demonstrate that MBD4 plays a critical role in the transcriptional control of flowering regulators by recognizing arginine methylation and facilitating acetylation removal. Additionally, we confirmed the significance of the Brassica napus MBD4 homeolog in modulating the transition to the reproductive phase through chromatin alterations at the BnaFLC and BnaMAF4 loci, suggesting that chromatin readers may have a global influence on important developmental traits in crops. Overall, understanding these molecular mechanisms is highly relevant to developing strategies to improve crop adaptation to global warming.

This study identifies MBD4 chromatin reader as a regulator of flowering time in plants that functions through recognizing histone arginine methylation and facilitating acetylation removal. This mechanism modulates the transcription of flowering regulators and contributes to high-temperature adaptation in Brassica napus and Arabidopsis. These findings open new avenues for improving crop adaptation to global warming through chromatin-based strategies.

## Key words
epigeneticsMBD4histone readerfloweringheat stressarginine methylationpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDPublished: April 21, 2026

## Introduction
Flowering is an energy-consuming developmental process that must be tightly regulated to ensure the reproductive success of plant species. Plants rely on seasonal fluctuations in environmental cues, such as photoperiod, to determine the optimal time to enter the reproductive phase ( ). In Arabidopsis thaliana, several floral repressors, including the MADS-box protein FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) ( ) and its homologs MADS AFFECTING FLOWERING 4 (MAF4) and MAF5 ( ), as well as other flowering inhibitors, delay the initiation of reproductive development by repressing floral activators such as FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT). Additionally, temperature perception by thermosensors allows plants to respond to short-term fluctuating conditions and to adapt over long timescales ( ).
Plants must balance long-term, genetically controlled adaptations with low plasticity, such as the canonical photoperiodic pathway, against short-term environmental cues and inputs that allow for more dynamic responses. For instance, during warm periods, the transcription factor PHYTOCHROME-INTERACTING FACTOR 4 (PIF4) induces FT expression and eventually promotes the initiation of flowering ( ). Simultaneously, PIF4 can mediate responses to high-temperature stress by interacting with the HEMERA (HMR) cofactor, inducing the expression of auxin-related heat-sensitive genes and promoting hypocotyl elongation ( ). Accordingly, temperature information must be effectively integrated into a complex web of interactions to ensure the appropriate activation of downstream effectors.
Transcriptional control of network hubs and effectors via chromatin remodeling is essential for dynamically and reversibly fine-tuning gene expression patterns in response to environmental fluctuations ( ). Nucleosomal histone composition and covalent modifications, which are deposited by writers, removed by erasers, and recognized by readers ( ; ) influence chromatin accessibility. Incorporation of structurally different histone variants into nucleosomes ( ) or histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) ( ; ), such as lysine (K) or arginine (R) methylation, can alter chromatin compaction and transcriptional competence. However, how epigenetic processes mediate plant transcriptional responses to high temperature remains poorly understood.
To date, no chromatin-associated methyl-R readers have been functionally characterized in plants ( ), and consequently, the downstream biological implications of histone R methylation remain largely unknown. The most extensive search for histone readers in Arabidopsis, which used state-of-the-art biochemical tools to analyze more than 200 putative readers, did not include readers for R-based post-translational histone modifications ( ). Among the few identified methyl-R readers, two Tudor-like proteins with a staphylococcal/micrococcal-like nuclease domain (SND), TSN1 and TSN2, which are homologous to the human Tudor protein SND, interact with the ARGONAUTE 2 (AGO2) RNA silencing pathway in a methyl-R-dependent manner ( ). PROTEIN ARGININE METHYLTRANSFERASES (PRMTs) are the enzymes that catalyze R methylation ( ), and TSN1/2 activity depends specifically on AGO2 protein methylation by PRMT5 ( ).
In this study, we identify candidate genes involved in flowering time control by mining transcriptionally altered Brassica napus gene modules under different temperatures. We show that the methyl-binding domain protein MBD4 ( ; ; ) acts as a temperature integrator that modulates the expression of flowering repressors in Arabidopsis and Brassica napus (oilseed rape, OSR). Remarkably, we show that MBD4 recognizes specific methylated R residues on histones, thereby acting as a reader of asymmetric dimethylation on the histone H3 tail, namely H3R17me2a and H3R26me2a. In addition, we demonstrate that MBD4 is a chromatin-binding protein that co-regulates the histone acetylation levels at the flowering repressor genes MADS AFFECTING FLOWERING 4 (MAF4) and MAF5 ( ; ) as well as CYCLING DOF FACTOR 1 (CDF1) and CDF3 ( ), among others. Given the limited information available on methyl-R readers in plants, characterizing a new chromatin reader that recognizes poorly described histone methyl-R modifications represents a significant step forward in our understanding of plant epigenetic regulation. Moreover, elucidating the mechanisms underlying epigenetic mark-dependent developmental plasticity in crops such as OSR remains challenging. Altogether, our work expands the scope of epigenetic research in plants by demonstrating how unexposed phenotypes can be mechanistically studied in a model plant while offering promising avenues for future research and the development of varieties better suited to withstand global warming through biotechnology.

## Results

## The chromatin-associated factor MBD4 is involved in flowering regulation and abiotic stress responses
In a previous study using genome-wide RNA-seq ( ), we observed that three OSR accessions with contrasting flowering responses to warm ambient temperatures displayed changes in expression between cultivars in genes homologous to EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3) and ELF4 at 21°C and 28°C, among others. To further explore potential candidate genes involved in temperature-dependent developmental responses, instead of focusing on individual differentially expressed genes (DEGs), we decided to reanalyze the entire dataset using weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) ( ), a systems biology approach used to characterize gene coexpression patterns across samples. With this approach, we aimed to identify synergistic gene clusters and candidates by analyzing the association between gene sets and phenotypes or traits, such as days to flowering, at two different temperatures.
WGCNA analysis generated 51 modules related to flowering time at two temperatures. From the module-trait correlation analysis, a clear relationship emerged among flowering-related clusters associated with positive and negative effects on the trait. We identified the green module (correlation coefficient = 0.8, A and 1B) containing 618 genes as highly positively correlated with the trait. Then, we reduced the number of genes for downstream analysis by setting the module membership (MM) threshold to greater than 0.7, resulting in 475 genes. The presence of an ELF4 homolog in the module confirmed the robustness of our analysis. To further narrow the candidates, we focused on genes with significant changes in expression across all varieties and conditions, resulting in 13 independent genes ( C and 1D). In addition to BnaELF4, the most robust candidate showing transcriptional induction at 28°C in all OSR varieties was a gene homologous to Arabidopsis MBD4 ( ). To confirm these results, we used qPCR to reanalyze the expression of BnaELF4 under different conditions in all three varieties ( E), which showed higher expression at 28°C in Wesway and Dux but not in Drakkar. We then decided to focus on BnaMBD4, the less investigated of the two in relation to temperature sensitivity. In young leaves, the expression of both homeologs present in the A and C rapeseed subgenomes was higher in Drakkar and Wesway and less pronounced in Dux ( F). The differences in expression between temperatures were minimal in older leaves but conspicuous in the Dux meristem ( F), reflecting a degree of variation between accessions and tissues. 
Interestingly, the Arabidopsis MBD4 gene is regulated in a PIF4/ELF3-dependent manner ( ; ). In addition, our qRT-PCR analyses revealed that this locus displays rapid transcriptional activation at 28°C in Arabidopsis ( A). MBD4 belongs to a large family of proteins found in eukaryotes and is named after the methyl-binding domain (MBD), first identified in Methyl-CpG BINDING PROTEIN 2 (MeCP2) ( ). Besides the MBD, an additional zinc-finger CW domain, named for its conserved cysteine and tryptophan residues, is present in the N-terminal part of the protein ( ) ( ). 
To dissect the possible role of this protein in temperature responses and flowering, we delved into the functional role of MBD4 in Arabidopsis. Analysis of GUS activity in Arabidopsis transgenic plants carrying a construct with the native AtMBD4 promoter showed high expression in seedlings, with prominent staining in apical meristems and young tissues ( B). For functional characterization, we searched for available T-DNA insertional mutants in the MBD4 locus ( A and 1B). The T-DNA insertion in the mbd4-1 allele (SAIL-434-A05) is located in the open reading frame (ORF) region, truncating the MBD domain, prompting us to pursue its further characterization. Negative regulation of phosphate starvation genes and a root-associated phenotype were previously described in the mbd4-1 mutant ( ). However, part of the Syngenta Arabidopsis Insertion Library (SAIL) collection of T-DNA lines is in a quartet 1-2 (qrt1-2) mutant background that could confound phenotypic interpretations ( ). To rule out this possibility, the qrt1-2 mutation was removed through backcrossing with Col-0. We obtained an additional MBD4 mutant allele (mbd4-2) using CRISPR–Cas9 to support our interpretations. This approach generated a point mutation resulting in a premature stop codon in the CW zinc-finger domain of MBD4 ( ). On the other hand, mbd4-3 bears a T-DNA insertion located in the first intron of the gene, while in mbd4-4, the insertion is at the end of the MBD domain. Three out of four mutant alleles obtained—mbd4-1 (Col-0), mbd4-4 (Ws), and the CRISPR-derived allele mbd4-2 (Col-0)—displayed a slight but consistent flowering delay under our growth conditions ( C and ). The flowering delay in mbd4-3 (Col-0) was less apparent and dependent on the environmental conditions of the experiment ( ). Plants overexpressing MBD4 under the constitutive CaMV 35S promoter showed no conspicuous changes in flowering time or development under standard growth conditions ( C). To assess its role during flowering, we complemented the mbd4-2 mutant with the MBD4 gene under its native promoter (pMBD4:MBD4). Complementation of mbd4-2 fully restored wild-type (WT) flowering time ( C). The flowering phenotype of the mbd4-2 mutant and the corresponding complemented line was also examined at high temperatures; mbd4-2 showed delayed flowering, whereas this phenotype was restored by the MBD4 transgene in the complemented line ( D).
To learn about the functional role of MBD4, we performed a transcriptomic analysis on seedlings of a representative 35S:MBD4 overexpression line and two mutants, mbd4-1 and mbd4-2 ( E). Of the two mutants analyzed, mbd4-1 showed less pronounced changes in MBD4 gene expression than mbd4-2. Remarkably, despite the lack of conspicuous phenotypic alterations, MBD4 overexpression caused gene expression misregulation reminiscent of that observed in the mbd4 mutants. We hypothesized that the ubiquitous overexpression might cause the misregulation of cofactors required for MBD4 activity. Alternatively, overexpression might alter the stoichiometry of the complex(es) involving MBD4, causing dysfunction that results in defective regulation of target genes, a situation that has been previously reported for chromatin remodeling factors ( ). A large number of DEGs were identified in the mbd4-2 mutant relative to WT (> 6,000 genes, FDR < 0.05). From the transcriptomic analysis ( ), we could not infer a general role of MBD4 as a repressor, as the numbers of upregulated and downregulated genes among mbd4-2 DEGs were practically identical (3767 vs. 3818, FDR < 0.05). Notably, in both mutant backgrounds and consistent with their delayed flowering phenotype, several genes involved in flowering repression showed higher expression, including CDF1, CDF3 ( ), B-box (BBX) proteins BBX31 and BBX32 ( ; ), TEMPRANILLO1 (TEM1), and TEMPRANILLO2 (TEM2) ( ) ( ). In addition, several transcription factor families were enriched among the DEGs identified in mbd4-2 ( ).
To further investigate the possible biological roles of MBD4, we performed gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the DEGs identified across all three genetic backgrounds assayed (925 genes). The results show a large proportion of GO terms related to responses to heat and abiotic stress ( E). We therefore analyzed the behavior of the two mutant alleles and a complemented mutant line under heat shock treatment. In contrast to Col-0 seedlings, no recovery was observed in mbd4-1 and mbd4-2 mutant lines 72 h after heat shock treatment at 42.5°C, suggesting greater sensitivity to heat stress. Importantly, the complemented line restored the WT response ( F). Moreover, we confirmed the defective response of mbd4 mutants to heat stress by quantifying the chlorophyll content in the mutants and several complemented lines, including transgenic lines expressing the genomic sequence of MBD4 either under its native promoter or the constitutive CaMV 35S promoter ( ). Constitutive overexpression restored the wild-type phenotype in the mutant, indicating that, under stress, high levels of MBD4 do not alter downstream targets in the same manner as in the mutants. Indeed, analysis of a myc-tagged MBD4 protein version expressed under the endogenous MBD4 promoter confirmed the increase in MBD4 protein levels under high-temperature conditions ( ).
Then, we performed RNA-seq analysis of the mbd4-2 mutant following transient heat-stress treatment to assess rapid transcriptional responses. This analysis revealed extensive differential gene expression compared with WT plants, indicating a strong impact of the mutation on heat-responsive regulatory pathways. Notably, several key flowering repressors in Arabidopsis, including CDF1, CDF2, TEM1, and TEM2, were significantly upregulated, suggesting altered control of flowering time under stress conditions. In addition, core components of the circadian clock were severely affected, with markedly increased expression of CCA1 and LHY, indicating that circadian regulation is also disrupted in mbd4-2 following heat treatment ( G).
We next investigated whether MBD4 binds directly to some of the flowering repressor genes that are upregulated in both mutant alleles, mbd4-1 and mbd4-2. First, myc-tagged MBD4 was found to bind to the CDF1 locus, as revealed by chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by qPCR (ChIP-qPCR) assays ( ). We also performed ChIP-qPCR assays on transgenic seedlings expressing FLAG-tagged MBD4 and confirmed its binding to the floral repressor locus MAF4. Given that myc-tagged MBD4 was more efficient in the ChIP-qPCR assays, we subsequently used an mbd4-2 mutant complemented with myc-tagged MBD4 under the control of its native promoter for further analyses. ChIP-seq was performed to identify direct in vivo genomic targets of MBD4 that may underlie the transcriptomic changes. Our first attempts yielded poor enrichment and revealed only a limited number of targets. Published ChIP-seq results ( ) and our preliminary experiments indicate a transient and labile binding of MBD4 to the chromatin. We used a different ChIP protocol, adding a fixation procedure with crosslinking reagent to overcome the initial poor enrichment ( ). ChIP-seq experiments revealed that MBD4 localizes predominantly to transcriptionally active gene bodies, with a pronounced enrichment from the transcription start site (TSS) to the transcription end site (TES) ( H). Combining data from independent ChIP-seq experiments, we observed a good overlap in the genome-wide regions detected. Using MACS2 (q value < 0.01, broad peak), we defined approximately 104 MBD4-occupied peaks across the three IPs, corresponding to 2,558 genes ( , ). GO enrichment analyses show significant enrichment in chromatin-related descriptors ( ); notably, MBD2, MBD7, and MBD12 genes are direct targets of the MBD4 protein. We analyzed the data using the MEME-suite tools ( ) to identify DNA motifs in the pulled-down MBD4-enriched sequences. A motif sequence previously described as a heat shock promoter element ( ) emerged from the analysis ( H). Together, these molecular data are consistent with the previous phenotypic analysis. We concluded that Arabidopsis MBD4 is an environmentally responsive gene involved in flowering, and that it encodes a protein that binds to chromatin regions enriched in DNA motifs related to temperature-dependent stress responses.

## MBD4 preferentially binds methylated arginine residues on histones
Research on the MBD protein family in plants has generally described them as readers of DNA methylation ( ). However, the affinity and specificity of some MBDs, especially MBD1, MBD2, and MBD4, for DNA have been shown to be low ( ; ; ; ; ). In our assays, the bacteria-expressed MBD4 protein showed no specific affinity for methylated DNA, as previously described ( ).
To isolate MBD4 chromatin-related complexes, we performed proteomic analysis using a previously described method ( ), which involved separating fractions of soluble and tightly bound complexes ( ) along with the use of mass spectrometry (MS)-cleavable crosslinkers to isolate higher-order protein complexes. Up to 1,547 independent peptides representing 981 proteins were identified within crosslinked complexes (FDR < 5%). Proteins found in the MBD4 unbound fraction were used as a blacklist to refine the search, removing proteins suspected to be non-specific contaminants. From the remaining peptides, only 126 (FDR < 1%) corresponding to 121 proteins were selected as reliable interactors ( ). Among these, the previously described interaction with HISTONE DEACETYLASE 6 (HDA6) was absent. However, direct partners of HDA6, such as the SWI/SNF complex subunit SWI3D and DEK3 domain-containing proteins ( ), were present, suggesting that the use of crosslinkers and a higher-order protein complex search approach might have hindered the detection of HDA6. Surprisingly, multiple histones appeared as direct MBD4 preys, indicating a likely connection to nucleosomes. These findings suggest a possible role for MBD4 as a histone mark reader. Furthermore, Arabidopsis MBD9 can interact with diverse epigenetic marks on histone tails ( ), and human MeCP2 can bind to the H3K27me3 histone mark ( ). To further confirm this hypothesis, we employed an unbiased approach, using heterologously expressed Maltose Binding Protein (MBP)-tagged MBD4 protein, to assess its affinity for a collection of modified H3 peptides in a histone immunoassay. Remarkably, we found that MBD4 bound to several histone H3 marks, including methylated R residues H3R17 and H3R26, H3K36ac, and the histone core mark H3K56ac ( A, ). Histone R residues can be symmetrically or asymmetrically dimethylated, and for both R17 and R26, binding appeared to be independent of the methyl group position on the R residues. We then expanded the approach and analyzed over 3,000 histone marks in peptide binding microarray (PBM) assays. We confirmed the screening results, and MBD4 was able to recognize methylated R residues in different histones ( B). In the PBM experiments, we demonstrated that an MBD4 variant mutated in the methyl recognition pocket (R104A and R123A) abolished binding to the peptides ( ). In addition, MBD4 also showed some affinity for methylated K residues. Nevertheless, the most consistent binding, in terms of specificity and intensity, was to asymmetrically or symmetrically methylated R residues. To exclude any possible artifacts due to the tag fused to MBD4, we employed MBD4 purified with a self-cleavable intein/chitin-binding domain tag or a poly-histidine tag in thermal shift assays (TSA), confirming the interaction between MBD4 and the H3R26me2a peptide, regardless of the purification method ( ). 
The current knowledge of the role of H3R17 and H3R26 methylation in plants is scarce, as is the availability of high-quality antibodies that can specifically recognize these histone marks. We observed an in vivo interaction between H3R26me2a and MBD4 in Nicotiana benthamiana co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) transient expression assays ( ). Despite our attempts with several antibody batches, plant materials, and conditions, we were unable to detect the H3R26me2a mark in Arabidopsis by standard immunoblot methods. Conversely, commercial antibodies recognized H3R17me2a in Arabidopsis. As in other organisms, the total amount of histone R methylation appears low, but it could be related to temperature and stress, following the behavior of the putative reader under those circumstances. Immunoblot analysis of samples obtained from seedlings grown at high temperature confirmed the increase of H3R17me2a levels at 28°C ( C). Taking advantage of the H3R17me2a increase at 28°C, we used a mild denaturing cross-linking immunoprecipitation assay ( ) and observed that the GFP-tagged MBD4 protein pulled down the histone mark in vivo ( D). Overall, these observations provide strong evidence that MBD4 acts as an H3R17me2a reader in Arabidopsis and that both the mark and the reader respond to increasing temperatures.

## mbd4 mutants exhibit elevated H3R17me2a levels at regions that extensively overlap with MBD4 genomic occupancy in wild-type plants
Western blot analysis of nuclear extracts from mbd4-1 and mbd4-2 using an anti-H3R17me2a antibody showed an increase in this mark in both mutants. In the pMBD4:MBD4 mbd4-2 complemented line, H3R17me2a levels were restored to WT levels ( A). PRMT enzymes catalyze R methylation ( ). In humans, depending on their activity and specificity, the nine PRMT members are classified into three types: type I PRMTs (PRMT-1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 8), type II PRMTs (PRMT-5 and 9), and type III PRMTs (PRMT-7). Using the same gene-by-gene nomenclature and categorization, we found that the Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains nine equivalent PRMTs ( ): PRMT1, PRMT11, PRMT3, PRMT4a, PRMT4b, PRMT5, PRMT6, PRMT7, and the plant-specific PRMT10. After detecting the changes in H3R17 methylation levels in mbd4 mutants, we assessed the expression of all PRMT genes in the mbd4-2 and MBD4oex backgrounds. Notably, PRMT4b, PRMT5, and PRMT11 exhibited higher expression in the mbd4 mutant plants ( ). Constitutive MBD4 overexpression moderately reduced the expression levels of PRMT5 ( ). The precise mechanism behind this molecular phenotype remains unknown. One possibility is that MBD4 disrupts PRMT activity at the protein level, but in our proteomic analyses, no binding between MBD4 and these proteins was detected, and to our knowledge, no interaction has been described to date. However, PRMT transcription increased in the mbd4 mutant background, primarily for PRMT4b and PRMT5, and protein abundance visibly correlated with gene expression. Further research in this regard will be necessary. 
To further support the observations described above, we performed a ChIP-seq analysis using a commercial H3R17me2a antibody that had been previously validated in ChIP-qPCR ( ) and genome-wide analyses ( ). When we compared pMBD4:MBD4 mbd4-2 against mbd4-2 genomic regions marked with H3R17me2a in a 2D matrix, the Pearson correlation coefficient approximation was 0.54, indicating a low overlap between the two backgrounds. The correlation between the complemented pMBD4:MBD4 mbd4-2 and WT was much higher, confirming the molecular phenotype restoration due to MBD4 ( ). The trend of H3R17me2a occupancy obtained by ChIP-seq is consistent with the immunoblot results, with the mbd4-2 mutant showing a pronounced enrichment in the mark and recovery to WT levels once the mutation was complemented ( B). Similar to MBD4 binding, the presence of H3R17me2a is higher in the gene body. Moreover, 67% of H3R17me2a broad peaks overlap with MBD4 genomic distribution ( C). The overlap between MBD4 and H3R17me2a peaks strongly suggests a direct role for MBD4 in the specific recognition of this histone mark and the modulation of its deposition.
We took advantage of prmt mutants to carry out an in vitro pull-down ( ) of native chromatin partially depleted of H3R17me2a. We focused on prmt4a and prmt4b because they display altered flowering time that is dependent on the negative regulation of FLC and MAF4/5 transcription ( ). Moreover, we included the prmt6 mutant in this analysis due to its redundant role with PRMT4a/PRMT4b in inhibiting FLC expression ( ). After incubation with MBD4-HIS, a lower amount of chromatin was recovered from the double prmt4ab and prmt6 mutants compared with the wild type ( D). To confirm the binding specificity of MBD4, we quantified the known MBD4-binding regions in MAF4, MAF5, CDF1, and CDF3 by qPCR, showing a consistent decrease in enrichment when using chromatin from the mutants ( D). Overall, our findings support the idea that MBD4 recognizes histone H3 methylated R residues and regulates the presence of H3R17me2a by adjusting the expression levels of PRMT genes. In addition, MBD4 binding to chromatin is decreased by mutations in these PRMT genes.

## MBD4 is functionally related to HDA6, and mbd4 mutations affect histone acetylation
MBD4 is present in complexes with the HDA6 protein ( ), which functions in general transcriptional repression and flowering promotion through the silencing of FLC, MAF4, and MAF5 repressors ( ; ). A tentative mechanism underlying the role of MBD4 as a reader could be its activity as a scaffold protein that recruits the HDA6 eraser to chromatin, thereby modifying histone acetylation levels and the accessibility of transcriptionally active regions. To validate this hypothesis, and because HDA6 was not found in our proteomic analysis with MBD4, we first confirmed its in vivo interaction with HDA6 through Co-IP and bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assays ( A and 6B). Then, we quantified possible differences in acetylation by ChIP-seq using antibodies against poly-acetylated histone H4 and specifically against H3K14ac in WT and mbd4-2 seedlings. Levels of acetylated histone H4 were marginally higher in mbd4-2; however, H3K14ac showed a robust increase in the mbd4-2 background compared with WT seedlings, particularly in the TSS region ( A; ; ). 
To obtain a deeper insight into the function of the HDA6/MBD4 complex, we generated mbd4-2 hda6 double mutants, which displayed an apparent additive phenotype in flowering time, with the mbd4-2 hda6 mutant flowering later than the parental single mutants (Figure 5B and 5C). We examined the expression levels of HDA6 targets, including FLC and MAF2, 3, 4, and 5, by qPCR, observing a clear trend toward higher expression of MAF4 gene in the mbd4-2 hda6 double mutant ( D). We then confirmed through ChIP-qPCR that histone H4ac levels at the MAF4 and MAF5 loci were higher in the mbd4-2 hda6 double mutant compared with single mutant plants ( E).
Finally, we reasoned that if the H3R17me2a reader is associated with the acetylation profile, it would be possible to detect changes in acetylation levels in PRMT-impaired mutants. We confirmed by ChIP-qPCR that individual PRMT mutants (prmt4a, prmt4b, and prmt6-1) showed altered H4 poly-acetylation levels at the CDF1 and CDF3 loci, which also exhibited acetylation changes in the mbd4-2 hda6 mutant ( A and 7B).

## Loss of MBD4 function causes late flowering in Brassica napus
Because MBD4 was initially identified through transcriptional analysis of flowering-related genes in OSR, we investigated whether the observed biological roles of Arabidopsis MBD4 are conserved in this crop. Brassica napus is an allotetraploid species resulting from hybridization between B. rapa and B. oleracea ( ). The OSR genome contains a duplicated set of genes in both subgenomes, named subgenome A (B. rapa) and subgenome C (B. oleracea), with most genes having redundant functions and multiple copies, including members of the MBD gene family ( ). Using CRISPR–Cas9 technology with specifically designed guide RNAs targeting the homologous BnMBD4 copies in both subgenomes, we created several putative mutant lines with varying degrees of flowering delay under greenhouse conditions ( A–8C). Due to the complexity of its genome ( ), B. napus can carry several independent mutant alleles in both subgenomes simultaneously ( ). After Cas9 transgene removal, we established two fixed lines, designated 1D and 2D, carrying loss-of-function biallelic mutations causing different degrees of alteration in flowering time. Both lines exhibit delayed anthesis ( A). BnaMBD4 expression was lower in these mutant lines than in WT plants ( B). Consistent with the observed flowering delay, downregulation of BnaFTA2 and BnaSOC1 homeologs ( B) was confirmed by qPCR in both mutant lines. 

## Bnambd4 mutants show increased expression of FLC/MAF flowering repressors and increased acetylation levels at these loci
In Arabidopsis, we observed that the FLC paralogs MAF4 and MAF5 appear to act downstream of MBD4 ( D). FLC orthologs in B. napus are central regulators of the vernalization response in rapeseed ( ), so we speculated that FLC homeologs could be responsible for the observed flowering delay in Bnambd4 1D/2D backgrounds, although the RV31 accession, our laboratory model, is a spring-type variety with poor sensitivity to vernalization. We focused our investigation on the FLC ortholog FLCA10 (BnaA10g22080D), a vernalization-related gene in B. napus ( ), due to its well-known association with flowering time ( ). Regarding MAF4 homologs, after a preliminary quantification of the four genes described in the BnlR Rapeseed Multi-omics Database ( ; http://yanglab.hzau.edu.cn/BnlRd), BnaC03G0526000D showed the most reliable expression. As the BnaMBD4 gene was initially identified in relation to high-temperature conditions, we also included temperature as a variable in the characterization of Bnambd4 mutants. At the standard growth temperature of 21°C, the expression patterns of both genes were consistent with the flowering phenotypes of the mutant lines ( A). Under suboptimal conditions, specifically continuous exposure to 28°C, expression increased in both mutants compared with the wild type and with their own expression at 21°C ( A). As expected, and as previously reported ( ), wild-type plants grown at 28°C showed delayed flowering ( B). Under the same conditions, Bnambd4 1D and Bnambd4 2D lines were extremely late flowering, with most plants unable to bloom ( B). 
To verify whether the proposed link with histone acetylation could explain the increased expression in the Bnambd4 mutants, we performed ChIP-qPCR targeting the H3K14ac mark in samples obtained from WT and Bnambd4 mutants just before flowering. We analyzed the distribution of the mark at the BnaFLCA10 and BnaMAF4C03G loci ( C). Enrichment of the H3K14ac mark was detected in these genomic regions in mutant plants, indicating the preservation of the probable MBD4/HDAC regulatory module in Brassica napus and Arabidopsis.
Given the increase in the H3R17me2a mark in Arabidopsis mbd4 mutants, we investigated whether this pattern is preserved in Brassica napus. Using ChIP-qPCR at the same BnaFLCA10 and BnaMAF4C03G loci, we confirmed the increased enrichment of the H3R17me2a mark in Bnambd4 mutants ( D). These observations are consistent with the notion that the MBD4–HDA regulatory module is conserved in both species.

## Discussion
MBD-type proteins are homologous to human MeCP2 ( ); however, their functional roles in plants remain unclear, especially for the subgroup that includes MBD1, MBD2, and MBD4. The lack of obvious phenotypic alterations in mutants and difficulties in biochemical characterization have made this family challenging to study ( ; ). In Arabidopsis, MBD4 loss-of-function mutants show noticeable phenotypic effects only under non-standard temperature conditions or other altered growth environments. Our study sheds light on the biological role of MBD4 in Arabidopsis thaliana and Brassica napus, identifying it as a chromatin reader that couples temperature sensing and signaling to the silencing of flowering repressors, with implications for breeding and adaptation to warmer environments.

## MBD4 functions in response to environmental conditions
BnaMBD4 and Arabidopsis MBD4 respond to fluctuations in ambient temperature, and the global transcriptomic changes and phenotypes observed in mbd4 mutant plants under challenging temperature conditions are consistent with a function in temperature-dependent developmental control. Other MBD family members have been linked to abiotic stress responses, including MBD10, which positively regulates Abscisic acid (ABA)-induced leaf senescence through a C-MAP kinase-dependent mechanism ( ). In Zea mays, the MBD4 homolog MBD101 is involved in DNA damage repair and transposon silencing following UV-B exposure ( ). Ultraviolet radiation and heat stress activate similar response pathways ( ), suggesting that MBD proteins may participate in shared chromatin-level control mechanisms.
In Arabidopsis thaliana, accelerated flowering under warmth is driven by a combination of temperature sensing mediated by photomorphogenesis effectors, especially ELF3, ELF4, and PIF4 ( ), and chromatin modulation by the histone variant H2A.Z ( ). Our WGCNA approach identified B. napus ELF4 and MBD4 homeologs in the most significant flowering-associated module positively correlated with flowering time. In this regard, the flowering delay in mbd4 mutants is subtle under standard conditions but more noticeable under low temperatures, high temperatures, or short days ( ). Several flowering repressors, including BBX31, BBX32 ( ), CDF1, CDF3 ( ), MAF4/5 ( ), and TEM1/2 ( ), are consistently induced in mbd4 backgrounds, likely providing a molecular explanation for the delayed floral transition. The transcriptional response of mbd4-2 mutant plants to short-term high-temperature treatment is particularly pronounced, and it includes high expression of the Morning Loop core circadian clock genes CCA1 and LHY, which encode repressors of the CO–FT photoperiodic output pathway ( ).
Interestingly, the BnMBD4 homeolog mutation causes a more evident flowering delay than the corresponding mutation in Arabidopsis thaliana. This may reflect the limited vernalization response in the Arabidopsis rapid-cycling Col-0 ecotype. The life cycle of this accession is fast and independent of FLC due to a deletion in the FRIGIDA (FRI) locus, the primary transcriptional activator of FLC ( ). Indeed, although mbd4 mutants show only a subtle flowering delay under standard conditions, they display significant differences at constant 16°C ( ). In B. napus, FLC homeologs influence flowering responses and distinguish spring and winter types ( ; ). Cultivated spring rapeseed varieties still exhibit a greater-than-expected dependence on FLC homeolog activity, as reflected by the differences in flowering between lines in a temperature- and BnaMBD4-dependent manner. MAFs and FLC-like genes are likely redundant ( ), contributing to the growth habit in the Brassicaceae family; it is therefore not surprising that there is a high degree of functional overlap among these genes. Overall, our results highlight BnaFLCA10 and BnaMAF4C03G as key flowering regulators that are tightly controlled by MBD4-mediated chromatin regulation.

## MBD4 acts as a reader of methylated arginine
MBD4 is homologous to human MeCP2, whose genetic variants are causal agents of Rett syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder ( ). An extensive corpus of MeCP2 biochemical and molecular studies describes MeCP2 as a methyl-CpG reader, with a preference for DNA containing 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) ( ). MeCP2 mediates transcriptional repression through interactions with histone deacetylases and the co-repressor SIN3A ( ), and also contributes to higher-order chromatin organization, including nucleosome-density modulation and chromatin aggregation at the nuclear lamina. In Arabidopsis, putative MeCP2 homologs MBD5 and MBD6 recognize CG methylation and repress transposons without affecting DNA methylation levels ( ). Other members of the family, such as MBD7, are also well-characterized DNA methylation readers ( ). Previously, Arabidopsis MBD4 could not be successfully characterized as a specific methylated-DNA reader ( ; ; our own results), leaving its biological activity unclear. However, recent reports have provided experimental evidence suggesting that MBD4 may also function as a canonical methyl-CpG reader in vivo ( ; ). Both activities—methyl-CpG recognition and histone-tail R methylation recognition—are not mutually exclusive and may coexist, similar to human MeCP2 ( ). MBD2, but not MBD1 and MBD4, acts during male gametogenesis to repress transposable elements (TEs) ( ). Despite its affinity for methylated chromatin and its presence in pollen, MBD4 appears to be unrelated to TE silencing and has been described as a possible evolutionary remnant of a methylated-DNA-binding protein that has lost its silencing capacity ( ).
The role of MBD4 in binding methylated or unmethylated chromatin remains unclear, and it has been reported to bind to unmethylated promoters ( ). Our results confirmed that MBD4 is primarily associated with euchromatin and expressed genes, with enrichment in promoter-proximal regions extending from the TSS toward the TES. The presence of heat shock elements (HSEs), the recognition sites of heat shock factors (HSFs), in MBD4-binding peaks suggests a biological function distinct from that of MBD2 ( ). Our proteomics experiments show that MBD4 binds nucleosomes directly in DNA-free samples, supporting the idea that MBD4 interacts with histones. The identification of well-known chromatin-linked proteins and nucleosome-remodeling factors, including DEK3 domain-containing proteins, NURF-like factors, and the SWI/SNF subunit SWI3D, suggests that MBD4 may play a central role in several complexes. However, the in vivo molecular activity of the protein remains an important question to interrogate. There are examples within the same protein family of non-canonical affinity for histone tails rather than DNA: human MeCP2 reads the repressive mark H3K27me3 to regulate gene expression ( ), and Arabidopsis MBD9 interacts with acetylated histone H4 or methylated R residues, guiding the SWR1 complex to specific sites for deposition of the histone variant H2A.Z ( ).
Interestingly, like MBD9, MBD4 binds acetylated peptides but shows a higher affinity for methylated R in histone H3-derived peptides. In the case of MBD9, affinity for histone tail modifications was proposed to be associated with plant homeodomains (PHDs) and bromodomains, which are absent in MBD4. Considering the similar histone PTM affinity of MBD4 and MBD9, the total loss of binding upon mutation of the MBD domain, and the absence of PHDs and bromodomains in MBD4, we speculate that the MBD domain could be the primary histone binding site. Alternatively, the CW zinc-finger domain present in MBD4 could adopt a conformation similar to that of a PHD domain when bound to the histone tail ( ). Indeed, our preliminary proteomic analysis does not exclude this possibility, as a CW zinc-finger domain peptide was isolated in the bound fraction. MBD4 shows higher affinity for H3R17/H3R26 methylation, whereas MBD9 preferentially recognizes H3R2/H3R8, indicating that the histone-tail-reading activities of MBD4 and MBD9 overlap but are not identical. Another important question for future study is the biological role—and even the existence—of the H3R26me2a mark in plants. We detected this histone modification in the Solanaceae family, but it appears absent in Brassicaceae, raising important open questions about the evolution and adaptive role of this mark in plants.

## Relationship of MBD4 with PRMTs and arginine methylation
R methylation depends on PRMT enzymes ( ). PRMT4a/b asymmetrically dimethylate H3R2, R17, and R26 in a partially redundant manner and regulate flowering through FLC and MAF4/5 ( ). Similarly, prmt5 mutants show delayed flowering associated with increased FLC expression ( ). Remarkably, we observed increased expression of PRMT4b, 5, and 11 in mbd4 mutants, accompanied by increased H3R17me2a enrichment and broader genome-wide distribution, both of which were restored in the mbd4-complemented line. We hypothesize that these alterations in PRMT expression and H3R17me2a accumulation represent responses to disrupted MBD4-mediated reading, whereby PRMTs are upregulated to compensate for a perceived deficiency in H3R17me2a recognition. We cannot rule out the possibility that MBD4 may compete with PRMT enzymes for histone binding, and that its absence allows more sustained access by PRMTs and, consequently, propagation of the mark. Previous studies have described changes in histone marks depending on their specific readers. In mice, PHF19, part of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), binds to trimethylated histone H3 Lys36 (H3K36me3) to recruit the demethylase NO66, thereby removing the mark from embryonic stem cell genes during differentiation ( ). However, in our case, we were unable to mechanistically link MBD4 with PRMTs, and further work is needed to disentangle their relationship, which may be extremely complex. For instance, AtPRMT11 interacts with MBD7 ( ), which is a direct MBD4 target in our study. This raises the intriguing possibility that MBD4 regulates PRMT11 activity indirectly through its control of MBD7 expression within a regulatory loop, a model that warrants further investigation.

## Molecular activity of the MBD4–HDA6 complex
MBD4 interacts with HDA6 ( ). Considering its activity as an H3R17me2a reader, MBD4 could act as a nexus between methyl-R modifications and the transcriptional repression mediated by histone deacetylase activity. Data from our proteomic analysis, together with the observed interactions with SWI3D and DEK3, suggest that MBD4 operates within a larger co-repressor assembly that includes chromatin remodelers and related activities. Similarly, genome-wide histone H4 polyacetylation is weakly affected in mbd4 plants; however, H3K14 acetylation is significantly higher in this mutant. Moreover, histone acetylation levels at flowering repressor loci are consistently higher in mbd4 hda6 double mutants. The additive increase in acetylation and the synergistic effect on gene expression and flowering phenotypes in mbd4 hda6, compared with the single parental mutants, suggest the possible co-option of other members of these protein families (HDAs and MBDs) that may partially compensate for the loss of both proteins in active complexes.
Based on the strong correspondence between MBD4- and HDA6-related phenotypes, the notable increase in H3K14 acetylation in the mbd4-2 mutant, and the previously reported interaction between the two proteins ( ), we propose a hypothetical working model in which the methyl-R reader MBD4 recruits the histone deacetylase HDA6 to flowering repressor genes ( E). This recruitment may allow the coordinated action of these two epigenetic marks, H3R17 methylation and associated histone acetylation. The H3R17me2a mark could serve as an anchor that scaffolds HDAs, thereby dampening transcription at specific loci. In summary, we propose that MBD4 might serve as a safeguard mechanism for HDA6 recognition of critical loci that require precise tuning of their expression.
Finally, the reduced heat tolerance displayed by mbd4 mutants suggests that MBD4 is involved in the epigenetic reprogramming of transcriptional patterns mediated by chromatin alterations under suboptimal and changing environmental conditions. In the future, studies on orphan histone marks and their readers will be crucial for defining a broader epigenetic landscape at the functional level, thereby helping to clarify the intricate responses to changing environments and expand the potential genetic targets for Brassica napus breeding.

## Methods

## Plant materials and growth conditions
All mutants and transgenic lines were in the Columbia-0 (Col-0) background, except for the mbd4-4 mutant, which was in the Wassilewskija (Ws) background. The mbd4-2 mutant allele was generated by CRISPR–Cas9 knockout mutagenesis. Insertional mutants were obtained from the NASC Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (SAIL_434_A05, mbd4-1; SALK_042834, mbd4-3) or the Versailles Arabidopsis Stock Center (FLAG_431B08, mbd4-4). Homozygous T-DNA insertion mutants were identified by standard PCR-based genotyping. As previously reported, the homozygous qrt1-2 mutation-free mbd4-1 (SAIL_434_A05) line was identified by dCAPS ( ) after crossing with Col-0. The hda6, prmt4a, prmt4b, and prmt6 mutants were previously described ( ; ; ). Transgenic Arabidopsis plants were generated by floral dipping, and B. napus mutants were generated by tissue culture and CRISPR–Cas9 technology (see section below). Unless otherwise stated, B. napus or Arabidopsis plants were grown in a greenhouse or growth chambers under standard long-day (LD) photoperiodic conditions (16 h light/8 h dark). High-temperature experiments were performed in climatic chambers at 28°C in standard LD photoperiod (16 h light/8 h dark) for Brassica napus and a neutral photoperiod (12 h light/12 h dark) for Arabidopsis thaliana.
For BiFC and Co-IP experiments, transient expression in N. benthamiana was used. Three-week-old plants were infiltrated with the appropriate constructs and the P19 silencing suppressor in Agrobacterium tumefaciens AGL0. After the cultures were grown overnight, the cells were suspended in 10 mM Tris (pH 5.5), 10 mM MgSO4, and 150 mM acetosyringone at an OD600 ratio of 0.7:0.7:1.0 and used for infiltration. Samples were harvested between 36 and 48 h after infiltration.

## Phenotypic analysis of flowering time and heat tolerance
In B. napus, flowering time was recorded as the day of anthesis. Flowering time in Arabidopsis was recorded as the number of leaves (rosette and cauline) at anthesis. For heat stress analysis, seeds from different wild-type (WT), mutant, or complemented backgrounds were germinated under standard conditions for 9 days on MS plates. After 9 days, at ZT4, the plants were treated for 2.5 h by submerging the plastic-covered plates in a bath at 42.5°C with constant water recirculation. After heat treatment, the seedlings were transferred to standard 21°C growth chambers and left to recover for 72 h. Damage was visually assessed, and chlorophyll content was quantified in independent seedlings (n = 20) by overnight extraction in DMF (N,N-dimethylformamide) and absorbance measurements at 647 and 664 nm in a plate reader (Bio-Rad). Independent experiments and biological replicates were performed with similar results. RNA-seq samples were obtained from the corresponding genotypes 0.5 h after the transient heat pulse during recovery at 21°C.

## Weighted gene coexpression network analysis of Brassica napus RNA-seq data
Weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) was performed ( ), using the WGCNA package implemented in R software ( ) to correlate gene expression with flowering time under various conditions. We utilized previously published RNA-seq data ( ), which comprised three biological replicates of three different rapeseed varieties under two temperatures, along with two numerical flowering-related traits: time to anthesis in days and number of leaves at blooming. No statistically significant differences were observed between the flowering traits. For convenience and to limit computing resources, subsequent analyses used only days to flower as the sole numerical trait. Corrected expression values were used to create a network based on correlation coefficients, and genes were then classified into modules of highly correlated genes. The significance of the association between the numerical trait of the experiment and each gene module was calculated to prioritize modules with positive and negative correlations. Finally, DEGs between plants at 21°C and 28°C in the three varieties assayed were compared with the most significant gene modules, resulting in a limited number of genes with a high correlation with the trait and a substantial change in expression.

## Vector construction and cloning
The MBD4 gene, including the 5′ and 3′ regions, was amplified by PCR for complementation experiments. Simultaneously, the promoter and ORF regions were also amplified. All PCR amplification products for these regions were first cloned into the pENTR/SD/D-TOPO plasmid (Invitrogen) and inserted using LR Clonase (Invitrogen) into the corresponding binary destination vectors with or without tags. The pGWB plasmid collections with kanamycin, hygromycin or Basta (PPT) resistance markers were used as the final plant vectors for transformation ( ). Plasmids were then transformed by electroporation into Agrobacterium tumefaciens GV3101 or AGL0 strains before plant genetic transformation. An MBD4 bacterial codon-optimized sequence was ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT) and cloned into pENTR/SD/D-TOPO for bacterial expression.
The MBD4 CRISPR–Cas9 knockouts in Arabidopsis and B. napus were generated using the Golden Gate cloning system and a modular vector with a fluorescent seed marker, as previously described ( ). Briefly, designed guides were ordered as primers ( ) and cloned by digestion at the BbsI sites in the corresponding unarmed entry vector under the control of the AtU6 promoter (pGG-A-AtU6 and pGG-B-AtU6). After validation by PCR and Sanger sequencing, the armed entry plasmids were combined in the pFASTRK_AtCas9 destination vector using BsaI digestion. The final vector was validated by sequencing and transformed into Agrobacterium tumefaciens.

## OSR transformation and mutant generation
B. napus RV31 seeds were sterilized with a 2% NaClO solution, followed by two subsequent washes with 70% ethanol (20 min) and 100% ethanol (1 min). After drying, seeds were stratified on half-strength Murashige and Skoog (1/2MS) medium for 7 days at 4°C. The seeds were then germinated in MS medium supplemented with 2% sucrose in the dark. After germination, seeds were grown at 22°C until the hypocotyls reached 15–20 mm in length. The day before transformation, an inoculum of Agrobacterium carrying the vector was prepared and grown overnight. The next day, a transformation culture was prepared from the inoculum and grown until it reached an OD600 of 0.3. Then, the transformation culture was centrifuged at low speed and resuspended in liquid MS medium with 100 μM acetosyringone (MS [pH 5.8], 30 g/l sucrose). The hypocotyls were cut into 2-mm sections with a scalpel, placed in a Petri dish with the Agrobacterium culture, and incubated with gentle agitation for 20 min. After the explants were dried with filter paper, they were placed in Petri dishes containing co-cultivation medium (MS [pH 5.8], 30 g/l sucrose, 1 mg/l 2,4-D, 0.3 mg/l kinetin). After two days, the explants were transferred to Petri dishes containing callus induction medium (MS [pH 5.8], 30 g/l sucrose, 1 mg/l 2,4-D, 0.3 mg/l kinetin, 5 mg/l AgNO3, 300 mg/l Timentin, and 25 mg/l kanamycin) for 20 days. After callus formation, the explants were transferred to shoot differentiation medium (MS [pH 5.8], 10 g/l sucrose, 5 mg/l AgNO3, 2 mg/l Zeatin, 0.1 mg/l IAA, 300 mg/l Timentin, 100 mg/l Kanamycin) and incubated until shoot growth was initiated, with the medium replaced every 20 days. Healthy shoots were transferred to bottles that contained root induction medium (MS [pH 5.8], 10 g/l sucrose). When the explants had formed well-developed roots, the plantlets were transferred to pots with soil and subjected to acclimation under greenhouse conditions. T2 plants without the Cas9 cassette were selected for mutant identification and characterization. For each independent T1 transformant, 9–20 T2 individuals were PCR-sequenced, and those with mutations in BnaMBD4 were selected for phenotype and molecular analysis.

## Proteomic analysis
Ten days after germination, pMBD4:MBD4-MYC seedlings in the mbd4-2 background were fixed in 1% formaldehyde in two 15-min rounds under vacuum. Plant material was frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C. Nuclei isolated from frozen material using a standard method (see section) and filtered twice using 70- and 40-μm strainers. Intact nuclei were rinsed with three equivalent volumes of crosslinking buffer (20 mM HEPES [pH 8.0], 25% glycerol, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 250 mM sucrose, 5% DMSO, and Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [ROCHE]) and collected by centrifugation at 2,000 × g. Half of the nuclei were kept on ice until chromatin lysis, sonication, and immunoprecipitation, representing the NF fraction (non-DSSO-fixed nuclei). The remaining intact nuclei were crosslinked in disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO; Thermo Scientific), prepared fresh as a 10 mM stock solution in 50 mM DMSO. DSSO was then added sequentially at room temperature in six aliquots, with a 2-min interval between additions, while the nuclei were incubated on a rotating wheel until a final concentration of approximately 200 μM to avoid nuclear overfixation and clumping, as previously described ( ). The fixation was allowed to proceed at room temperature (RT) for 15 min and stopped by adding 1 M Tris to a final concentration of 50 mM. The nuclei were collected and washed twice in PBS/1 mM EDTA by centrifugation at 2,000 × g and resuspended in five volumes of glycerol buffer (20 mM Tris [pH 7.6], 75 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 50% v/v glycerol, and 1× Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [ROCHE]). An equal volume of nuclear lysis buffer (10 mM Tris [pH 7.6], 300 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 M urea, 1% Nonidet P-40, and Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [ROCHE]) was added for 2 min on ice to isolate the nuclear soluble fraction. After incubation, the sample was centrifuged for 2 min at 16,000 × g, and the chromatin pellet was washed twice with PBS/1 mM EDTA. The first and subsequent washes were pooled and kept on ice until immunoprecipitation (nuclear soluble fraction). The pellet was resuspended in sonication buffer (20 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, and Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [ROCHE]), and sonication was performed in 20 cycles of 30 s sonication/30 s rest at high power in a Diagenode Bath Sonicator. Simultaneously, sonication was performed for DSSO-unfixed material under identical conditions. After sonication, all fractions were centrifuged at 18,000 × g for 15 min, and supernatants were diluted 1:10 in dilution buffer (20 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, and Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [ROCHE]). The samples were incubated overnight at 4°C on a rotating wheel with Pierce™ Anti-Myc Magnetic Beads. After washing the beads with dilution buffer, the samples were eluted in 50 μL of 2% SDS buffer and subjected to methanol/chloroform precipitation for proteomic analysis.
Samples were loaded directly onto an S-Trap™ column after denaturation with 5% SDS, reduction and alkylation with TCEP and chloroacetamide, and trypsin digestion. Each digest was cleaned with a StageTip C18 before LC-ESI-MS/MS, which was performed using LC coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 240 MS. The samples were quantified at the peptide level by fluorimetry, and 500 ng of each digest was injected. Data acquisition was performed using a 60-min liquid chromatography gradient followed by peptide fragmentation in the mass spectrometer. Database searches were performed using MASCOT against the UniProt Arabidopsis thaliana database. Cross-linked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software (v1.8.10; ; https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch) and manually curated to remove soluble peptides and contaminants using in-house blacklists.

## Recombinant protein expression and purification
Recombinant MBP-MBD4 and MBP-MBD4mut proteins were expressed in the Escherichia coli Rosetta strain (Novagen) after cloning into the pMAL-c2 vector (New England Biolabs). Proteins were purified according to the NEB instructions. MBD4mut resulted from R-to-A substitutions at positions 104 and 123 in the MBD domain of MBD4. All purification steps were performed following the NEB or Invitrogen recommendations. Two additional constructs were made, one with a polyhistidine tag using the pDEST17 plasmid (Invitrogen) and the second with an intein–chitin-binding domain (CBD), which enables purification and tag excision with DTT in one step. After tag removal, the protein was further purified using anion-exchange chromatography and gel filtration chromatography (Superdex 75, GE Healthcare). Finally, the protein was dialyzed against the incubation buffer using Amicon® Ultra Centrifugal Filters (Merck) and concentrated to a 10 mg/ml working stock before validation.

## Peptide array and microarray assays
The Histone H3 Peptide Array ELISA Kit (96-well plate-based) from Abcam (ab233494) was initially used to assess MBD4 specificity for H3 modifications following the manufacturer’s instructions. The murine Anti-MBP Monoclonal antibody from NEB (E8032S) was used as the primary antibody, and the HRP-coupled Goat anti-mouse antibody (Invitrogen, 626520) was used as the secondary antibody. After incubations, washes, and ELISA development, absorbance was recorded using a microplate reader (Bio-Rad) at 450 nm with a reference wavelength of 655 nm. Binding intensity was calculated as the sample OD minus the blank OD for each peptide.
The PBM was ordered from JPT Peptide Technologies (Germany) and consisted of a slide with 4 subarrays of 3,000 histone peptides each. Incubations with MBD4 and MBD4mut were performed on duplicate subarrays. The array was pre-washed with incubation buffer (filtered 1× Tris-buffered saline [TBS] containing 0.1% Tween 20 [TBS-T] and 5% BSA) for 40 min under gentle shaking. Then, 300 μL of a 2 μM solution of the protein purified in incubation buffer was directly deposited onto the printed peptides on the slide in a microarray incubation chamber. The microarray was incubated overnight at 4°C in the dark. After incubation, it was washed 5× with TBS-T with gentle shaking. The primary antibody (Anti-MBP Monoclonal, NEB) was incubated with the slide for 2 h at RT. After 5× washes with TBS-T, a Cy5-coupled secondary antibody (ECL Plex Goat anti-Mouse IgG-Cy™5, Cytiva, PA45009) was added to the microarray and incubated for 1 h at RT with gentle shaking. After stringent washes with TBS-T (5×) and Milli-Q water (3×), the slide was dried under an N2 stream for a few seconds. Fluorescence scanning was performed at a 10 μm resolution using a GenePix® 4000 device (Axon Instruments). Numerical data were extracted as GPR files from images, and normalization and data analysis were performed using the PAWER package implemented in R ( ).

## Crosslinking immunoprecipitation of MBD4
Binding of MBD4 to H3R17me2a in vivo was detected through immunoprecipitation under mild denaturing conditions that maintained the histone and reader accessible to the antibody after crosslinking ( ). First, ground plant material was crosslinked for 10 min at RT on a rotating wheel using a non-amine-containing crosslinking buffer (10 mM HEPES-KOH [pH 7.6], 25% glycerol, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 5% DMSO, 250 mM sucrose, 5 mM disuccinimidyl suberate [DSS], and protease inhibitors). The reaction was quenched with glycine (20 mM final concentration). Subsequently, nuclei were purified with Honda buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH [pH 7.4], 10 mM MgCl2, 0.44 M sucrose, 1.25% Ficoll [w/v], 2.5% Dextran T40 [w/v], 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.5 mM DTT, and protease inhibitors) following a standard protocol. Purified nuclei were resuspended in Benzonase buffer (50 mM Tris [pH 8], and 1 mM MgCl2, plus Complete® Protease Inhibitor). Then, 1 μL of Benzonase (Millipore, 70746) was added, and the suspension was incubated at 4°C for 1 h with gentle agitation. Mild denaturing nuclear lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES-KOH [pH 7.4], 7.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.3 M NaCl, 1 M urea, 0.1% SDS, and Complete® Protease Inhibitor [ROCHE]) was gently added after Benzonase treatment. Sonication was performed for 3 cycles of 5 min (30 s on/30 s off). After centrifugation and clarification, the urea concentration was reduced by half by dilution with IP buffer (50 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, and Complete® Protease Inhibitor), and immunoprecipitation was carried out overnight with gentle rotation using anti-GFP magnetic beads (ChromoTek Nano-Traps). The following day, after four stringent washes in IP buffer, the samples were eluted in Laemmli buffer at 95°C for 5 min with agitation (500 rpm) and immediately analyzed by standard western blotting without storage.

## Native chromatin pull down
Native chromatin from WT, prmt4ab, and prmt6 plants was obtained by standard procedures, and the pull-down was performed as previously described ( ). Briefly, MBD4 resin (25 μl at 1 mg/ml) was incubated with 10 μg of each chromatin sample in triplicate and washed three times with incubation buffer (10 mM HEPES-KOH [pH 7.4], 0.5 mM EGTA, 20 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol, and protease inhibitor cocktail[ROCHE]). The retained and eluted fractions were measured by fluorometric quantification using Qubit (Thermo) and the specificity of the chromatin was assessed by standard qPCR.

## Thermal shift assay (TSA)
The thermal shift assay (TSA) was performed using a LightCycler® 480 System (ROCHE) melting curve program with a temperature increment of 0.2°C and a 20°C–95°C temperature range. The experiment was performed in a 20-μl final volume in 96-well plates using a 5× dilution of SYPRO Orange stock solution (Thermo Scientific) in standard HEPES TSA buffer (100 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl [pH 7.5]). The protein concentration in the reaction was ∼1 mg/ml, and the peptide concentration was 500 μM, as previously described ( ). For DNA probes, a 10-fold excess of ligand relative to MBD4 was used.
The recorded curves were analyzed using the MoltenProt program (EMBL). Controls with the dimethylated arginine peptide, MBD4 alone, and the unmodified histone H3 peptide were included. No fluorescence was observed in the absence of the MBD4 protein.

## Protein gel blotting
Acid extraction of histones was performed as previously described ( ). Total protein extracts were obtained by homogenizing plant material in RIPA extraction buffer (150 mM sodium chloride, 1.0% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 50 mM Tris [pH 8.0]), Complete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablet [ROCHE], and 10 μM β-mercaptoethanol. The extracts were centrifuged at 4°C for 10 min, and the protein content was quantified by the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) or, for acid-extracted histones, by total protein dot blot and Coomassie staining. Protein samples were heated at 95°C for 5 min in Laemmli loading buffer, and were then immediately separated using 4%–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Gels (Bio-Rad) in 1× Tris/Glycine/SDS buffer. Proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes (Whatman), and proteins on the blots were immunodetected with the corresponding antibody (see the section).

## ChIP-qPCR
Standard chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed, as previously described ( ). For MBD4-myc ChIP, a second fixation with DSSO was performed as described above for proteomic analysis and as published previously for ChIP analysis ( ). Enrichment was quantified as the percentage of immunoprecipitated DNA relative to input (% input). No-antibody immunoprecipitations were included as negative controls in each ChIP, and their nonspecific enrichment was subtracted from the samples treated with antibodies. All qPCR primers used in the study are listed in , and the antibodies are listed in the corresponding section.

## ChIP-seq, library preparation, and genome-wide analysis
Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) was performed after DNA purification using AMPure beads (Berthold). After DNA quality assessment with Qubit, libraries were constructed with the QIAseq Ultralow Input Library Kit (QIA180492) for Illumina sequencing. At least 100 pg of DNA per library was used. Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 Sequencing System using paired-end sequencing to generate 150-bp reads.
ChIP-seq bioinformatics processing was performed using a standard pipeline. First, reads were mapped to the TAIR10 Arabidopsis genome using BWA-MEM2 ( ). Duplicates were removed, and reads were sorted and indexed using Samtools. Finally, read counts were normalized to the genome-wide coverage. ChIP-seq scaling factors were obtained from the BAM files using ChIPseqSpikeInFree ( ) and then converted to BigWig files using deepTools (v3.5.1) ( ) with the scale factors. Peak calling was performed using the bdgbroadcall utility from the MACS2 package (v3.5.4) ( ), and peaks were assigned to genes using ChIPseeker (v1.28.3) ( ). Profile plots and heat maps were drawn with deepTools.

## RNA extraction and RT-qPCR
B. napus and Arabidopsis samples were harvested in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until RNA extraction. Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. DNA digestion was performed using on-column DNase I treatment (Qiagen). RNA quality and integrity were assessed using a Qubit fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Qubit HS or BR kits.
For RT-qPCR, cDNA was obtained by reverse transcription using 1 μg of total RNA with the Maxima cDNA Kit with dsDNase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Relative expression quantification was performed by real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR) using LightCycler 480 SYBR Green chemistry (Roche) on a LightCycler® 480 System (Roche) with the specific primers listed in . Relative gene expression levels were calculated using the 2−ΔΔCT method.

## RNA-seq analysis
RNA-seq libraries were prepared from 1 μg of high-integrity total RNA (RIN > 8) with the TruSeq Stranded mRNA library preparation kit (Illumina). Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 Sequencing System using paired-end sequencing to generate 150-bp reads. Data were first quality-checked with FastQC and trimmed and preprocessed using fastp ( ). Gene expression values were obtained using Salmon (v1.4.0) ( ) and compiled by tximport (v1.12.3) ( ). We used DESeq2 ( ) to analyze expression differences between treated (mutant) and control (WT) samples.

## Antibodies
The following antibodies were used: rabbit anti-histone H3 (asymmetric dimethyl R17) antibody (Abcam, ab8284); rabbit anti-dimethyl-histone H3 (Arg17) antibody (Merck, 07–214); rabbit anti-histone H3 (asymmetric dimethyl R26) antibody (Abcam, ab194679); rabbit polyclonal anti-histone H3 antibody (Abcam, ab1791); monoclonal mouse anti-c-Myc clone 9E10-coupled Pierce™ Anti-c-Myc Magnetic Beads (Thermo Fisher, 88842), for ChIP; rabbit polyclonal anti-acetyl-histone H3 (Lys14) antibody (Merck, 07–353); anti-histone H4 antibody, pan, clone 62-141-13, rabbit monoclonal (Millipore, 05–858); mouse anti-Myc Tag antibody, clone 4A6, Upstate® (Merck, 0572425); monoclonal ANTI-FLAG® M2 antibody produced in mouse (Merck, F3165); mouse anti-MBP monoclonal antibody (NEB, E8032); ECL Plex Goat anti-Mouse IgG-Cy™5 (Cytiva, PA45009); secondary goat anti-mouse IgG-HRP (Santa Cruz, SC-2005); and secondary mouse anti-rabbit IgG-HRP (Santa Cruz, SC-2357).

## Data and material availability
All data are available in the main text or the Supplemental Materials. The sequencing data for this study have been deposited in the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) at EMBL-EBI under project accession number PRJEB87656. Requests for materials should be addressed to J.A.A.

## Acknowledgments
We thank the technical staff at the CBGP for their assistance and support during this work. During this research, J.A.A. was financially supported by the Autonomous Region of Madrid through a Talento fellowship and the associated project (2018-T1/BIO-11380) and by grant TED2021-132137B-C22. Grant PID2022-137131NB-I00 to M.P./J.A.J. was funded by MICIU/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033/“ERDF/EU”; grants TED2021-132137B-C21 to M.P./J.A.J. and TED2021-132137B-C22 to J.A.A. were funded by MICIU/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033/EU/PRTR. Grant PID2023-151361NB-I00 to J.A.A. was funded by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/EU/PRTR. We acknowledge support from the Severo Ochoa Program for Centers of Excellence in R&D from the Agencia Estatal de Investigación of Spain (SEV-2016-0672 (2017–2021) from MCIN/AEI/10.13039/5011000 11033) for supporting the scientific services used in this work. We are also thankful to the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments on this study. No conflict of interest declared.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, J.A.A., M.P., and J.A.J.; methodology, J.A.A. and G.C.; investigation, J.A.A., G.C., J.C., J.P., I.d.O., and E.A.-P.; visualization, J.A.A.; data curation, J.A.A.; supervision, J.A.A., M.P., and J.A.J.; writing – original draft, J.A.A.; writing – review and editing, J.A.A., M.P., and J.A.J.; funding acquisition, J.A.A., M.P., and J.A.J.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Supplemental Figures 1–8

## Supplemental Data 1. Differential gene expression analysis (DESeq2) of mbd4-1, mbd4-2, and MBD4oex relative to WT, based on RNA-seq data

## Supplemental Data 2. Results of MBD4-Myc ChIP-seq experiments in mbd4-2 complemented with pMBD4:MBD4-Myc

## Supplemental Data 3. Peptides identified by mass spectrometry analysis after MBD4-Myc IP
The first tab contains MASCOT identification for soluble, unfixed proteins. The second tab contains the MASCOT list of highly soluble proteins released from the fixed nuclear fraction and immunoprecipitated during the washing steps before sonication. The third tab contains the MASCOT list of fixed and chromatin-linked proteins. The fourth tab contains peptides identified as crosslinked by Xi software at an FDR <1%

## Supplemental Data 4. Results of MBD4wt vs. MBD4mut on peptide-binding microarray (PBM) analysis
The first column describes the protein post-translational modifications (PTMs), and the second column describes the histone identity. Results for specific H3 PTMs are also included

## Supplemental Data 5. Results of H3R17me2a ChIP-seq experiments in WT and mbd4-2 plants

## Supplemental Data 6. Results of H3K14ac ChIP-seq experiments in WT and mbd4-2 plants

## Supplemental Data 7. List of primers used in this study

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

Supplemental information is available at Plant Communications Online.