3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1224544612245446122454464064155210.1016/j.isci.2025.112302Humanized mouse model reveals T cell ANXA2 as a potential therapeutic target in ischemic stroke
ZhangTianyuan ZhengXiaojuan LuAijun LiShuyuan LiKeshen HuangXiaoxiong LiuYanfang ChenWei HuangShengming HeNiu TsangChi Kwan MaiHongcheng XuAnding LuDan 1Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China2Clinical Neuroscience Institute, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China3Key Lab of Guangzhou Basic and Translational Research of Pan-vascular Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China4Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-Sen MemorialHospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China5Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China6Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, The Central Hospital of Shaoyang, Shaoyang 422099, China∗Corresponding author maihch7@mail.sysu.edu.cn
∗∗Corresponding author tlil@jnu.edu.cn
∗∗∗Corresponding author ludan@jnu.edu.cn
7Senior author
8These authors contributed equally
9Present address: The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, No. 601, West Huangpu Avenue, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, China
10Lead contact
2420252851123021123021072025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Stroke T cell studies in rodents have not been translated to human studies. The mechanism of cellular and molecular T cells changes after stroke remains incompletely understood. Thus, this study established a humanized mouse model after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) and identifies potential therapeutic targets of humanized T cell populations. Similar to patients with stroke, a proportion of T cells was decreased in peripheral blood of humanized T cell stroke mice. Using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), we identified Annexin A2 (ANXA2) as biomarker of humanized T cell subsets in MCAO, which was validated using human ischemic brain and peripheral blood. With small-molecule inhibitors Leu-Cys-Lys-Leu-Ser-Leu (LCKLSL), ANXA2 inhibition altered TCM and TEM subset in humanized mice. Furthermore, LCKLSL exhibited a neuroprotective role against ischemic damage, mitigating neuroinflammation, inhibiting T cell infiltration, and decreasing pro-inflammatory factors. Hence, this humanized T cell ischemic stroke model is more representative of the human disease than previous models; furthermore, ANXA2 is a meaningful therapeutic target.
Subject areas: Molecular neuroscience, Model organism

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•scRNA-seq showed the heterogeneity of humanized T cells in humanized ischemic stroke model
•ANXA2 was one of the targets in heterogeneity of humanized T cells
•ANXA2 represents a potential biomarker and therapeutic target in ischemic stroke
•ANXA2 was validated in human samples, humanized mice, and WT mice

Molecular neuroscience; Model organism

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Oct 4; Revised 2025 Feb 11; Accepted 2025 Mar 24; Collection date 2025 May 16.

## Introduction
Stroke is the leading cause of death and disability worldwide. Alternative therapeutic strategies are needed; therefore, translational stroke research has focused on neuroinflammation caused by different leukocyte populations. , , Several immune cell types are involved in the neuroinflammatory response to stroke; T cells are among the most consistently implicated immune cells in initial and secondary brain injury. , , Several clinical trials have used antibodies to target T cell invasion into the ischemic brain. , However, these clinical trials have failed to yield satisfactory outcomes because of a variety of factors, such as the use of inappropriate models in preclinical studies. , Therefore, we developed a preclinical model that more accurately mimics T cell invasion in patients with stroke.
Humanized mouse models are ideal preclinical models for human diseases, especially those involving the immune system; therefore, they are often used as experimental preclinical models in biomedical research. Hundreds of genes are expressed in human and mouse leukocytes after ischemic stroke, but few of these genes are expressed by both species. , Therefore, an understanding of how cell infiltration in humans (on both cellular and molecular levels) is affected by ischemic stroke is imperative. A humanized mouse model was recently developed in which immunodeficient mice harbor human peripheral blood leukocytes (humanized T cells); these cells have the same immune and inflammatory molecules as those of the human immune system. These humanized mice have been used for infectious disease, transplantation, and oncology studies, which are valuable for understanding human disease. , , However, the role and molecular mechanisms of humanized T cells after ischemic stroke remain poorly understood.
Previous stroke studies in wild-type (WT) mice using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) have revealed several phenotypic changes in brain cells and immune cells. , However, few studies have used scRNA-seq to identify specific phenotypes of human T cells and their molecules after stroke. To gain deeper insight, we developed a stroke model with humanized T cells and used an scRNA-seq approach to investigate these T cells and their molecular heterogeneity. scRNA-seq revealed that CD4 TEM1 may be the key subpopulations of human T cells different from mouse T cells after ischemic stroke. Moreover, Annexin A2 (ANXA2) represents a potential biomarker and therapeutic target for human T cell subpopulations in humanized mice, such as TCM and TEM cells after ischemic stroke, by alleviating neuroinflammation through the inhibition of the pro-inflammatory response. These results suggest that this preclinical animal model using humanized T cells is a tool for translational stroke research and for targeting T cells in stroke immunotherapy.

## Results

## Establishment of a novel humanized T cell ischemic stroke model
We collected the peripheral blood from patients with stroke and control group, and the flow cytometry and routine blood test demonstrated that T cells decreased in patients with acute ischemic stroke ( A, 1B, and C). The T cells had moderate predictive accuracy shown in receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, indicating one of the biomarkers in patients with stroke (area under the curve [AUC]: 0.820, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.7249 to 0.9149) ( C). Before that, we also analyzed their neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) as well as lymphocytes from blood test. The results showed that NLR was higher while lymphocytes were decreased in patients with stroke, especially for severe group, indicating that immune cells were more prominent alterations in the severe stroke group ( ). The baseline characteristics of participants in this study are shown in and .
 Similarly, we used transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) model mimicking patients with severe stroke to compare different lymphocytes, including B cells, natural killer cells, and T cells, which revealed that T lymphocytes were the main peripheral infiltrating immune cells present 3 to 7 days after ischemic stroke ( and ).
Next, we established a model of transient ischemic stroke using human T cells capable of mimicking the clinical scenario of lymphocyte infiltration into the ischemic brain. To achieve this, we transferred human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from healthy adults to severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice and studied the specific subtypes of these humanized T cells in mice 3 days after tMCAO ( D). First, we confirmed that the human immune cells (mostly T cells) proliferated rapidly at week 5 after PBMC transplantation ( E and A–S4C). Subsequently, the T cell percentage in the peripheral blood of humanized mice (i.e., humanized T cells in SCID mice) was similar to that in patients; both percentages decreased rapidly after stroke ( A, 1B, and 1F). Furthermore, we sorted human (human CD45+ cells) and mouse immune cells (murine CD45+ cells) harvested from the brain after tMCAO or the control operation by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS); both increased after ischemic stroke ( D). The patterns observed in the brain and the blood were similar in humanized mice and patients. Subsequently, to comprehensively identify the landscapes of responsive T cells in the ischemic hemispheres of humanized mice, we used scRNA-seq analysis to determine the molecular signatures according to unbiased transcriptional profiles ( G and 1H).

## scRNA-seq revealed T cell subset landscapes of ischemic hemisphere in humanized mice
We collected human cells in mixed samples for scRNA-seq analysis and separated them according to species-specific genomic databases (hg19 and mm10). After quality control (see and ), we identified 11,898 human cells from two biological replicates of 12 animals from the control group and 11,097 human cells from the tMCAO 3D group ( A). The cluster analysis revealed a group of human T cells derived from humanized mice when plotted on a uniform manifold approximation and projection diagram ( A). Moreover, we collected the transcriptomes of two human T cell subtypes (CD4+ and CD8+ T cells) characterized by CD3D, CD4, and CD8A as well as CD8B ( C). The percentage of CD4+ T cells increased after stroke ( B).

## Characterizing subpopulations and trajectories of humanized T cells in the ischemic stroke mouse model
The humanized T cells were subdivided using the spectral clustering method of Seurat. , , This clustering analysis is based on unique signature genes, and it identified a total of eight stable human T cell clusters, including four clusters of CD4+ and four clusters of CD8+ T cells ( G–1I). The T cells in the first CD4+ cluster exhibited high expression of the CCR7 and TCF7 genes, corresponding to humanized naive T cells and/or central memory T cells (hCD4 naive/TCM). The second cluster, hCD4 TEM2, showed high expression of CXCR4 and IL7R genes, indicating that this cluster is normally associated with memory or effector T cells. The third cluster, hCD4 TEM1, shared some genes, such as IL7R, with the hCD4 TEM2 cluster and expressed unique memory T cell-associated markers, namely S100A4. The fourth cluster, hCD4 regulatory T cell (Treg), represented Tregs with high expression levels of the FOXP3, IL2RA (CD25), and IKZF2 genes. Interestingly, we identified a novel hCD4 TEM1 cluster in the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) 3D group in which the percentage of cells was dramatically increased 3 days after stroke compared with that of humanized T cells in the control group; by contrast, the percentage of hCD4 naive/TCM was significantly lower than that of humanized T cells in the control group. A similar analysis was performed on CD8+ T cells, which revealed that two subtypes of CD8+ T cells (hCD8 cytotoxic T1 cells and hCD8 cytotoxic T2 cells) were significantly increased; the other two types of CD8+ T cells (hCD8 effector T cells and hCD8 cytokine T cells) decreased after 3 days ( G–1I).
To determine the relationship of CD4+ T subtypes in the humanized mice between the normal state and the pathological state, we performed a pseudotime trajectory analysis using the Monocle2 algorithm to reveal the trajectories corresponding to the transcriptional differences among the human CD4+ T cell subtypes ( A). The derived trajectory of the state transition of CD4+ T cells contained effector lines showing a bifurcated structure from the root state to the intermediate or final state ( B). hCD4 naive/TCM cells were considered the root of the trajectories expressing TCF7, CCR7, SELL, and NMB, and the end-stage cells highly expressed effector-associated genes, such as S100A4, S100A6, S100A10, ANXA1, and ANXA2 ( B). In addition to an initial developmental branch of hCD4 naive/TCM cells, two main branches of human CD4+ T cell trajectories were observed. One branch proceeded through hCD4 naive/TCM T cells, hCD4 TEM2 cells, and hCD4 TEM1 cells. Another branch was distinct from hCD4 Treg cells; it appeared to occupy an intermediate state and a terminal state and comprised hCD4 naive/TCM cells, hCD4 Treg cells, and hCD4 TEM2 cells. These data suggest that CD4 naive/TCM cells can develop into two functional branches. These branches were used as marker genes for the construction of the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, and the hub genes of PPI network included ANXA2, CD4, IL7R, CCR7, FOXP3, and CTLA4 ( C). A recent study found that ANXA2 mobilizes immune cell invasion, but more investigation is necessary to determine whether ANXA2 plays a protective or damaging role in the MCAO model.
 We also analyzed CD8+ T cell subpopulations using similar methods, and their pseudotime trajectories contained two main lineage branches ( A). One branch extended from hCD8 cytokine T (initial state) cells, which showed a high expression of genes encoding chemokines and cytokines (such as CCL4, CCL4L2, CCL3L1, and CCL3), to the cell types of the terminal differentiation state of hCD8 cytotoxic T1 cells expressing the markers CX3CR1 and FGFBP2 ( I and B); the other branch extended from CD8 cytokine T cells to the cell types of the terminal differentiation state of hCD8 cytotoxic T2 cells, which showed a higher expression of the markers GZMK, GZMH, GZMA, CST7, and CTSW ( I and B). Overall, the developmental trajectories of human CD8+ T cells after ischemic stroke showed a trend of increased cytotoxicity. To further demonstrate the cytotoxic effect of the cell types of human CD8 T cells, we constructed a PPI network and found that the hub genes in the PPI network contained cytotoxic genes, such as GZMA, GZMB, IFNG, and PRF1 ( C). Considering the broad array of biological functions ascribed to ANXA2 related to T cells, which extend beyond its known association with cytotoxicity, , we conducted a focused investigation into its potential role in neuroinflammation during ischemic stroke.

## Exploring ANXA2 as a potential biomarker for T cells and ischemic stroke—Through T cell analysis and human verification
We utilized a violin plot analysis to examine the expression of ANXA2 across different T cell subpopulations. This revealed that ANXA2 was present in nearly all T cell subpopulations and was particularly highly expressed in the hCD4 TEM1 subpopulation; we observed that this expression increased under MCAO ( D). This finding suggests that ANXA2 may be a key gene involved in human T cell regulation.
Considering this, we explored whether ANXA2 could serve as a biomarker for ischemic stroke. First, we discovered that ANXA2 was expressed in T cells from postmortem brain samples of patients with stroke, specifically in those obtained from the MCAO region ( E). Next, we isolated T cells from the peripheral blood using density gradient centrifugation; we then sorted the T cells using FACS and extracted the RNA for analysis. The quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) results indicated that the levels of ANXA2 mRNA in T cells were lower in patients with stroke than in the control group ( F and 2G), and ANXA2 mRNA had high predictive accuracy according to the ROC curve (AUC: 0.969, 95% CI: 0.9302 to 1.000) ( H). Our results suggest that ANXA2-positive cells are enriched from peripheral blood and significantly accumulate in the ipsilateral brain tissue of patients with ischemic stroke.

## Exploring ANXA2 inhibition as a potential therapeutic target to suppress humanized T cell proliferation and alter T cell subpopulations in humanized mice
Next, we explored the effects of ANXA2 inhibition on T cells in humanized mice; the experimental design is detailed in A. A common symptom of graft-versus-host disease is weight loss, which is typically attributed to excessive human T cell proliferation. , However, when we treated these mice with Leu-Cys-Lys-Leu-Ser-Leu (LCKLSL), an ANXA2 inhibitor, the weight loss was reversed ( ). This finding suggests that LCKLSL can effectively reduce human T cell proliferation. Immunofluorescence further supported this conclusion, demonstrating that although ANXA2-positive T cells were scarcely detectable in the control group, LCKLSL effectively reversed the increase in these cells following ischemic stroke ( B and 3D). Thus, ANXA2 may serve as a promising therapeutic target for ischemic stroke.
 T cells infiltrating the brain during an ischemic stroke predominantly originate from the peripheral blood. We administered LCKLSL intravenously through the tail vein and observed that it appeared to have a greater effect on peripheral blood T cells than T cells in other organs. We further assessed the impact of LCKLSL on T cell subpopulations using flow cytometry ( A). This analysis involved various T cell subpopulations: TEM1, TCM, Teff, and TN/TSCM. We found that compared with the control group, the number of peripheral blood T cells decreased under MCAO conditions, and this decrease was even more pronounced with the addition of LCKLSL ( B). Among the decreased T cells, the proportion of two memory T cell types increased; by contrast, Teff and TN/TSCM decreased, and TSCM comprised most of the TN/TSCM population ( C–S9F). ANXA2 inhibition was able to reduce the increase in the two memory T cell types, but it did not reverse the decrease in Teff and TSCM. Overall, our findings suggest that ANXA2 inhibition reduces T cells, particularly memory T cells.

## Exploring Anxa2: A potential therapeutic target to reduce T cell and pro-inflammatory factors in WT mice
To circumvent potential rejection issues in humanized mice, we evaluated the impact of ANXA2 inhibition on the protective effect in WT mice with MCAO; this is because the Anxa2 gene was expressed in most of the murine T subpopulation, similar to humanized T cells ( and ). Immunofluorescence demonstrated the colocalization of Anxa2 and CD3, and LCKLSL administration resulted in a reduction in ANXA2+ CD3 cells ( C and 3E). This finding was echoed in the RT-qPCR analysis, which showed a decrease in Anxa2 mRNA expression following LCKLSL treatment ( F). Therefore, we posit that LCKLSL mitigates neuroinflammation by moderating the levels of pro-inflammatory factors. Indeed, the pro-inflammatory factors Il-6, Il-1b, and Tnfa showed reduced levels in the MCAO LCKLSL group compared with the MCAO saline group ( G–3I). These findings indicate that LCKLSL reduced candidate T cells and neuroinflammation in WT mice subjected to MCAO.

## LCKLSL ameliorates infarct sizes and neurological function after ischemic stroke in WT mice
We designed several experiments to further verify the neuroprotective effect of LCKLSL ( A). Following MCAO and reperfusion surgery, the mice were subjected to a magnetic resonance (MR) scan on day 1 and neurological behavioral tests on day 3, after which their brain tissues were collected for further examination. The application of LCKLSL significantly reduced the size of the brain infarct, as illustrated in T2 MR imaging scans ( B and 4C). Additionally, mice treated with LCKLSL performed better on neurological behavioral tests. This improvement was evidenced by a reduced completion time on the adhesive removal test ( D) and a lower ratio of foot faults to total steps in the grid-walking test ( E).
 To further analyze the effects of LCKLSL, the peri-infarct zone in the cortex was selected and taken for the western blot and RT-qPCR experiment, and we utilized western blot to measure the protein levels of Anxa2, synapsin I, and PSD95 ( F). Our results showed that LCKLSL effectively suppressed the expression of Anxa2, which was elevated in the MCAO group without LCKLSL administration ( G). Moreover, the expression of Synapsin I and PSD95, which was compromised in the MCAO group, was restored when LCKLSL was administered ( F, 4H, and 4I). These findings demonstrate that the inhibition of Anxa2 by LCKLSL not only reduces infarct sizes and improves neurological function but also decreases the expression of synapsin-associated proteins.
In summary, the inhibition of Anxa2 presents a promising avenue for neuroprotection through its potential to alleviate neuroinflammation.

## Discussion
This study provides a new strategy for investigating T cells in ischemic stroke using humanized T cell mice models; this strategy involves the analysis of differences in immune micro-environments between WT mouse strains and humanized T cell mouse models. These models are convenient to prepare and can be exploited to study disease mechanisms, develop new gene therapies and pharmacological treatments, and improve our understanding of T cell functions in ischemic stroke scenarios. The uniqueness of constructing stroke models in humanized T cell mouse strains lies in their ability to standardize mouse immune phenotypic reconstitution using specific human immune cells without compromising the natural course of stroke mechanisms. In this way, these models optimize the simulation of immune cells’ responses to stroke events.
Immune responses are complicated processes that contribute significantly to the brain damage caused by stroke, and T cells are considered a key cell type that regulates immune responses. , , , Specifically, T cells mediate inflammation after stroke and have impact on prognosis. However, lymphocyte responses to stroke in typical mouse models are often milder than those in humans. Therefore, we constructed a humanized T cell mouse model as a preclinical model for studying human T cell responses after stroke. To help determine the success of this preclinical T cell stroke model, we used scRNA-seq to classify human T cells and their subpopulations; the stroke-specific T cell subsets identified in humanized mice can be considered more robust therapeutic targets for subsequent translational research. Therefore, our humanized model provides a preclinical model to study unique subsets of humanized T cells and how they alter gene expression and functions in response to stroke. The role of the genes in the subsets of effector T cells (the increase in their proportions) in ischemic stroke must be explored more deeply in the future.
We used scRNA-seq analysis to demonstrate that the heterogeneity of humanized T cell populations consisting of multiple transcriptionally distinct subsets in the humanized mice contributes to different responses to acute ischemic stroke. Different from the responses observed in WT mice, our results revealed several important T cell subpopulations of humanized mice, and the proportions of hCD4 TEM1, hCD8 cytotoxic T1, and hCD8 cytotoxic T2 cells were significantly higher in brains with MCAO 3D operation, with preferential enrichment of effector T cell subsets. Then, we identified a potential biomarker, ANXA2 (encoded for by a hub gene of T cells), which was predicted and verified in human postmortem ischemic stroke brain tissue, peripheral blood samples from patients with ischemic stroke, and humanized mouse T cells.
Previous studies have shown that the ANXA2/P11 system (ANXA2 and its binding partner S100A10 [P11]) accelerates the tPA-dependent activation of fibrinolytic protease plasmin, the enzyme responsible for thrombus dissolution and fibrin degradation. , The inhibition of ANXA2 contributes to antiphospholipid syndrome and venous thrombosis, , indicating that a reduction in ANXA2 on peripheral T cells may have prothrombotic effects after ischemic stroke. Moreover, recombinant ANXA2 reduced infarct size in the embolic model and reduced thrombus formation by amplifying endogenous tPA. , However, the genetic ablation of ANXA2 reduces the infiltration of T cells and neutrophil granulocytes by tPA and decreases hemorrhagic transformation. , Notably, in our study, the inhibition of ANXA2 by the small molecular inhibitor LCKLSL played a protective role in the MCAO/R model. This constitutes a novel addition to our understanding of how ANXA2 regulates the mechanism in stroke; LCKLSL led to a reduction in the infarction area and an improvement of functional recovery in the MCAO/R model, which suggests that it decreased the infiltration of T cells and pro-inflammatory factors, similar to the impact of ANXA2, accounting for hemorrhagic transformation. Furthermore, in non-tPA reperfusion processes after ischemic stroke, ANXA2 can increase the infarction area and increase the neuroinflammatory response via the responses of various immune cells. This presents a new insight: the precise modulation of ANXA2 activity, considering its differing roles during various stages of stroke and different reperfusion modalities, could represent a critical breakthrough in stroke treatment strategies. This may hold particular value in balancing thrombolysis and anti-inflammation and preventing hemorrhagic transformation.

## Conclusions
This study provides a new investigation strategy in the field of brain cytoprotection against ischemic stroke. In this study, we advanced research into stroke-related immune mechanisms in a humanized animal model. We not only characterized novel T effector cell subsets but also successfully identified previously underexplored genes, such as ANXA2, providing new insights. We discovered the role of ANXA2 in neural injury and, using commercially available small-molecule inhibitors, uncovered its targeted neuroprotective effects in stroke.

## Limitations of the study
The present study has certain limitations. While we identified that ANXA2 inhibition reduced the T cells after MCAO, we did not fully elucidate the molecular mechanisms of ANXA2 after ischemic stroke. Likewise, we did not prove the expression of ANXA2 in clinical trial and the treatment effect of ANXA2 inhibition in patients with stroke. Future studies are needed.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Dan Lu (ludan@jnu.edu.cn).

## Materials availability
Request for reagents will be made available by the lead contact with a Material Transfer Agreement.

## Data and code availability

•Single-cell RNA-seq data have been deposited at GEO (GEO accession number: GSE212704).
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Analytical and Testing Center and Biomedical Translational Research Institute of Jinan University for the assistance of using FC and FACS, the corporation of Guangzhou Saliai Stem Cell Science and Technology for single-cell library preparation and sequencing, and TopEdit (www.topeditsci.com) for English language editing of this manuscript. This work was supported by grants from following funding.
National Natural Science Foundation of China (82271304, 81801150, 82171316, 82401525, and 82401561), Guangdong TeZhi plan (0720240214), Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2018A0303130182, 2020A1515010279, and 2022A1515012311), Science and Technology Projects in Guangzhou, China (2025A04J6829, 202201010127, and 2023A03J1021), Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou: Key Lab of Guangzhou Basic and Translational Research of Pan-vascular diseases (202201020042), Young Talent Support Project of Guangzhou Association for Science and Technology (QT-2023-024), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2023A1515111085), Outstanding Innovative Talents Cultivation Funded Programs for Doctoral Students of Jinan University (2021CXB011), Sun Yat-Sen University Hundreds of Talent Program (1320324001), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Sun Yat-sen University (24qnpy309), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2025B1515020086), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (21621102, 21623304, and 21624319), and Science and Technology Projects in Guangzhou (202201020058 and 2024A04J4100).

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, T.Z., D.L., and A.X.; methodology, T.Z., H.M., X.Z., A.L., S.H., Y.L., and S.L.; investigation, T.Z., Y.L., W.C., S.L., N.H., and X.H.; visualization, T.Z., H.M., A.L., X.Z., and W.C.; funding acquisition, T.Z., D.L., and A.X.; project administration, H.M., D.L., and A.X.; supervision, K.L., C.K.T., D.L., and A.X.; writing – original draft, D.L., T.Z., H.M., A.L., and X.Z.; writing – review and editing, T.Z., H.M., K.L., C.K.T., D.L., and A.X.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Patient recruitment and blood samples collection
The collection of human blood samples was approved by the local ethics committee and the review board of the First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University (approval number: KY -2021-024). Healthy volunteers, acute ischemic stroke patients (AIS), and control patients were recruited from June 2021 to June 2022 in the First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University. Inclusion criteria of stroke patients in the study were: (1) over the age of 18 years old, (2) diagnosis of not minor ischemic stroke (The severity of AIS patients was determined based on the National Institute of Health Stoke Scale (NIHSS) combined with imaging analysis within 72 h of stroke onset, (3) signed informed consent by patients or their immediate family members. Exclusion criteria of patients were (1) time of stroke onset to initial blood collection longer than 72 h, (2) intracerebral hemorrhage, (3) serious heart, lung or kidney damage, (4) malignant tumors, (5) surgery within the past 3 months, (6) TIA or unknown diseases. Control patients were recruited in the study if they were: (1) over the age of 18 years old, (2) signed informed consent by patients or their immediate family members. We excluded controls with intracerebral hemorrhage, ischemic stroke, serious heart, lung or kidney damage, malignant tumors, surgery within the past 3 months or unknown diseases.
Blood was drawn from each donor, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were immediately isolated by density gradient centrifugation using FicollPaque (Cat.: LTS1077, TBD, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 4 mL of fresh peripheral blood was collected in EDTA tubes containing anticoagulants (Lot: 0167224, Cat# YZ367863, BD) and transferred to the same volume of PBS solution. After density gradient centrifugation at 500 X g for 30 min at room temperature (RT), PBMCs were carefully collected from the interphase and washed once with cold PBS. PBMCs were incubated with 1X Red Blood Cell Lysis Buffer (Lot: 2410278, # 00-4333-57, Invitrogen) for 10 min and centrifuged at 500 g for 10 min at 4°C to lyse red blood cells (RBCs). Samples were stored at −80°C until use.

## Human brain sample collection
The collection of human brain samples was approved by the Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University (approval number: KY -2021-101). Brain tissue samples were obtained from patients with hemorrhagic cerebral infarction who died between 1 and 3 days after stroke onset or brain tissue had to be removed for the surgery assessed by neurosurgeons (N = 2). Samples were derived from brain regions in the vascular territory of the middle cerebral artery.

## Establishment of human immune system (HIS) mouse model: Hu-PBMC model
All animal experiments in this study comply with the ARRIVE guidelines. 8-week-old male ICR mice were purchased from Institute of Laboratory Animal Science of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (Guangzhou, China), whereas 5-week-old male B-NDG mice (NOD.CB17-PrkdcscidIl2rgtm1/Bcgen) were supplied by BIOCYTOGEN (Beijing, China). The mice were maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions at the Laboratory Animal Management Center of Jinan University. To minimize aggressiveness, no more than five animals per cage were kept in plastic cages under specific pathogen-free (SPF) conditions and standardized conditions with a 12-h light-dark cycle, stable temperature (22 ± 1°C), and access to food and water ad libitum. All animal experiments were approved by the Institute of Animal Experimentation of Jinan University (Guangzhou, China) and were performed carefully in accordance with its recommendations and ethical regulations (approval number: 20210318-04, 20220129-01).
In this experiment, we used PBMCs as sources of human immune cells for the establishment of a functional human immune system. , , The PBMCs were purchased from AllCells (CAT#: PB004F-C). Briefly, 5–10 ˆ 106 human PBMCs cells which was resuspended in 200 μL PBS and was intravenously (i.v.) administered to each B-NDG mouse via the tail vein. After injection, peripheral blood cells obtained from mice were identified by flow cytometry at 2-5 weeks to evaluate human CD45+ cells or CD3+ T cells. The humanized mice were applied to stroke animal model before onset of graft-versus-host disease (GvHD, usually 4–6 weeks after PBMC injection), and mice were excluded from further study because of the evident sign of GvHD which normally exhibited the significant loss of body-weight and the yellow fur.

## Transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model in mice
Vascular occlusion in the tMCAO model was induced by intraluminal suturing of the left middle cerebral artery (MCA) for 60 min as previously described. Briefly, animals were anesthetized and ventilated with 1.0–3.5% isoflurane (R510-22, RWD, China) in 70% nitrous oxide and 30% oxygen via a face mask. After sterilization, a small midline incision was made on the neck. The left common carotid artery (CCA) was exposed and identified. A 6/0 surgical monofilament nylon suture with a silicone-coated tip (Cat. 602256PK5Re, DOCCOL, America) was carefully inserted into the CCA and advanced to the origin of the MCA. After 60 min of MCAO in mice, the suture was carefully withdrawn to allow reperfusion of blood. Regional cerebral blood flow (CBF) was monitored in mice with a laser Doppler probe. Animals in which subarachnoid cerebral hemorrhage occurred during brain sampling or whose regional CBF decreased by less than 10% compared with preischemic values were excluded from further study. During this procedure, body temperature was maintained at 37°C with an electric blanket. Control-operated mice were subjected to the same procedure without MCA occlusion. The LCKLSL or saline (NS.) administration was injected via tail vein injection.

## Mice behavioral tests
Mice were labeled and were randomly divided into three groups: Control, MCAO, MCAO+LCKLSL. Mice behavioral tests were performed by an experience investigator blinded to the experimental groups and the data was analyzed by separate investigator.
For the grid-walking task, we used an grid area of 32 cm × 20 cm × 50 cm (length × width × height) which comprises of 12 mm square wire mesh, and mice were placed individually on the elevated wire grid and allowed to move freely for 3 min. Stepping errors (foot faults) were record by camera located beneath the grid. The numbers of foot faults and total foot steps for each limb were counted. A ratio was calculated as follows: number of foot faults/(total of foot steps) × 100%.
For the adhesive removal test, two pieces of adhesive-backed paper dots (of equal size, 25 mm2) were used as bilateral tactile stimuli occupying the distal-radial region on the wrist of each forelimb. The time for mice to remove paper dots from the forelimb were recorded and the time exceeded 60 s were recorded as 60 s. Mice were trained for 3 days before surgery and were subjected to the following experiments, once mice were able to remove the dots within 10 s.

## Method details

## Tissue digestion and single-cell suspensions preparation
Single-cell suspensions were prepared from blood or brain hemispheres as described previously. , The entire process was performed at 4°C. Briefly, peripheral blood was collected from the lateral tail vein and collected in EDTA tubes. Before brain isolation, mice were anesthetized and perfused transcardially with ice-cold saline. The spleen was removed and single cell suspensions of the cells were prepared by manually mashing the organs through a 70 μm cell strainer (Lot 192718, Cat# 352350, Falcon, USA). For isolation of brain infiltrating cells and microglia, the ipsilesional hemispheres were rapidly collected in culture medium (RPMI medium 1640 basic, Lot:8121313, Cat# C11875500BT, gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), mechanically homogenized and passed through a 70 μm cell strainer to obtain dissociated cells. The filtered mixture was washed and centrifuged at 500 g for 10 min. Then the supernatant was aspirated while the cell pellets were resuspended in Percoll (Lot: 10285540, Cat# 17-0891-02, GE Healthcare, USA) density gradient (37%) and centrifuged at 500 x g for 30 min without acceleration or interruption to separate myelin and debris. Interphase cells were collected and washed with 1% fetal bovine serum (Cat# 04-001-1ACS, Biological Industries, Israel). Then, the cell suspensions obtained from blood or brain were resuspended and incubated with 1x Red Blood Cell lysis buffer to remove red blood cells. The individual cell suspensions were washed and resuspended in 1XPBS for further experiments.

## Panel design for flow cytometry (FC)
For immune cell subset analysis, single cell suspensions were prepared from blood or brain hemispheres and PBMCs as described above and incubated with primary antibodies for 30 min at 4°C in the dark. Different primary antibodies depending on the expression of target cell antigens formed different flow cytometric panels. Primary antibodies were purchased from Biolegend (San Diego, CA, USA), and antibodies were stained according to their instructions.
To analyze the proportion of different immune cells in the ischemic cerebral hemispheres of ICR mice and B-NDG mice after stroke, the 9-color panel contained the following primary antibodies: anti-mouse CD45 (clone 30-F11; APC/Cyanine7, cat #103115), anti-mouse Ly-6G (clone 1A8; Alexa Fluor 647, cat #127609), anti-mouse/human CD11b (clone M1/70; FITC, cat. 101205), anti-mouse CD19 (clone 6D5; Brilliant Violet 605, cat #115539), anti-mouse CD3E (clone 500A2; Alexa Fluor 700, cat #152315), anti-mouse CD49b (clone DX5; PE, cat #108907), anti-mouse CD11c (clone N418; Brilliant Violet 421, cat #117329), anti-mouse CD34 (clone HM34; PE/Cyanine7, cat #128617). Cells were then washed and stained with 7-AAD Viability Staining Solution (clone B308961, cat #420403) for 5 min at 4°C to exclude dead cells.
To identify the establishment of the human immune system in Hu-B-NDG mice, peripheral blood was tested with the following primary antibodies: anti-human CD3 (clone OKT3; PE, cat #317307), anti-mouse CD3 (clone 17A2; Alexa Fluor 700, cat #100215), anti-human CD45 (H130; APC, cat #304011), anti-mouse CD45 (clone 30-F11; APC/Cyanine7, cat #103115).
To analyze the subtype of lymphocytes, the two panels were divided by species. One panel contained anti-human CD45 (clone HI30; FITC, cat #304006), anti-human CD3 (clone HIT3a; APC, cat #300312), anti-human CD4 (clone RPA-T4; APC, cat #300508), anti-human CD8 (clone SK1; APC, cat #344709), while the other is anti-mouse CD45 (clone 30-F11; APC/Cyanine7, cat #103115), anti-mouse CD3 (clone 17A2; Alexa Fluor 700, cat #100215), anti-mouse CD4 (clone RM4-5; FITC, cat #100509), anti-mouse CD8a (clone 53–6.7; PerCP/Cyanin5.5, cat #100733). Data were collected using a FACSCanto (BD Bioscience, Franklin lakes, NJ, USA) flow cytometry system, and data analysis was performed using Flow Jo software (version 10, TreeStar Inc., Ashland, OR, USA).

## Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) sorting of immune cells from brain hemispheres of humanized mice for scRNA-seq
Single-cell suspensions of brain hemispheres from humanized mice were prepared as described above. Single cells were then incubated with primary antibodies such as anti-mouse CD45 (clone 30-F11, APC/Cyanine7, cat #103115), anti-human CD45 (clone HI30, FITC, cat #304006) for 30 min on ice in the dark. Immediately before sorting with a fluorescence-activated cell sorting system (FACS), cells were stained with 7-AAD for 5 min; FACS Aria SORP; BD/Becton, Dickinson and Company). Forward and side scatter settings were used to exclude duplicates and cell debris to select single cells. Live mouse CD45+ cell populations and human cell populations (human CD45+ cells) with negative staining of 7AAD were purified, enriched, and processed for single-cell RNA sequencing.

## Single-cell library preparation and sequencing
Two pairs of single cell suspensions, human CD45+ cells alone or the combination of human cells and mouse CD45+ cells (1:1), were used to prepare single cell RNA libraries according to the manufacturer’s instructions of the 10x Genomics Single Cell 3′ v2 Reagent Kit and the previously described 9. Briefly, each sample was washed twice and resuspended in PBS (Lot 2152426, Cat# 02-023-1ACS) containing 0.04% BSA. The viability of the samples was more than 90% and the number was determined using an automatic cell counter (Countstar, FL-CD, China) after cell staining with trypan blue (Thermo Fisher Scientific; T10282, USA). Then, the corresponding volume of each sample was calculated and loaded into the 10x Genomics single cell A chip (120236; 10x Genomics Inc., Pleasanton, CA, USA). Then, the French fries were transferred to a prechilled 8-well tube (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and heat-sealed for reverse transcription in a Veriti 96-well thermal cycler (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
The cDNA was recovered using the recovery agent of 10x Silane DynaBead clean-up (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the instructions for use, and the purified cDNA samples were purified after amplification for 12 cycles using SPRIselect beads (Beckman, Indianapolis, IN, USA). To determine the cDNA concentration, these samples were diluted 4:1 and then analyzed in a bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). Based on the calculated cDNA concentration, the cDNA libraries were prepared according to the Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kits v3 User’s Manual with significant modifications to the PCR cycles (as recommended by 10x Genomics).
Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies) and qPCR amplification data were used to measure library size to calculate the molarity of each library. Then the samples were pooled, normalized to 10 nM, and diluted to 2 nM with the elution buffer containing 0.1% Tween 20 (Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were sequenced using the Novaseq 6000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) with the following run parameters: Read 1, 150 cycles; Read 2, 150 cycles; Index 1, 8 cycles. The median sequencing depth for each sample was 50,000 reads/cell.

## Preprocessing and quality control
Single-cell RNA-seq raw data (bcl files) were converted to fastq files using Illumina bcl2fastq (version 2.19.1; Illumina) and aligned to the GRCm38 (mm10) mouse reference genome and GRCh38 (h19) human genome reference sequence. CellRanger (version 3.1.0; 10x Genomics Inc., https://support.10xgenomics.com/) was used to generate a raw digital gene expression matrix for each example from the FASTQ files of the Illumina sequencing runs. Gene expression matrices for immune cells from humanized mice or WT mice were then combined and converted to a Seurat object using the R package Seurat (version 4.0.5, https://satijalab.org/seurat) Cells with less than 200 discovered genes or more than 5500 discovered genes per cell with more than 10% unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) associated with mitochondrial genes were removed. And genes detected in less than three cells (UMI count >0) were removed.

## Unsupervised clustering of cells and uniform manifold approximation and projection visualization
After quality control, single-cell gene expression data were log normalized and scaled using the NormalizeData and ScaleData functions from the R package Seurat. Highly variable genes (HVGs) were identified using the Seurat function FindVariableGene with default parameter settings before ScaleData. Then Harmony was used to integrate different sample datasets and remove the batch effect (https://github.com/immunogenomics/harmony). After calculating clusters using the FindNeighbors and FindClusters functions, the results were visualized using UMAP for dimension reduction plots.

## Cell annotation and protein-protein interaction analysis
To annotate the cell clusters, Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with high discrimination abilities between different cluster were identified through the FindAllMarkers function in Seurat package using the default non-parametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. The cell populations were annotated manually based on the DEGs, the well-known cellular markers from the literature the CellMarker database. , , The top 15 genes in selected phenotypes of T cells were used for Protein-protein interactions by using STRING database (https://string-db.org/). 

## Constructing single-cell trajectories
We applied the single-cell pseudotime trajectories analysis using Monocle2 package (http://cole-trapnell-lab.github.io/monocle-release). Monocle used reversed graph embedding and profiled a low-dimensional space, inferring trajectories which ordered cells into a branched pseudotime trajectorie.

## Collection of public single cell datasets
To compare immune cell properties between humanized mice and wild type after stroke, we collected publicly available scRNA-seq data from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO accession number: GSE171171 and GSE174574). , 

## Quantitative real-time (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA of brain samples was isolated by using the phenol-chloroform extraction method according to manufacturer’s guidelines (Molecular Research Center, Inc.). The RNA concentration of RNA was determined by NanoDrop TM 2000C (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). Then, RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA with corresponding primers using Prime Script RT Master Mix (Takara, Japan, catalog #:RR047A) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The relative mRNA expression levels of the target genes was detected using LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master (Roche, United States, catalog #:04887352001) in a Quant Studio 3 real-time PCR machine (Bio-Rad, CA, United States) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The expression of each target gene was normalized to that of GAPDH. The sequences of primer used in this study are shown in .

## Immunofluorescence
For immunofluorescence, the brain samples were rinsed with PBS and fixed with 4% PFA at 4°C overnight. Next, samples were washed in PBS three times and permeabilized with PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 for 15 min and blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 60 min at room temperature. After blocking, Then they were incubated overnight at 4°C with the following primary antibodies: anti-Annexin A2 (1:100; abcam, ab189473) and mouse-anti-CD3 (1:400, Invitrogen, MA1-10175), mouse-anti-CD3 (1:200, Invitrogen, 11-0032-82). Subsequently, brain slices were incubated with the appropriate Alexa Fluor secondary antibody (1:200, YEASEN, 34106ES60 and 34212ES60) for antigen visualization (1 h, room temperature). Cellular nuclei were counterstained using a fluorescent preserving mounting medium containing 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Beyotime, C1006). Images were taken with a confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss LSM700, Vizna, Germany).

## Western blot
Brain were harvested on day 0, day 3 after stroke and lysed with Western and IP lysis buffer containing a proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China). Then, protein concentrations were determined by the BCA protein assay kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, P0012) and equalized before mix with loading buffer. Equal quality of protein samples were separated on 10% SDS-PAGE, transferred to MC membranes, and probed with the following primary antibodies: Rabbit anti-ANXA2 polyclonal antibody (1:1000; abcam, ab189473), Rabbit anti-synapsin I polyclonal antibody (1:1000; abcam, ab254349), rabbit anti-psd95 polyclonal antibody (1:1000; abcam, 3450S) on 4°C overnight. The protein samples were washed and incubated with respective HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:10000, Abcam, ab181662). An enhanced chemiluminescence detection system was used to visualize the reactivity, and the band intensity was analyzed using ImageJ software.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
SPSS (Windows version 27.0; IBM Corp., Armonk, N.Y., USA) or GraphPad Prism software (version 8.0.1 for Windows, GraphPad Software, San Diego, California USA, www.graphpad.com) were used to perform statistical analyzes. For data from stroke patients, Shapiro-Wilk normality test was used to determine the normality of data. Mann-Whitney U-test was used to compare two independent groups of data that are not normally distributed. Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) was used to compare two independent groups of data that are normally distributed. Sample sizes for animal studies were determined mainly on the basis of pilot studies. Results are reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD). For comparisons between two groups, statistical analyzes were performed with unpaired t tests. For comparisons of data with more than two groups, a one-tailed ANOVA was used. p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Published: April 2, 2025

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.112302.

## Contributor Information
Hongcheng Mai, Email: maihch7@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
Anding Xu, Email: tlil@jnu.edu.cn.
Dan Lu, Email: ludan@jnu.edu.cn.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S11 and Tables S1 and S2

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S11 and Tables S1 and S2

## Data Availability Statement

•Single-cell RNA-seq data have been deposited at GEO (GEO accession number: GSE212704).
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.