615transoncolTranslational OncologyTransl OncolNeoplasia PressPMC1147420111474201114742013935746510.1016/j.tranon.2024.102145Highlighting function of Wnt signalling in urological cancers: Molecular interactions, therapeutic strategies, and (nano)strategies
HashemiMehrdad RezaeiMahdi RezaeiaghdamHadi JamaliBehdokht KoohparZeinab Khazaei TanhaMahsa BizhanpourAnahita AsadiSaba JafariAli Moghadas KhosroshahiElaheh Mohandesi EslamiMaedeh SalimimoghadamShokooh NabaviNoushin RashidiMohsen FattahEisa TaheriazamAfshin EntezariMaliheh aDepartment of Genetics, Faculty of Advanced Science and Technology, Tehran Medical Sciences, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, IranbFarhikhtegan Medical Convergence Sciences Research Center, Farhikhtegan Hospital Tehran Medical sciences, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, IrancHealth Research Center, Chamran Hospital, Tehran, IrandDepartment of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Shahrekord Branch, Islamic Azad University, Shahrekord, IraneDepartment of Microbiology and Genetics, Kherad Institute of Higher Education, Bushehr, IranfDepartment Of Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,Tonekabon Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tonekabon, IrangDepartment Of Biological Sciences, University Of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Al, United StateshDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Shahid Chamran University of Ahvaz, Ahvaz, IraniIndependent Researcher, Victoria, British Columbia, V8V 1P7, CanadajThe Health of Plant and Livestock Products Research Center, Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, Sari, IrankDepartment Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, Sari, IranlSchool of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, IranmDepartment of Orthopedics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran Medical Sciences, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran⁎Corresponding authors. dr.mohsenrashidi@yahoo.comeesa.fat@gmail.coma.taheriazam@iautmu.ac.irmentezari@iautmu.ac.ir
11020245010214510214515102024© 2024 Published by Elsevier Inc.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

## Highlights
•Urological cancers include prostate, bladder and renal tumors that affect many individuals around the world.
•Dysregulation of Wnt has been associated with tumorigenesis.
•Wnt upregulation In PCa enhances carcinogenesis and can mediate proliferation nd metastasis.
•Wnt upregulation in bladder cancer (BC) can enhance malignancy and mediate chemoresistance.
•Overexpression of Wnt has been correlated with increase renal cancer progression.
Keywords: Prostate cancer, Bladder cancer, Renal cancer, Wnt, Chemoresistance, Nanoparticles

## Abstract
Cancer is a complex, multistep process characterized by abnormal cell growth and metastasis as well as the capacity of the tumor cells in therapy resistance development. The urological system is particularly susceptible to a group of malignancies known as urological cancers, where an accumulation of genetic alterations drives carcinogenesis. In various human cancers, Wnt singalling is dysregulated; following nuclear transfer of β-catenin, it promotes tumor progression and affects genes expression. Elevated levels of Wnt have been documented in urological cancers, where its overexpression enhances growth and metastasis. Additionally, increased Wnt singalling contributes to chemoresistance in urological cancers, leading to reduced sensitivity to chemotherapy agents like cisplatin, doxorubicin, and paclitaxel. Wnt upregulation can change radiotherapy response of urological cancers. The regulation of Wnt involves various molecular pathways, including Akt, miRNAs, lncRNAs, and circRNAs, all of which play roles in carcinogenesis. Targeting and silencing Wnt or its associated pathways can mitigate tumorigenesis in urological cancers. Anti-cancer compounds such as curcumin and thymoquinone have shown efficacy in suppressing tumorigenesis through the downregulation of Wnt singalling. Notably, nanoparticles have proven effective in treating urological cancers, with several studies in prostate cancer (PCa) using nanoparticles to downregulate Wnt and suppress tumor growth. Future research should focus on developing small molecules that inhibit Wnt singalling to further suppress tumorigenesis and advance the treatment of urological cancers. Moreover, Wnt can be used as reliable biomarker for the diagnosis and prognosis of urological cancers.

## Graphical abstrcat
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Oct 25; Revised 2024 May 6; Accepted 2024 Sep 27; Collection date 2024 Dec.

## Introduction
Cancer remains one of the most significant health challenges faced by humanity. Cancer causes significant impact on the socioenconimic status and in addition to being a healthcare challenge, its diagnosus has been delayed due to the emergence of COVID-19. In spite of developing different therapeutic approaches such as immunotherapy, cancer cells have developed strategies for resistance. Despite various preventative measures, its incidence persists, underscoring the need for more focused treatment strategies and understanding biological profile of tumorigenesis [ , , ]. Factors such as industrialization have increased exposure to carcinogenic compounds, and modern lifestyles characterized by reduced physical activity contribute to cancer risk. Moreover, lack of physical activity and unhealthy diet are among other risk factors of cancer. However, the precise causes of cancer, which involve a range of genomic and epigenetic changes, remain complex and not fully understood. As a result, comprehensive preventative strategies have yet to be effectively implemented on a broad scale. Instead, significant efforts have shifted towards treatment, leveraging insights from pre-clinical studies and providing insights for the future clinical studies. Recent research has emphasized the role of genomic alterations and the accumulation of these changes in driving tumor progression and enhancing the malignancy of cancer cells. Understanding these molecular networks is critical for developing targeted therapeutics in cancer treatment. However, a major challenge in cancer therapy lies in the complexity of molecular networks involved in tumorigenesis involving both genomic and epigenetic factors. Identifying and targeting the most influential pathways that contribute significantly to tumor growth remains a critical focus in the ongoing battle against cancer [ ]. WNT1 was first identified in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, during the 1980s [ ], and since then, up to 19 WNT genes have been identified in mammals [ ]. These genes encode glycoproteins that signal through receptors and co-receptors to control cell proliferation, stem cell self-renewal, and differentiation, among others. Wnt ligands are categorized based on whether they act through β-catenin-dependent or independent pathways. The critical roles of Wnt singalling in growth, invasion, viability, stem cell regulation, and embryogenesis make it a significant focus of biological research [ , , ]. Dysregulation of the Wnt pathway can lead to the development of human cancers due to its extensive involvement in essential cellular processes [ , ], affecting proliferation, metastasis and therapy response. Key components of the Wnt pathway include FZD and LRP receptors, as well as downstream targets like β-catenin, which are critical in the canonical pathway where the pathway's inhibition is linked to β-catenin degradation, impacting gene expression [ ]. Structurally, Wnt ligands are glycoproteins requiring lipid modification for functional and structural optimization, a process facilitated by porcupine in the endoplasmic reticulum. When a Wnt ligand binds to the FZD receptor on a cell, it forms a complex with LRP5/6. The focus has generally been on the destruction complex's role in degrading β-catenin and inhibiting the Wnt pathway. However, changes in receptors including ZNRF3 and RNF43, which are ubiquitin-protein ligases, can also downregulate the Wnt pathway by degrading LRP6 and FZD [ , , ]. Moreover, ZNRF3 and RNF43′s functions can be inhibited by R-spondin, and DKK1 also acts to suppress the Wnt pathway by forming a complex with LRP5/6, preventing Wnt ligand from binding [ , , ]. When a Wnt ligand is present, it binds to the FZD receptor and subsequently to its co-receptor LRP5/6. This interaction allows for the attachment of Dvl, leading to the phosphorylation of LRP5/6 at one or more sites. Notably, phosphorylating even a single motif is sufficient to activate the Wnt pathway [ , , ]. Following phosphorylation, LRP5/6 associates with Axin, which stabilizes β-catenin by inhibiting the destruction complex responsible for its degradation[ ]. This describes the canonical pathway of Wnt, which primarily involves β-catenin's role. However, research also highlights the non-canonical pathway of Wnt, involving ligands such as Wnt4, Wnt5a, Wnt7a, Wnt11, and Wnt16 [ , , ]. In this pathway, binding of Wnt11 to its receptors activates RhoA and RAC1, leading to the stimulation of the JNK and ROCK pathways. These pathways enhance cytoskeleton remodeling, which accelerates cell adhesion and motilit [ , , ]. The significance of the Wnt pathway in cancer emphasizes its critical role in various mechanisms related to the disease [ ]. Additionally, this discussion includes the current pharmacological modulation of the Wnt mechanism in urological cancers ( ).
 

## Wnt singalling in oncology
Recent research has elucidated how Wnt interactions at cellular and molecular levels influence cancer progression. Notably, Wnt has been shown to interact with both genomic and epigenetic factors. In most cases, epigenetic factors such as non-coding RNAs function as upstream mediator of Wnt axis. The oncogenic potential of Wnt has been increasingly recognized, with studies showing that tumor progression correlates with Wnt upregulation; as tumors advance towwards later stages of development, Wnt expression levels also increase, highlighting its carcinogenic activity. Wnt's role in tumorigenesis extends beyond a single mechanism, emerging as a critical regulator across various cancer types. Notably, Wnt activation can enhance the expression of GPX4 in gastric cancer, inhibiting ferroptosis and promoting tumorigenesis [ ]. Conversely, reductions in Wnt expression can also contribute to cancer development. For instance, in lung cancer, CD248-mediated decreases in Wnt expression in pericytes lead to increased OPN and SERPINE1, stimulating angiogenesis and tumor growth [ ]. The characteristics and proliferation of cancer stem cells (CSCs) are closely controlled by the Wnt pathway. However, Wnt is not always central; in hepatocellular carcinoma, SNHG5 increases Wnt expression, which suppresses UPF1, enhancing CSC characteristics and tumor growth [ ]. Additionally, metabolic changes in cancer cells can modulate Wnt activity. In colon cancer, Drp1 upregulation promotes carcinogenesis by enhancing fatty acid-mediated mitochondrial fission, which, in turn, boosts Wnt expression to drive tumorigenesis [ ]. Thus, decreasing Wnt expression can potentially slow tumor progression. Compounds like Oxy186 and Oxy210, derivatives of oxysterol, have been shown to reduce Wnt expression, effectively suppressing cancer cell growth both in vitro and in vivo [ ]. Moreover, Wnt can stimulate EMT in increasing progression and metastasis of cancer cells [ ].
The role of Wnt singalling has also been emphasized in cervical tumors, where research shows that OTX1 elevates the levels of Wnt9b and β-catenin, thereby promoting tumorigenesis. Conversely, silencing OTX1 leads to increased levels of APC, GSK-3β, and AXIN2, which in turn suppresses the Wnt pathway [ ]. Additionally, Wnt singalling is linked to the invasion capabilities of tumor cells and due to its carcinogenic activity, upregulation of Wnt can promote the metastasis of cancer cells. In colorectal cancer, the overexpression of MRGBP elevates Wnt expression via DKK1 downregulation, which contributes to enhanced invasion by stimulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [ ]. Hypoxia, known to augment tumorigenesis in colorectal cancer, affects various pathways, including enhancing β-catenin lactylation, which promotes growth and stemness in colorectal tumors [ ]. Interestingly, Wnt ligands can also activate other molecular pathways; for example, Wnt6 not only stimulates the Wnt pathway but also increases Notch1 expression, contributing to the development and pathogenesis of ovarian tumors [ ]. Thus, the function of Wnt in human cancers plays a pivotal role in their progression, as outlined in and detailed in .
 

## Wnt singalling and tumor microenvironment (TME): perspectives for urological cancers
Epithelial cells undergo a transformation known as EMT, which is crucial for morphogenesis [ ]. During EMT, epithelial cells lose characteristics such as cell-cell contact and polarity and acquire mesenchymal traits like increased motility. Key indicators of EMT include the loss of E-cadherin at the plasma membrane, the gain of vimentin and fibronectin, and increased nuclear accumulation of β-catenin. The different stages of EMT including morphological and biochemical alterations can occur simultaneously. This transition requires a series of cellular changes, from epithelial to mesenchymal types. While EMT is vital for normal developmental processes, it also significantly contributes to tumor formation and progression when unregulated . The TME plays a critical role in cancer metastasis by inducing EMT in tumor cells. Singalling pathways such as TGF-β, NF-κB, Notch, Wnt, and receptor tyrosine kinase are involved in this process singalling [ ]. This section discusses how the TME stimulates the Wnt/β-catenin singalling pathway, leading to the transition from epithelial to mesenchymal cells. Not only do Wnt ligands activate nuclear Wnt singalling, but growth factors released by stromal cells in the TME also contribute to this activation singallingsingallingsingalling [ ]. For example, in colorectal cancer cells (CRCs), activation of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) promotes phosphorylation of β-catenin at tyrosine residues and its dissociation from Met (encoded by the proto-oncogene MET), enhancing β-catenin production via the PI3-K pathway. This increase in HGF levels also boosts the activity of TCF family transcription factors controlled by β-catenin. Studies indicate that Met and β-catenin facilitate cell cycle entry and prevent apoptosis. In cervical cancer progression, there is a notable link between c-Met overexpression and disease advancement [ ]. The interaction between HGF, produced by the TME, and Wnt/β-catenin in colorectal cancers aids tumor development and invasion [ ]. Additionally, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) has been shown to stimulate the Wnt/β-catenin singalling pathway. Research by Yang et al. revealed that PDGF treatment leads to phosphorylation of p68, a DEAD box RNA helicase, at the Y593 residue, facilitating β-catenin's nuclear translocation. This occurs by preventing β-catenin phosphorylation by GSK-3β and releasing axin from β-catenin, allowing β-catenin to interact with LEF/TCF in the nucleus and initiate EMT singalling[ ]. Both EGF and TGF-β are also responsible for tyrosine phosphorylation of p68, critical for initiating EMT. This suggests that the p68-β-catenin axis may serve as a common endpoint for various singalling pathways singalling[ ].
Several singalling pathways involved in cancer development and progression are influenced by the intrinsic characteristics of tumor cells [ ]. However, the interaction between cancer cells and other cell types within the TME also plays a crucial role [ ]. This interaction occurs both within the primary tumor site and at metastatic locations. For example, prostate stromal cells secrete various members of the WNT family, significantly affecting tumor development and disease progression. One instance is the activation of canonical Wnt singalling in the epithelium by stromal Wnt-3a, which promotes the progression from prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) lesions to adenocarcinoma and contributes to resistance against androgen deprivation singalling [ ]; these findings are based on studies in mice. It has been observed that overexpression of the high mobility group protein Hmci-c in mouse stroma leads to the development of multifocal PIN lesions, associated with increased expression of Wnt2, Wnt4, and Wnt9a, which could be suppressed by overexpressing sFRP1 and Dkk1 [ ]. While WNT10B expression is elevated in the stroma of human PCa, inhibiting its expression has demonstrated a reduction in the protumorigenic effects of stromal cells on LNCaP tumor formation in xenograft models [ ]. Additionally, WNT signals from the TME contribute to resistance against conventional treatments. For instance, therapeutic DNA damage induces an increase in WNT-16B production in prostate fibroblasts [ ], enhancing classical WNT singalling in tumor cells, thus promoting therapy resistance and disease progression singalling [ ]. Further research is needed to understand the role of stromal-derived WNT-16B and other WNT family members, such as WNT-5A129, in different stages of PCa. In BC, the regulation of the TME by Wnt is also crucial. Elevated Wnt levels increase cancer progression, yet stimulation of endostatin can suppress β-catenin, hindering proliferation and metastasis, and impacting stem-like cells in the TME [ ]. Moreover, different TME subtypes that influence BC progression exhibit alterations in RTK-RAS, NOTCH, WNT, Hippo, and PI3K pathways [ ]. The role of Wnt in TME remodeling in renal cancer, however, still requires further investigation.

## PCa: a summary
PCa is the most frequently diagnosed cancer among males in both the USA and Europe, and it ranks as the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths globally [ ]. PCa's histological profile, which includes both immune and non-immune cells, plays a significant role in its pathogenesis [ , ]. It is second only to lung cancer in incidence rates, with approximately 1276,000 new cases diagnosed in 2018, leading to 359,000 deaths [ ]. The incidence of PCa is notably higher in developed countries [ ] and is particularly prevalent in the USA, Canada, Australia, and Europe [ , ]. By 2040, the number of PCa cases is expected to rise to 2.3 million, resulting in 740,000 deaths. Factors such as lifestyle and diet, which can influence the risk of developing PCa, are critical areas for prevention, with the Western lifestyle linked to an increased cancer risk [ ]. PCa is a slowly progressing cancer that can develop over decades, characterized by its heterogeneity and varying clinical symptoms [ ]. The changes in the molecular pathways can cause the development of chemoresistance [ ]. The disease originates from epithelial or progenitor cells in the tissue, driven by genetic factors, cellular activities, and the host microenvironment [ ]. Recent insights suggest that PCa progression involves interactions among various pathways. For instance, gut dysbiosis may exacerbate PCa tumorigenesis by boosting STAT3 expression, potentially leading to docetaxel resistance [ ]. SOX15 enhances ROS production and mediates ferroptosis in PCa by increasing AOC1 expression [ ]. Additionally, PELO promotes tumorigenesis by facilitating Smad4 degradation through the ubiquitination pathway mediated by PLK1 [ ]. Changes in the immune system, such as ARID1A deficiency, can lead to immune suppression in PCa [ ]. Epigenetic factors also play a crucial role in PCa progression [ , ]. Given the importance of genetic and epigenetic factors in PCa tumorigenesis, new treatment strategies have emerged, including the use of siRNA-loaded nanostructures s and nanocarriers for drug and gene delivery, as detailed in .
 

## Wnt and increase in cancer progression
Numerous studies have confirmed that alterations in the expression level of Wnt can escalate malignancy and carcinogenesis in PCa. β-Catenin plays a crucial role in coordinating molecular networks to amplify tumorigenesis in PCa. For instance, ALK collaborates with the N-Myc axis via the Wnt pathway to promote PCa tumorigenesis [ ]. Autocrine singalling is another mechanism through which Wnt enhances tumorigenesis, specifically by boosting ROR1 expression to increase metastasis and support stem cell maintenance in PCa cells [ ]. A significant challenge in treating PCa is that increased tumorigenesis diminishes the tumor's response to therapy. Identifying the pathways responsible for carcinogenesis could potentially reduce tumorigenesis and improve therapeutic outcomes. The overexpression of ASPM is thought to increase the stemness of PCa cells, and experimental data suggests that ASPM prevents the proteasomal degradation of Dvl-3, thereby elevating Wnt expression and β-Catenin's transcriptional activity, further promoting PCa tumorigenesis[ ]. The enhanced invasion of PCa cells remains a critical issue for clinicians. The induction of EMT is a primary mechanism that facilitates metastasis in PCa. Various mechanisms regulate EMT; for example, low expression of nc886 activates EMT, enhancing the invasiveness of tumor cells [ ], while the lncRNA UBE2R2-AS1 promotes growth and EMT-mediated invasion and metastasis in PCa [ ]. Conversely, 6-gingerol can inhibit EMT and stimulate autophagy and ferroptosis in PCa [ ], and cathepsin K promotes M2 polarization of macrophages and stimulates EMT, increasing PCa invasion [ ]. Therefore, multiple mechanisms including Wnt regulate metastasis and EMT in PCa. Silencing GPX2 has been shown to reduce the progression and metastasis of PCa cells, and decreasing its expression can lower levels of Wnt3a and β-catenin. GPX2 activates Wnt as an alternative pathway to induce EMT, thereby enhancing PCa invasion and metastasis [ ]. Furthermore, the role of Wnt in inducing EMT and enhancing cancer metastasis was confirmed in another study where PRKAR2B promoted metastasis of PCa cells through EMT stimulation, driven by the upregulation of Wnt/β-catenin [ ].
The androgen receptor (AR) can enhance the progression of PCa, and studies have shown that there is an interaction between AR and the Wnt singalling pathway in PCa. Silencing Wnt not only reduces PCa progression but also promotes apoptosis. Additionally, WNT5A and LEF1, which are associated with the Wnt pathway, are inhibited by AR [ ]. Given that decreasing Wnt activity impairs tumorigenesis, targeting upstream mediators such as LINC00115 has become a strategy in PCa therapy. High expression of LINC00115 in PCa acts by sponging miR-212–5p to increase FZD5 expression, thereby activating the Wnt/β-catenin pathway and enhancing carcinogenesis [ ]. Notably, Frizzled receptors (FZDs) facilitate the interaction between Wnt and other molecular pathways. FZD8, for example, upregulates Wnt11 expression, leading to ATF2 transcription and promoting cooperation between Wnt-11 and TGF-β to increase tumorigenesis in PCa [ ]. The interactions between FZDs and other factors also play a role in regulating Wnt-mediated PCa progression. GIPC2 positively interacts with FZD7 to activate the Wnt pathway, thereby increasing PCa invasion [ ]. Moreover, FOXB2 regulates WNT7B, which contributes to tumorigenesis in PCa [ ]. Interestingly, both Wnt-11 and miR-21 are involved in enhancing invasion and inducing EMT, further promoting PCa progression as depicted in [ ].
 

## Wnt and therapy resistance
In the recent years, the therapy resistance has been a challenging issue and the studies have focused on the specific mechanisms contributing to the development of drug resistance in human cancers. Resistance to therapy has increasingly complicated the treatment of PCa, especially in clinical trials where urgent measures are required to save patient lives and overcome resistance that leads to therapeutic failure. It is crucial to understand the mechanisms through which PCa cells develop chemoresistance. Numerous studies have shown that the disruption of molecular networks is a key factor in the development of drug resistance. For example, WDR5 is known to enhance carcinogenesis in PCa by upregulating PD-L1 expression and inducing chemoresistance [ ]. Additionally, an increase in the expression levels of oncogenic factors such as ZEB proteins can intensify the invasion capabilities of PCa cells and contribute to chemoresistance [ ]. n response, anti-cancer agents, including quercetin, have been developed to inhibit tumorigenesis and improve drug sensitivity in PCa [ ]. Conversely, a decrease in E-cadherin levels leads to increased Notch expression, reducing the sensitivity to paclitaxel [ ]. Traditional Chinese medicine has also been recognized as a novel approach for reversing drug resistance in PCa [ ]. Moreover, diminishing the EED/EZH2 axis has been found to enhance chemosensitivity in PCa [ ]. Given the prevalent issue of chemoresistance in PCa, this section aims to explore the role of the Wnt axis in mediating chemoresistance in PCa [ , , ].
The expression levels of Wnt are linked with AR and MMP-7 in PCa cells. Mutations and amplifications in AR can alter the expression of β-catenin, influencing the progression of PCa cells. Additionally, the complex singalling networks governed by Wnt play a significant role in determining how PCa cells respond to chemotherapy singalling[ ]. High levels of Wnt expression are closely associated with the malignancy of PCa cells, as increased Wnt activity promotes EMT, enhances neuroendocrine differentiation, and amplifies the cancer-stem cell characteristics of PCa cells [ ]. Both canonical and non-canonical Wnt pathways are involved in the development of therapy resistance in PCa. Studies of circulating tumor cells in PCa reveal that the non-canonical Wnt pathway particularly stimulates therapy resistance. Furthermore, the upregulation of Wnt5a diminishes the anti-cancer effects typically mediated by AR suppression. As a result, the non-canonical pathway of Wnt can weaken the response of PCa cells to anti-androgen therapy [ ]. Additionally, increased activity in the non-canonical Wnt pathway can lessen the effectiveness of enzalutamide chemotherapy. Inhibiting the non-canonical Wnt pathway may improve the sensitivity of PCa cells to enzalutamide [ ].
Clinical studies have explored the role of Wnt in the development of chemoresistance in PCa, finding that mutations in Wnt that lead to its upregulation and activation can diminish the tumor cells' response to chemotherapies like enzalutamide and abiraterone [ ]. Additionally, increased Wnt expression not only promotes PCa cell invasion but also accelerates their cell cycle progression and contributes to resistance against abiraterone acetate-prednisone [ ]. In castration-resistant PCa (CRPC), heightened Wnt expression is linked to enhanced carcinogenesis. A notable interaction between β-catenin and the androgen receptor (AR) in PCa cells has been identified; inhibiting Wnt singalling with ICG001 can improve the tumor cells' sensitivity to enzalutamide singalling [ ]. Reducing Wnt levels can therefore weaken tumorigenesis and chemoresistance in PCa. For example, miR-425–5p can downregulate β-catenin, cyclin D1, and c-Myc, impairing tumorigenesis in PCa and increasing tumor cell sensitivity to cisplatin [ ]. Targeting the degradation of β-catenin is considered an optimal strategy for inhibiting its singalling. PIk1, through its substrate Axin2, promotes the interaction between GSK-3β and β-catenin, enhancing the degradation of β-catenin, which reduces Wnt expression and suppresses PCa tumorigenesis singalling [ ]. Thus, when developing Wnt suppressors to increase chemosensitivity, focusing on enhancing β-catenin degradation is advantageous. Elevating levels of APC and GSK-3β reduces β-catenin, suppressing Wnt activity, which in turn decreases metastasis and EMT in PCa, and reduces resistance to enzalutamide [ ].
The involvement of various interactions targeting the Wnt axis in PCa introduces complexities in understanding how chemoresistance develops. For example, miR-4784 has been identified as potentially reducing β-catenin expression to increase chemosensitivity. However, the lncRNA ERVH48–1 counters this by boosting the β-catenin pathway, reducing miR-4784 expression, which enhances the growth rate of PCa cells and induces resistance to docetaxel [ ]. A substantial body of research has examined Wnt's role in modulating the response to docetaxel and paclitaxel in PCa cells. These drugs prevent the depolymerization of microtubules, leading to cell cycle arrest and reduced tumorigenesis. Despite this, resistance develops through mechanisms such as EMT induction, prompting the design of nano-scale delivery systems for their targeted release . Suppressing Wnt/β-catenin has been shown to overcome docetaxel resistance in PCa [ ]. This is attributed to the fact that increased β-catenin expression activates EDD, mediating docetaxel resistance [ ]. Additionally, gene expression alterations can foster paclitaxel resistance; for instance, a deficiency in PKCδ can enhance Mcl-1 and Wnt expression levels, promoting resistance to paclitaxel in PCa [ ]. Therefore, chemoresistance remains a significant challenge in PCa, often driven by the upregulation of Wnt due to HOTTIP overexpression [ ], and the role of the non-canonical Wnt pathway in stimulating drug resistance to agents like cabazitaxel [ ] has garnered increased focus ( ).
 

## Drugs targeting Wnt
Previous sections and have highlighted the role of Wnt in promoting tumorigenesis in PCa. Consequently, various drugs targeting the Wnt pathway have been developed for cancer therapy, as summarized here. Zeylenone, for instance, is used in the treatment of PCa and effectively inhibits the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, thereby disrupting metastasis by reducing levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9, among others [ ]. Additionally, suppressing Wnt expression with bortezomib (Bortezomib) enhances the effectiveness of mitoxantrone in halting PCa progression, resulting in a synergistic effect [ ]. As noted earlier, elevated Wnt expression can drive EMT-mediated metastasis in PCa. The suppression of Wnt by anticancer agents like 2′-hydroxyflavanone reduces invasion and metastasis by inhibiting EMT [ ]. Similarly, wogonoside targets the Wnt pathway, inhibiting EMT and thereby decreasing PCa invasion [ ]. Beyond phytochemicals and natural products, small molecules have also been developed to down-regulate Wnt. For example, CWP232291 inhibits the Wnt pathway and induces endoplasmic reticulum stress, reducing carcinogenesis and proliferation of PCa cells [ ].
Luteolin, a natural compound used in the treatment of PCa, enhances E-cadherin expression to curb invasion [ ] and, when combined with ellagic acid and punicic acid, effectively suppresses PCa metastasis[ ]. Luteolin also reduces the expression of ANO1 [ ] and promotes apoptosis in PCa cells [ ]. Additionally, it increases the expression of FZD6, helping inhibit the Wnt pathway and reduce the stemness of PCa cells [ ]. Anti-cancer drugs that target the Wnt pathway can significantly impede the growth and metastasis of PCa cells. For example, alkaloids from Moringa oleifera have been shown to decrease COX-2 expression, thereby disrupting Wnt/β-catenin mediated carcinogenesis [ ]. A synergistic effect is also achieved through drug combinations, such as the co-application of salinomycin and cabazitaxel, which lowers levels of Wnt, Akt, and NF-kB to halt PCa progression [ ]. Additionally, a blend of Angelica gigas and Torilis japonica diminishes AR singalling and Wnt expression, impairing carcinogenesis [ ]. TCapsaicin similarly suppresses the activity of cancer stem cells in PCa by reducing Wnt expression [ ]. Therefore, targeting Wnt expression with anti-cancer compounds is a viable strategy for disrupting tumorigenesis in PCa [ , ].

## BC: a summary
BC is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths among men and ranks ninth worldwide [ ]. The incidence of BC is higher in men than in women, with 90 % of cases being urothelial carcinoma (UC) and the remaining 10 % comprising squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma [ ]. Several risk factors contribute to BC development, including smoking, alcohol consumption, and exposure to aromatic amines [ , ]. However, genetic mutations have recently gained significant attention as contributing factors in BC pathogenesis. In BC, immune infiltration is regulated by PSMD2, which increases Th2 cell infiltration and promotes cancer cell colony formation [ ]. The upregulation of HIF-1α drives tumorigenesis, while CNN1 decreases its expression to inhibit metabolic reprogramming and progression of BC [ ]. Rad54L plays a role in regulating the cell cycle and senescence [ ], and elevated levels of KRT6A promote growth and inhibit apoptosis [ ]. NF-kB enhances the expression of lncRNA CASC9, which suppresses miR-195–5p, further enhancing tumorigenesis [ ]. The function of NFE2L3 is associated with a poor prognosis in BC [ ] and ac4C modification of BCL9L, Akt1, and SOX4 by NAT10 escalates tumorigenesis [ ]. Increased expression of PHGDH prevents ferroptosis in BC cells by overexpressing SLC7A11 [ ]. Additionally, the molecular profile changes, such as the upregulation of circZNF609, enhance cisplatin resistance by promoting CDC25B expression through miR-1200 sponging [ ]. Dysregulation of molecular pathways like mTORC1 [ ] and lncDBET [ ] can also affect BC malignancy. provides a summary of the role of Wnt in regulating tumorigenesis in BC.
 

## Wnt and increase in cancer progression
The role of Wnt in regulating BC progression is analogous to its influence in PCa, primarily impacting the proliferation and invasion of cancer cells. In BC, heightened Wnt activity leads to EMT and an increase in metastasis. EFEMP2, for example, can lower Wnt expression, thereby mitigating invasion and migration of tumor cells[ ]. The contribution of Wnt to BC tumorigenesis involves interactions with other factors; for instance, silencing BCL9L reduces its expression, and in conjunction with Wnt, this promotes disease progression and tumorigenesis [ ]. Additionally, the overexpression of Akt is believed to advance BC progression, with TEAD4 activating Akt to enhance EMT-mediated metastasis [ ]. The growth and spread of BC cells are further accelerated by UCHL5, which activates the Akt pathway, increasing c-Myc expression [ ]. STIL is also implicated in promoting the PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis, contributing to increased carcinogenesis in BC [ ]. In BC, Akt can modulate Wnt levels; PYCR1, for instance, enhances Akt activity, thereby stimulating the Wnt/β-catenin pathway and increasing tumorigenesis [ ]. Conversely, reducing Wnt expression can slow BC progression. LASP2 reduces growth and metastasis of BC cells by suppressing Wnt, disrupting carcinogenesis [ ]. However, it is important to recognize that tumorigenesis in BC is not controlled by a single pathway. RSPO3, for example, enhances metastasis and invasion of BC cells by activating both the Hedgehog and Wnt pathways, thereby augmenting carcinogenesis [ ].
The metastasis of BC cells primarily relies on the activation of the EMT mechanism, which can be triggered by exosomal KRT6B to promote tumorigenesis [ ]. EMT suppression by nitroxoline effectively impairs BC metastasis [ ], and factors that regulate EMT in BC are also implicated in mediating chemoresistance, illustrating the link between metastasis and drug resistance in cancer cells [ ]. As noted, an increase in Wnt expression facilitates EMT, enhancing cancer invasion. Notably, CUL4B acts as a significant regulator of BC invasion and metastasis by stimulating the Wnt axis to mediate EMT [ ]. Additionally, the function of ligands in activating the Wnt axis for BC tumorigenesis can be controlled by miRNAs. For example, Wnt7a activates the canonical Wnt pathway to promote BC metastasis, which is inhibited by miR-370–3p [ ]. Given the crucial role of Wnt in promoting the growth and metastasis of BC cells, any pathway capable of reducing its expression can decrease the malignancy of cancer cells. TMEM88, for instance, reduces Wnt expression to suppress proliferation and metastasis in BC [ ]. Moreover, high Wnt expression enhances BC cell resistance to apoptosis. IC-2 suppresses the Wnt pathway, stimulating apoptosis and reducing cancer cell growth[ ]. Pathways such as Linc00152, which are highly expressed in BC, can stimulate the Wnt axis to enhance growth and invasion of tumor cells [ ]. Recent studies have noted dysregulation of miRNAs in BC; for example, C1GALT1, known to increase tumorigenesis, has its expression suppressed by miR-1–3p [ ]. miR-1307–5p is associated with a reduction in the growth rate of BC cells [ ], and a decrease in miR-136–5p expression by circSPECC1 leads to a significant increase in tumorigenesis [ ]. miRNAs regulate Wnt expression in BC as well; miR-621 reduces Wnt expression, inhibiting β-catenin and thus decreasing invasion and carcinogenesis [ ]. The stimulation of the EZH2/Wnt axis increases tumorigenesis in BC, whereas miR-144 decreases Wnt expression through EZH2 suppression, disrupting the growth of cancer cells [ ]. Thus, Wnt singalling significantly influences the key hallmarks of BC.

## Wnt and therapy resistance
Unlike PCa, where a variety of molecular pathways can regulate Wnt-mediated chemoresistance, there has been limited research on the role of Wnt in mediating drug resistance in bladder cancer (BC). Increased Wnt activity is associated with the progression of cancer cells and may lead to drug resistance in BC. For example, exosomal miR-148b-3p, often enriched in exosomes from cancer-associated fibroblasts, has been linked to the development of drug resistance in BC. Conversely, low levels of miR-148b-3p in exosomes can lead to Wnt downregulation and PTEN upregulation, enhancing chemosensitivity [ ]. Resistance to paclitaxel (PTX) is commonly observed in BC, but combining PTX with other anticancer agents can counteract chemoresistance [ , ]. Additionally, upregulation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway can increase cancer stem cell traits in BC, thereby promoting PTX resistance [ ]. UCA1 is another factor that increases GPT2 expression, escalating tumorigenesis in BC [ ], and it promotes EMT via the HMGB1 axis to enhance BC metastasis [ ]. Increased expression of UCA1 also stimulates cisplatin resistance in BC by upregulating Wnt6, which activates the Wnt pathway [ ]. Conversely, silencing the lncRNA TUG1 can suppress the Wnt axis, thereby increasing doxorubicin sensitivity in BC [ ]. Thus, high Wnt expression is closely linked to chemoresistance in BC cells.

## Drugs targeting wnt
The use of drugs to modulate Wnt singalling in BC has been explored, though only in a limited number of studies. These studies have shown that drug-mediated modulation of Wnt can effectively suppress tumorigenesis. For instance, magnesium-assisted cisplatin shows promise in reducing the viability of BC cells by inhibiting Wnt [ ]. Additionally, the growth of BC cells, which often depends on the upregulation of Wnt, can be curtailed by Qici sanling decoction, a traditional medicine known to decrease Wnt expression and inhibit proliferation [ ]. High levels of Wnt not only promote EMT and increase BC invasion, but agents like thymoquinone can also reduce Wnt expression, thereby suppressing EMT[ ]. Furthermore, exposure to tobacco smoke, a risk factor for BC development, leads to increased Wnt activity, whereas curcumin can inhibit Wnt, disrupting EMT and the acquisition of cancer stem cell characteristics as shown in [ ].
 

## Renal cancer: a summary
Renal cancer, comprising 3 % of adult malignancies worldwide [ ], stands as the third most prevalent urological cancer, particularly affecting men [ , ]. It is one of the fastest-growing cancer types globally, with projections indicating an upward trend over the next 20 years [ ]. The predominant form of renal cancer is clear cell-renal cell carcinoma, accounting for up to 80 % of cases. Histologically, these tumors feature cells with clear cytoplasm, the result of cholesterol esters, phospholipids, and glycogen accumulation, and a distinct cell membrane [ ]. Molecular alterations in renal cancer contribute to the progression of tumor cells. Pirfenidone, an anti-fibrotic agent, curtails levels of TGF-β, thereby mitigating immunosuppression [ ]. IFI35 fosters tumorigenesis in renal cancer by suppressing STAT1/STAT6-mediated autophagy [ ]. SGK2 activation leads to increased phosphorylation of Akt and ERK1/2, accelerating the progression of renal cancer [ ]. S100A16 elevates VEGF/VEGFR2 levels, thereby promoting angiogenesis and facilitating the progression of renal cancer [ ]. Cancer-associated fibroblasts within the TME notably enhance Akt and STAT3 levels, furthering renal cancer tumorigenesis [ ]. NSD2 raises Akt/ERK axis activity to increase Bcl-2 levels and decrease Bax levels, contributing to tumor growth and proliferation [ ]. The interaction between KDM4C and JAFG1 is crucial for increasing angiogenesis by upregulating VEGFR-3, enhancing the malignancy of renal cancer [ ]. Thus, the interplay of molecular pathways plays a significant role in the regulation of renal cancer progression [ , ]. The following section will delve into the role of the Wnt pathway in this context.

## Wnt singalling and renal cancer progression
Elevated Wnt expression enhances cancer stem cell characteristics in renal cancer, contributing to increased growth and self-renewal abilities of these cells. Concurrent inhibition of the Wnt and Notch pathways has been shown to diminish the growth and self-renewal capabilities of cancer stem cells in renal cancer [ ]. In particular, IGFBP-4 has been found to raise the expression levels of M-CAM and promote Wnt/β-catenin singalling, accelerating growth and invasion of renal tumor cells [ ]. Additionally, the methylation status of SOX7 is noted in renal cancer, where SOX7 typically acts to inhibit tumor progression and suppress growth rates. Silencing of SOX7, however, activates the Wnt pathway, facilitating EMT and increasing tumorigenesis and metastasis in renal tumor cells[ ]. Studies on renal cancer progression have largely focused on the canonical Wnt pathway, which can be activated by Ror2, subsequently increasing Wnt3a levels [ ]. However, pathway interactions can suppress Wnt in renal cancer. For instance, Jade-1-induced Wnt downregulation through ubiquitination and the impairment of tumorigenesis by pVHL in a Jade-1-dependent manner [ ] highlight these interactions. Additionally, DKK-3, an antagonist of Wnt, promotes apoptosis in renal tumors [ ], and its increased exogenous concentration has been used to lower Wnt expression to combat renal cancer [ ]. Similarly, DKK1 and DKK2, both Wnt antagonists, also promote apoptosis and, in the case of DKK2 [ ], inhibit the cell cycle in renal cancer [ ]. ARL4C is known to enhance renal cancer metastasis by activating the Wnt pathway, thereby increasing levels of cyclin D1 and c-Myc to stimulate EMT [ ]. Furthermore, miR-106b-5p upregulates Wnt expression, promoting a stem cell-like phenotype and the progression of renal cancer [ ]. Given Wnt's role in advancing renal cancer progression, its downregulation by anticancer drugs such as genistein [ ] and LGK974 [ ] has been leveraged to inhibit the progression of this disease ( ).
 

## Nanomaterials targeting Wnt singalling in cancer therapy: a perspective on urological cancers
In the recent years, the application of nanoparticles for the treatment of human cancers has been of importance and they are able to deliver drugs and genes in cancer therapy. Furthermore, the nanocarriers can mediate phototherapy in the inhibition of cancer progression. Regarding to these benefits of nanoparticles in cancer therapy, the recent studies have focused on the regulation of specific molecular pathways in cancer therapy. Nanoparticles have been utilized to modulate the Wnt singalling pathway, influencing the progression and pathogenesis of various diseases. For example, zinc oxide nanoparticles and spironolactone (Aldactone) have been shown to inhibit the Wnt pathway, thereby reducing nephrotoxicity in rats [ ]. Gold nanoparticles can also regulate the Wnt pathway [ ], and silver nanoparticles loaded with gallocatechin can inhibit apoptosis and enhance wound healing by modulating Wnt [ ]. Additionally, nanoparticles derived from natural products, such as betulinic acid, have been developed to regulate the Wnt pathway and slow the pathogenesis of conditions like bone loss [ ]. In cancer therapy, the regulation of Wnt by nanoparticles is particularly significant. Nanostructures that down-regulate AFAP1-AS1 can disrupt the Wnt axis, preventing radio-resistance[ ]. Nanostructures carrying sorafenib are effective in suppressing the Wnt axis, thereby reducing the progression of hepatoma [ ]. Although the potential of nanoparticles in this area has been underexplored, emerging data suggests that nanoparticles can effectively regulate Wnt singalling in the treatment of urological cancers. For instance, sweroside nanostructures can decrease Wnt expression to suppress bone metastasis of PCa cells [ ]. Similarly, cuprous oxide nanostructures can diminish Wnt expression levels, reducing stemness in PCa [ ]. However, further studies are needed to explore the use of nanostructures in regulating Wnt in BC and renal cancer.

## Immunotherapy and immune checkpoint inhibitors in UC: Perspectives for Wnt singalling

## Immunotherapy of UC
The "immune-editing" theory proposed by Schreiber et al. highlights the complex interaction between a host's immune system and tumor cells [ , ]. This theory drives the growing interest in exploring immunotherapy for treating UC. Under normal conditions, immune cells, including effector CD8+ cytotoxic T cells and natural killer (NK) cells, identify and eliminate tumor cells based on their expression of tumor-specific antigens [ , , , ]. However, tumor cells can evade this immune response by activating immunosuppressive pathways such as PD-1 [ ]. PD-1 is a receptor found on various immune cells, including CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, dendritic cells, B cells, and NK cells [ , ], and has two main ligands, PD-L1 (B7-H1) and PD-L2 (B7-DC). The binding of PD-1 to PD-L1 suppresses T cell activity, inhibiting cytokine production and reducing T cell clonal expansion [ , ], thereby attenuating the antitumor immune response. Additionally, PD-1 contributes to the TME's immunosuppression by promoting the differentiation of CD4+/CD25− T lymphocytes into regulatory T cells (Tregs), blocking antigen presentation, secreting immunosuppressive cytokines, and suppressing effector cell activities [ ]. The immunogenic nature of UC has long been recognized, partly due to the established effectiveness of intravesical BCG in non-muscle-invasive BC (NMIBC), which stimulates a local antitumor immune response[ , ]. Recent research has further elucidated the biology and immunological landscape of advanced UC. Bladder cancer is notable for having the fourth highest total mutational burden among all cancers, exceeded only by carcinogen-induced malignancies like non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) and melanoma [ , , ]. This high mutational load increases the production of tumor-specific neoantigens, leading to the priming, activation, and recruitment of antigen-specific T lymphocytes to the TME [ ]. Evidence of UC's immunogenicity includes the presence of immune cells infiltrating tumor tissues [ ]. However, immune inhibitory pathways, including the upregulation of PD-L1 on tumor or infiltrating immune cells, are also commonly observed [ , ]. Antibodies such as pembrolizumab, atezolizumab, nivolumab, durvalumab, and avelumab, which target the PD-1 pathway, help to reverse immune suppression, shifting the balance from immune evasion to immunological elimination.
Checkpoint blockade immunotherapy was initially tested as a second-line treatment for patients with UC who had developed resistance to platinum-based chemotherapy[ ]. After platinum failure, the prognosis is generally poor, with an expected overall survival of about seven months [ ]. The IMvigor 210 trial, a phase II international, multi-cohort, single-arm study, investigated the PD-L1 antibody atezolizumab (1200 mg every three weeks) for the treatment of advanced UC. The primary endpoint of this study was the objective response rate (ORR), and results were categorized based on PD-L1 expression levels on tumor-infiltrating immune cells (ICs) as determined by the Ventana SP142 assay [ ].
The study specifically included a cohort (cohort 2 [ ]) of patients with platinum-resistant metastatic UC (mUC), where atezolizumab achieved an ORR of 15 %, including complete responses (CRs) in 5 % of patients. The subgroup with higher PD-L1 expression (IC2/3), indicating at least 5 % expression, showed even better response rates (26 % and 11 % respectively). Notably, the durability of these responses was significant, with most lasting around ten months. In 2016, the FDA granted accelerated approval for atezolizumab as a second-line treatment for patients with platinum-refractory advanced UC based on the sustained responses and significant unmet need [ ]. The follow-up IMvigor211 study, a phase 3 trial, aimed to confirm these findings by comparing atezolizumab against physicians’ choice of chemotherapy (vinflunine, paclitaxel, or docetaxel) in 931 patients with platinum-resistant mUC. This study sought to demonstrate a survival benefit, particularly in the IC2/3 subgroup, using a hierarchical analysis. However, despite previous phase 2 results, the IMvigor211 trial did not meet its primary endpoint. The chemotherapy arm for IC2/3 patients showed an overall survival of 10.6 months, longer than the median overall survival of 6–7 months typically observed in second-line chemotherapy trials for mUC [ , ]. Researchers speculated that the higher than expected survival rates in the chemotherapy group might be due to the prognostic implications of high PD-L1 expression, potentially skewing the effectiveness results. A post-hoc analysis of overall survival across all participants, however, suggested a statistically significant benefit, supporting the hypothesis of a treatment impact.

## Wnt signalling in cancer immunotherapy
The activation of noncanonical Wnt pathways may foster a tumor-proliferative environment [ ]. For example, stimulation with WNT5A has been shown to increase IL-12 production from dendritic cells, enhancing TH1 responses [ ]. Conversely, a deficiency of WNT5A in another study was associated with reduced levels of TH1 cells producing interferon gamma [ ], suggesting that Wnt singalling can significantly influence the role of peripheral T lymphocytes in tumor recognition. For instance, sustained β-catenin activation in CD4+ T cells has been linked to the upregulation of RAR-related orphan receptor C (RORC), leading to TH17 cell polarization and the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines that contribute to tumor growth [ ]. Additionally, increased β-catenin expression has been found to enhance the survival of regulatory T cells (Tregs) [ ]. These observations underscore the complex impact of Wnt singalling on tumor immunology and highlight its potential as a target for developing new therapeutic strategies. Wnt singalling also affects immune tolerance, with alterations in Wnt singalling within dendritic cells potentially disrupting the priming of antitumor cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). In the TME, high levels of Wnt ligands are indicative of a regulatory statesingallingsingalling[ ]. This was explored using a mouse tumor model with DC-specific deletions of LRP5/6, which showed slowed tumor growth, increased differentiation of effector T cells, and reduced Treg differentiation [ ]. A pharmacological approach using the PORCN inhibitor IWP-L6 was employed to replicate these effects [ ]. In clinical settings, patients with melanoma received denilukin diftitox (ONTAK), a diphtheria toxin fragment/IL-2 fusion protein, prior to DC vaccines. This treatment increased β-catenin levels in the skin, enhancing immunological tolerance through the survival of resting Tregs [ ]. In another study, forced expression of non-degradable β-catenin in melanoma cells or dendritic cells led to the release of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, impairing the ability of dendritic cells to cross-prime CD8+ CTLs for tumor recognition [ , ]. These findings suggest that tumor-induced increases in β-catenin singalling in dendritic cells can promote tolerogenic properties in malignancies, thereby facilitating immune evasion. In another experiment, immunization with tumor antigen in DC-β-catenin-/- animals, which lacked β-catenin specifically in CD11c cells, did not protect against tumors and revealed a deficiency in CD8+ T cell immunity singalling[ ]. Additionally, the use of PKF115–584, a transcription blocker dependent on β-catenin, was shown to stimulate dendritic cells to cross-prime tumor-specific CTLs in a human melanoma mouse model, altering Wnt-induced immunosuppression and improving treatment responses[ ]. These results highlight the dual role of β-catenin in dendritic cells, where abnormal levels, either through depletion or excess, can lead to immune tolerance.
The TME comprises tumor cells, fibroblasts, stromal cells, vasculature, immune cells, and the extracellular matrix [ , ]. The role of immune cell infiltration in the TME can either accelerate or inhibit tumor growth, depending on the immune cells' specific functions. For instance, in melanoma, it has been shown that CD8+ cytotoxic T cells can recognize tumor antigens, playing a crucial role in anti-cancer immunity[ ]. These active CD8+ T cells are pivotal in producing cytokines, cytotoxic perforins, and granzymes that facilitate cell death. As a result, tumors with higher T-cell infiltration typically respond better to therapies and have more favorable prognoses[ , ]. Dendritic cells, the primary antigen-presenting cells, absorb and present tumor antigens, which activate CD8+ or CD4+ T cells. CD8+ T cells are particularly targeted by dendritic cells to initiate their cytotoxic activity [ ]. Conversely, regulatory dendritic cells can promote the activation of regulatory CD4+ T cells (Tregs), which play a role in mediating immune suppression in cancers [ ]. Cancer cells can create an inhibitory TME to evade immune detection. This involves reducing tumor antigenicity, cytokines, and factors while increasing Treg cell numbers. Despite limited clinical success against major tumors, recent research aims to identify new treatment strategies that activate anti-tumor immune responses. The Wnt/β-catenin singalling pathway is also implicated in cancer immunotherapy. Activation of Wnt singalling affects the anti-tumor immune response. Aberrant Wnt singalling, characterized by its role in immune evasion, is associated with reduced immune cell infiltration in tumors exhibiting high Wnt singalling levels singallingsingallingsingallingsingalling [ ]. Malfunctioning dendritic cells in the TME contribute to immunosuppression, influenced significantly by Wnt singalling, which regulates dendritic cell growth and function. Tumor-derived Wnt ligands activate β-catenin in dendritic cells, promoting Treg activation, inhibiting CD8+ T cell activity, and suppressing the immune response to cancersingalling [ , ]. Hong et al. showed that dendritic cells express Wnt co-receptors LRP5 and LRP6, and that deletion of these receptors on dendritic cells slowed tumor growth and enhanced cancer-fighting capabilities [ ]. Furthermore, a study demonstrated that Wnt1 induced a tolerogenic response in lung cancer by attenuating T-cell responses via the downregulation of the transcription factor Cebpb in dendritic cells, leading to reduced chemokine production essential for T-cell priming and activation singalling [ ]. Using RNA interference against Wnt1 was found to increase cytotoxic T cell numbers and decrease tumor burden [ ].
Wnt singalling pathways play a significant role in shaping the immune environment of tumors, possessing dual capabilities. They can either promote tumor growth by fostering an immunosuppressive environment or boost immunogenicity based on how they are regulated and which specific Wnt ligands are involved. Tumor cells may utilize Wnt singalling to escape immune detection. For instance, abnormal activation of Wnt/β-catenin singalling can induce the expression of immunosuppressive molecules and inhibit the efficacy of T-cell mediated anti-tumor responses. Consequently, targeting Wnt pathways may help re-establish immune recognition and destruction of tumor cells. The adoption of immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as those that target PD-1/PD-L1, is emerging as a key therapeutic approach in treating UC, with Wnt singalling playing a role in modifying the effectiveness of these therapies. Changes in Wnt singalling could alter PD-L1 expression on tumor cells, thereby impacting responses to checkpoint inhibitors. Certain Wnt ligands, like WNT5A, are known to enhance the differentiation of immune cells in ways that potentially bolster anti-tumor immunity. These activities include augmenting dendritic cell functions, which can improve T-cell priming and activation. In immunotherapy, targeting Wnt singalling entails not only the direct inhibition of tumor promoting Wnt functions but also the modulation of the immune landscape. Inhibiting Wnt-driven immunosuppression might amplify the effectiveness of existing immunotherapies and foster the development of new treatment modalities. Ongoing research is examining the impact of Wnt modulation on immunotherapy responses in clinical trials, with preliminary data suggesting that the Wnt activity patterns in tumors may influence patient responses to immunotherapies. Continued exploration of these pathways is vital to refine treatment approaches for UC and possibly other cancers.

## Conclusion and remarks
This paper explores the role of the Wnt pathway in urological cancers, illuminating the factors involved in tumorigenesis and setting the stage for future research aimed at developing cancer treatments. The Wnt pathway plays a crucial role in carcinogenesis, with growing evidence suggesting its involvement in promoting tumorigenesis across various human cancers, including urological cancers. PCa, one of the most common and aggressive tumors in humans, shows increased cell viability and survival with elevated Wnt expression levels. Overexpression of Wnt is also associated with therapy resistance, drug resistance, proliferation, and invasion in PCa, as well as in BC and renal cancer. Given the Wnt pathway's role in promoting tumorigenesis in urological cancers, a primary therapeutic approach involves targeting and suppressing this pathway to reduce carcinogenesis. However, current research is limited by the underdevelopment of small molecule inhibitors that effectively suppress Wnt and impede the progression of urological cancers. Meanwhile, phytochemicals such as thymoquinone have been identified that can suppress Wnt-induced progression in urological cancers. The malignancy of urological cancers has also been targeted using nanostructures, commonly employed due to their ability to inhibit the Wnt pathway, thereby reducing tumorigenesis, particularly in PCa. Therefore, further development of nanoparticles aimed at regulating the Wnt pathway in BC and renal cancer is also recommended to extend the benefits seen in PCa to other urological malignancies.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mehrdad Hashemi: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. Mahdi Rezaei: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. Hadi Rezaeiaghdam: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. Behdokht Jamali: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. Zeinab Khazaei Koohpar: Data curation, Investigation, Resources. Mahsa Tanha: Data curation, Investigation, Resources. Anahita Bizhanpour: Investigation, Resources. Saba Asadi: Investigation, Resources. Ali Moghadas Jafari: Writing – review & editing. Elaheh Mohandesi Khosroshahi: Visualization. Maedeh Eslami: Visualization. Shokooh Salimimoghadam: Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Noushin Nabavi: Writing – review & editing. Mohsen Rashidi: Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Eisa Fattah: Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Afshin Taheriazam: Supervision. Maliheh Entezari: Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Footnotes
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.tranon.2024.102145.

## Contributor Information
Mohsen Rashidi, Email: dr.mohsenrashidi@yahoo.com.
Eisa Fattah, Email: eesa.fat@gmail.com.
Afshin Taheriazam, Email: a.taheriazam@iautmu.ac.ir.
Maliheh Entezari, Email: mentezari@iautmu.ac.ir.

Appendix.

## Supplementary materials

Image, application 1

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Image, application 1