pmcAdv Sci (Weinh)Adv Sci (Weinh)2933advsciADVSAdvanced Science2198-3844WileyPMC11831520PMC11831520.111831520118315203973135510.1002/advs.202408996ADVS106521Research ArticleResearch ArticleAneurysm Is Restricted by CD34+ Cell‐Formed Fibrous Collars Through the PDGFRb‐PI3K Axis
WuHonghttps://orcid.org/0009-0007-3519-5994 YangXiaoping ChenTinghttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9723-9020 YuBaoqi ChenMengjia WangTing JiangLiujun ZhangBohuan ZhouXuhao ChengJunning ChenKai ZhangTao HuYanhua XuSimon LianJiangfang ZhangHongkun XiaoQingzhong q.xiao@qmul.ac.ukYeHonghua lhlyehonghua@nbu.edu.cnXuQingbohttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-6414-2273 qingbo_xu@zju.edu.cn

1

Department of Cardiology
The First Affiliated Hospital
Zhejiang University School of Medicine
Hangzhou
310003
China

2

Department of Cardiology
Ningbo Institute of Innovation for Combined Medicine and Engineering
Lihuili Hospital Affiliated to Ningbo University
Ningbo University
Ningbo
Zhejiang
315000
China

3

Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology
School of Basic Medical Sciences
Capital Medical University
Key Laboratory of Remodeling‐Related Cardiovascular Diseases
Ministry of Education
Beijing Key Laboratory of Metabolic Disorder‐Related Cardiovascular Diseases
Beijing
100069
China

4

Department of Vascular Surgery
Peking University People's Hospital
Beijing
100044
China

5

Department of Surgery
Liverpool Heart and Chest Hospital
Liverpool
L14 3PE
UK

6

Department of Vascular Surgery
The First Affiliated Hospital
Zhejiang University School of Medicine
Hangzhou
310003
China

7

Centre for Clinical Pharmacology and Precision Medicine
William Harvey Research Institute
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry
Queen Mary University of London
London
EC1M 6BQ
UK

*E‐mail: q.xiao@qmul.ac.uk; lhlyehonghua@nbu.edu.cn
qingbo_xu@zju.edu.cn

271220242202512748235410.1002/advs.v12.72408996
05122024
0182024
271220241802202520022025© 2024 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbHhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Aortic aneurysm is a life‐threatening disease caused by progressive dilation of the aorta and weakened aortic walls. Its pathogenesis involves an imbalance between connective tissue repair and degradation. CD34+ cells comprise a heterogeneous population that exhibits stem cell and progenitor cell properties. However, the role of CD34+ cells in abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) remains unclear. In this study, downregulated CD34 expression is observed in aneurysmal aortas from both patients and mouse models compared to that in non‐dilated aortas. Furthermore, by combining Cd34‐CreERT2;Rosa26‐tdTomato;(Apoe−/−
) lineage tracing, bone marrow transplantation, and single‐cell sequencing, it is found that during AAA development, non‐bone marrow CD34+ cells are activated to transdifferentiate into Periostin+ myofibroblasts, thereby contributing to the formation of fibrotic collars. Dual recombinase‐based lineage tracing confirms the presence and involvement of CD34+/Periostin+ myofibroblasts in fibrotic collar formation during AAA development. Functionally, selective depletion of systemic or non‐bone marrow CD34+ cells, as well as CD34+/Periostin+ myofibroblasts, by diphtheria toxin significantly exacerbates AAA progression and increases disease mortality. Mechanistically, it is identified that the PDGF‐PDGFRb‐PI3K axis is indispensable for Periostin+ myofibroblast generation from non‐bone marrow CD34+ cells in AAA, offering a new therapeutic target for patients with AAA at a high risk of rupture.

The study unveils a previously unknown role of CD34+ cells in the pathogenesis of AAAs, shedding light on their contribution to tissue repair and aneurysmal fibrous collar formation. Non‐bone marrow CD34+ cells undergo transdifferentiation into Periostin+ fibroblasts, a process with important implications in protecting AAA from rupture. The involvement of the PDGF‐PDGFRb‐PI3K axis in CD34+ cell activation and transdifferentiation into Periostin+ myofibroblasts adds a novel mechanistic insight into AAA pathogenesis.
 

aneurysmsCD34+ cellsfibroblastsgenetic cell lineage tracingsPDGFRbNational Natural Science Foundation of China
10.13039/50110000180982030008824005508217048982470428817004203230094531830039Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province
10.13039/501100004731LR22H020001LQ23H020006LHDMZ24H02000Ningbo Key Research and Development Program2024Z2322024Z210Medical and Health Science and Technology Projects of Zhejiang Province2024KY281British Heart Foundation
10.13039/501100000274PG/15/11/31279PG/15/86/31723PG/20/10458PG/23/11371 To determine the distribution and expression patterns of CD34 in aortic tissues, we collected samples of human thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) and AAA, corresponding non‐dilated aortic tissues, and Ang II‐ and CaCl2‐induced mouse aneurysm samples. Histopathological analysis revealed that both human and mouse aneurysmal aortas showed marked SMC apoptosis, elastic lamina degradation, adventitial thickening, and fibrosis (Figure , Supporting Information). Immunofluorescence (IF) staining showed abundant CD34+ cells in the adventitia of human non‐dilated aortas, which were reduced in both human TAA and AAA aortas (Figure  ). This observation was further confirmed by immunohistochemical (IHC) staining (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Western blotting revealed decreased levels of CD34 but increased levels of fibrosis‐related proteins, including Periostin, COL1A1, and vimentin, in human aneurysmal aortas (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). A similar phenomenon was observed in Ang II‐ and CaCl2‐induced AAA. In particular, we observed abundant CD34+ cells in the abdominal aortic endothelium and adventitia of normal mice, but only a small number of CD34+ cells in Ang II or CaCl2‐induced AAA (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Western blotting revealed decreased CD34 expression and increased levels of fibrosis‐related proteins and platelet‐derived growth factor (PDGF) receptors in Ang II‐induced AAA (Figure  ). Interestingly, the majority of CD34+ cells were positive for PDGFRa (Figure  ) and PDGFRb (Figure , Supporting Information) in the adventitia and the EC marker CD31 in the endothelium, but negative for the immune cell marker CD45 at baseline (Figure , Supporting Information). Collectively, our data showed dynamic changes in CD34 expression and adventitial fibrosis in both human and mouse aortic aneurysms, implicating CD34+ cells in their pathogenesis.

2.2

## CD34+ Cells Contribute to Myofibroblasts in AAA
To elucidate the nature and cellular heterogeneity of abdominal aortic CD34+ cells during AAA progression, we used Cd34‐CreERT2; Rosa26‐tdT; (Apoe
−/−) mice to trace CD34+ cells and their progeny (Figure
 ; Figure , Supporting Information). As described in our previous report,[
 
] 10‐week‐old mice were administered tamoxifen to induce tdTomato (tdT) labeling of CD34+ cells. Multiple experimental techniques, including whole‐body in vivo imaging, 3D reconstruction of the whole aorta, flow cytometric analyses, and IF staining, confirmed that the tdT signal accurately represented CD34+ cells (Figure , Supporting Information). Moreover, IF staining and flow cytometry analysis revealed cellular heterogeneity of tdT+ cells in the abdominal aorta under physiological conditions, comprising abundant adventitial fibroblasts (37.1% PDGFRa+ fibroblasts), a subset of ECs (1.8% CD31+ ECs), perilipin A+ adipocytes (PLIN+), and a small population of immune cells (0.8% CD45+ cells) (Figure , Supporting Information). Furthermore, a substantial proportion of PDGFRa+ fibroblasts (43.9%; Figure , Supporting Information) and CD31+ ECs (24.8%; Figure , Supporting Information) were positive for tdT+ cells, suggesting a significant contribution of CD34+ cells to these cell types in the abdominal aorta at baseline.
 Two mouse AAA models were used to examine the role of CD34+ cells in AAA development: 1) adventitial application of calcium chloride (CaCl2) to the infrarenal aorta of Cd34‐CreERT2; Rosa26‐tdT mice and 2) subcutaneous implantation of an Ang II osmotic pump in Cd34‐CreERT2; Rosa26‐tdT; Apoe
−/− mice to induce AAA, typically in the suprarenal aorta (Figure  ). Male mice with an Apoe−/−
 background were used to increase the incidence of Ang II‐induced AAA, whereas both male and female wild‐type (WT) mice with a C57BL/6 background were used for CaCl2‐induced aneurysm. Flow cytometry analysis revealed that both Ang II infusion and CaCl2 adventitial application significantly increased the proportion of tdT+ cells in the abdominal aorta (Figure  ). Consistent with a previous report,[
 
] the proportion of CD34 lineage cells (tdT+) in the abdominal aorta of Apoe
−/− mice (Figure  ) was much higher than that in WT mice (Figure  ) under physiological conditions. Moreover, IF staining revealed a substantial number of tdT+ cells accumulating in the thickened adventitia of both the suprarenal and infrarenal aneurysmal aortas, with few tdT+ cells in these aortas co‐expressing SMC markers (SM22, αSMA, Calponin, and Myh11; Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information), suggesting a limited contribution of CD34+ cells to SMCs in AAA.

Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdT;(Apoe
−/−) and Postn‐CreERT2;R26‐tdT mice were used to study the potential contribution of CD34+ cells to myofibroblasts in abdominal aorta homeostasis. IF staining of myofibroblast markers, including Periostin and αSMA,[
 
] revealed that Periostin+ cells were scarce in normal healthy abdominal aorta. However, the number of Periostin + cells increased in vascular smooth muscle cells when the mice were fed a high‐cholesterol diet (HFD) or in the Apoe−/−
 background (Figure  , Figure , Supporting Information). Interestingly, genetic lineage tracing studies using Cd34‐CreERT2, R26‐tdT, Apoe
−/− mice have also revealed a limited contribution of CD34+ cells to Periostin+ cells in sham‐treated suprarenal or infrarenal aorta. However, some SMMHC+ cells were derived from Periostin+ cells in the abdominal aorta with an Apoe−/− background before Ang II induction (Figure  , Figure , Supporting Information). In contrast, a large number of tdT+ (CD34+) cells accumulated in the adventitia and co‐expressed common fibroblast markers (PDGFRa, DDR2, Vimentin) (Figure , Supporting Information) and myofibroblast markers (Periostin) (Figure  ) upon Ang II or CaCl2 stimulation, demonstrating that CD34+ cells were activated to transdifferentiate into myofibroblasts during AAA progression. Quantitative analysis showed an increased contribution of CD34+ cells to myofibroblasts in both Ang II‐induced suprarenal aortic aneurysms and CaCl2‐induced infrarenal aortic aneurysms. In particular, we observed that ≈40.08 ± 9.42% of Periostin+ myofibroblasts in the suprarenal aortic aneurysm and 25.33 ± 4.41% in the infrarenal aortic aneurysm were derived from CD34+ cells (Figure  ). Simultaneously, ≈74.92 ± 9.25% PDGFRa+ fibroblasts in the Ang II model and 60.08 ± 9.30% in the CaCl2 model originated from CD34+ cells (Figure , Supporting Information). Interestingly, low expression of αSMA was occasionally observed in tdT+ cells in aortic samples with severe AAA (Figure , Supporting Information), suggesting that these adventitial myofibroblasts acquire some contractile properties to enhance the biomechanical force and maintain vascular integrity when the SMC layer is severely damaged in advanced AAA.[
 
] Additionally, we found that CD34 lineage cells contributed significantly to the inflammatory response, but had limited involvement in luminal and microvascular endothelial repair during the Ang II‐induced AAA process, comprising ≈32.21 ± 5.49% of CD45+ inflammatory cells in the Ang II model and 21.29 ± 5.62% in the CaCl2 model (Figure , Supporting Information), as well as 15.42 ± 3.62% of CD31+ endothelial cells in the Ang II model and 20.45 ± 4.26% in the CaCl2 model (Figure , Supporting Information). Collectively, these data confirmed the significant contribution of CD34+ cells to Periostin+ myofibroblasts in AAA.
To understand the precise identity and cellular heterogeneity of CD34 lineage cells (tdT+) at the single‐cell level, we conducted 10x scRNA‐seq analysis of single‐nucleated live tdT+/CD45− cells isolated from normal (Sham tdT) and aneurysmal (Ang II tdT) abdominal aortas of Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdT;Apoe
−/− mice. Specifically, tdT+CD45− cells in the Ang II tdT group were targeted for scRNA‐seq to capture more non‐immune CD34 lineage cells (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Following quality control, UMAP clustering, and preliminary cell‐type identification of tdT+ cells (Figure , Supporting Information), they were integrated with whole‐cell datasets (GSE221789) of normal (Sham 4 weeks) and aneurysmal (Ang II 4 weeks) abdominal aortas to understand the cellular landscapes and communication between CD34 lineage cells and other aortic cells in AAA. The integrated datasets were re‐clustered and defined (Figure , Supporting Information), revealing nine distinct cell types, including Cd34
high fibroblasts, Cd34
media fibroblasts, Cd34
low fibroblasts, ECs, SMCs, Mo/Macro, neutrophils, DCs, and lymphocytes, in the normal and aneurysmal abdominal aortas (Figure  , Figure , Supporting Information). CD34 lineage cells typically exhibited a similar cellular landscape with a whole aortic cell atlas except for the absence of SMCs (Figure , Supporting Information). Consistent with immunostaining and flow cytometry analysis, cellular component analysis of non‐immune cells showed that fibroblasts constituted >90% of the tdT+ cells, with a decreased percentage of Cd34
high fibroblasts and an increased proportion of Cd34
low fibroblasts in the Ang II tdT group compared to those in the Sham tdT group (Figure  ). Moreover, the Ang II (Ang II 4 weeks) group exhibited a significant decrease in SMC percentage, but a substantial increase in the proportion of fibroblasts compared with the Sham‐treated group (Figure  ). Analysis of the fibroblast activation state, defined by high Postn expression, indicated a significantly high ratio of Postn
high fibroblasts in both AAA groups (Ang II tdT and Ang II 4 weeks; Figure  ), suggesting a key role for Periostin+ myofibroblasts in AAA development. Finally, Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis indicated that under angiotensin II stimulation, CD34+ cell‐derived (CD34 lineage) fibroblasts exhibited enhanced extracellular matrix formation, calcification, proliferation, and migration capabilities compared to total fibroblasts (Figure  ). Therefore, lineage tracing combined with scRNA‐seq analysis demonstrated that a substantial number of CD34+ cells contributed to Periostin+ myofibroblasts and CD45+ inflammatory cells in AAA, whereas a smaller subset of CD34+ cells generated ECs with minimal contribution to SMCs from CD34+ cells in murine AAAs.

2.3

## Non‐BM‐Derived CD34+ Cells Function as Fibroblast Progenitor Cells
To determine whether these CD34+ cells originated from BM or non‐BM sources, four types of chimeric mice were generated, as shown in Figure
 , in which BM cells from WT or Apoe
−/− mice were transferred to irradiated CD34 lineage tracing mice (BMTWT or

Apoe

−/−→
Cd34
), and vice versa (BMT
Cd34
→WT or

Apoe

−/−). Flow cytometry confirmed successful BM reconstitution in the transplanted mice (Figure , Supporting Information). In BMT
Apoe

−/−→
Cd34
 chimeric mice infused with Ang II, tdT+ cells were predominantly localized in the adventitia of the aneurysmal suprarenal aorta with a lamellar distribution (Figure  ), and the majority of Periostin+ cells (30.62% ± 17.98%) were positive for tdTomato (Figure  ). A similar phenomenon was observed in BMTWT→

Cd34
 chimeric mice treated with CaCl2 (Figure  ). A small number of tdT+ cells were αSMA+ (Figure  ), and very few CD45+ immune cells co‐expressed tdT (Figure  ), suggesting that non‐BM CD34+ cells primarily contributed to myofibroblasts in Ang II‐ or CaCl2‐induced AAA, with no or limited contribution to CD45+ inflammatory cells. Furthermore, ≈20% of CD31+ ECs displayed tdT positivity (Figure , Supporting Information). Conversely, in BMT
Cd34

→WT or

Apoe

−/− chimeric mice, a significant proportion of tdT+ cells exhibited CD45 expression, but rarely co‐expressed non‐immune cell markers, including CD31, SM22, Periostin, and αSMA, in the aneurysmal aortic wall (Figure , Supporting Information). Quantitative analysis revealed a comparable level of tdT+ Periostin+ myofibroblasts between non‐BMT and BMT(BM:

Apoe

−/−) mice, and a similar percentage of tdT+CD45+ immune cells between non‐BMT and BMT(BM:

Cd34

) mice. Notably, a significant decrease in tdT+ Periostin+ myofibroblast levels and tdT+CD45+ immune cells was observed in BMT(

Cd34

→WT or

Apoe

−/−) and BMT(WT or

Apoe

−/−→
Cd34)
 mice, respectively (Figure  ). Thus, BM‐derived CD34+ cells predominantly give rise to infiltrating CD45+ immune cells rather than vascular wall cells, including myofibroblasts.
 These findings suggest that non‐BM CD34+ cells are activated and transdifferentiated into myofibroblasts during AAA progression. Next, pseudo‐time analysis with the Monocle R package revealed distinct trajectories after point 1 for fibroblasts from the normal (Sham 4 weeks and Sham tdT) and AAA groups (Ang II tdT and Ang II 4 weeks), where Cd34
high cells initiated the trajectory and transitioned to Cd34
low cells (Figure , Supporting Information), suggesting potential transdifferentiation from CD34+ cells to myofibroblasts during AAA progression. Furthermore, gene expression profiling of pre‐ and post‐branch point 1 revealed four gene co‐expression modules (Figure  ). Module 1, enriched with stem/progenitor genes, such as Pi16, Ly6a, and Fn1, was downregulated during the differentiation of Cd34
high cells into myofibroblasts, with enriched GO biological processes related to mesenchymal stem differentiation and vascular development. Modules 2 and 3 primarily consisted of profibrogenic genes, such as Postn, Pdgfrb, Spp1, Thbs1, Eln, and Col1a1, which were upregulated during the transition from Cd34
high cells to myofibroblasts and were consistently enriched for ECM and collagen organization, as well as biological functions related to cell adhesion and migration. Module 4 contained genes that were upregulated under oxidative stress and were primarily expressed in Cd34
median cells (Figure  ). Collectively, these results suggest that non‐BM CD34+ cells function as potential fibroblast progenitors that can be activated and transdifferentiated into myofibroblasts in AAA (Figure  ).

2.4

## CD34+ Cells Generated Periostin+ Myofibroblasts Forming Fibrous Collar to Protect AAA from Rupture
To functionally determine the role of CD34+ cells in AAA progression, Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdT/DTR;Apoe
−/− mice were generated and subjected to the experimental procedures illustrated in Figure
 , to selectively ablate the CD34+ population during Ang II‐induced AAA. 3D reconstruction and flow cytometry analysis demonstrated an obvious reduction in the number of tdT+ cells in the abdominal aorta, peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and BM (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). To determine the potential cardiotoxic effects of diphtheria toxin (DT) and its impact on mouse survival during Ang II induction, Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdT;Apoe
−/− mice treated with DT and Cd34‐CreERT2;DTR/tdTomato; Apoe
−/− mice treated with phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS) were used as separate controls for DT‐mediated cell ablation (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). No significant differences were observed between the two control groups in terms of animal mortality or AAA development (Figure , Supporting Information). Consequently, these experimental animals were combined into a single control (CD34+ cell non‐deletion) and CD34+ cell deletion groups for further analyses. Remarkably, the ablation of CD34+ cells aggravated AAA development, as evidenced by an increase in the maximal outer width of the suprarenal AAA and a significant decrease in the survival rate (Figure  ). Furthermore, CD34+ cell‐deleted mice exhibited much higher AAA rupture and incidence rates, as autopsies of the deceased mice revealed substantial intra‐abdominal blood loss (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Careful dissection of the whole aortic tree determined the exact rupture site in the adventitia of the suprarenal AAA (Figure  ). Importantly, longitudinal and transverse ultrasound images taken four weeks after Ang II induction revealed more pronounced aortic dilatation in CD34+ cell‐deleted mice, and color Doppler ultrasound revealed aggravated false channel and intramural hematoma (Figure  ). The suprarenal aortic diameters in the CD34+ cell deletion group were considerably larger than those in the non‐deletion group after just one week of Ang II induction, exhibiting slow growth over the next three weeks (Figure  ). Combined Picro‐Sirius red and Victoria blue (PSR‐VB) staining confirmed the destruction of the elastic membrane and remodeling of the fibrotic adventitia, revealing a thinner adventitial layer and lower degree of adventitial fibrosis in the CD34+ cell deletion group (Figure  ). Notably, we observed that numerous tdT+ Periostin+ myofibroblasts were present in the adventitial layer of the aneurysm, forming a thick fibrous collar around the aneurysmal aorta in CD34+ cell non‐deletion mice. However, fewer tdT+ cells and tdT+ Periostin+ myofibroblasts were observed in the fibrous collar regions of the aneurysmal aorta in CD34+ cell deletion mice (Figure  ). Histopathological analysis of the suprarenal aorta tissue from AAA rupture mice revealed almost complete disappearance of the aortic adventitial fibrous collar at the rupture site, with low levels of tdT+/Periostin+ myofibroblast investment (Figure  ). Moreover, quantification of tdT+ cells confirmed that AAA rupture mice exhibited significantly higher CD34+ cell elimination efficiency than AAA‐unruptured mice (Figure  ). Collectively, these findings suggest that the increased mortality in CD34+ cell‐depleted mice can be attributed to a weakened fibrous collar in the aortic adventitia. This weakening may potentially decrease the biomechanical strength and forces within the aortic wall, thereby increasing the likelihood of aneurysm rupture and hemorrhage. CD34+ cells actively contribute to the formation of a fibrous collar around the aneurysmal aorta by generating Periostin+ myofibroblasts, which may enhance the biomechanical strength to protect the aneurysm from rupture.
 To further elucidate the specific role of CD34+ cells of different origins, chimeric mice, allowing for selective ablation of BM or non‐BM CD34+ cells, were used in the two mouse aneurysm models (Figure  , Supporting Information). We found that non‐BM CD34+ cell‐eliminated mice exhibited a higher incidence of Ang II‐induced AAA, more pronounced aortic dilatation, thinner adventitial layer, and fewer tdT+/Periostin+ myofibroblasts in the aneurysmal aorta than BMT‐CTRL mice (Figure , Supporting Information). However, after BM transplantation (BMT), the mice showed a reduced incidence of aneurysms in the Ang II‐induced AAA model,[
 
] possibly explaining the lack of statistical difference in terms of mortality between the BMT‐DT and BMT‐CTRL groups (Figure , Supporting Information). In contrast, the selective elimination of BM CD34+ cells had a minimal effect on the aortic expansion and adventitial thickness of Ang II‐induced suprarenal aortic aneurysms and CaCl2‐induced infrarenal aortic aneurysms (Figure , Supporting Information). This could be attributed to inflammatory cells from non‐CD34 lineages compensating for the loss of CD34+ cells, which was further supported by our co‐culture experiments involving BM cells and adventitial fibroblasts (Figure , Supporting Information). In summary, the deletion of systemic or non‐BM CD34+ cells, but not BM CD34+ cells, exacerbates AAA progression and increases animal mortality, supporting the beneficial effect of these CD34+ cells in restricting and stabilizing AAA.
Next, an intersectional genetic strategy using dual recombinase‐based lineage tracing[
 
] was employed to fate‐map the subpopulation of CD34+ cells (CD34+Periostin+ cells) in Ang II‐induced AAA and to investigate their potential contribution to AAA incidence and severity. Cd34‐Dre and Postn‐CreERT2 mice were crossbred with R26‐RSR‐LSL‐tdTomato‐DTR reporter (R26‐rox‐stop‐rox‐loxp‐stop‐loxp‐tdTomato‐DTR) mice to generate Cd34‐Dre;Postn‐CreERT2;Dou‐tdT‐DTR double‐lineage tracing and depleted mice (Figure
 ). Eight‐week‐old male mice were administered a single intravenous pAAV/D377Y‐mPCSK9[
 
] injection at a dosage of 1.0 × 1011 vector genomes, followed by HFD feeding to induce hypercholesterolemia (Figure , Supporting Information) and increase the incidence of aortic aneurysm. Considering that Periostin is rarely expressed in adventitial fibroblasts under physiological conditions, 14‐week‐old mice were subcutaneously implanted with an Ang II osmotic pump after six weeks of HFD feeding, and tamoxifen was immediately administered after Ang II infusion to induce Cre‐loxp and Dre‐rox recombination. Moreover, DT injection allowed the specific deletion of CD34+ Periostin+ myofibroblasts in these mice (Figure  ). The results indicated that the deletion of CD34+Periostin+ myofibroblasts significantly exacerbated Ang II‐induced AAA and reduced the survival rate and thickness of adventitial fibrous collars (Figure  ). Compared to the DT group, a larger number of tdT+ cells co‐expressing periostin was detected in the adventitia of the aneurysmal suprarenal aorta in the No‐DT group. Notably, these CD34+Periostin+ myofibroblasts were predominantly distributed in regions where SMCs were absent (Figure  ). No tdT+ cells were observed in the adventitia of the abdominal aorta from mice without Ang II infusion, and very few tdT+ cells were co‐expressed with αSMA (Figure  ). Semi‐quantitative analysis revealed that CD34+Periostin+ myofibroblasts accounted for 19.55% ± 5.03% of Periostin+ myofibroblasts (Figure  ). Because dual recombinase‐mediated lineage tracing depends on both Cre‐loxp and Dre‐rox recombination, we expected a relatively lower level of dual recombination efficiency than that of single recombination. However, we observed a relatively small number of tdT+ cells labeled with Cd34‐Dre and Postn‐CreERT2 (Figure  ) compared to those labeled with Cd34‐CreERT2 tracer and Periostin immunostaining (Figure  ). Therefore, we demonstrated that adventitial CD34+ cells can be activated and transdifferentiated into Periostin+ myofibroblasts during AAA progression, which has a beneficial effect on restricting and stabilizing AAA, thereby protecting animals from death.
 
2.5

## CD34+ Cells Activation through PDGF Signaling
An in‐depth analysis using scRNA‐seq data from the Sham tdT and Ang II tdT groups revealed the potential mechanisms underlying CD34+ cell activation and transdifferentiation. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis indicated that Cd34
high cells exhibited a strong cell migration ability with enriched pathways for cytoskeleton organization, cell junction organization, cell spreading, and cell differentiation (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information), whereas Cd34
low cells exhibited pathways associated with cell activation and ossification (Figure , Supporting Information). 3D imaging of whole aortas from BMT(BM

: Apoe−/−

) chimeric mice revealed increased CD34+ cell migration to vulnerable sites, where they clustered and self‐proliferated (Figure  ). Additionally, IF staining for tdTomato and the cell proliferation marker Ki67 confirmed the proliferation of CD34+ cells in the abdominal aneurysmal aortas (Figure , Supporting Information), which was further supported by a 5‐ethynyl‐2′‐deoxyuridine (EdU) incorporation assay (Figure , Supporting Information). EdU‐incorporated myofibroblasts (tdT+ Periostin+) originating from CD34+ cells were also detected (Figure  ). Thus, upon Ang II stimulation, some CD34+ cells, potentially CD34+ fibroblast progenitors, can be activated and migrate to vulnerable sites where they proliferate and transdifferentiate into myofibroblasts, thereby protecting AAA from rupture.
Subsequently, we used the Cellchat R package to analyze cellular communication and identify the signaling pathways that activate CD34+ cells, observing abundant PDGF signaling between fibroblasts and other cell types (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Specifically, PDGF receptors were predominant in fibroblasts, with Pdgfra in the Cd34
high subpopulation and Pdgfrb in both Cd34
high and Cd34
low cells, as well as in SMCs (Figure  ). IF staining and 3D reconstruction confirmed the co‐expression of tdT and PDGFRa, particularly at the dilated sites of the abdominal aneurysmal aortas (Figure , Supporting Information). Furthermore, PDGF ligand‐receptor pair analysis revealed that Cd34
high could receive all PDGF signals from SMCs, ECs, and macrophages, with enhanced interactions in AAA (Figure , Supporting Information). Notably, we observed significant upregulation in the expression levels of Pdgfrb and Pdgfra in Ang II tdT and Ang II 4 weeks Cd34
high cells (Figure  ). Additionally, RT‐qPCR demonstrated increased expression of fibrotic genes, including Pdgfrb and Pdgfra, in tdT+CD34high cells compared to tdT+CD34low cells isolated from Postn‐CreERT2;tdT‐R26 mice with TAM and Ang II induction (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Collectively, our results indicate that PDGF ligands secreted by other aortic cells, including SMCs, ECs, and macrophages, trigger PDGF signaling pathways by binding platelet‐derived growth factor receptors (PDGFRs) on CD34+ cells to activate CD34+ cells, thereby promoting CD34+ cell migration and transdifferentiation into myofibroblasts during AAA pathology.

2.6

## Specific Deletion PDGFRb Rather Than PDGFRa in CD34+ Cells Significantly Increased Mortality of AAA
To further validate the function of PDGFRs during AAA progression, we crossed Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdTomato;Apoe
−/− with Pdgfra
fl/fl or Pdgfrb
fl/fl mice to generate Cd34‐CreERT2;Pdgfr
fl/fl;R26‐tdTomato;Apoe
−/− mice to knockout PDGFRa or PDGFRb specifically in CD34+ cells (Figure , Supporting Information) and used the Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdTomato;Apoe
−/− mice as control. Western blotting confirmed the specific PDGFR deletion in CD34+ cells isolated from the respective mice (Figure , Supporting Information). CD34+ cell‐specific knockout of PDGFRa exacerbated AAA development but did not elevate animal mortality, as evidenced by the increased maximum diameters of aortas in the Pdgfra
−/− group compared with controls, and a comparable survival rate was observed between the two groups (Figure
 ). Notably, PDGFRb deletion in CD34+ cells not only promoted AAA progression but also significantly increased the mortality rate of aneurysms (Figure  ). PSR‐VB staining showed a significant decrease in the adventitial thickness of abdominal aneurysmal aortas in both Pdgfra
fl/fl and Pdgfrb
fl/fl mice compared to that in the controls (Figure  ). We also observed a significant reduction in tdT+ Periostin+ myofibroblasts in the adventitial fibrous collar regions in Pdgfrb
fl/fl mice, but not in Pdgfra
fl/fl mice (Figure  ). Additionally, tdT+αSMA+ myofibroblasts were scarcely detected in the adventitial fibrous collar regions in all mice (Figure  ). Finally, IF staining for EdU, tdT, and Periostin demonstrated that a specific knockout of either PDGFRa or PDGFRb in CD34+ cells significantly decreased CD34+ cell proliferation in the pathological status of AAA (Figure  ). Collectively, although both PDGFRs in CD34+ cells play important roles in CD34+ cell proliferation and AAA progression, PDGFRb, rather than PDGFRa, is required for CD34+ cell transdifferentiation into Periostin+ myofibroblasts, thereby protecting aneurysms from rupture.
 
2.7

## PDGF‐PDGFRb‐PI3K Axis is Responsible for CD34+ Cell Activation and Transdifferentiation to Periostin+ Myofibroblasts
To further investigate the molecular mechanism of CD34+ cell activation in vitro, we used PDGFBB, a ligand that can activate both PDGFRa and PDGFRb,[
 
] to stimulate CD34+ cells. CD34+ cells were isolated from the aortas of Cd34‐CreERT2,R26‐tdTomato,Apoe
−/−; Cd34‐CreERT2, Pdgfra
fl/fl, R26‐tdTomato, Apoe
−/−; and Cd34‐CreERT2;Pdgfrb
fl/fl;R26‐tdTomato;Apoe
−/− mice after TAM induction, followed by various functional studies. The EdU assay showed that CD34+ cells exhibited a stronger proliferative ability than CD34− cells, requiring both PDGFRa and PDGFRb for PDGFBB‐induced proliferation (Figure
 ). Consistently, western blotting revealed higher expression of the cellular proliferative marker proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in Pdgfr
+/+CD34+ cells than in Pdgfr
+/+CD34− cells, with a significant decrease observed in both Pdgfra
−/− CD34+ and Pdgfrb
−/− CD34+ cells (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). The Transwell experiment demonstrated higher migration ability in CD34+ cells, which was attenuated by Pdgfrb knockout rather than Pdgfra knockout (Figure  ). A collagen gel contraction assay was conducted to examine the effect of PDGFRs on the ECM remodeling capability of fibroblasts, a key function of myofibroblasts.[
 
] An increased level of ECM contraction induced by PDGFBB was observed in CD34+ fibroblasts, which was mitigated by the deletion of Pdgfrb rather than Pdgfra (Figure  ). IF staining revealed that PDGFBB stimulation substantially increased Periostin expression in Pdgfr
+/+ and Pdgfra
−/− cells, but not in Pdgfrb
−/− fibroblasts (Figure  ), suggesting a critical role for PDGFRb in PDGFBB‐induced Periostin expression. Moreover, no consistent synergistic effect on the proliferation, migration, and transdifferentiation of CD34+ cells was observed following the simultaneous knockdown of Pdgfra and Pdgfrb by small interfering RNA (siRNA) (Figure , Supporting Information). Collectively, these data demonstrated that PDGFRb plays a more pivotal role than PDGFRa in CD34+ cell activation and transdifferentiation into Periostin+ myofibroblasts.
 To further identify the downstream signaling pathways of PDGFRb, we analyzed CD34 lineages and observed dynamic changes in fibrosis‐related genes and several other signaling pathways during the pseudo‐time transitions. Specifically, Postn, Pdgfra, and Pdgfrb were consistently upregulated in the AAA group compared to those in the Sham‐treated group (Figure  ). Notably, Postn expression was predominantly upregulated in CD34+ cells at both the early and late stages of differentiation trajectories, whereas Pdgfra and Pdgfrb expression substantially increased at the prophase and end of differentiation trajectories (Figure  ), suggesting a role for PDGFRa and PDGFRb in the early and late stages of the CD34+ cell transdifferentiation process, respectively. Among all the screened pathways, the changing trend of the PI3K‐AKT signaling pathway was almost identical to that of Pdgfrb in the context of AAA (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Therefore, we performed western blotting to verify the elevated Periostin levels and activation of the PI3K‐AKT pathway in control CD34+ cells after PDGFBB administration (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Notably, the knockout of PDGFRb, rather than PDGFRa, in CD34+ cells, abolished the upregulation of Periostin, p‐PI3K, and p‐AKT induced by PDGFBB (Figure  and , Supporting Information), suggesting a critical role for PDGFRb in these processes. We then constructed an adenovirus expressing Pdgfra (Ad‐Pdgfra), Pdgfrb (Ad‐Pdgfrb), and an Ad‐vector to infect adventitial CD34+ cells, achieving high overexpression levels with an infection titer of 108PFU mL−1 (Figure , Supporting Information). Overexpression of PDGFRb in Pdgfrb
−/− cells rescued the Periostin expression induced by PDGFBB (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Furthermore, immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry (Figure  ) identified PI3K as a downstream target of PDGFRb, but not PDGFRa (Supplementary Excel ). Exogenous and reciprocal endogenous co‐immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated the interaction between PDGFRb and PI3K in CD34+ cells treated with PDGFBB (Figure  ), whereas no interaction was observed between PDGFRa and PI3K (Figure , Supporting Information), which may account for the functional disparity between PDGFRa and PDGFRb, as previously described. Additionally, Periostin expression was almost entirely inhibited by the PI3K pathway inhibitor LY294002 in Pdgfrb
−/− CD34+ cells with or without PDGFRb overexpression (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information), confirming the crucial role of the PI3K signaling pathway in regulating Periostin expression in CD34+ cells. Additionally, we observed that Ang II marginally elevated Periostin expression in CD34+ cells, and that neither PDGFRb‐ nor PDGFRa‐deletion affected Ang II‐induced Periostin expression in these cells (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Therefore, the PDGF‐PDGFRb‐PI3K axis is responsible for the activation and transdifferentiation of CD34+ cells into Periostin+ myofibroblasts (Figure  ).

3

## Discussion
Using scRNA‐seq and lineage tracing techniques, we previously reported that CD34+ cells constitute a heterogeneous population, primarily composed of a large number of adventitial fibroblasts, a small fraction of endothelial progenitors, and immune cells.[
 , 
] However, the potential role of CD34+ cells in adventitial remodeling in AAA remains unclear. In this study, we found that non‐BM‐derived CD34+ cells function as fibroblast progenitor cells to generate Periostin+ myofibroblasts, which participate in the formation of the adventitial fibrous collar of the aneurysmal aorta, thereby restricting aneurysm development. The significant downregulation of CD34 expression in both human and mouse aneurysmal tissues, in combination with the increased expression of fibrosis‐ and myofibroblast‐related markers, including PDGFRb and Periostin, suggested that CD34+ cells transition into an activated fibroblast state distinct from that of common fibroblasts. Corroborating this progenitor role, scRNA trajectory analysis reveals that Cd34
high cells are in an undifferentiated primitive state, with marked enrichment in mesenchymal stem cell differentiation pathways. This profile highlights the stem‐like properties of adventitial CD34+ cells and their capacity to differentiate in response to aneurysm signals. Functionally, our combined BMT and DTR mouse model demonstrates that the depletion of either systemic or non‐BM CD34+ cells exacerbates aneurysm progression, elucidating their essential protective role. Notably, the specific elimination of CD34+ cell‐derived Periostin+ myofibroblasts in dual recombinase‐based lineage tracing (Cd34‐Dre;Postn‐CreERT2;Dou‐tdT‐DTR) mice further confirms the functional contribution of CD34+ cell‐derived Periostin+ myofibroblasts to adventitial fibrous collar formation within aortic aneurysms, and their beneficial effects in preventing abdominal aortic rupture and increasing animal survival. Mechanistically, PDGFRb is required for CD34+ cell activation and transdifferentiation into Periostin+ myofibroblasts in AAA. Therefore, our study highlights CD34+ cells as potential therapeutic targets for decelerating AAA progression and enhancing aneurysmal aortic stability.
Rupture and hemorrhage of an aortic aneurysm constitute a complex process influenced by intricate interactions among multiple factors. Over time, a progressive imbalance between connective tissue repair and degradation drives aneurysm growth,[
 
] ultimately leading to aortic wall rupture when the structural integrity can no longer withstand the applied stresses.[
 , 
] Studies have demonstrated that ECM degradation and abnormal collagen fibril formation play crucial roles in AAA occurrence and progression.[
 
] Fibroblasts adopt a transient and contractile myofibroblast (αSMA+ myofibroblasts) or ECM‐producing (Periostin+ myofibroblasts) phenotype in adventitial remodeling in response to damage.[
 , 
] Thus, phenotypic switching of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts and deposition of collagen and other ECM molecules are essential for maintaining the compromised structural integrity of the AAA wall.[
 , 
] In particular, it has been reported that peri‐adventitial transplantation of gingival fibroblasts onto elastase‐injured abdominal aortas[
 
] or intravenous injection of BM‐derived fibrocytes into mice infused with Ang II[
 
] effectively impedes the progression and rupture of AAA, suggesting the therapeutic potential of fibroblast/fibrocyte transplantation in AAA. Consistent with these previous findings, our study demonstrated that non‐BM‐derived CD34+ cells can create an activated fibrotic microenvironment to promote the repair of damaged/disrupted adventitial connective tissues induced by AAA pathological conditions and may enhance the biomechanical strength of aneurysmal aortas, thereby limiting AAA progression and protecting them from rupture.
The contribution of total and non‐BM CD34+ cells to endothelial repair in AAA appears to be limited, as indicated by the small and comparable percentage of CD34+ cell‐derived ECs in the aortic walls under both pathological and physiological conditions. However, our previous study reported that a small proportion of non‐BM‐derived CD34+ cells functioned as endothelial progenitor cells and participated in endothelial regeneration in a wire injury‐induced endothelial denudation mouse femoral artery model.[
 
] This discrepancy may be due to the fact that endothelial dysfunction is an early pathologic event in AAA formation, leading to both oxidative stress and inflammatory cell infiltration into the degenerating aortic wall.[
 , 
] In contrast, wire injury‐induced endothelial denudation results in more severe endothelial damage and complete EC loss in the injured area, necessitating rapid re‐endothelialization from various cellular sources, including CD34+ endothelial progenitor cells. Thus, we hypothesized that the contribution of CD34+ cells to endothelial regeneration may be dependent on the severity of endothelial damage. Additionally, our data showed that selectively deleting CD34+ cells of BM origin did not affect adventitial fibrous collar thickness or AAA severity. This can be attributed to several factors. First, a significant number of non‐CD34+ cell‐derived inflammatory cells were observed, potentially compensating for the loss of CD34+ cell‐derived inflammatory cells during AAA pathogenesis. Second, DT injection effectively reduced, but did not completely eliminate, all CD34+ cells from the experimental mice, with the remaining CD34+ cells possibly generating inflammatory cells and contributing to AAA development. Third, CD34+ cells targeted for depletion are those induced by TAM within a specific time window, and newborn CD34+ cells may be generated after TAM withdrawal at a later stage.
The PDGF signaling pathway is crucial for the self‐renewal and proliferation of fibroblasts. PDGF ligands bind to PDGFRa and PDGFRb tyrosine kinase receptors, which activate multiple downstream signaling cascades, including phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase/protein kinase B pathway and mitogen‐activated protein kinase/extracellular signal‐regulated kinase pathway. A previous study showed that overexpression or inhibition of PDGF significantly affects fibrosis in the BM, lung, kidney, liver, and heart of mice.[
 
] PDGF promotes tissue fibrosis by regulating cell division, proliferation, or chemotactic properties of tissue fibroblasts.[
 
] Nintedanib, a clinically approved antifibrotic agent, is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that blocks PDGFR activity and inhibits the differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts and their proliferation in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.[
 
] Clinical studies have reported a close link between Pdgfrb variants and aneurysms[
 
] and a strong association of nintedanib treatment with an increased risk of aortic aneurysm and dissection,[
 
] thereby providing clinical relevance to pharmacological interventions or targeting fibroblasts in patients with AAA. Cellular communication analysis using scRNA‐seq datasets revealed intensive PDGF‐PDGFR interactions between CD34+ cells and other aortic cells during AAA development, with upregulated PDGFRb expression in CD34+ fibroblasts. PDGFR (PDGFRa or PDGFRb)‐specific deletion in CD34+ cells in vivo revealed that CD34+ cells give rise to Periostin+ myofibroblasts through PDGFRb and not PDGFRa, whereas both receptors are required for CD34+ cell proliferation in AAA. In vitro mechanistic studies demonstrated that PDGFRb interacts with PI3K to mediate Periostin expression and that the PDGFRb‐PI3K axis is indispensable for PDGFBB‐induced Periostin+ myofibroblast generation from CD34+ cells. Notably, Ang II appeared to play a minor role in Periostin expression in CD34+ cells. Therefore, we conclude that the activation and transdifferentiation of CD34+ cells into myofibroblasts in AAA is likely controlled by PDGFRb signaling induced by PDGF ligands secreted by other aortic cells, including ECs, SMCs, and macrophages, rather than by the direct effect of Ang II on CD34+ cells.
In terms of limitations, the specific function of CD34+ progenitors in patients with AAA requires further validation, despite our demonstration of their significant reduction in both human TAA and AAA. The translational application of CD34+ cell‐targeted therapies should emphasize balancing beneficial fibrotic reinforcement with the risk of adverse adventitial remodeling. Moreover, although the Ang II‐induced AAA model is ideal for studying fibrotic collars generated from adventitial myofibroblasts, the extraluminal application of CaCl2 may not perfectly mimic the pathophysiological conditions of aortic dilatation. CaCl₂ incubation causes chemical damage to the aortic adventitia, and rupture of infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysms caused by CaCl2 is infrequent. The contribution of fibrous collars formed by myofibroblasts to the maintenance of AAA wall strength or the enhancement of aortic stability deserves further investigation.

4

## Conclusion
In this study, we investigated the contribution of CD34+ cells to AAA development and progression using advanced techniques, including scRNA‐seq, dual recombinase‐mediated genetic lineage tracing, IF staining with 3D aortic reconstruction, and various gene‐modified mouse strains. These findings demonstrate that CD34+ cells are non‐BM‐derived fibroblast progenitors that transdifferentiate into myofibroblasts in AAA, forming a fibrous collar in the adventitial layer of the aneurysmal aorta to maintain the compromised structural integrity of the aneurysmal aortic wall. Furthermore, this study provides new regulatory insights into myofibroblast generation from CD34+ cells and demonstrates that the PDGFBB‐PDGFRb‐PI3K‐Akt axis is indispensable for this differentiation process. Therefore, this study suggests that targeting CD34+ cell‐derived myofibroblasts may be a promising therapeutic approach aimed at stabilizing aneurysms and reducing the rupture risk.

5

## Experimental Section
A detailed description of the materials and methods used in this study is provided in the Supporting Information.

## Collection of Human Samples for Histological Analysis
Human tissue samples were collected in accordance with the protocol approved by the Research Ethics Committee at the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine. Local ethics approval and written informed patient consent for human aortic tissue collection were obtained before sample collection. (institutional review board approval No. 2021/330 and No. 2022/295). Non‐dilated ascending aortic samples were collected from heart transplant recipients and lung donors, non‐dilated abdominal aortic samples from the donors during kidney transplantation, and diseased thoracic aortic samples from sporadic thoracic aortic aneurysms as well as abdominal aortic aneurysms samples from patients underwent surgery. Aneurysmal aortic specimens were characterized by loss of SMCs and degradation of elastin identified by H&E and EVG staining. Clinical baseline characteristics of the study groups were summarized in supporting information (Table , Supporting Information), with detailed information provided in Supplementary Excel .

## Mice Generation and Breeding
Animal procedures were in accordance with the Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the US National Institute of Health (8th edition, 2011) and approval for the study was obtained from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Zhejiang University School of Medicine (No.2021/105).
The Cd34‐CreERT2 mice were generated by conventional embryonic stem cell gene targeting methods[
 
] in Shanghai Model Organisms Center, Inc. Postn‐CreERT2 knock‐in mouse model, and Cd34‐Dre knock‐in mouse model were developed by Shanghai Model Organisms Center, Inc. Specifically, the CreERT2 targeting construct was designed to insert a P2A peptide and a CreERT2 fusion gene into the stop codon site of Postn gene. This construct was inserted into the targeted gene via CRISPR/Cas9 system in a C57BL/6J mouse background. The donor vector with Cas9 targeted guide RNA (sgRNA) and Cas9 mRNA was transcribed and purified in vitro, then microinjected into C57BL/6J fertilized eggs. F0 generation mice positive for homologous recombination were identified by long PCR spanning 5′ or 3′ homologous arm. The PCR products were further confirmed by sequencing. Postn‐CreERT2 heterozygous mice were obtained by crossing F0 mice with C57BL/6J mice. Cd34 targeting vector, Kozak‐Dre‐wpre‐PA, was designed and constructed that be inserted into between the 5′ UTR and first exon of Cd34 targeted allele through homologous recombination. Then F0 mice were bred with C57BL/6J mice to obtain CD34‐Dre heterozygous mice. The Rosa26‐tdTomato (JAX: 007909), Rosa26‐DTR (JAX: 007900), Dou‐tdT‐DTR (Rosa26‐CAG‐LSL‐RSR‐tdTomato‐2A‐DTR, Cat.NO.NM‐KI‐190086) and Apoe
−/− (Jax: 002052) mice lines were purchased from Shanghai Model Organisms Center. Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdTomato;Apoe−/−
 mice were obtained by crossing Cd34‐CreERT2 with Rosa26‐tdTomato mice and Apoe
−/− mice. Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐DTR/tdTomato;Apoe
−/− mice were obtained by crossing Cd34‐CreERT2 mice with Rosa26‐tdTomato mice, Rosa26‐DTR mice and Apoe
−/− mice. Postn‐CreERT2;R26‐ tdTomato mice were obtained by crossing Postn‐CreERT2 mice and Rosa26‐tdTomato mice. Cd34‐Dre;Postn‐Cre ERT2;Dou‐tdT‐DTR mice were obtained by crossing Postn‐CreERT2 mice, Cd34‐Dre mice, and Dou‐tdT‐DTR mice.
CD34+ cells‐specific conditional knockout Pdgfra or Pdgfrb genes were generated as follows. Pdgfraflox/flox
 (T007274) mice line were purchased from GemPharmatech CO., Ltd, and Pdgfrbflox/flox
 mice line was generated by the Shanghai Model Organisms Center. In brief, to obtain Pdgfra alleles appropriate for Cre‐mediated conditional inactivation of Pdgfra, a targeting vector was designed and constructed in which two loxP sites flanking exons 3 and 5 of the PDGFRa gene could be inserted through homologous recombination. Then Pdgfra
flox/flox mice were bred with Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdT;Apoe−/−
 transgenic mice to generate the Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdT;Pdgfraflox/flox
;Apoe−/−
. Similarly, a targeting vector was designed and constructed that could insert two loxP sites through homologous recombination flanking exons 4 and 7 of the Pdgfrb gene in mouse embryonic stem cells. Then Pdgfrbflox/flox
 mice were bred with Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdT;Apoe−/−
 transgenic mice to generate the Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdT;Pdgfrbflox/flox
;Apoe−/−
.

## rAAV8‐D377Y‐mPCSK9 Overexpression in Cd34‐Dre;Postn‐Cre ERT2;Dou‐tdT‐DTR Mice
The adeno‐associated virus serotype 8 (AAV8) vector encoding gain‐of‐function mutant mouse PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9) (rAAV8‐D377Y‐mPCSK9) and empty vector were constructed by OBiO Technology[
 
] (Shanghai, China). The virus (1 × 1012 vg mL−1) were administered to 8‐week‐old Cd34‐Dre;Postn‐Cre ERT2;Dou‐tdT‐DTR mice (0.2 mL per animal) through tail vein injection, and animals were challenged with high‐fat diet containing 40 kcal% fat, 1.25% cholesterol and 0.5% sodium cholate (D12109C, Research Diets) for 6 weeks. Then Ang II‐induced abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) model was established. The primer sequences used for plasmid construction are in Table , (Supporting Information).

## Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Animal Models
All mice were raised at 24 ± 2 °C and 40 ± 5% humidity under a 12 h light/dark cycle with access to diet and water ad libitum. The Ang II‐induced AAA model was implemented as previously described. Briefly, a mini osmotic pump (Alzet model 1004, 28‐day delivery; Durect Corporation, USA) loaded with Ang II (1000 ng kg−1 min−1, A9525; Sigma, MO, USA) or saline was subcutaneously infused into 12 to 14‐week‐old male mice for 4 weeks. Then mice were anesthetized, and the whole aortas were harvested at 28 days after implantation surgery. The aorta was considered to be aneurysmal if the abdominal aorta diameter or maximal outer width of the suprarenal aorta increased by 50% or more. Any mouse that died prior to the study endpoint was subjected to autopsy, and aneurysm rupture was characterized by the presence of egress with blood clots outside the adventitia of the dilated aortic wall.
The calcium chloride (CaCl2) adventitial application model was carried out as previously described.[
 
] 12‐week‐old male and female mice were both used for the CaCl2‐induced aneurysm model and were randomly allocated to different experimental groups. CaCl2‐incubated infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysms were characterized by VSMC apoptosis at the incubation site, with relatively smaller changes in aorta diameter. Briefly, the infrarenal region of the abdominal aorta was separated through a midline incision under general anesthesia. 0.5mol L−1 CaCl2 soaked filter paper of appropriate size was applied peri‐vascularly for 10 min. Replace this filter paper with another PBS‐impregnated filter paper for 5 min. Two weeks after modeling, the mice were euthanized and tissues were perfusion‐fixed with a mixture of 4% paraformaldehyde at physiologic perfusion pressure. The harvested abdominal aorta was further fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and a follow‐up histological analysis was performed.
Based on the NIH guidelines for animal euthanasia, mice were euthanized with carbon dioxide (CO2) four weeks after having the Ang II osmotic pump implanted, with minimal stress to them. Briefly, a cage containing 3–5 mice was placed in a separate 20‐litre volume chamber. Compressed 99.99% CO2 gas in a cylinder was connected to and introduced into the chamber with a flow rate of 10 liters per minute. The mice were all unconscious in 3 min, lacking spontaneous breathing. After another minute's CO2 flow, the mice were checked again to confirm with no respiration, their eye color faded, and no pupillary response to light. The mice were then removed from the cage, the chests were cut open and the hearts were perfused through left ventricular puncture with PBS. Aortas were then harvested for single‐cell RNA sequencing, flow cytometric analyses, and immunostaining (another 15 min 4% PFA perfusion after PBS perfusion), and the mice were then confirmed dead by removing the hearts.

## Genetic Labeling or Depleting CD34+ Cells
Labeling or depleting CD34+ cells was described previously.[
 
] Briefly, to label CD34+ cells in Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdTomato mice, Tamoxifen (Sigma, T5648, 0.15mg g−1 body weight) was administered by gavage every 3 days with a total of 4 pulses. To delete CD34+ cells, diphtheria toxin (20 ng g−1 body weight by 4 intraperitoneal injections every 2 days with a total of 5 pulses) in Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐DTR/tdTomato mice before AAA animal model was performed. Diphtheria toxin (Sigma, D0564) was dissolved in sterile PBS to a storage dilution of 2 µg mL−1.

## Ultrasound Image Acquisition
Ang II‐induced AAA progression was longitudinally and transversely monitored at different time points in vivo using high‐frequency ultrasounds. Ultrasound imaging was performed with mice placed supine on a heated table under isoflurane anesthesia and depilated with hair removal cream. High‐resolution ultrasound imaging system (VINNO, 650LAB) with 10–23 MHz frequency real‐time microvisualization scan‐head (X10‐23L) and 15 × 15 mm field of view was used first in B‐mode to obtain a 2D‐transverse image to localize the suprarenal abdominal aorta, while abdominal blood flow was visualized by Color Doppler and Pulsed Doppler measurements. Blood flow toward the transducer was shown in red, while away from the transducer in blue. The retrograde (cranially directed) flow was observed in the false channel. The ultrasound operator manually assessed the delineation of the vessel and remodeled the wall. Measurements were taken before treatment initiation to determine the baseline diameters and were repeated several times during the experiment.

## Immunostaining, Histological Analysis, and 3D Reconstruction of Aortas
In order to stain cryo‐sections of mouse aortas with immunofluorescence (IF), aortas were harvested, washed with PBS, and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 37 h at 4 °C, then aortas were dehydrated in 30% sucrose solution at 4 °C overnight until fully penetrated. Tissues were embedded in optimum cutting temperature (O.C.T., Sakura, 4583), frozen at −80 °C for storage, or cut into 5‐µm sections. The cryosections were air‐dried for ≈30 min at room temperature and then blocked for 1 h, followed by primary antibody staining overnight at 4 °C and then incubated with Alexa Fluor‐conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen, 1:500) for 1 h. As counterstain, the DAPI counterstain reagent (Servicebio, G1012) was used to stain nuclei. Finally, the slides were mounted in the anti‐fade mounting medium (Servicebio, G1401). To eliminate the specificity of each signal, isotype IgG control for primary antibodies (Invitrogen, Cat No. 31933, 02–6102, 31903, 31245) for each host species were used as negative controls, together with secondary antibody‐only controls to validate the specificity of antibodies.
IF staining of cultured cells requires washing with PBS followed by 15 min of fixation in 4% PFA. After permeabilizing in PBS with 0.5% Triton X‐100 for 15 min, samples were blocked in 5% donkey serum for 1 h, followed by staining according to the same protocol as described above. A Leica TCSSP8 DIVE confocal microscope and a Zeiss LSM 900 Airyscan 2 were used to acquire cryo‐section and cell staining images, further analyzed by relevant software. Regions were selected randomly to avoid biasing. The Image Pro Plus software 6.0 software (Media Cybernetics, Inc.) was used for image analyses.
For tissue clearing and 3D reconstruction, tissue was harvested and fixed overnight at 4 °C, followed by 3 × 1 h's wash in PBS. The tissue was next immersed in CUBIC‐L solution [10% (wt/wt) N‐butyldiethanolamine (TCIchemicals, B0725) and 10% (wt/wt) Triton X‐100 in ddH2O] at 37 °C for 2 days. After another 3×1 h's wash in PBS, the tissue was immersed in the primary antibody solution and incubated at 4 °C for 2 days, and another 3×1 h's wash in PBS was followed. Tissue was then incubated with the secondary antibodies at room temperature for 1 day, and washed 3 times by PBS. After that, the tissue was immersed in CUBIC‐R+ solution [45% (wt/wt) antipyrine (TCIchemicals, D1876), 30% (wt/wt) nicotinamide (TCIchemicals, N0078), 0.5% (vol/vol) N‐butyldiethanolamine in ddH2O] for transparency. Images were obtained using a Leica TCSSP8 DIVE confocal microscope and further reconstructed using the Imaris 9.0.1 (Bitplane, Switzerland) software.
The procedures for staining hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), Masson's trichrome, Picro‐Sirius red (PSR), Victoria Blue (VB), and EVG were carried out according to the instructions of the manufacturer. PSR and VB stain (PSR‐VB stain) were combined to specifically highlight elastic fibers and collagen in the same section. The Image Pro Plus 6.0 software (Media Cybernetics, Inc.) was used for image analyses. The investigators were blinded to different groups when performing histology staining and analyzing the data.

## Single‐Cell RNA Sequencing of Aortic Cells with 10× Chromium and Data Analysis
The abdominal aortas of male 16–18‐week‐old Cd34‐CreERT2;R26‐tdTomato; Apoe
−/− mice were harvested from sham‐treated and Ang II‐inducted groups (8 mice per group). After full digestion, the cell pellet was suspended in PBS and stained with CD45‐FITC (BD Pharmingen, 553079, 1:100) for 30 min, and then stained with LIVE/DEAD Fixable Near‐IR Dead Cell Stain Kit (1:1000) and Hoechst 33342 (Invitrogen, H3570, 1:1000) for 20 min on ice. After PBS washing, cells were resuspended in PBS and single nucleated live tdTomato+ or tdTomato+CD45− cells (Hoechst+ & Dead Cell Stain & tdTomato+) were sorted into PBS with 0.04% BSA using a BD FACS ARIA II Flow Cytometer (BD Biosciences). A ChromiumTM Single Cell Reagent Kit v3 Chemistry (10x Genomics) was used along with a standard protocol. The library was generated and sequenced on a Novaseq6000 PE150 platform (Illumina) with a paired‐end 150 bp sequencing strategy. The 10x ChromiumTM procedure, library generation, and sequencing were performed by Novogene Co., Ltd (Beijing, China). Moreover, the raw data of whole aortic cell datasets (Sham 4 weeks and Ang II 4 weeks) reported in our previous article were available in Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE221789). The scRNA‐seq datasets for human aortic aneurysms (GSE155468 and GSE166676) were collected from public repositories.
Single‐cell RNA‐sequencing raw data were processed using Cell Ranger (version 6.0). Aligned reads and gene‐barcode matrices were then generated from FASTQ files including Read 1, Read 2, and i7 index. Cellranger mkfastq demultiplexed raw data and produced FASTQ files, which were further processed by “Cellranger count” to align reads to the mouse reference to count the number of barcodes and UMI and to generate feature‐barcode matrices. At a sequencing depth of 30 mb per sample, 3008 genes were detected on average per cell.
The Seurat package (version 4.0.1) was used to perform cell filtration, data normalization, dataset integration, dimension reduction, cell clustering, and cluster visualization using the default parameters unless otherwise specified.[
 
] Briefly, cells expressing <400 or >7500 genes were filtered out to exclude noncell or cell aggregates, and cells with >5% mitochondrial gene percentage were also filtered out to exclude cells at a compromised state. Then doublet cells were filtered with the DoubletFinder R package.[
 
] After alignment and quality control, a total of 34 329 cells (Sham 4 weeks:5024 cells; Ang II 4 weeks: 12127 cells; Sham tdT: 6541 cells; Ang II tdT 10637 cells) were aggregation and included in the subsequent analysis. “ScaleData” was used to scale the top 2000 highly variable genes after log‐normalization. Principle component analysis was then performed on selected highly variable genes, and the first 30 principal components with a resolution of 0.5 were used for cell clustering and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization.

## Mouse Vascular Adventitial CD34+ Cell Isolation, Cell Culture and Differentiation
Mouse aortic stem/progenitor cells were isolated as previously described.[
 
] Briefly, the entire aorta was harvested and cut open. The adventitial layers were carefully dissected from the medial and intimal layers. The isolated aortic adventitia was then sliced into small pieces, seeded in a 0.04% gelatin (Sigma, G1393)‐coated T25 flask and maintained in complete cell culture medium, which consists of DMEM (Sigma, D6429), 10% Fetal Bovine Serum FBS (HyClone, SH30396.03), 100 U mL−1 penicillin‐streptomycin (Gibco, 15140122), 2% chick embryo extract (MP Biomedical), 100 nm retinoic acid (Sigma–Aldrich), 50 nm 2‐mercaptoethanol (Sigma–Aldrich), 2% B27 (Invitrogen), 1% N2 (Invitrogen) and 20 ng mL−1 bFGF (R&D Systems). Cells derived from the outgrowth of aortic adventitia were then passaged for cell enrichment. Primary aortic cells were maintained in a complete cell culture medium and passaged at a ratio of 1:3 every 3 days. The cell culture medium was changed every other day. When expanded to the fifth generation, CD34+ cells were sorted into DMEM with 20% FBS using a BD FACS ARIA II Flow Cytometer (BD Biosciences). The purified CD34+ cells were expanded and cultured for subsequent experiments.
DMEM containing 10% FBS and 1% P/S was used to maintain CD34+ cells in differentiation experiments. CD34+ cells were serum‐starved by culturing for 24 h in DMEM without serum and then treated with 200ng mL−1 PDGFBB (MCE, HY‐P7087) for 12 h to induce CD34+ cell activation. Moreover, CD34+ cells were also infected with Ad‐Pdgfrb (108 pfu mL−1) for 48 h and treated with 12 h 15 µm LY294002 (inhibitor of PI3K) combined with 200ng mL−1 PDGFBB (MCE, HY‐P7087) prior to any further analysis.

## Western Blot
Human aortic samples and mice abdominal aortic samples were collected and homogenized in RIPA lysis buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (78425, Thermo Scientific, 1:100); Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay kit (23225, Thermo Scientific). Protein extracts were boiled at 95 °C for 10 min in 1X loading buffer, then subjected to SDS‐PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. Followed by blocking for 1 h at room temperature in TBST with 5% no‐fat milk, the membranes were incubated with primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight. Following three washes in TBST buffer, the membranes were incubated with goat‐anti rabbit IgG (Beyotime) conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP), goat‐anti mouse IgG (Beyotime) secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. The membranes were then washed three times in TBST buffer, and chemiluminescent signals were detected with Pierce ECL western blotting substrates and analyzed by Image Lab (v6.0). The primary antibodies used are listed in the supporting information.

## Statistical Analysis
GraphPad Prism 9.0 was used for statistical analysis and image creation. Numbers refer to independent experiments or mice as indicated in figure legends. Data are presented as mean ± SD. For human and animal data, normality was tested by the D'Agostino–Pearson (n > 8) or Shapiro–Wilk (n = 3 to 8) test. Normal distribution data between two groups were tested by unpaired two‐tailed t‐test, with Welch correction for unequal variance; nonparametric Mann‐Whitney tests were used for abnormal distributions. For >2 groups, normal distribution data were tested by ordinary 1‐way analysis of variance with the Tukey test (equal SDs) or by Brown‐Forsythe and Welch analysis of variance tests with Tamhane's T2 test (unequal SDs). Survival curves were analyzed by log‐rank (Mantel‐Cox) test. For cell culture data, 4 groups of data were first tested by the Shapiro–Wilk test and then assessed by ordinary one‐way ANOVA analysis (Tukey's multiple comparisons test). 6 groups of data were tested by two‐way ANOVA test. p <0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

## Data Availability Statement
Data and R scripts related to the findings of this study are available upon request. The scRNA‐seq data of this study are available in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE260887). A previously published mouse scRNA‐seq dataset (GSE221789)[
 
] from our group, the normal mouse and CaCl2‐induced aneurysmal aorta datasets (GSE164678),[
 
] and two scRNA‐seq datasets for human aortic aneurysms[
 
] (GSE155468 and GSE166676) are available in public repositories.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Author Contributions
H.W., X.Y., and T.C. contributed equally to this work. Q.X., H.Y., Q.X., H.Z., J.L., and H.W. conceptualized and designed the research. H.W., X.Y., T.C., M.C., T.W., L.J., X.Z., K.C., Y.H., S.X., and B.Z. performed most bench work and data analyses. H.W. wrote the original draft. T.C., B.Y., L.J., J.C., T.Z., Q.X., and Q.X. reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.

## Supporting information
Supporting Information
Supporting Table 1
Supporting Table 2

## Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Alibaba‐Zhejiang University Joint Research Center of Future Digital Healthcare and Alibaba Cloud. The authors were also grateful to the Core Facility Platform of the Zhejiang University School of Medicine for technical assistance. The author would also like to thank Mr. Li Jing from the Department of Ultrasound for his guidance and assistance with ultrasound imaging of the mouse abdominal aorta. Graphical abstract and schematic diagrams (Figures  , , , ; Figure , Supporting Information) were drawn by Figdraw. National Natural Science Foundation of China (82400550, 82030008, 82170489, 82470428, 81700420, 32300945 and 31830039), Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LR22H020001, LQ23H020006 and LHDMZ24H02000), Ningbo Key Research and Development Program (2024Z232, 2024Z210), Medical and Health Science and Technology Projects of Zhejiang Province (2024KY281) and British Heart Foundation (PG/15/11/31279, PG/15/86/31723, PG/20/10458, and PG/23/11371).

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available in the supplementary material of this article.;