pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10635555PMC10635555.110635555106355553794386410.1371/journal.pone.0291943PONE-D-23-130601Research ArticleBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNANon-coding RNANatural antisense transcriptsMicroRNAsBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionGene regulationMicroRNAsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBrainHippocampusMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBrainHippocampusBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionBiology and life sciencesMolecular biologyMolecular biology techniquesSequencing techniquesRNA sequencingResearch and analysis methodsMolecular biology techniquesSequencing techniquesRNA sequencingBiology and life sciencesMolecular biologyMolecular biology techniquesSequencing techniquesDNA sequencingGene SequencingResearch and analysis methodsMolecular biology techniquesSequencing techniquesDNA sequencingGene SequencingBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBrainHypothalamusMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBrainHypothalamusBiology and Life SciencesComputational BiologyGene Regulatory NetworksBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene Regulatory NetworksBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsGlial CellsMacroglial CellsAstrocytesThe microRNA-mediated gene regulatory network in the hippocampus and hypothalamus of the aging mouse
miRNA-mediated gene regulatory network in the aging mouse brainhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9239-366XMunkhzulChoijamtsConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – original draft YiSun ShinConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigation KimJunhyungFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing LeeSeongsooFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing KimHyuntaeInvestigationResourcesWriting – review & editing MoonJong-SeokConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationSupervisionWriting – original draft https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9689-6937LeeMihyeConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationSupervisionWriting – original draft 1
Soonchunhyang Institute of Medi-Bio Science, Soonchunhyang University, Cheonan, Korea2
Department of Integrated Biomedical Science, Soonchunhyang University, Cheonan, Korea3
Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Medical Sciences, Soonchunhyang University, Asan, Korea4
Gwangju Center, Korea Basic Science Institute (KBSI), Gwangju, Korea5
Department of Systems Biotechnology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong, KoreaGrubić KezeleTanjaEditor , and minimal data set for are available as files.

## Data Availability
RNA sequencing data generated in this study are available in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under GSE231582. Additionally, the minimal data sets for Figs , and minimal data set for are available as files.

## Introduction
Aging is an irreversible, time-dependent process marked by the decline of physiological functions responsible for survival and fertility [ ]. This physiological decline leads to loss of organ and tissue function and an increased risk of cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease [ ]. Aging of the brain is often associated with a decline in motor, sensory, and cognitive functions, resulting in common neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease [ ]. To understand the aging processes, the molecular mechanisms of aging, as well as morphological and physiological changes in the aging brain, have been extensively investigated [ ]. In particular, analysis of gene expression changes associated with brain aging can characterize cellular events during aging and may allow prevention or treatment of age-related diseases [ ]. Gene expression changes during aging have been reported at cellular, tissue and organism level using Drosophila [ , ], Caenorhabditis elegans [ ], and mouse models [ ]. Several studies have identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) by comparing young and aged mice, mostly focusing on specific brain regions [ ]. Using RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), Shavlakadze et al. [ ] identified 229 age-regulated genes with a significant proportion implicated in immune-response signaling pathways in the hippocampal region of rats. Li et al. [ ] performed RNA-seq of the hippocampal regions of the mouse brain during aging and found DEGs associated with neuroinflammation. Ximerakis et al. [ ] performed single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) of whole brains of young and aged mice and found DEGs involved in protein synthesis, oxidative stress, inflammatory responses, and growth factor signaling. However, the underlying control mechanisms of genome-wide gene expression in aging are still not comprehensively understood.
miRNAs are small non-coding RNAs composed of 19–24 nucleotides that regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level [ , ]. miRNA-mediated regulation of gene expression is critical for most biological processes, including tissue development, cellular differentiation, cell proliferation, and cell death [ ]. In humans, 60% of protein-coding genes are regulated by miRNAs [ ]. Numerous studies have shown that miRNAs play an important role in regulating aging processes, such as cognitive decline, inflammation, and neurodegenerative diseases, in mouse brains [ – ]. Li et al. [ ] analyzed miRNA expression datasets from human prefrontal cortex obtained from individuals aged 2 days to 98 years and proposed that age-related miRNAs play an important role during development and the aging process of the human brain. Danka Mohammed et al. [ ] performed small-RNA sequencing (small-RNA seq) of mouse brain hippocampal regions in young and aged mice and identified a differentially upregulated miR-204 target Ephb2, which may be involved in age-associated cognitive decline. Inukai et al. [ ] investigated miRNA expression in whole brains of young (5-month-old) and aged (24–25-month-old) mice, and found that the predicted target genes of eight age-dependent upregulated miRNAs were enriched in the insulin signaling pathway, which plays a significant role in the aging process [ ].
Our understanding of miRNA-mediated regulation of gene expression in the complex aging process remains incomplete. We therefore performed simultaneous analysis of mRNA and miRNA expression in the hypothalamic and hippocampal regions of young and aged mouse brains. Our sequencing data indicated early signatures of aging when comparing gene expression in young (2-month-old) and aged (15-month-old) samples. Several DEGs, including C4b, were confirmed in publicly available single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) data from young (4-month-old) and aged (24-month-old) mouse brains. In addition, we identified differentially expressed miRNAs during aging and predicted the regulatory gene networks of miRNAs and their targets. The complement and coagulation cascades were notably associated with miRNA-mediated gene expression changes during brain aging in both the hypothalamus and hippocampus. Furthermore, coagulation factor III, a primary initiator of the extrinsic coagulation pathway, was detected at a higher level in aged mouse brain than in young mouse brain.

## Results

## Transcriptomic analysis of mRNA expression from the hippocampus and hypothalamus of aging mouse brains
Age-dependent gene expression changes in the mouse brain have been primarily examined in the late stages (24–27-month-old) of aging [ , ]. Here, we focused on understanding the early events in brain aging, which could reveal triggering factors of the aging process. We investigated mRNA and miRNA expression changes in the relatively early aging process using young (2-month-old) and aged (15-month-old) C57BL/6J mice. Brain tissue has a complex structure with multiple regions [ , ]. The hypothalamus is a crucial structure in the brain region involved in neuronal, endocrine, homeostatic, and aging processes [ – ]. Age-related changes are observed in the neurons of the hypothalamus that control metabolism and energy expenditure during obesity-associated aging [ , , ]. The hippocampus plays an important role in regulating learning, encoding memory, and memory consolidation, and participates in cognitive aging [ – ]. Age-related decline in hippocampal volume has been well documented and correlates with Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment [ – ]. We therefore examined tissue-specific signatures in both the hypothalamus and hippocampus during brain aging. Total RNA isolated from hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues of young and aged mice were used for both mRNA and small RNA sequencing ( and ). At the transcriptome level, 17,997 genes were analyzed in hypothalamic tissue ( ). Differential expression analysis revealed 74 downregulated genes and 65 upregulated genes ( ). A total of 17,818 genes were analyzed in hippocampal tissues ( ), with 117 downregulated genes and 83 upregulated genes (fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) ( ). Among differentially expressed genes (DEGs), we found 20 upregulated and 34 downregulated genes common to both hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues (fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) ( ). Brain region-specific transcriptome analysis also revealed hypothalamus- or hippocampus-specific DEGs, including 45 upregulated and 40 downregulated hypothalamic genes, and 63 upregulated and 83 downregulated hippocampal genes ( ). Individual DEGs identified in our data have also been reported in previous studies. Pluvinage et al. [ ] found that age-dependent upregulation of Cd22 in hippocampal tissue is related to cognitive decline in old mice. Furthermore, interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 3 (Irak3), a cytokine signaling modulator that play an important role in obesity and metabolic syndromes by regulating inflammatory responses, is upregulated with age [ ]. Li M et al. [ ] found cognitive dysfunction related Defb1, Spag6, and Ly9 genes that are differentially downregulated in the hippocampal tissue of aged mice (12 months) when compared with young mice (2 months), and these genes are reportedly involved in apoptosis and inflammation during aging.
 

## KEGG enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes
In our analysis, the expression level changes for most genes were under 1.5-fold, with the exception of 54 genes in both tissues, suggesting that changes in mRNA expression are not dramatic during brain aging. Although expression levels of individual genes are only slightly altered, the interconnected gene networks of DEGs can play a triggering role in the aging process and drive critical events. Therefore, to investigate biological pathways linked to DEGs, we performed Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis of upregulated and downregulated genes in hippocampal and hypothalamic tissues. For hypothalamic tissues, upregulated genes were significantly enriched in cytosolic DNA-sensing and B-cell receptor signaling pathways, whereas downregulated genes were enriched in pyrimidine metabolism and leukocyte transendothelial migration pathways ( ). For hippocampal tissues, KEGG pathway enrichment analysis revealed that upregulated genes were enriched in complement and coagulation cascades, and antigen processing and presentation pathways, whereas downregulated genes were enriched in ECM-receptor interaction and glycine, serine, and threonine metabolic pathways ( ). Taken together, during brain aging, upregulated genes are enriched in immune-related pathways in both hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues, while downregulated genes are associated with metabolic pathways. The aging brain exhibits systemic inflammation and impaired immune responses and undergoes decreased energy utilization and increased mitochondrial dysfunction [ – ]. Hypometabolism and inflammation, which are closely connected, correlate with cognitive decline and increase the risk of age-related diseases, including neurodegenerative disease [ , ]. Our results suggest that age-dependent gene expression changes underlie immune and metabolic system dysfunction, thus highlighting the relevance of gene regulatory networks in brain aging.

## Cell-type specific DEG analysis using single-nucleus RNA sequencing data
We next investigated from which cell types in the mouse brain the age-related signatures found in our analysis originated. We compared our bulk mRNA-seq data to publicly available snRNA-seq data from hypothalamic (GSE188646) [ ] and hippocampal (GSE161340) [ ] regions, although snRNA-seq only provides nuclear mRNA levels [ ]. First, we verified the total coverage of gene expression level analysis in the bulk mRNA-seq and snRNA-seq. In hypothalamic tissue, our bulk RNA-seq identified 17,997 genes, of which 57.7% were detected in snRNA-seq data [ ] ( ). In hippocampal tissue, our bulk mRNA-seq identified a total of 17,818 genes, of which 56% were found in snRNA-seq data [ ] ( ). We also analyzed the number of overlapping genes for each cell type and found a higher number of overlapping genes in neuronal cell types ( ). We then calculated the module score of relative expression for the genes common to both bulk mRNA-seq and snRNA-seq data within the identified cell types [ ]. In hypothalamic tissue, the module scores of astrocytes, microglia/macrophages, oligodendrocytes, tanycytes, and vascular leptomeningeal cells (VLMCs) were similar, whereas ependymocytes, oligodendrocyte precursors (OPCs), and pericytes/endothelial cells exhibited relatively higher scores. Neurons exhibited a distinctly high module score in the hypothalamus ( ). In hippocampal tissue, the module scores of neurons and interneurons were also higher than those of microglia, oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and OPCs ( ). Brain cells have more neurons compared with other non-neuronal glial cells [ ], which accounts for the high module scores in our analysis. We then evaluated DEG expression levels from our bulk mRNA-seq and snRNA-seq data. Among 65 upregulated and 74 downregulated genes from hypothalamic bulk mRNA-seq data, five upregulated and seven downregulated genes in astrocytes, seven upregulated and nine downregulated genes in neurons, and five upregulated and eight downregulated genes in oligodendrocytes were detected in snRNA-seq data ( ). In the hippocampus, 12 upregulated and 16 downregulated genes in astrocytes, 16 upregulated and 18 downregulated genes in neurons, and 14 upregulated and 16 downregulated genes in oligodendrocytes were found in snRNA-seq data among the total of 83 upregulated and 117 downregulated genes ( ). Only a small number of overlapping genes were detected in snRNA-seq data, probably due to inadequate coverage of low-abundance genes. For these overlapping gene sets, global correlation of expression level changes was not observed in bulk mRNA-seq and snRNA-seq data ( ). However, several genes showed age-dependent gene expression changes in specific cell types, similar to the results in bulk mRNA-seq ( , , ). The snRNA-seq samples were obtained from 3- and 24-month-old mice for the hypothalamus, and 4- and 24-month-old mice for the hippocampus. Our bulk RNA-seq samples were obtained from 2- and 15-month-old mice for both hypothalamic and hippocampal regions. We plotted the normalized expression levels for each individual gene using the same log10-scale as the publicly available snRNA-seq data (TP10k values) and our bulk mRNA-seq data (TPM values) at each aging time point. In hypothalamic tissue, we observed increased mRNA levels of C4b and Dpyd in astrocytes; Abca8a and Dpyd in oligodendrocytes; and Kcnh7, Glra3, Lrmda, and Plcxd3 in neurons in both snRNA-seq and our bulk mRNA-seq data ( ). C4b was previously defined an aging-induced gene and implicated in age-related macular degeneration [ , ]. The mRNA level of Nat8f1 in astrocytes decreased during brain aging ( ). In hippocampal tissue, we observed increased mRNA levels of C4b in astrocytes; C4b and C1ql3 in oligodendrocytes; and Fam8a1, despite the slight increase, in neurons ( ). Decreased mRNA levels of Phkg1 in astrocytes; Polr3e, Sgk2, and Gamt in oligodendrocytes; and Polr3e and Ndn in neurons were observed during brain aging in the snRNA-seq data ( ). Combined with the snRNA-seq data of 24-month aged mice, several early signatures of brain aging in bulk mRNA-seq data of 15-month-old aged mice were confirmed in specific cell types of brain tissue.
 

## Age-dependent microRNA expression changes in hippocampal and hypothalamic tissues
To investigate miRNA-mediated regulatory networks of gene expression during the early stages of brain aging, we performed small-RNA sequencing in the hypothalamus and hippocampal tissues of young (2-month-old) and aged (15-month-old) mice using the same RNA samples as for mRNA sequencing analysis ( ). A small number of differentially expressed miRNAs in hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues during brain aging were identified ( ). Among a total of 731 miRNAs analyzed in hypothalamic tissue, six miRNAs were upregulated, and three miRNAs were downregulated (fold change > 1.5; padj < 0.05) during brain aging ( , , and ). A total of 731 miRNAs were expressed in hippocampal tissue, of which 16 were upregulated and 29 were downregulated (fold change > 1.5; padj < 0.05) ( , , and ). Differentially expressed miRNAs miR-542-3p and miR-322-5p were validated by quantitative PCR ( ). A previous study, in which 49 upregulated and 31 downregulated miRNAs in hippocampal tissues between young (2 and 6 months) and aged (18 months) mice were detected, reported downregulation of miR-322-5p and miR-322-3p [ ]. In this study, three miRNAs, mmu-miR-5100, mmu-miR-8114, and mmu-miR-3084-3p were upregulated, and three miRNAs, mmu-miR-322-3p, mmu-miR-542-3p, and mmu-miR-412-5p were downregulated in both hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues ( ).
 

## Differentially expressed miRNAs and their target genes are involved in specific biological pathways during brain aging
To investigate the physiological effects of differentially expressed miRNAs, we first predicted miRNA target genes using Targetscan-Mouse v7.2 [ ]. We then selected a subset of target genes that were differentially expressed from our mRNA sequencing data. In hypothalamic tissue, 27 upregulated genes were predicted as potential targets for the three downregulated miRNAs, of which Abca8a, C4b and Xdh exhibited increased expression levels of more than two-fold ( ). For the six upregulated miRNAs, 40 downregulated genes, including Wdfy1, Aplnr, Dynlt1b, Nnt, Pdlim2, and Gabra2 (log2 fold change < -1), were predicted as potential targets ( ). In hippocampal tissue, 64 upregulated target genes for 26 downregulated miRNAs ( ) and 76 downregulated target genes for 15 upregulated miRNAs ( ) were predicted. Among them, 8 upregulated target genes, Abca8a, C4b, Pcdhb9, Pcdhb3, Xdh, Mlph, Zbtb16, and Zc3hav1, and 17 downregulated target genes, Wdfy1, Nnt, Pdlim2, Sgk2, Rnf122, Gabra2, Mog, Btbd16, Cldn11, Mal, Eln, Tspan2, Ddah2, Srd5a1, Cd248, Hist1h1c and Apcdd1, were commonly detected in both hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues. We then analyzed a gene regulatory network of miRNA-targeted DEGs using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING). We found densely interconnected networks of miRNA target genes, suggesting that miRNAs mediate functional networks through gene expression regulation ( ). KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of potential miRNA target genes with differential expression during aging also indicated the functional relevance of miRNA-mediated gene expression regulation. In the hypothalamus, upregulated target genes C4b, Fcgr2b, and Irf8 are enriched in the complement and coagulation cascades, which are targeted by downregulated miR-322-3p or miR-542-3p in hypothalamic tissues ( and ). Downregulated genes targeted by upregulated miRNAs were significantly enriched in dilated cardiomyopathy, adrenergic signaling, and prolactin signaling pathways in hypothalamic tissue ( ). In the hippocampus, upregulated genes targeted by downregulated miRNAs were significantly enriched in the complement and coagulation cascades, as well as antigen processing and presentation signaling pathways ( ). Cd22, which is upregulated in the aged brain, restrains phagocytic capacity and phagocytic clearance of protein aggregates and cellular debris [ ]. In our analysis, we found, in addition to Cd22, several upregulated genes involved in antigen processing and presentation signaling pathways, which is concordant with the decreased expression of relevant miRNAs ( ). Downregulated genes targeted by upregulated miRNAs were significantly enriched in the arginine and proline metabolic pathways ( ). Taken together, our gene network and functional enrichment analyses suggest that miRNA-mediated gene expression regulation induces age-dependent molecular and cellular changes.

## Gene regulatory network of differentially expressed miRNAs and their target genes in aged brain
From our mRNA and small-RNA sequencing data, we identified the network of differentially expressed miRNAs and their predicted target genes that are commonly found in the hypothalamus and hippocampus. Upregulated Pcdhb3, Zc3hav1, Pcdhb9, C4b, Zbtb16, Mlph, Xdh, and Abca8a are linked to downregulated miRNAs miR-322-3p and miR-542-3p as miRNA–target gene pairs ( ). Upregulated miRNAs miR-3084-3p and miR-8114, and downregulated target genes Sgk2, Gabra2, Nnt, Wdfy1, Hist1h1c, Pdlim2, Ddah2, Rnf122, Cldn11, and Tspan2 ( ) also exhibit miRNA–target gene relationships. We then investigated whether age-related differentially expressed target genes are repressed by their corresponding miRNAs. C4b expression levels decreased upon transfection with miR-322-3p and miR-542-3p mimics in the astrocyte cell line ( ).
 Relieving miRNA-mediated suppression of gene expression during brain aging can contribute to C4b upregulation, which is a noticeable aging signature in our analysis. C4b is a key component of the complement system that plays an important role in innate immunity and links the immune system to the coagulation pathway [ , ]. Higher C4b levels are associated with inflammation and tissue destruction [ , ]. Dysfunction of the complement and coagulation systems are involved in age-related macular degeneration, thrombosis, and hemorrhage [ ]. Our study found aging-dependent changes of miRNAs and target genes involved in the complement and coagulation pathways (Figs , and ). Therefore, we examined the alteration of a key effector in the complement and coagulation pathways in aged mouse brain samples. We analyzed the levels of coagulation factor III, a primary initiator of the extrinsic coagulation pathway, and 110 soluble proteins, including cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors, with the Mouse XL Cytokine Array Kit in young and aged brains using the same samples as for mRNA and small-RNA sequencing. The levels of most other cytokines and soluble proteins did not significantly change in the aged brains ( ). However, higher coagulation factor III levels were observed in the aged brains than in the young brains ( ). Collectively, our data suggest dysregulation of complement and coagulation pathways as a prominent feature of gene expression changes during brain aging.

## Discussion and conclusions
miRNA-mediated regulatory networks in the early stages of normal brain aging are not comprehensively understood. We therefore performed simultaneous mRNA and small-RNA sequencing of hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues from young and aged mouse brains, which enabled identification of novel miRNA-mediated regulatory networks ( ). The number of genes with significant changes is limited, and the overall ranges of gene expression changes are small in both hypothalamic and hippocampal tissue during the early stage of normal brain aging (2 months and 15 months). Previous studies reported more variability in differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNAs in hippocampal tissue at later stages (2 months and 18 months [ ], and 2 months and 24 months [ ]) of aging. However, we identified several aging-related differentially expressed mRNAs ( ) and miRNAs ( , ) in hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues. The early signatures revealed by our study can provide insight into triggering factors that induce age-dependent progressive molecular and cellular changes, which warrant further investigation. Our RNA-seq data were generated from the hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues of young and aged male mice. Therefore, further analysis of aging in female mouse brain is also needed to identify both common and sex-specific aging processes.
Recently, single-cell sequencing has been performed to understand cell type-specific aging processes in mouse brains [ , ]. Although snRNA-seq data for the hypothalamus and hippocampus only cover approximately half of the genes analyzed from our bulk mRNA-seq, we tried to estimate the cell-type origin of DEGs in our bulk mRNA-seq data using snRNA-seq data. Only a small number of genes among approximately 100 DEGs of the bulk mRNA-seq data were found in the snRNA-seq data. DEGs that change sensitively in response to cellular signaling or environmental stimulation may be expressed in low abundance and can therefore not be detected by snRNA-seq analysis [ – ]. Several DEGs of our bulk mRNA-seq data similarly showed changed expression in snRNA-seq data, especially in oligodendrocytes, even though the total genes analyzed by bulk mRNA-seq were mainly found in the snRNA-seq data of neurons. Compared with neurons, which comprise approximately 50% of mouse whole brain tissue, oligodendrocytes make up a smaller proportion [ ]. However, gene expression changes during aging seem to be particularly dynamic in oligodendrocytes. When expression levels of DEGs detected in our bulk mRNA-seq data were evaluated in snRNA-seq, C4b in particular was shown to be upregulated in several cell types, including hippocampal astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, and hypothalamic astrocytes ( ). Previous studies have reported that isolated hypothalamic [ ] and hippocampal astrocytes [ ] exhibit increased C4b expression during aging. DEGs only detected in bulk mRNA-seq data need to be further validated with a sensitive method to capture small changes at the single cell level, which would further our understanding of cell type-specific changes in gene expression during brain aging.
In this study, we identified specific pathways related to gene expression changes during the early aging process ( ). Immune-related pathways were significantly enriched in DEGs. Specifically, our mRNA-seq analysis showed notable upregulation of Cd22, previously reported to regulate B cell receptor signaling during aging [ ], consistent with another previous report [ ]. We also analyzed miRNA-mediated gene regulatory networks using miRNA and mRNA expression profiles in young and aged mouse brains ( ). miRNA-target genes with differential expression in our sequencing data are enriched in immune-related biological pathways, including the complement and coagulation cascades, the IL-17 signaling pathway, antigen processing and presentation, and chemokine signaling. Giannos and Prokopidis [ ] performed a meta-analysis of gene expression data of hippocampal tissues of young (5–8 months) and aged (21–26 months) male rats to identify clustered protein–protein interaction networks of DEGs. Similar to our result, their highly-ranked cluster of 19 age-related hippocampal DEGs was also associated with immune response. These independent analyses of aging in mouse and rats indicate that immune system and immune-related responses are closely related to the early aging process, which is consistent with previous findings that immune system dysfunction has a great effect on aging [ , ].
C4b, a representative gene in the complement system, was upregulated and targeted by two downregulated miRNAs in the hypothalamus, and thirteen downregulated miRNAs in the hippocampus during brain aging ( ). In particular, miR-542-3p, miR-322-3p, and C4b form a gene regulatory network commonly found in the hypothalamus and hippocampus. Serum concentrations of complement components have previously been reported to increase in the brains of aged mice [ ], and are associated with increased susceptibility to neurodegeneration. A knockout mouse model of C1q, another component of the complement system [ ], exhibited less cognitive decline [ , ]. The complement system is interconnected with the coagulation system [ ], of which coagulation factor III was found to be elevated in our aged mouse brain sample at the protein level. Aging is associated with thrombosis and bleeding disorders [ – ]. In addition, thrombin dysregulation leads to inflammatory brain diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease [ – ]. Zorzetto et al. [ ] found that patients with Alzheimer’s disease have statistically significant increased C4b expression compared with healthy controls, and suggested that increased C4b explain the possible role of elevated complement component C4 protein levels in Alzheimer’s disease development. Stein et al. [ ] indicated that elevated C4b level may be associated with increased inflammation in aging brains. Taken together with previous findings, our data indicate the necessity of clearly defining the direct effects of a gene regulatory network on the complement and coagulation cascades, which could uncover the critical gene regulatory network of miRNAs and their target genes in brain aging.
Herein, we presented mRNA and miRNA profiles generated from the same samples of mouse hypothalamus and hippocampus tissues, which covered age-dependent changes from 2 to 15 months. Our data provides a valuable resource to understand miRNA-mediated gene expression regulation during the early stage of brain aging. In addition, the identification of other potential age-dependent regulators of gene expression, such as circular RNA and long non-coding RNA, could reveal complex gene regulatory networks involved in aging processes.

## Materials and methods

## Animal studies
All experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Soonchunhyang University (protocol number #SCH19-0027). Male C57BL/6J mice (2 months old for young, n = 6; 15 months old for aged, n = 6) were obtained from ORIENT BIO (Seongnam-si, Korea) and Korea Basic Science Institute (KBSI) Gwangju Center (Gwangju, Korea). Each cage contained 5–6 mice. Mice were fed Harlan 2018S (ENVIGO Co., LTD) ad libitum. The feed was sterilized using irradiation and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Water and Beta-Chip bedding (Abedd, LTE E-001) were autoclaved at 121°C for 20 minutes before use. Mice were housed in specific-pathogen free environment. Temperature and humidity were maintained at 18–22°C and 40–60%, respectively. Ventilation rate was 10–15 times/hour (All Fresh Air System). Mice were kept in 12 h light (7:00–19:00)/12 h dark cycle (19:00–7:00). We sterilized the equipment used using an autoclave, and goods that were non-autoclavable were sterilized with H2O2.

## Brain tissue isolation
We isolated the hypothalamus and hippocampus of the mouse brains. Tissues were dissociated with Tissue Extraction Reagent I (FNN0071, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) or TRIzol™ Reagent (15596026, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 min using a BeadBug™ microtube homogenizer (Z763713, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Total RNA was isolated from hypothalamus and hippocampus tissue lysates using TRIzol™ Reagent (15596026, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

## Cell lines and transfection
Astrocyte cell line C8-D1A (astrocyte type I clone from C57/BL6 strains) was purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA). Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cells were subsequently transfected with 40 nM mmu-miR-542-3p, mmu-miR-322-3p, and NC mimics (GenePharma, Shanghai, China) using Lipofectamine (RNAiMAX Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were harvested after 48 hours of transfection for the analysis.

## Quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted from cells using TRIzol™ Reagent (15596026, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and DNase I. cDNA synthesis was performed with 0.5 μg total RNA using ReverTra Ace qPCR RT Master Mix reverse transcription kit (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan). Using the synthesized cDNA, quantitative PCR (qPCR) was used to determine mRNA levels, normalized to universal housekeeping reference gene 36B4 levels, and qPCR was performed using SYBR Green Realtime PCR Master Mix (Toyobo). Mature miRNA levels were identified using TaqMan microRNA assays (Applied Biosystems, Bedford, MA, USA) and normalized to U6 snRNA levels. The comparative cycle threshold (Ct) method was used to determine relative mature miRNA and mRNA levels. Primer sequences used for RT-PCR were as follows: 36B4, forward 5′-AACGGCAGCATTTATAACCC-3′, reverse 5′-CGATCTGCAGACACACACTG-3′; C4b, forward 5′-ACTTCAGCAGCTTAGTCAGGG-3′, reverse 5′-GTCCTTTGTTTCAGGGGACAG-3′.

## Analysis of coagulation factor III levels
Whole male mouse brains were isolated and lysed in Tissue Extraction Reagent I (FNN0071, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to quantify coagulation factor III levels. Tissue lysates were centrifuged at 15,300 × g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatant protein concentrations determined using the Bradford assay (500–0006, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Mouse brain protein lysates were analyzed for coagulation factor III and 110 soluble proteins, including chemokines, cytokines, and growth factors, using the Mouse XL Cytokine Array Kit (ARY028, R&D systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 100 μg protein lysate was incubated with nitrocellulose membranes containing 111 different captured antibodies, printed in duplicate, for 16 h at 4°C. Nitrocellulose membranes were subsequently incubated with a detection antibody diluted in assay buffer for 2 h at room temperature and then incubated with streptavidin–horseradish peroxidase (HRP) in assay buffer for 30 min at room temperature. Immunoreactive spots on the nitrocellulose membranes were detected using the chemical reagent mix and then exposed to X-ray film. In this study, multiple exposure times were used. Pixel densities from positive signals on the developed X-ray film were collected using a transmission mode scanner and analyzed with image analysis software (HLImage++ Version 25.0.0r, https://www.wvision.com/QuickSpots.html, Western Vision Software, Salt Lake City, UT, USA). Pixel densities were quantified and the relative change in analyte levels was determined.

## mRNA library preparation and sequencing
Three biological replicates (three mice) were prepared from each group of young (2-month-old) and aged (15-month-old) male mice. Total RNA was extracted from the mouse brain tissue using TRIzol (Invitrogen) reagent. For bulk-RNA sequencing, a 2100 Bio-Analyzer and RNA 6000 Nano Kit (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) were used to assess RNA quantity and quality. Total RNA from each sample was used to generate mRNA sequencing libraries provided by BGI Genomics Co., Ltd. Briefly, poly-A-containing mRNA molecules were purified using poly-T oligo-attached magnetic beads. After purification, the mRNA was cleaved with divalent cations at high temperature, and the cleaved RNA fragments were subsequently converted into single-strand cDNA using reverse transcriptase and random primers. The second strand of cDNA was synthesized using DNA Polymerase I and RNase H. After PCR amplification, the products were purified and enriched. DNA nanoballs were loaded into patterned nanoarrays, and 100 bp pair-end reads were performed using the BGISEQ-500 platform for further data analysis.

## Small-RNA library preparation and sequencing
Small-RNA sequence libraries were prepared using the TruSeq Small RNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), with 5 μg total RNA per sample for 12 samples. Sequencing adapters were attached to the RNA molecules, which were used as primer-binding sites during reverse transcription and PCR amplification of the cDNA sequence pool. The amplified cDNA fragments were separated on agarose gel, and the band corresponding to the miRNA fragments with ligated adapters was excised for subsequent sequencing. The library ranged from 145 to 160 bp. cDNA fragments were sequenced by read-length using the sequence-by-synthesis method on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform.

## mRNA sequence analysis
For mRNA sequencing, low-quality raw sequence reads, reads with adapters, and reads with unknown bases were filtered using SOAPnuke software (https://github.com/BGI-flexlab/SOAPnuke) to yield clean reads [ ]. Next, filtered clean reads were mapped onto the reference mouse genome (Mus musculus, UCSC mm10) (https://genome.ucsc.edu/) using Hierarchical Indexing for Spliced Alignment of Transcripts (HISAT) (http://www.ccb.jhu.edu/software/hisat/index.shtml) [ ]. StringTie (http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/stringtie) was used to predict novel genes [ ]. Cuffcompare (Cufflinks tools) (http://cole-trapnell-lab.github.io/cufflinks) [ ] was used to compare the reconstructed transcripts to the reference annotation, and CPC tools (http://cpc.cbi.pku.edu.cn) [ ] were used to predict the coding potential of novel transcripts. Subsequently, the gene expression levels of each sample were determined using Bowtie2 (http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/Bowtie2/index.shtml) [ ] and RSEM (http://deweylab.biostat.wisc.edu/RSEM) [ ]. To reflect gene expression correlations between samples, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficients of all gene expression levels and displayed these coefficients using heat maps. All samples were hierarchically clustered according to the expression levels of all genes.

## Small-RNA sequence analysis
Raw sequencing reads were filtered based on quality and trimmed using adapter sequences. The trimmed reads form a unique cluster that matches both sequence identity and read length. The reads were aligned to the reference mouse genome (Mus musculus, UCSC mm10) (https://genome.ucsc.edu/) and miRBase v21 (http://www.mirbase.org/) [ ] precursor miRNAs to identify known and novel miRNAs, respectively. The miRDeep2 (https://www.mdc-berlin.de/8551903/en/) [ ] (Friedländer, et al., 2008) algorithm was used to predict potential hairpin structures. Unique cluster reads were then sequentially matched against the reference mouse genome, miRBase v21, and the non-coding RNA database, Rfam9.1 (http://rfam.xfam.org/) [ ], to classify the known miRNAs. Read counts for each miRNA were extracted from the mapped miRNAs to determine abundance. Reproducibility was evaluated using Pearson’s coefficient of the log2(Count+1)-value. For the range -1 ≤ r ≤ 1, values approaching 1 represent greater similarity between samples. Differentially expressed miRNAs in young and aged mice were identified using DESeq2 algorithms (https://github.com/mikelove/DESeq2) [ ].

## Differential gene expression analysis
For small-RNA sequencing, the reads for each miRNA were normalized to the total reads of each sample. The normalized values were then converted to reads per million (RPM), calculated as miRNA count/total count of each sample x 1 million, to identify differentially expressed miRNAs. Fold-change and nbinomWald Test from DESeq2 algorithms were used for statistical analysis of each comparison pair. Selection criteria for differentially expressed mRNA and miRNAs included fold change ≥ 1.5 and an adjusted p-value < 0.05. Volcano plots for mRNA sequencing were generated using the EnhancedVolcano v1.12 R package (https://github.com/kevinblighe/EnhancedVolcano) [ ]. Scatter plots for small-RNA sequencing were generated using the ggplot2 R package (https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org).

## Comparison of individual age-related genes in bulk RNA-seq and snRNA-seq datasets
We compared changes in the expression of individual candidate genes during brain aging in hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues from publicly available snRNA-seq hypothalamic (GSE188646) (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE188646) and hippocampal (GSE161340) (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE161340) datasets to our bulk RNA-seq datasets. RNA counts from each cell type were normalized and transcripts per 10,000 (TP10k)-values were calculated using the Seurat R package (https://satijalab.org/seurat/) [ ]. We then used the log10 scale to normalize the TP10K values of each transcript of the identified cell types in snRNA-seq datasets. For our bulk RNA-seq datasets, which were generated from hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues, we used the fragments per kilobase of transcript per million fragments mapped (FPMK)-count of each identified gene and divided it by the gene length. We then multiplied these values by one million and divided by the total number of identified genes to calculate normalized transcript per million (TPM) values. We then used the log10 scale-normalized TPM values from each transcript to compare individual RNA counts in the publicly available snRNA-seq datasets and our bulk RNA-seq datasets. To analyze common genes in both bulk mRNA-seq and snRNA-seq data within the identified cell types, we used module score function (Seurat::AddModuleScore()) from the Seurat R package, which represents average expression level of each cluster on single-cell level, subtracted by the aggregated expression of control sets [ ].

## miRNA target prediction and functional analysis
Targetscan-Mouse v7.2 (https://www.targetscan.org/mmu_72/) [ ] was used for target prediction analysis of the differentially expressed miRNAs. Predicted target genes from differentially expressed miRNAs were analyzed with KEGG pathway enrichment (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/kegg1b.html) [ ] using the “pathfindR” R package (https://github.com/egeulgen/pathfindR) [ ]. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. Enriched KEGG pathways and differentially up- and downregulated target genes were constructed and visualized using Cytoscape v3.9.0-BETA1 software (https://cytoscape-builds.ucsd.edu/Cytoscape-3.9.0/beta1/) [ ]. Differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNA in hippocampal and hypothalamic tissues were also visualized using the Cytoscape software.

## miRNA–mRNA regulatory network and core subnetwork analysis
Upregulated and downregulated differentially expressed target genes were mapped into the STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) (https://string-db.org/) database (stringApp v1.7.1) (https://github.com/RBVI/stringApp/releases) [ ], and a confidence score ≥ 0.1 was used to assess the information of the gene regulatory network between target genes visualized with Cytoscape v3.9.0-BETA1. The Cytoscape plug-in app MCODE v2.0 (https://mcode.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) [ ] was applied to the gene regulatory networks to calculate the major hub target genes, and the top ten targets were ranked by the degree method using the Cytoscape plugin app cytoHubba v0.1 (https://apps.cytoscape.org/apps/cytohubba) [ ] to identify significant functional modules.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## mRNA sequencing analysis of the hypothalamus and hippocampus of young and aged mice.
(A). Heatmap of Pearson’s correlation coefficients for gene expression in each young and aged mouse brain hypothalamus and hippocampus sample. The X and Y axes represent each sample, and the color represents the correlation coefficient. (B, C). Volcano plots of all detected genes from mRNA sequencing analysis of young versus aged hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues. Differentially upregulated genes are colored red, differentially downregulated genes are colored blue, and non-significant genes are colored gray. The cut-off was set as fold change > 1.5, and statistical significance was set as padj < 0.05.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Number of gene distributions covered for cell types from hypothalamic and hippocampal tissue.
(A) Bar graph showing the number of gene distributions covered for each cell type in hypothalamic tissue in bulk RNA sequencing versus single nucleus RNA sequencing datasets. (B) Bar graph showing the number of gene distributions covered for each cell type in hippocampal tissue in bulk RNA sequencing versus single nucleus RNA sequencing datasets.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Correlation analysis of differentially expressed genes in both our bulk mRNA sequencing and publicly available single nucleus RNA sequencing datasets.
(A). Pearson’s correlation analysis of Log2FC expression of differentially upregulated genes in bulk mRNA sequencing (cut-off value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) and single nucleus RNA sequencing (cut-off value: log2FC > 0.1, padj < 0.05) datasets from hypothalamic tissue. Linear regression is indicated with the colored line. The Pearson’s correlation coefficient (R2) and p-value are displayed in the graph. Gene expression changes in hypothalamic astrocytes (R2 = 0.65, p = 0.098), oligodendrocytes (R2 = 0.01, p = 0.85) and neurons (R2 = 0.01, p = 0.78) are not correlated. (B) Pearson’s correlation analysis of Log2FC expression of differentially downregulated genes in bulk mRNA sequencing (cut-off value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) and single nucleus RNA sequencing (cut-off value: log2FC > 0.1, padj < 0.05) datasets from hypothalamic tissue. Linear regression is indicated with the colored line. The Pearson’s correlation coefficient (R2) and p-value are displayed in the graph. Gene expression changes in hypothalamic astrocytes (R2 = 0.01, p = 0.81), oligodendrocytes (R2 = 0.04, p = 0.61) and neurons (R2 = 0.15, p = 0.3) are not correlated. (C) Pearson’s correlation analysis of Log2FC expression of differentially upregulated genes in bulk mRNA sequencing (cut-off value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) and single nucleus RNA sequencing (cut-off value: log2FC > 0.1, padj < 0.05) datasets from hippocampal tissue. Linear regression is indicated with the colored line. The Pearson’s correlation coefficient (R2) and p-value are displayed in the graph. Gene expression changes in hippocampal astrocytes (R2 = 0.84, p = 2.9e-05) and oligodendrocytes (R2 = 0.34, p = 0.029) are significantly correlated, whereas gene expression changes in hippocampal neurons (R2 = 0.0044, p = 0.81) are not correlated. (D) Pearson’s correlation analysis of Log2FC expression of differentially downregulated genes in bulk mRNA sequencing (cut-off value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) and single nucleus RNA sequencing datasets (cut-off value: log2FC > 0.1, padj < 0.05) from hippocampal tissue. Linear regression is indicated with the colored line. The Pearson’s correlation coefficient (R2) and p-value are displayed in the graph. Gene expression changes in hippocampal astrocytes (R2 = 0.00035, p = 0.95), oligodendrocytes (R2 = 0.003, p = 0.84), and neurons (R2 = 0.0061, p = 0.76) are not correlated.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## miRNA sequencing analysis of the hypothalamus and hippocampus of young and aged mice.
(A) Heatmaps of Pearson’s correlation coefficients of log2(Count+1) values for miRNA expression of each young and aged mouse brain from hypothalamic and hippocampal tissue samples. The X and Y axes represent each sample, and the color represents the correlation coefficient. (B, C) Volcano plots of detected miRNA expression from miRNA sequencing datasets of young and aged mouse brain from (B) hypothalamic and (C) hippocampal tissues. Differentially expressed genes (cutoff value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) are colored red for upregulated genes, blue for downregulated genes, and gray for non-significant genes. (D, E) Validation of miRNA expression from small-RNA sequencing datasets by qRT-PCR in the (D) hypothalamic and (E) hippocampal tissues (n = 4). Data are presented as mean ± SEM. **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05. (F, G) Heatmap of differentially expressed miRNAs (cut-off value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) count numbers (TPM log2) in young and aged mouse brain samples from (F) hypothalamic and (G) hippocampal tissues.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## Differentially downregulated miRNAs predicted to target differentially upregulated mRNAs in hypothalamic tissues during aging.
Heatmap shows differentially upregulated gene expression (cut-off value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) predicted to be targeted by differentially downregulated miRNAs (cut off value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) in mRNA sequencing and small-RNA sequencing datasets from hypothalamic tissue.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## Differentially upregulated miRNAs predicted to target differentially downregulated mRNAs in hypothalamic tissues during aging.
Heatmap shows differentially downregulated gene expression (cut-off value: fold change > -1.5, padj < 0.05) predicted to be targeted by differentially upregulated miRNAs (cut off value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) in mRNA sequencing and small-RNA sequencing datasets from hypothalamic tissue.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## Differentially downregulated miRNAs predicted to target differentially upregulated mRNAs in hippocampal tissues during aging.
Heatmap shows differentially upregulated gene expression (cut-off value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) predicted to be targeted by differentially downregulated miRNAs (cut-off value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) in mRNA sequencing and small-RNA sequencing datasets from hippocampal tissue.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S8 Fig

## Differentially upregulated miRNAs predicted to target differentially downregulated mRNAs in hippocampal tissues during aging.
Heatmap shows differentially downregulated gene expression (cut-off value: fold change > -1.5, padj < 0.05) predicted to be targeted by differentially upregulated miRNAs (cut-off value: fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.05) in mRNA sequencing and small-RNA sequencing datasets from hippocampal tissue.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S9 Fig

## Protein–protein interaction (PPI) network of miRNA-mediated differentially expressed target genes in hypothalamic and hippocampal tissues during aging.
(A) PPI analysis of differentially upregulated genes targeted by differentially downregulated miRNAs in hypothalamic tissues, derived from mRNA sequencing datasets and small-RNA sequencing datasets. PPI network analyzed by STRING and MCODE, node sizes for target genes are determined by the degree method, and node color indicates the cell type. (B) PPI analysis of differentially downregulated genes targeted by differentially upregulated miRNAs in hypothalamic tissues, derived from mRNA sequencing datasets and small-RNA sequencing datasets. PPI network analyzed by STRING and MCODE, node sizes for target genes are determined by the degree method, and node color indicates the cell type. (C) PPI analysis of differentially upregulated genes targeted by differentially downregulated miRNAs in hippocampal tissues, derived from mRNA sequencing datasets and small-RNA sequencing datasets. PPI network analyzed by STRING and MCODE, node sizes for target genes are determined by the degree method, and node color indicates the cell type. (D) PPI analysis of differentially downregulated genes targeted by differentially upregulated miRNAs in hippocampal tissues, derived from mRNA sequencing datasets and small-RNA sequencing datasets. PPI network analyzed by STRING and MCODE, node sizes for target genes are determined by the degree method, and node color indicates the cell type.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## mRNA sequencing datasets from hippocampal and hypothalamic tissues of young and aged mouse brain during aging.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## miRNA sequencing datasets from hippocampal and hypothalamic tissues of young and aged mouse brain during aging.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Dataset

## Minimal data set for .
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Dataset

## Minimal data sets for , .
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank the members of our laboratories for discussions and assistance throughout this project.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0291943.r001Decision Letter 0
Grubić KezeleTanjaAcademic Editor© 2023 Tanja Grubić Kezele2023Tanja Grubić Kezelehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
28 Jun 2023

PONE-D-23-13060The microRNA-mediated gene regulatory network in the hippocampus and hypothalamus of the aging mousePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Lee,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================
Based on the reviewers' suggestions, the paper needs major revision.  The reviewers' comments can be found below.
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Aug 12 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Tanja Grubić Kezele, Ph.D., M.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure:
“This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (Grant NRF-
2021R1A2C4002421 to M.L.; 2019M3E5D3073092 to M.L.; 2021R1C1C1007810 to J.M.) and
Soonchunhyang University Research Fund (Soonchunhyang University Research Fund 2021 to J.M.).”
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed.
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript:
“We thank the members of our laboratories for discussions and assistance throughout this
project. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (Grant NRF-
2021R1A2C4002421 to M.L.; 2019M3E5D3073092 to M.L.; 2021R1C1C1007810 to J.M.) and
Soonchunhyang University Research Fund (Soonchunhyang University Research Fund 2021 to J.M.).”
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form.
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows:
“This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (Grant NRF-
2021R1A2C4002421 to M.L.; 2019M3E5D3073092 to M.L.; 2021R1C1C1007810 to J.M.) and
Soonchunhyang University Research Fund (Soonchunhyang University Research Fund 2021 to J.M.).”
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
5. PLOS requires an ORCID iD for the corresponding author in Editorial Manager on papers submitted after December 6th, 2016. Please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field. This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager. Please see the following video for instructions on linking an ORCID iD to your Editorial Manager account: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_xcclfuvtxQ
6. We note that you have included the phrase “data not shown” in your manuscript. Unfortunately, this does not meet our data sharing requirements. PLOS does not permit references to inaccessible data. We require that authors provide all relevant data within the paper, Supporting Information files, or in an acceptable, public repository. Please add a citation to support this phrase or upload the data that corresponds with these findings to a stable repository (such as Figshare or Dryad) and provide and URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers that may be used to access these data. Or, if the data are not a core part of the research being presented in your study, we ask that you remove the phrase that refers to these data.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: In this study, the authors aimed to elucidate molecular mechanisms involved in mouse brain aging through the profiling of mRNA and miRNA changes in the hypothalamus and hippocampus of young and aged mice. Moreover, utilizing published scRNA-seq data from the regions under study, they assigned a subset of the differentially expressed genes to different brain cell types and highlighted increased levels of C4b in astrocytes in both brain regions, concomitantly providing independent validation of their findings through the scRNA-seq data used. Then, they identified common miRNA changes in the hypothalamus and hippocampus and experimentally validated reduced levels of miR-542-3p and miR-322-5p in both regions. They proceeded with predicting the targets of differentially expressed miRNAs in conjunction with their transcriptomic data, focusing on transcripts displaying inverse expression patterns to their predicted regulatory miRNAs. Next, they identified the interconnections of these miRNA-regulated transcripts, highlighting a common hypothalamic and hippocampal signature entailing the involvement of the complement and coagulation cascades, in which C4b is involved. They provide functional evidence on the regulatory role of miR-322-3p and miR-542-3p on C4b expression levels, through in vitro analyses and show that coagulation factor III, involved in the coagulation pathway, is increased in aged mice.
This study highlights a functional miRNA-miRNA network, possibly mediated by astrocytes, which affects the coagulation pathway during aging. To this end, this study further extends previous research reporting C4b increases during aging by providing a miRNA-mediated mechanistic insight.
Below are some comments that could help improve the manuscript:
- The text, especially the introduction part, could be more concise to help the reader. I would suggest the introduction to be more focused. Avoid citing several, in most cases very old references, that obscure the reader. Please carefully, revise the references, as in several cases they are not cited in the most appropriate position in the manuscript, and reduce the references cited by keeping the most relevant ones.
- As the authors have stated, their RNA-seq and small RNA-seq analysis identified a relatively low number of differentially expressed genes and miRNAs compared to similar studies. It would be nice if they provide an explanation of possible reasons, that could be for example related with the differential expression analysis packages they used. DeSeq2, used for the miRNA analysis in this study, is commonly used for differential expression analysis. In the results section, instead of commenting on selected transcripts (Cd22, Irak3), it would be better to compare their findings with previous similar studies (for example ref 10 and https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2020.12.001 for mRNA analyses) and provide a schematic representation (e.g. Venn diagrams) of the detected overlaps.
- The authors highlighted C4b upregulation during aging, which has also been reported in neurodegenerative and neurological disorders, such as Alzheimer’s and Schizophrenia. To my opinion it would be interesting to include in the discussion a kind of parallelism of this finding between aging and neurodegenerative / neurological disorders.
- Regarding materials and methods: Please provide details on the miRNA mimics used for the transfections and state at which point following transfection the cells were harvested for further analysis. Please provide the primer sequences used for C4b qRT PCR and comment on the selection of the housekeeping gene used. Also, provide a description either in the materials and methods or in the corresponding figure legend (Figure 2) of the module score.
Regarding figures: Figure 3: E the statistics symbol is missing. If there is no statistical significance in the result please note it in the legend. C: include the statistic symbols (* , **) meaning to the legend. Figure S4: D: missing the graph for miR-322-5p validation E: please check spelling. The figure shows miR-522-3p. Also, the statistics symbols are missing from E. If no statistical significance, please note it in the legend. Include the statistic symbols (**) meaning to the legend
Reviewer #2: The manuscript provides a comprehensive and meticulous analysis of age-related changes in gene expression and microRNA (miRNA) profiles in the hypothalamus and hippocampus regions of the mouse brain. The authors employed a robust experimental design using both young and aged mouse groups, coupled with both mRNA and small-RNA sequencing. The use of well-established bioinformatics tools like HISAT, StringTie, and Bowtie2 ensured accurate mapping, prediction, and comparison of novel genes and transcripts. Their rigorous approach to data normalization and determination of differentially expressed genes is commendable.
Moreover, the analysis of both mRNA and miRNA provides a broader view of the changes occurring at the genetic level, allowing for a more comprehensive understanding of the aging process. The researchers also explored the miRNA-mRNA regulatory network, a crucial factor in understanding the complex interplay of gene expression regulation. Their use of predictive analysis tools, like Targetscan-Mouse v7.2 and the STRING database, lends weight to their findings and provides potential avenues for further research.
However, the study has some limitations. First, the study used only male mice, limiting the generalizability of the results to female mice or other species. Sex-specific differences in gene expression could impact the aging process, so a more comprehensive study including both sexes might provide a broader perspective. Secondly, while the authors have measured a substantial number of variables, it might have been beneficial to have more biological replicates in each group to increase statistical power and the reliability of the findings.
Furthermore, while the authors have used in vitro studies using astrocyte cell lines, integrating data from a wider range of neuronal and non-neuronal cell types could be beneficial, given the cellular diversity of the brain and the potential influence of other cell types on aging processes.
Overall, while the manuscript is robust in its analysis and provides valuable insights into the aging process at the molecular level, further research, including both sexes and a wider array of cell types, could be beneficial to present a more comprehensive picture of age-related changes in the brain.
Moreover, the authors' representation of the current literature appears incomplete and could be greatly enriched by referencing recent relevant work in this field, particularly studies focusing on the aging brain in other species. A recent gene-expression meta-analysis (doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.915907) explored the changes from multiple gene expression studies of the hippocampus in aging rats from a molecular interaction perspective and found substantial alterations related to immune functions and immunoglobulin dynamics. This lends credence to the concept of inter-species commonalities in brain aging processes and should be mentioned in the Introduction and / or the Discussion. It is essential for the authors to contextualize their study within the broader framework of aging research.
From a proofreading perspective, the manuscript is generally well-written and organized. The language is clear, concise, and uses standard scientific terminology correctly. The methods section follows a logical progression, detailing the steps of the analysis sequentially and making it easier to follow.
However, there are a few areas that could be improved for clarity and precision. The authors should consider using a more consistent style when referring to various software packages, databases, and resources. For instance, in some cases, URLs are provided, while in others, they are not. This could potentially cause confusion for readers trying to replicate the study. Also, the manuscript often presents several methods sequentially without much transition or explanation of why each step is necessary. Providing more context or rationale for each step of the method might improve clarity for readers unfamiliar with the specific techniques used. Lastly, sentences are quite long and packed with information. Breaking these up into smaller, more digestible sentences might enhance readability. For instance, the sentence starting with "For small-RNA sequencing..." could be split into two for clarity.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0291943.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
14 Aug 2023

Please check the uploaded file of "response to reviewers".
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_Reviewers_PloSoNe_v6.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0291943.r003Decision Letter 1
Grubić KezeleTanjaAcademic Editor© 2023 Tanja Grubić Kezele2023Tanja Grubić Kezelehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
10 Sep 2023

The microRNA-mediated gene regulatory network in the hippocampus and hypothalamus of the aging mouse
PONE-D-23-13060R1
Dear Dr. Lee,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Tanja Grubić Kezele, Ph.D., M.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: The authors have now addressed my concerns and I believe the manuscript warrants publications at present.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0291943.r004Acceptance letter
Grubić KezeleTanjaAcademic Editor© 2023 Tanja Grubić Kezele2023Tanja Grubić Kezelehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
2 Nov 2023

PONE-D-23-13060R1 
The microRNA-mediated gene regulatory network in the hippocampus and hypothalamus of the aging mouse 
Dear Dr. Lee:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Prof. dr. Tanja Grubić Kezele 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE