pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpa101573691Cell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC10511667PMC10511667.11051166710511667NIHMS18955703695234610.1016/j.celrep.2023.112293NIHMS1895570NIHPA18955701ArticleTranscriptomic atlas and interaction networks of brain cells in mouse CNS demyelination and remyelination
HouJinchao ZhouYingyue CaiZhangying TerekhovaMarina SwainAmanda AndheyPrabhakar S. GuimaraesRafaela M. AntonovaAlina Ulezko QiuTian SvibenSanja StroutGregory FitzpatrickJames A.J. ChenYun GilfillanSusan KimDo-Hyun Van DykenSteven J. ArtyomovMaxim N. ColonnaMarco 1Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA2Ribeirao Preto Medical School, University of Sao Paulo - Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo 14049-900, Brazil3Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA4Washington University Center for Cellular Imaging, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA5Departments of Cell Biology and Physiology and Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA6Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA7Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA8Present address: 10X Genomics, Pleasanton, CA 94588, USA9These authors contributed equally10Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.H., Y.Z., and M.C. designed the study and interpreted the results. J.H. performed animal experiments. J.H. and A.S. prepared single nuclei suspension samples. J.H., Y.Z., P.S.A., M.T., A.U.A., and T.Q. performed bioinformatic analyses. J.H. conducted immunostaining, and Z.C. and R.M.G. performed quantification. Y.C. provided anti-APOE antibody. S.S., G.S., and J.A.J.F. performed EM sample preparation and imaging. S.G. bred Trem2−/− mice. D.-H.K. and S.J.V.D. provided Il1rl1−/− mice. M.N.A. provided guidance on bioinformatic analyses. J.H., Y.Z., S.G., and M.C. wrote and revised the manuscript with feedback from all authors. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript.
*Correspondence: mcolonna@wustl.edu2542023213202342444568511229311229309052023231020232310202306102025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
Demyelination is a hallmark of multiple sclerosis, leukoencephalopathies, cerebral vasculopathies, and several neurodegenerative diseases. The cuprizone mouse model is widely used to simulate demyelination and remyelination occurring in these diseases. Here, we present a high-resolution single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) analysis of gene expression changes across all brain cells in this model. We define demyelination-associated oligodendrocytes (DOLs) and remyelination-associated MAFBhi microglia, as well as astrocytes and vascular cells with signatures of altered metabolism, oxidative stress, and interferon response. Furthermore, snRNA-seq provides insights into how brain cell types connect and interact, defining complex circuitries that impact demyelination and remyelination. As an explicative example, perturbation of microglia caused by TREM2 deficiency indirectly impairs the induction of DOLs. Altogether, this study provides a rich resource for future studies investigating mechanisms underlying demyelinating diseases.

## In brief
Hou et al. identify key transcriptional signatures of brain glial and vascular cells during demyelination and remyelination induced by cuprizone using single-nucleus RNA sequencing. They reveal cell-cell interactions that impact these processes and demonstrate that a population of demyelination-associated oligodendrocytes is dependent on a TREM2-mediated microglia response.

## Graphical Abstract

 

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
Myelin is a multilayered lipid sheath produced by oligodendrocytes (OLs) and Schwann cells that wrap around neuronal axons to facilitate the propagation of electrical impulses. In the central nervous system (CNS), white matter is enriched for myelinated axons, whereas neuronal somas are mostly located in the gray matter. Loss of myelin sheaths, a hallmark of multiple sclerosis (MS) as well as leukoencephalopathies and cerebral vasculopathies, results in axon degeneration and impairment of neuronal connectivity and functions. – Damage of myelin integrity has also been reported in several neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease. Recent single-cell transcriptional profiling studies have highlighted the heterogeneity of OLs and microglia responses in human MS and the mouse model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) caused by an autoimmune attack against myelin components. – However, the transcriptomes of all brain cell types in response to myelin damage caused by non-autoimmune conditions is incompletely understood. Therefore, we analyzed global transcriptomic changes at the single-cell level in a commonly used mouse model of CNS demyelination that is induced by the toxic agent cuprizone (CPZ). , 
CPZ is a copper chelator that disrupts mitochondrial functions. Oral administration of 0.2% CPZ in mice causes selective OL cell death and massive demyelination in the corpus callosum (CC) and the cerebral cortex; removal of CPZ from the diet is followed by progressive remyelination. , OL death initiates within the first 2 weeks of CPZ treatment, inducing demyelination along with subsequent microgliosis and astrogliosis. Peak demyelination occurs around 4–5 weeks of CPZ treatment. Meanwhile, oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) proliferate and differentiate, giving rise to newly formed OLs that generate new myelin sheaths. Both microglia and astrocytes participate in demyelination and remyelination processes: reactive microglia promote myelin debris clearance and subsequent remyelination, whereas astrocytes facilitate microglia recruitment to damaged myelin and secrete growth factors that promote OPC proliferation and differentiation. Analysis of microglia transcriptomes at the single-cell level in the CPZ model divulged a stereotypic response to demyelination characterized by proliferation and expression of genes indicative of activation, phagocytosis, and lipid metabolism that is dependent on the microglial receptors TREM2 and MERTK. – Transcriptomic analysis also suggested predominant upregulation of the cholesterol-synthesis pathway in OLs during remyelination. , 
Here, we deciphered the dynamic molecular responses of virtually all brain cell types to demyelination and remyelination utilizing single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) and constructed a network of cell-cell interactions that may mediate these transcriptional changes. Moreover, we experimentally validated the effects of CPZ-induced demyelination and cellular responses in mice deficient in interleukin-33 (IL-33) signaling and TREM2, two key molecules mediating microglia functions.

## RESULTS

## CPZ-mediated myelin alterations induce global transcriptional changes
We fed 8-week-old male wild-type (WT) mice with 0.2% CPZ or regular chow and set up three experimental groups: (1) demyelination (5-week CPZ treatment), (2) remyelination (5-week CPZ treatment followed by 2-week regular chow), and (3) control (regular chow throughout the time course). Tissues from cerebral cortex and CC were collected after each treatment for snRNA-seq analysis ( ). Examination of CC by electron microscopy (EM) corroborated de- and remyelination ( and ). In total, 58,079 nuclei from all three groups were analyzed after quality control ( ). Unsupervised clustering yielded 19 populations, annotated as various neuronal subsets, OLs, astrocytes, microglia, OPCs, and vascular cells, based on cluster marker genes and known cell-type markers ( , , , and ; ). CPZ treatment mostly affected the frequency of OL and microglia nuclei ( and ). OL nuclei were drastically purged by CPZ treatment but fully recovered after CPZ withdrawal; microglia nuclei increased ~3-fold after demyelination and remained elevated throughout remyelination ( and ). Microglia and OLs also bore the most differentially expressed genes (DEGs) during both de- and remyelination ( and ). The frequency of astrocyte nuclei slightly dipped during demyelination but significantly rose during remyelination ( ), whereas DEGs were substantial during both de- and remyelination ( ). A marked number of DEGs was also noted in vascular cells and OPCs during de- and remyelination, although their nuclei frequencies did not obviously change ( and ). These results suggest that CPZ predominantly affects brain glial and vascular cells.

## Demyelination induces a subset of SERPINA3N+ oligodendrocytes
To further delineate the impact of CPZ on oligodendrocyte lineage transcriptomes, we reclustered oligodendrocyte lineage cells into eight subclusters that were defined based on published markers as mature oligodendrocytes (MOLs, clusters 0, 2, 4), myelin-forming oligodendrocytes (MFOLs, cluster 5), newly formed oligodendrocytes/differentiation-committed oligodendrocytes (NFOL/COPs, cluster 6), OPCs (cluster 1), proliferating OPCs (POPCs, cluster 7), and demyelination-associated oligodendrocytes (DOLs, cluster 3) ( and ). Demyelination was associated with a marked reduction of MOLs and MFOLs ( and ); these cells expressed genes encoding components of actin filaments (Anln, Gsn, and Stmn4), cholesterol-synthesis enzymes (Hmgcs1), prostaglandin D2 synthase (Ptgds), Il33, and myelin components, such as Plp1, Mal, Cldn11, and Mog ( and ). PTGDS has been shown to promote myelination in the peripheral nervous system in vivo, whereas the role of IL-33 in CNS remyelination remains controversial. , Oligodendrocytes remaining after demyelination formed the DOL cluster ( and ); these cells expressed genes indicative of proteolytic inhibition (Serpina3n), senescence and death (Cdkn1a), and anti-oxidative response (Moxd1) ( and ). DOLs also expressed growth differentiation factor 15 (Gdf15), a neurotrophic factor of the transforming growth factor β superfamily elevated in the serum of patients with MS, , 
Apoe and Abca1 that mediate cholesterol transport, and Col5a3 that drives the deposition of fibrillar collagen and extracellular matrix (ECM) ( and ). In parallel with decline of MOLs/MFOLs and expansion of DOLs during demyelination, we observed a slightly compensatory increase of OPCs and NFOL/COPs ( ). We validated the appearance of SERPINA3N+ DOLs during both demyelination and remyelination by co-staining the medial CC for SERPINA3N and the mature oligodendrocyte marker CC1 ( and ); we corroborated the expansion of OPCs during demyelination by immunostaining the lateral CC for NG2 ( and ).
Withdrawal of CPZ and remyelination led to reconstitution of MOLs and MFOLs paralleled by reduction of DOLs ( ). Correspondingly, most of the genes down- and upregulated during demyelination returned to homeostatic expression levels ( ). A few genes rose throughout de- and remyelination, including pleiotrophin (Ptn), a secreted growth factor that functions as a neuromodulatory peptide in neurodevelopment and promotes remyelination ( ). During remyelination, OPCs expressed elevated levels of transcription factors such as Olig1 and Sox10 that drive OL development and maturation, , suggesting that remyelination and developmental myelination follow a similar trajectory ( ).
To corroborate this conclusion, we integrated oligodendrocyte lineage cells in our CPZ model with those from mouse juvenile and adult CNS. Results showed that OLs in the CPZ model followed a trajectory from OPCs to MOLs similar to that occurring in development ( and ). In addition, DOLs were predominantly enriched in the CPZ model ( ). To further determine the trajectory toward DOLs, we calculated RNA velocity in demyelination and remyelination, which was projected onto the existing uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP). The results showed movement of MOLs toward DOLs during demyelination as well as movement from NFOL/COPs toward MOLs during remyelination ( ). The trajectories were further corroborated by velocity pseudo-time calculation ( ).
To compare oligodendrocytes in the CPZ model with other neurodegenerative disease models, we integrated our CPZ oligodendrocytes with those in the 5XFAD model of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), which revealed two distinct DOL subpopulations (DOL1 and DOL2) ( and ). Expressing Serpina3n and C4b, DOL1 appeared during both de- and remyelination as well as in the 5XFAD model ( – ). DOL2 was more demyelination specific and highly expressed stress-response genes such as Cdkn1a, Gdf15, and Moxd1 ( – ). Moreover, a subset of interferon-responsive (IFN-R) oligodendrocytes was present in both models ( and ).
Finally, we compared CPZ oligodendrocyte signatures with those in human MS. We selected genes upregulated in pairwise comparisons between demyelination vs. normal or remyelination vs. demyelination in CPZ; these gene sets were compared with genes upregulated in various pathological regions of progressive patients with MS vs. controls from two public datasets, , including normal-appearing white matter, demyelinated lesion core, active, chronic active (CA), chronic inactive, remyelinated lesions, and periplaque regions. We found that limited, yet crucial, genes were shared between human MS oligodendrocyte and mouse CPZ signatures ( – ; and ). The cholesterol-synthesis gene HMGCS1 was upregulated in MS tissues in both human datasets ( , , , and ) as well as during remyelination following CPZ in mice ( and ). Co-staining of the medial CC for HMGCS1 and the mature oligodendrocyte marker CA2 validated the significant reduction of HMGCS1+ oligodendrocytes during demyelination, followed by a recovery during remyelination ( – ). Genes encoding components involved in formation of and myelin itself, such as PLP1 and CNP, were also enriched during remyelination in the CPZ model and in several pathological MS states, including active and CA lesions in one dataset ( ). This implies that demyelination in MS is paralleled by a compensatory process of remyelination.

## IL-33-ST2 pathway attenuates demyelination
Patients with MS reportedly have increased levels of IL-33 in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid. , IL-33 was thought to be predominantly released by astrocytes, , especially in humans. , However, our snRNA-seq dataset revealed predominant expression of Il33 mRNA in oligodendrocytes, which dipped to the lowest level during demyelination ( and ). We validated nuclear IL-33 protein in oligodendrocytes at steady state and following remyelination, whereas it was absent during demyelination ( and ). These results suggest that IL-33 is stored in oligodendrocyte nuclei in steady state, released into the extracellular space upon their death, and re-constituted de novo in the nuclei of new oligodendrocytes. We also detected scarce Il33 expression in astrocytes, which did not change across various conditions either in our snRNA-seq data ( and ) or at the protein level ( and ).
Since IL-33 is known to elicit repair mechanisms in spinal cord injury by acting on microglia and astrocytes, we further examined the impact of IL-33 signaling on CPZ-induced demyelination in mice lacking the IL-33 cognate receptor ST2 encoded by Il1rl1 ( ). Microglia expressed ST2 in steady state, but this waned after 2 weeks of CPZ treatment ( and ). Luxol fast blue staining of the CC revealed more pronounced demyelination in Il1rl1−/− than in WT mice after 2 weeks of CPZ treatment, but comparable demyelination after 5 weeks of CPZ treatment ( and ). EM confirmed a lower percentage of myelinated axons in Il1rl1−/− mice after 2 weeks of CPZ treatment ( and ). Exacerbated demyelination in Il1rl1−/− mice was associated with heightened microglia activation, measured by expression of apolipoprotein E (APOE) in microglia on a per-cell basis ( – ), whereas GFAP+ activated astrocytes were similar in Il1rl1−/− and WT mice ( and ). These data suggest that IL-33-ST2 interaction attenuates CPZ-induced demyelination at an early stage.

## Astrocytes adopt distinct metabolic and stress-response signatures in demyelination and remyelination
Although astrocyte abundance was minimally affected by CPZ ( and ), marked transcriptional changes were evident during de- and remyelination ( ). Demyelination induced upregulation of the classical activation genes Gfap and vimentin (Vim) together with Serpina3n and C4b ( and ). Upregulated genes also encoded the heterodimeric amino acid transporters SLC7A5/SLC3A2 and SLC7A11/SLC3A2. The SLC7A5/SLC3A2 complex imports essential amino acids that promote mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) activation. The SLC7A11/SLC3A2 complex mediates the exchange of extracellular L-cystine and intracellular L-glutamate across the plasma membrane. Cystine intake facilitates synthesis and release of glutathione that attenuates oxidative stress and ferroptosis. , Epoxide hydrolase (EphX1), which has been associated with anti-oxidant activity and senescence, was also upregulated ( and ). Upregulation of Stat3 suggested potential involvement of this signaling pathway in the astrocyte response. Additionally, astrocytes upregulated IFN-R genes such as H2-d1 and Ifi27 during demyelination ( and ). Pathway analysis of DEGs corroborated the involvement of mTOR, anti-oxidative, anti-apoptotic, STAT3, and IFN pathways ( ). During remyelination, astrocytes adopted a distinct signature marked by detoxifying metabolic pathways and activation of nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) (Irak2, Nfkbia) ( and – ); the former included Slc39a14, a transporter of divalent metals that reduces their overload during inflammation, and glutamate dehydrogenase (Glud1), a major enzyme for glutamate detoxification. In addition, pathway analysis highlighted the synthesis of cholesterol and metabolism of fatty acids in astrocytes during remyelination ( ), which may be supplied to neurons and other cells. 
To decipher whether stress-induced responses involved all astrocytes or distinct subsets, astrocyte nuclei were further subclustered into nine subsets ( ). At steady state, homeostatic astrocytes were heterogeneous: in addition to clusters 0 and 1 that expressed pan-astrocyte genes, cluster 3 expressed genes controlling ECM production, including Agt, Sparc, Igsf1, Itih3, Spon1, and Slc6a11. Cluster 4 was enriched for mitochondrial genes, indicating dying cells induced by CPZ or tissue processing. Cluster 5 expressed the synaptogenic gene Thbs4 and the neurogenesis-related gene Igfbp5, which may reflect astrocytes in the subventricular zone niche. Cluster 6 expressed high levels of Gfap, as well as Myoc, Nrp2, Disp3, and Serpinf1 that may have neuroprotective functions ( ). In demyelination, stress-response and mTOR pathway genes (Ephx1, Slc7a11, Slc7a5, and Slc3a2) were upregulated in all subsets, whereas classical astrocyte activation genes and IFN-R genes were enriched in two distinctive subsets, clusters 7 and 8, which were absent in steady state ( and ). Cluster 7 was featured by Serpina3n, Gfap, Vim, and C3 ( ); immunostaining of lateral CC confirmed the expression of SERPINA3N, VIM, and GFAP ( , , , and ). Cluster 8 expressed IFN-R genes ( ) and was distinguished by STAT1 accumulation within GFAP+ astrocytes in CC from mice undergoing both de- and remyelination ( and ). During remyelination, abundance of clusters 7 and 8 abated ( and ). In addition, homeostatic Gfap− astrocyte clusters 0 and 1 were not restored, but rather replaced by cluster 2 expressing NF-κB-related genes (Irak2 and Il18), circadian clock genes (Cry2), genes controlling astrocyte adhesion (Ezr and Igsf11), metabolism (Glud1, Nrros, and Slc39a14), and stress response (Paxx and Neat1) ( and ). Together, these data demonstrate that astrocytes follow stress- or IFN-response trajectories during demyelination while acquiring a distinct response state demarcated by detoxifying metabolic pathways and activation of the NF-κB pathway during remyelination.
To compare astrocyte signatures in the CPZ model with those in human MS, we overlaid astrocyte DEGs of the CPZ model with featured genes of the “astrocytes inflamed in MS” characterized from MS CA lesions. We found that human MS shared GFAP, VIM, and NUPR1 with mouse demyelination and CST3, CD81, GJA1, CSRP1, and FAM107A with mouse remyelination ( and ; and ). Some of the shared genes, such as the stress-inducible transcription regulator NUPR1, suggested commonality of essential pathways controlling astrocyte reactive responses.

## MAFBhi microglia emerge during remyelination
Microglia expanded during de- and remyelination and displayed abundant DEGs ( – ). Subclustering of microglia identified nine subsets with distinct cluster markers ( and ). In steady state, microglia were mainly composed of cluster 0 enriched for homeostatic genes ( , , and ). Demyelination induced the emergence of several microglia subsets (1, 2, 4–8) ( and ). Cluster 2 (DAM-like, DAM-L) exhibited a composite signature similar to that of disease-associated microglia (DAM) ( – ) and white matter associated microglia (WAM) ( – ), demarcated by expression of Apoe, Lpl, and Spp1 ( ). However, variegated expression of DAM genes, exemplified by non-overlapping expression patterns of Ccl4, Itgax, Gpnmb, and Ch25h, suggested graded polarization and functional heterogeneity within this cluster ( ). Moreover, the DAM-L cluster highly expressed genes not previously defined as DAM genes, including the transcription factor Mitf, which has been reported to induce GPNMB in response to lysosomal stress ; and Plau, the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) gene that is associated with microglial migration and is upregulated in MS lesions ( ). Clusters 1 and 5 (transition microglia) bridged the gamut between homeostatic and DAM-L microglia ( and ). Demyelination-induced clusters 6, 7, and 8 selectively expressed major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II (Cd74 and H2-Aa), IFN-R (Ifi204 and Oasl2), and proliferation genes (Top2a and Mki67), respectively ( ) and evoked similar subsets reported in mouse models of AD. , Co-staining markers for microglia (IBA1), DAM (CD11c), and MHC class II (CD74) corroborated the presence of these microglia subsets ( and ). Another subset (cluster 4) was enriched for mitochondrial genes, which indicated stressed cells possibly induced by CPZ or tissue processing. CPZ withdrawal correlated with a decline in demyelination-induced clusters (1, 5, and 8), paralleled by reconstitution of homeostatic microglia (cluster 0) ( and ). In addition, a remyelination-specific subset that selectively expressed Mafb (cluster 3) also emerged ( and ). Since Mafb is required for maintenance of the microglia homeostatic signature, this subset may encompass microglia that transition from reactive states back to homeostasis after CPZ withdrawal. Remarkably, MAFB expression was enriched in microglia from CA lesions and acute lesions of human MS ( and ; ), implicating MAFB is crucial for driving microglia responses to myelin alterations. MAFBhi microglia were validated by immunostaining in the CPZ model ( ). Pseudo-time analysis of microglia corroborated that DAM-L, IFN-R, and MHCII trajectories persisted throughout de- and remyelination, whereas MAFBhi microglia peaked during remyelination ( – ).

## Remyelination is associated with reprogramming of vascular cells
In addition to glial cells, CPZ treatment induced evident changes in the signatures of vascular and mesenchymal brain populations. Analysis of DEGs in these cell compartments revealed substantial changes during remyelination vs. demyelination ( and ). Pathway analysis of theseDEGs highlighted tissue development, cell adhesion, and migration pathways ( ). We further distinguished the vascular-mesenchymal cells into endothelial cells (Endo.1 and Endo.2), pericytes, smooth muscle cells (SMCs), meningeal fibroblasts (Fibro.1), and perivascular fibroblasts (Fibro.2–4) , ( and ) and examined the expression of DEGs ( ). Perivascular fibroblasts (Fibro.4) and pericytes upregulated Cd248, a marker for angiogenesis. Pericytes amplified expression of Il34, a ligand of CSF1R that may sustain perivascular macrophages during vascular remodeling. Fibroblasts highly expressed Loxl2, encoding a hypoxia-induced amine oxidase that promotes ECM remodeling by catalyzing crosslinking of collagen and elastin. SMCs upregulated Pdlim5, which promotes hypoxia-mediated vascular remodeling ( ).
We examined the relative abundance of vascular subclusters throughout CPZ treatment: pericytes trended to decline, while Endo.2 expanded during demyelination ( ). Pericyte loss may result in increased permeability of the blood-brain barrier. , Compared with Endo.1, the Endo.2 cluster expressed the hypoxia-induced gene Rgs5, together with a signature indicative of oxidative stress and exposure to IFN ( and ). Interestingly, during remyelination, perivascular fibroblasts (Fibro.2) upregulated genes that impact endothelial biology ( ): for example, Ccn1 that promotes angiogenic activities in endothelial cells and Timp3 that promotes endothelial apoptosis. Altogether, these results document a response of vascular cells to hypoxia and vascular injury.

## Transcriptional changes reflect neuronal functional defects only in part
snRNA-seq analysis of neurons revealed a slight reduction in the proportion of neuronal nuclei after remyelination ( ), which may be a delayed consequence of axonal degeneration after demyelination. Analysis of DEGs across neuronal subclusters revealed that remyelination was associated with an upregulation of genes involved in neurogenesis, suggesting an attempt to compensate for neuronal damage ( and ). One of the top genes increased in neurons was Epha5, encoding an Eph receptor involved in neuronal synapse formation. These modest transcriptional changes were somewhat in contrast to the markedly reduced neuronal activity previously reported in CPZ-induced demyelination. Moreover, immunostaining for the presynaptic marker synaptophysin in CPZ-treated mice did corroborate diminished synapses during demyelination and remyelination ( ). We conclude that transcriptional changes only partially reflect the neuronal defects induced by CPZ.

## snRNA-seq reveals cell-cell interactions elicited by demyelination
Leveraging the comprehensive transcriptomic information provided by snRNA-seq, we explored potential cellular interactions between all brain cell types using NicheNet analysis, which predicts which ligands in the sender cell potentially regulate gene expression changes in the receiver cell. Specifically, we exploited NicheNet to rank ligand-receptor pairs that most likely account for differential gene expression during demyelination vs. normal in the receiver cells ( – ), and mapped gene expression of these ligands and receptors to the various cell types ( and ). One of the top ligands was neuron/glia-derived neurofascin (NFASC), predicted to engage Contactin1 (CNTN1) expressed in oligodendrocyte lineage cells ( , , , and ). NFASC-CNTN1 interaction between glia and axons impacts axo-glial junction formation, myelin maintenance, and axon segregation. , NFASC-CNTN1 interaction also induces differentiation of OPCs into mature oligodendrocytes, promoting myelination during neurodevelopment. Thus, NFASC-CNTN1 interaction during CPZ treatment may underline a process of oligodendrocyte differentiation similar to that occurring during postnatal brain development.
NicheNet analysis also revealed that fibroblast growth factor 13 (FGF13) expressed by microglia may stimulate astrocytes through fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3). Additionally, SEMA4D, expressed by oligodendrocytes and microglia, may impact astrocytes by interacting with Plexinb1 (PLXNB1) ( , , and ). PLXNB1 is associated with cognitive decline in patients with AD, and knockdown of astrocyte PLXNB1 led to lower extracellular levels of Aβ42 in astrocyte cultures. Moreover, microglial-astrocyte SEMA4D-PLXNB1 interaction exacerbates CNS inflammation during EAE. Likewise, SEMA4D may aggravate pathology in the CPZ model by interacting with astrocyte PLXNB1.
Vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) produced by astrocytes was among the top ligands predicted to affect gene expression changes in microglia during demyelination via the VEGFA co-receptors Neuropilin 1/2 (NRP1/2) ( , , and ). Microglial NRP1 promotes remyelination by interacting with platelet-derived growth factor α (PDGFRα) on OPCs. Thus, astrocyte-derived VEGFA, microglia NRP1, and OPC PDGFRα may anchor a circuitry that controls myelination. In addition to aforementioned interactions, we corroborated the well-known interactions of TAM receptors with GAS6 and PROS1, which recognize phosphatidylserine on the surface of apoptotic cells and have been shown to impact myelination. , , Interestingly, we found that distinct cell types utilize disparate TAM receptors for binding GAS6 and PROS1: microglia and astrocytes expressed AXL and MERTK, whereas oligodendrocytes and neurons mainly expressed TYRO3 ( – , , and ). In the CPZ model, microglia predominantly expressed Pros1 ( ), which we validated at the protein level in cell lysates of cultured primary microglia ( ). To further demonstrate the impact of PROS1 on the uptake of apoptotic cells by astrocytes, carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE)-labeled apoptotic thymocytes were cocultured with astrocytes with or without mouse PROS1, and phagocytosis was assessed by flow cytometry ( ). PROS1 protein enhanced astrocyte phagocytosis of apoptotic thymocytes ( – ), supporting the importance of PROS1-AXL/MERTK interaction in astrocyte-mediated clearance of apoptotic cells in the CPZ model.

## TREM2 deficiency indirectly impairs induction of DOLs
Since our previous work suggested that reactive oligodendrocytes are partially TREM2 dependent in the 5XFAD mouse model, we examined the impact of TREM2 deficiency on DOL induction. TREM2 sustains the capacity of microglia to clear damaged myelin, enabling subsequent remyelination. , – However, does TREM2 indirectly affect other cells in response to myelin alterations in a cell-extrinsic manner? To address this question, we performed snRNA-seq of brain specimens from WT and Trem2−/− mice treated with CPZ ( ). Demyelination was delayed and axon myelination curtailed in Trem2−/− vs. WT mice, as evidenced by EM analysis of myelin in the CC ( – ). Consistently, Trem2−/− mice had fewer OLIG2+ oligodendrocyte lineage cells than did WT mice during remyelination ( and ). Unbiased clustering of single nuclei sequenced identified major cell types in the brain ( , , and ; ). Differential expression analysis of WT and Trem2−/− mice showed that microglia and oligodendrocytes bore the greatest number of DEGs ( and ).
Subclustering of microglia delineated distinct demyelination-induced populations, including DAM-L, MHCII, and transition microglia, all of which were severely contracted in the absence of TREM2 ( , , , and ). The abatement of Trem2−/− DAM-L and MHCII microglia was sustained through remyelination. The demyelination-induced IFN-R and proliferating subclusters were not evidently TREM2 dependent ( and ). We validated the loss of DAM-L and MHCII microglia in Trem2−/− mice by co-staining for IBA1, CD74, APOE, and CD11c ( , , and – ).
We next analyzed the relative abundance of oligodendrocyte subclusters in WT and Trem2−/− mice ( , , , and ). During demyelination, MOLs (MOL1 and MOL2) were more abundant in Trem2−/− than in WT mice, which was paralleled by a reduction of DOLs ( and ). Consistent with this, myelination-associated genes, such as Plp1 and Ptgds, were more abundant, whereas genes associated with demyelination, such as Col5a3, were more weakly expressed in Trem2−/− than in WT oligodendrocytes ( – ). Double immunolabeling for SERPINA3N and OLIG2 corroborated a significant diminution of DOLs in Trem2−/− mice ( and ). Microglia are necessary for removal of damaged myelin, and TREM2 is required to mount a microglial response to myelin breakdown. , , Hence, we speculate that the defects emanating from Trem2 deficiency hamper removal of myelin debris, which causes a secondary delay in the stress response of oligodendrocytes, preserving their homeostatic configuration.

## DISCUSSION
The CPZ mouse model is widely used to simulate demyelination occurring in MS and neurodegenerative diseases. While gene expression changes in microglia at the single-cell level have been delineated in this model recently, , less is known about those occurring in other brain cell types. Here, we present a comprehensive snRNA-seq analysis of gene expression changes in the CPZ model, defining cell-type-specific signatures for demyelination and remyelination. Furthermore, snRNA-seq data provide insights into ligand-receptor interaction networks, enabling construction of complex cellular circuitries involved in de- and remyelination.
The oligodendrocyte response to CPZ-induced demyelination was remarkably complex and multipronged. We noted that oligodendrocytes spared by demyelination acquired a DOL signature, marked by inflammatory mediators, stress-response factors, anti-oxidant enzymes, cholesterol metabolism, and growth factors. Comparison of DOLs with oligodendrocytes in mouse models of amyloid pathology revealed common expression of Serpina3n and C4b genes, , while Syt4, Moxd1, and Gdf15 were demyelination specific. DOLs largely overlapped with the disease-associated oligodendrocytes recently reported in multiple neurodegenerative models. Moreover, we demonstrated that the emergence of DOLs is affected by TREM2 deficiency, suggesting that DOLs are partly a secondary ramification of microglia activation. A further interesting aspect of the oligodendrocyte response was the release of nuclear IL-33, which attenuated CPZ-mediated demyelination. The response of oligodendrocytes to demyelination was paralleled by compensatory expansion of OPCs expressing transcription factors that drive oligodendrocyte maturation and myelination. Comparing CPZ oligodendrocytes with those in juvenile mice revealed that oligodendrocyte recovery during remyelination follows a trajectory echoing that of developmental myelination. Thus, remyelination in the CPZ model partially recapitulates oligodendrocyte development.
Astrocytes also evinced unique transcriptional signatures in response to CPZ. During demyelination, astrocytes adopted a gene expression program encompassing wound healing (Vim, Gfap, and Thbs4), complement and coagulation cascades (C4b and Serpina3n), cellular growth (Slc7a5, Igfbp2, and Igfbp5), and anti-oxidative metabolism (Slc7a11/Slc3a2 and Ephx1). This program probably depends on STAT3 among other transcription factors. Another demyelination-induced subset expressed genes indicating type I IFN signaling, mirroring a subset found in a model of lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation. Demyelination-induced astrocyte subsets declined during remyelination, conceding to an emerging subset with a transcriptional profile indicative of cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism (Ldlr and Sqle), detoxifying and stress-response pathways (Paxx, Nrros, and Neat1), cell adhesion (Ezr and Igsf11), and activation of NF-κB (Irak2, Il18, and Nfkbia).
In addition to reported signatures of DAM, IFN-R, and MHCII in microglia responses to demyelination, , our snRNA-seq study identified MAFB as a major transcription factor underlying microglia responses during remyelination. MAFB represses macrophage self-renewal and promotes differentiation. – Expression of Mafb is elevated in adult microglia and required for maintenance of the homeostatic signature during adulthood by inhibiting IFN pathway genes. Thus, MAFB may be crucial for microglial recovery of homeostasis phenotype during remyelination. Our data also revealed unprecedented alterations in the vascular and mesenchymal compartment during remyelination that affect endothelial cells, pericytes, and perivascular fibroblasts. These changes reflected endothelial responses to hypoxia and reactive oxygen species, pericyte supply of IL-34 for perivascular macrophages, and fibroblast-mediated remodeling of ECM. While CPZ impairs CNS functions, , its impact on the neuronal transcriptional profile was not dramatic and contrasted with the marked synaptic loss detected by immunostaining. Thus, snRNA-seq may provide a partial proxy for the impaired neuronal connectivity caused by CPZ-induced demyelination.
NicheNet analysis unveiled a rich network of interactions among oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and microglia that may be altered during CPZ-induced demyelination. These interactions mediate oligodendrocyte regeneration and formation of myelin sheaths, microglial phagocytosis of damaged myelin and apoptotic neurons, and astrocyte repair functions. Our study also provides a benchmark for comparing mouse signatures of de- and remyelination with human diseases. We identified key genes governing glial responses to myelin alterations shared by mouse CPZ and human MS, particularly HMGCS1, NUPR1, and MAFB. Moreover, we noted co-existence of gene expression profiles related to both CPZ de- and remyelination in human MS, implying that MS involves demyelination and simultaneous attempts to reconstitute myelin sheaths. Altogether, this study provides a rich resource that can be leveraged to generate new mechanistic hypotheses and tools to fully delineate demyelination and remyelination.

## Limitations of the study
While CPZ selectively lowers the mitochondrial transmembrane potential of oligodendrocytes, with negligible effects on microglia, astrocytes, or neurons in vitro, we could not exclude that CPZ subtly affects these cells. Yet the similarity of DOL signatures in CPZ and mouse models of AD suggests that the responses identified here may be general and not limited to CPZ-induced damage. Although our analysis of germline Il1rl1−/− mice revealed a role for IL-33 in delaying demyelination, oligodendrocyte-specific deletion of Il1rl1 is necessary to precisely define the impact of oligodendrocyte-secreted IL-33.

## STAR★METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Marco Colonna (mcolonna@wustl.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
Single-nucleus RNA-seq data have been deposited at the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and are publicly available as of the date of publication under accession number GSE204770.
Original code has been deposited at Github at: https://github.com/marcocolonnalab/CPZ.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

## Animals
WT C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (#000664). Trem2−/− mice were generated as previously described. 
Il1rl1−/− mice were generated in the lab of Dr. S. Akira (Osaka University) and were a gift from Steve Van Dyken (Washington University in St. Louis). WT littermates were used as controls. All mice were housed in specific-pathogen-free conditions. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Washington University in St. Louis approved all protocols used in this study. 8-week-old mice were fed with 0.2% (w/w) cuprizone (bis-cyclohexanone oxaldihydrazone) (Sigma, #c9012) in ground breeder chow for 5 weeks to induce demyelination. For WT C57BL/6J snRNA-seq dataset, tissues from 2 WT C57BL/6J mice in normal condition, 3 in demyelination and 3 in remyelination were processed. For Trem2−/− snRNA-seq dataset, tissues from 3 mice per genotype per condition were processed. The normal control mice were sacrificed at the same time with the demyelination group (5 weeks after cuprizone). All mice applied in this study were male.

## Primary cell culture
Primary mixed glia were cultured from neonatal brains as described previously with minor modifications. Superficial cortex dissected from P2 or P3 WT mice were dissociated with 300 μg/mL DNase I (#11284932001, Sigma) and 0.15% trypsin (#T1426, Sigma) in 37°C water bath for 10 min with gentle agitation every 2 min. After removal of undispersed tissue using a 70-μm cell strainer, cells were suspended in 5 mL complete DMEM medium (containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, 1X kanamycin sulfate, 1mM sodium pyruvate, 1X MEM nonessential amino acids, and 1X GlutaMAX) and seeded in poly-L-lysine-coated 25-cm2 culture flasks (#P4707, Sigma). The culture was maintained by changing the medium every 3 days. After 14 days in culture, astrocytes were at the bottom layer, and microglia grew on top of the astrocyte layer. Microglia were then detached from the bottom of the flasks by vigorous shaking. Adhered cells, which mainly consisted of astrocytes, were detached using 0.05% trypsin, seeded on a poly-L-lysine-coated 24-well plate, and maintained in complete DMEM medium until use.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Isolation of nuclei from frozen brain tissue
Isolation of nuclei was performed similarly as previously described. Briefly, frozen brain cortex and white matter were Dounce homogenized in 5 mL of lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, and 0.025% NP-40) for 15 min. Following initial Dounce homogenization, the solution was then filtered through a 30-μm cell filter and pelleted at 500g for 5 min at 4°C. Nuclei were washed and filtered twice with nuclei wash buffer (1% BSA in PBS with 0.2 U μl−1 RNasin (Promega)). Nuclei pellets were resuspended in 500 μL nuclei wash and 900 μL 1.8 M sucrose. This 1,400 μL mixture was carefully layered on top of 500 μL 1.8 M sucrose and centrifuged at 13,000g for 45 min at 4°C to separate the nuclei from myelin debris. The nuclei pellet was resuspended in nuclei wash buffer at 1,200 nuclei μl−1 and filtered through a 40-μm FlowMi Cell Strainer.

## Single-nucleus RNA sequencing and data processing
Droplet-based snRNA-seq was performed using the Chromium Single Cell 5’ Reagent Kits (v1 for WT C57BL/6J snRNA-seq dataset and v2 for Trem2−/− snRNA-seq dataset) per the manufacturer’s instructions (10x Genomics). Nuclei were resuspended to a concentration of 1,200 nuclei per μl before loading according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The libraries were sequenced using Illumina sequencers (NovaSeq instrument) with 150bp paired-end sequencing at the McDonnell Genome Institute. Sample demultiplexing, barcode processing and single-cell counting were performed using the Cell Ranger Single-Cell Software Suite (10x Genomics). To include Clec7a gene, we built a custom reference genome by adding Clec7a cDNA to the pre-built mouse reference genome (mm10). Cellranger count (v.3.0.2) was used to align reads to the custom reference genome, quantify reads and filter reads with a quality score below 30.

## Processing data with seurat package and quality control
The Seurat package in R was used for subsequent analysis. For quality control, nuclei with mitochondrial content >5% were removed. Nuclei that are doublets or multiplets were filtered out by two steps. First, nuclei with high UMI and gene number per nucleus were filtered out. Cutoffs for UMI and gene number were determined on the basis of histograms showing cell density as a function of UMI per gene counts. Then nuclei with more than one cell type marker gene expressed were removed. For WT C57BL/6J mouse brain snRNA-seq analysis, a cutoff of 500–10,000 UMI and 500–4,000 genes was applied. After filtering, a total of 58,079 individual nuclei across all conditions remained, with a median of 1,808 UMIs and 1,250 genes per nucleus for downstream analysis. For Trem2−/− and littermate WT mouse brain snRNA-seq analysis, a cutoff of 500–15,000 UMI and 400–5,000 genes was applied. After filtering, a total of 117,729 individual nuclei across all genotypes remained, with a median of 3,082 UMIs and 1,951 genes per nucleus for downstream analysis. Data were log normalized and regressed on mitochondrial gene percentage during data scaling, using the mitochondria ratio as the argument for ‘vars.to.regress’. Samples were batch corrected using FindIntegrationAnchors function and Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA). Principal component analysis was performed using the top 3,000 most variable genes and UMAP analysis was performed with the top 20 PCAs. Clustering was performed using a resolution of 0.3. For identifying markers for each cluster, we performed differential expression of each cluster against all other clusters, identifying positive markers for that cluster, using FindAllMarkers() function in the Seurat package with default parameters. Cluster marker genes are listed in and . Nuclei from broad cell types (neurons, oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, microglia and vascular cells) were taken and re-clustered to further analyze the sub-clusters in each cell type. For data visualization, BBrowser (version 2) was also used.

## Sub-clustering analysis
To identify subsets in each cell type, nuclei from all samples belonging to a given major cell type were extracted for downstream analysis. Doublets were filtered out as described above. Re-integration was applied to microglia sub-clustering (both C57BL/6J and Trem2−/− datasets), and oligodendrocyte sub-clustering (Trem2−/− dataset). Principal component analysis was performed prior to clustering and the first ten principal components were used based on the ElbowPlot. Clustering was performed using the FindClusters() function. For C57BL/6J dataset, clustering resolution at 0.3 was used for oligodendrocyte lineage, 0.6 for astrocytes, and 0.6 for microglia. For vascular cells, the first 15 principal components were used, and clustering was done with resolution 1.1. For Trem2−/− dataset, clustering resolution at 0.3 was used for oligodendrocyte lineage, and 0.6 for microglia.

## Identification of DEGs across conditions
Differential expression of genes between conditions was done using FindMarkers() function with default parameters of the Seurat package in R, which is based on the non-parametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Log2(fold change) of average expression and the percentage of cells (pct) expressing the genes in each condition were generated. The adjusted p value was calculated using Bonferroni correction. Genes with log2(Fold Change) > 0.5, adjusted p < 0.05 were considered as significant DEGs. Lists of DEGs were generated by filtering all genes for log2 (fold change) > 0.25 ( and ). These gene lists were used as inputs for downstream pathway analyses.

## Heatmap
Average expression per cluster per sample was calculated using the AverageExpression() function in the Seurat package. For heat maps of relative gene expression across cell types, average expression of each gene was Z score transformed across samples and plotted using heat.map2 function in the gplots packge (v3.1.1) in R.

## NicheNet analysis
Ligand-receptor interactions were mined from the snRNA-seq data using the NicheNet algorithm (nichenetr 1.0.0). Briefly, sender and receiver cells were defined and indicated in . NicheNet analysis was performed using upregulated DEGs in the defined receiver cells between demyelination versus normal (log2(fold change) > 0.5, adjusted p value <0.05) as input with default settings. Circos plot was computed based on calculation of interaction scores between possible ligand-receptor combinations. Interaction pairs were filtered for those bona fide interactions that were documented in the literature and publicly available datasets.

## Pseudotime trajectory analysis
Single-cell pseudotime trajectories were inferred using the R package slingshot (v2.1.0). All C57BL/6J microglia nuclei except for the proliferating microglia were used for the analysis.

## Estimation of RNA velocity
RNA velocity analysis was performed using the package scVelo (v.0.2.4) with stochastic modeling, as instructed. Briefly, we used the.bam and.bam.bai files from the CellRanger output and generated the.loom files for the representative samples in each condition (demyelination: A3, and remyelination: B7) using the velocyto.py version 0.17 with the velocyto run10x command. Next, the.loom files were loaded into Python (v3.9.13) using scv.read function to generate count tables in JupyterLab interface. The Seurat objects from each genotype were converted into anndata files as described (https://smorabit.github.io/tutorials/8_velocyto/) and then loaded separately into JupterLab interface with Python via the function sc.read.h5ad. RNA velocity was computed via scv.tl.velocity(), and the final velocity streams and pseudotime were generated using the commands scv.pl.velocity_embedding_stream() and scv.pl.velocity_pseudotime(), respectively. For visualization, the RNA velocity stream was projected onto each predefined UMAPs.

## Dataset integration
To compare oligodendrocyte gene signatures in the cuprizone model to that observed in mouse juvenile CNS as well as DOL signature characterized in the 5XFAD model, we re-analyzed the raw or filtered matrix data of the two aforementioned datasets. Filtering parameters were the same as in the original manuscript. After filtering, each dataset was processed using functions implemented in the Seurat package (SCTransform, RunPCA, RunUMAP, FindNeighbors, FindClusters). Oligodendrocyte lineage cells were extracted using subset() function in the Seurat package. Samples were integrated using FindIntegrationAnchors() function and CCA. CPZ oligodendrocyte dataset was integrated with Marques et al. dataset and Kenigsbuch et al. dataset, respectively. Principal component analysis was performed using the top 3,000 most variable genes and UMAP analysis was performed with the top 20 PCAs. Annotation of subclusters were based on original reference or clusters characterized in the current manuscript. Dot plot of marker gene expression was generated using scanpy (v1.9.3) and dendrogram was built by performing hierarchical clustering on predefined subclusters.

## Re-analysis of public datasets
To reanalyze publicly available datasets on human patients with MS, raw or filtered matrix of UMI counts and associated metadata were downloaded from GEO under accession number GSE124335, GSE118257 and GSE180759, and analyzed using Seurat package. For oligodendrocyte signature comparisons, oligodendrocyte lineage cells were extracted from the two datasets, respectively. , Differential expression analysis was performed between each pathological state and the control as described above. DEGs were considered as genes with log2 (fold change) > 0.25, adj. p value <0.05 for GSE124335 dataset, with log2 (fold change) > 0.25, adj. p value <0.05 for GSE118257 dataset, and with log2 (fold change) > 0.5, adj. p value <0.05 for GSE180759 dataset. For astrocyte signature comparisons, top 100 marker genes of the AIMS were extracted from Absinta et al., 2021. For microglia comparisons, top 94 marker genes of the MIMS-foamy isolated from the chronic lesions of patients with MS, or top 100 feature genes of microglia from acute lesions of patients with MS were extracted. Gene sets listed in were used as inputs for this analysis. Human genes were converted to mouse genes using biomaRt package (2.48.3) in R. Venn diagrams were plotted using BioVenn package (v1.1.3) in R.

## Gene set score analysis
Gene set scores were calculated using the AddModuleScore() function in Seurat package. Briefly, for each cell, the log-transformed average expression of all genes in each gene set was calculated and subtracted by the log-transformed expression of control features sets. The white matter-associated microglia (WAM) score was calculated by using the top 100 signature genes of WAM identified from aged mice. The disease-associated microglia (DAM) score was determined by using the top 71 signature genes of DAM identified in the 5XFAD model. The reactive oligodendrocyte signature was defined by the cluster markers of DOLs cluster. Gene signatures of myelination was obtained from the “Myelination” pathway from Metascape pathway analysis. Gene sets listed in were used as inputs for this analysis.

## Pathway enrichment analysis
For pathway enrichment analysis, enrichment for Gene Ontology terms was obtained through Metascape. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed using the hallmark pathways from the Molecular Signature Database.

## Immunofluorescence
Animals were anesthetized by 10 mg/mL ketamine and 1 mg/mL xylazine solution i.p. and perfused transcardially with PBS containing 1U/ml heparin. Fixation of brain samples was done in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) overnight. The brain tissues were then incubated in 30% sucrose in PBS for 24 h. After freezing the tissue on dry ice using Tissue-Tek O.C.T and 30% sucrose at a ratio of 1:2, 20-μm coronal sections were cut by a Leica CM 1900 cryostat. Floating mouse brain sections were blocked with 3% BSA and 0.25% Triton X-100 in PBS for 1h at room temperature, and stained with anti-IBA1 (1:500; rabbit, #17198S, Cell Signaling Technology), anti-IBA1 (1:500; goat, #5076, Abcam), anti-CD74 (1:200; Alexa Fluor 647-labeled rat IgG2b, #151004, Biolegend), anti-OLIG2 (1:500; Rabbit, #AB9610, EMB Millipore), anti-CA2 (1:200, rat, #MAB2184, R&D), anti-CC1 (1:50, Mouse, #OP80, Calbiochem), anti-SER-PINA3N (1:300; Goat, #AF4709, R&D), anti-IL33 (5 μg/mL; Goat, #AF3626, R&D), anti-GFAP (1:1000; Alexa Fluor 488-labbeled mouse IgG1, #53–9892-82, ThermoFisher Scientific), anti-APOE (1:300; biotinylated, mouse monoclonal: HJ6.3, a gift from Dr. David M. Holtzman), anti-CD11c (1:500; Rabbit, #97585, Cell Signaling Technology), anti-MAFB (1:400; Rabbit, #A700–046, BETHYL), anti-Vimentin (1:500; Mouse, #sc-373717, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-STAT1 (1:300; Rabbit, #14994, Cell Signaling Technology), anti-HMGCS1 (1:200; Rabbit, #PA5–29488, Invitrogen) and anti-Synaptophysin (1:200; Rabbit, #36406, Cell Signaling Technology) overnight at 4°C, followed by staining with anti-rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor 555 (1:2,000; #ab150074, Abcam), anti-rat IgG Alexa Fluor 647 (1:2,000; #A21472, Invitrogen), anti-mouse IgG2b Alexa Fluor 488 (1:2,000; #A21141, Invitrogen), anti-goat IgG Alexa Fluor 488 (1:2,000; #ab150129, Abcam), anti-Streptavidin, conjugate (1:2,000; #s868, ThermoFisher Scientific), and DAPI (1 μg/ml; #D9542, Sigma) for 1 h at room temperature. All antibodies were used in blocking buffer, and between all incubations, sections were washed for 10 min in PBS 3 times. Images were collected using a Nikon A1Rsi confocal microscope or Zeiss LSM880 microscope. z-Stacks with 1-μm steps in the z direction, 1,024 × 1,024-pixel resolution, were recorded. Extraction of parameters were performed in Imaris (version 9.8.0), and further processing was performed using automated scripts in MATLAB. 
To quantify staining signals in the confocal images by volume in MCC or LCC, we created surfaces using the “skip automatic function, edit manually” option in Imaris and manually selected the MCC or LCC area on the top and bottom sections; we then used the “masked channel” function to create new channels that selectively contain signals of protein of interest inside the selected regions. Then “batch colocalization” of MATLAB function was run on the newly generated channels and colocalization channels were created. The volumes of signal of interest in each image were determined using “Surface” function in Imaris. Ratios of double-positive volumes over single positive volumes (IBA1+CD74+/IBA1+, IBA1+CD11C/IBA1+, IBA1+APOE+/IBA1+ and SERPINA3N+GFAP+/GFAP+) were then calculated. To analyze SERPINA3N+ volume in Trem2−/− and WT mice, total SERPINA3N+ volume was measured within 2-μm radius of OLIG2, then ratios of total SERPINA3N+ volume over OLIG2+ number were calculated. To quantify VIM+ and Synaptophysin+ area in the LCC and cortex, images were first converted to a 2D image and then were converted to a binary image with the ImageJ “Make Binary” tool. The area of LCC or cortex were selected manually on the binary image using the ImageJ “Freehand Selections” tool. The mean signal intensity value was measured by the ImageJ “Measure” tool, using “mean gray value” as the readout.

## Flow cytometry
Brains from 4 mice in each group were dissected and homogenized by a Dounce homogenizer in the dissociation buffer (1%BSA, 1mM EDTA). Myelin debris was removed by 30% Percoll density gradient centrifugation, followed by the labeling of microglia with CD45-APC-Cy7 (1:200, #103116, BioLegend) and IL-33R (ST2)-PE (1:200; #12-9333-80, Invitrogen). Dead cells were excluded using DAPI (1 μg/ml; D9542, Sigma). Cells were acquired using BD FACSCantoII flow cytometer. Microglia were gated on CD45low cells and analyzed using Flowjo (v10.8.1).

## Transmission electron microscopy
Brains were processed for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis as previously described. Briefly, animals were perfused with the 4% PFA (Electron Microscopy Sciences, #15714-S), and post-fixed in the fixative containing 2.5% glutaraldehyde/2% paraformaldehyde/0.15M cacodylate buffer with 2mM CaCl2 (Electron Microscopy Sciences, #16300, #15710) at 4°C for 24 h before further dissection. Post fixation, brain samples were cut in sagittal direction near the midline into 100 μm thick sections with a vibratome (Leica VT1200S, Vienna, Austria). Whole brain sections containing CC were rinsed in 0.15 M cacodylate buffer containing 2 mM calcium chloride 3 times for 10 min each followed by a secondary fixation in 1% osmium tetroxide/1.5% potassium ferrocyanide in 0.15 M cacodylate buffer containing 2 mM calcium chloride for 1 h in the dark. The samples were then rinsed 3 times in ultrapure water for 10 min each and en bloc stained with 2% aqueous uranyl acetate overnight at 4°C in the dark. After another 4 washes in ultrapure water, the samples were dehydrated in a graded ethanol series (30%, 50%, 70%, 90%, 100% x3) for 10 min each step. Once dehydrated, samples were infiltrated with LX112 resin (Electron Microscopy Sciences) and flat embedded and polymerized at 60°C for 48 h. Post curing, medial regions of the CC were excised and mounted on blank epoxy stubs for cross sectioning. 70 nm sections were then cut, post-stained with 2% aqueous uranyl acetate and Sato’s lead and imaged on a TEM (JEOL JEM-1400 Plus) at an operating voltage of 120 Kv. 
For each TEM analysis, five to ten randomly selected CC regions in each mouse were imaged. Data analysis was performed using ImageJ 1.53a software. The myelinated ratios and g-ratios were measured with ImageJ on transverse electron micrographs at 3,000× magnification. The perimeters of each axon and the myelin sheath were measured with the freehand tool by tracing the outer surfaces of each structure. The g-ratio was calculated as the perimeter of the axon over the perimeter of its myelin.

## LFB staining
Myelin sheaths were stained with luxol fast blue (Electron microscopy sciences, Luxol Fast Blue, 0.1% in 95% alcohol, #26056–15). For the measurement of LFB intensity, the micrograph was first converted to a binary image with the ImageJ “Make Binary” tool. The area of MCC was then selected manually on the binary image using the ImageJ “Freehand Selections” tool. The mean LFB intensity value was measured by the ImageJ “Measure” tool, using “mean gray value” as the readout. For the quantification of LFB intensity, the mean intensity values in 3 adjacent brain sections from one animal were calculated and used for further statistical analysis. At least 3 animals per genotype were analyzed and the n was specified in the figure legends.

## Microglial PROS1 ELISA
Microglia detached from the mixed glia culture were seeded in 24-well plate at a density of 100,000 cells/well in complete RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% LCCM. After one day, microglia were stimulated with myelin debris (500 μg/ml) for 48hrs, and the microglial lysis was harvested for PROS1 ELISA (#AE25758MO, Abebio). Total protein concentration was quantified by DC protein assay (#5000112, BIO-RAD).

## Assessment of astrocytic phagocytosis
For fluorescent labeling of thymocyte membranes, WT thymocytes were incubated with CFSE dye (5μM; C1157, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 8 min with constant agitation at room temperature. CFSE-labeled thymocytes were then incubated with 2μM Dexamethasone (D1756, Sigma) for 6 h in 37°C incubator to induce apoptosis. Our preliminary experiment confirmed that around 70% CFSE-labeled thymocytes became apoptotic after dexamethasone incubation by Annexin V and 7AAD staining (#559763, BD Biosciences). The CFSE-labeled apoptotic thymocytes were then incubated for 10 min with or without 10nM recombinant mouse PROS1 (#9740-PS-050, R&D systems), added to the astrocyte culture at a ratio of 20:1 (apoptotic thymocytes: astrocytes), and incubated for 12 h at 37°C. Astrocytes were then briefly washed in PBS for 3 times, incubated for 3 min at 37°C in 0.25% trypsin and detached by vigorous pipetting. Phagocytic astrocytes were assessed using LSR Fortessa (BD Biosciences). Dead cells were excluded by PI staining. The post-acquisition data was analyzed by FlowJo software (v10.8.1).

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All statistical tests used are indicated in figure legends. No data were excluded from the analysis. Data are presented as mean ± sd unless specifically described. All statistical analyses for validation assay were performed using Prism 8.0 software with one-way or two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, and p values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Statistics on cell type compositional analysis were calculated using scCODA package (v.0.1.8) in Python (v3.9.2). p values in snRNA-seq analysis were adjusted based on Bonferroni correction. p values in violin plots were calculated using stat_compare_means() function of ggpubr package (0.4.0) in R, using Wilcox test.

## Supplementary Material
123456

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Tristan Q. Li, Simone Brioschi, and Vincent Peng for scientific discussions. We thank David M. Holtzman for providing the anti-APOE antibody. We acknowledge the Washington University Center for Cellular Imaging for assistance in imaging studies, supported by Washington University School of Medicine, the Children’s Discovery Institute of University and St. Louis Children’s Hospital (CDI-CORE-2015-505 and CDI-CORE-2019-813), the Foundation for Barnes-Jewish Hospital (3770), the Washington University Diabetes Research Center (DK020579), and the Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center of Washington University School of Medicine and Barnes-Jewish Hospital (CA091842). The Zeiss LSM880 microscope was purchased with support from the Office of Research Infrastructure Programs, National Institutes of Health, a part of the NIH Office of the Director (OD021629). J.A.J.F. is supported by a Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Imaging Scientist award (2020-225726). R.M.G. is supported by the Sao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP, 2021/10477-5). M.C. is supported by the NIH (RF1 AG051485, R21 AG059176, and RF1 AG059082) and Cure Alzheimer’s Fund. Graphical abstract and schematics were created with BioRender.com.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
M.C. is a member of the scientific advisory board of Vigil, receives research support from Vigil, and is a consultant for CST.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112293.
 

## Highlights
Cuprizone-induced de- and remyelination are analyzed by single-nucleus RNA-seq
Oligodendrocytes exhibit a demyelination-specific subset dependent on microglia TREM2
Astrocytes and vascular cells show metabolic, anti-oxidative, and interferon signatures
Microglia acquire a transcription factor MAFB-induced state during remyelination