pmciScienceiScience3532isci101724038iScience2589-0042ElsevierPMC9813795PMC9813795.1981379598137953661998210.1016/j.isci.2022.105808S2589-0042(22)02081-81058081ArticleDeciphering postnatal limb development at single-cell resolution
GaoManman LiuXizhe GuoPeng WangJianmin LiJunhong WangWentao StoddartMartin J. GradSibylle LiZhen WuHuachuan LiBaoliang HeZhongyuan ZhouGuangqian LiuShaoyu ZhuWeiminszhzwm@email.szu.edu.cn ChenDafuchendafujst@126.com ZouXuenongzouxuen@mail.sysu.edu.cn ZhouZhiyuzhouzhy23@mail.sysu.edu.cn 1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China2Department of Sport Medicine, Institute of Translational Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen Second People’s Hospital, Shenzhen 518035, China3AO Research Institute Davos, Davos 7270, Switzerland4Laboratory of Bone Tissue Engineering, Beijing Laboratory of Biomedical Materials, Beijing Research Institute of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Beijing JiShuiTan Hospital, Beijing 100035, China5Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Orthopedics and Traumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China6Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Anti-aging and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medical Cell Biology and Genetics, Health Sciences Center, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518071, China∗Corresponding author szhzwm@email.szu.edu.cn∗∗Corresponding author chendafujst@126.com∗∗∗Corresponding author zouxuen@mail.sysu.edu.cn∗∗∗∗Corresponding author zhouzhy23@mail.sysu.edu.cn7Lead contact
201202313122022261424210105808122202222820229122022131220220601202302092025© 2022 The Author(s)2022https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
The early postnatal limb developmental progression bridges embryonic and mature stages and mirrors the pathological remodeling of articular cartilage. However, compared with multitudinous research on embryonic limb development, the early postnatal stage seems relatively unnoticed. Here, a systematic work to portray the postnatal limb developmental landscape was carried out by characterization of 19,952 single cells from murine hindlimbs at 4 postnatal stages using single-cell RNA sequencing technique. By delineation of cell heterogeneity, the candidate progenitor sub-clusters marked by Cd34 and Ly6e were discovered in articular cartilage and enthesis, and three cellular developmental branches marked by Col10a1, Spp1, and Tnni2 were reflected in growth plate. The representative transcriptomes and developmental patterns were intensively explored, and the key regulation mechanisms as well as evolvement in osteoarthritis were discussed. Above all, these results expand horizons of postnatal limb developmental biology and reach the interconnections between limb development, remodeling, and regeneration.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Delineation of postnatal limb developmental landscape
•Discovery of candidate progenitors in articular cartilage and enthesis
•Parsing of three cellular developmental branches in postnatal growth plate
•Reaching interconnections of postnatal limb development and pathological remodeling

Biological sciences; Omics; Transcriptomics

## Subject areas
Biological sciencesOmicsTranscriptomicspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDPublished: January 20, 2023

## Introduction
Limb development is a highly orchestrated process. In the past decades, limb ontogeny, patterning, and morphogenesis during embryonic stage have been intensively studied. Nowadays, increasing attention has been focused on the interconnections between limb development, remodeling, and regeneration. , Compared with embryonic developmental process, postnatal limb development, a process involving diversified cell lineages cross-talked with the relatively mature extra-cellular matrix micro-environment to coordinate recruitment, proliferation, and differentiation, is a magnificent spectacle connected with embryonic rudiment formation and mapped into tissue remodeling and regeneration.
During postnatal stage, the limb is one orchestrated composite of diverse cellular types. In murine long bones, the secondary ossification center (SOC) develops postnatally, when the articular cartilage and subchondral bone develop, mature, and separate from one entire cartilage template. With SOC formation, the heterogeneity of epiphyseal growth plate (GP) chondrocytes reaches its peak, when exactly the epiphyseal stem cells generate. , , Hitherto, the cellular biological heterogeneity of GP chondrocytes lacks deeper parsing. For articular cartilage, zonal organization and maturation also occur postnatally. Although previous studies have identified the presence of cells with a progenitor or stem character in the superficial zone of adult articular cartilage, , , the variation of self-regenerative capability encouraged us to consider the heterogeneity of the progenitor cell reservoir with age.
In the present study, considering current limitation in the understanding of postnatal limb developmental biology, we systematically mapped the cell atlas of murine postnatal limbs by single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). By dissecting the cellular heterogeneity, we identified clusters marked by Cd34 and Ly6e in articular cartilage and evolutional branches marked by Col10a1, Spp1, and Tnni2 in GP. The evolvement in both development and osteoarthritis was discussed, reaching further understanding of the interconnections between limb development, remodeling, and regeneration.

## Results

## Cell diversity of murine hindlimb delineated by single-cell transcriptomic analysis
To systematically parse the postnatal limb developmental process, murine hindlimbs of postnatal day 1 (P1), day 5 (P5), day 14 (P14), and day 28 (P28) were used for scRNA-seq ( A and A). Here, we profile the transcriptomes of 19,952 single cells with an average of 3,282 genes detected in each individual cell after quality control. At each time point, 3,048, 5,803, 6,325, and 4,776 cells were delineated, respectively. All single-cell transcriptomes were subjected to Louvain clustering and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization, revealing 23 subsets unequally distributed at each time point ( B and S1C). According to feature genes expression, the cellular type of each subset was recognized and annotated ( A, 1B, and D), including GP chondrocytes (Epyc, Matn1, Matn3, and 3110079O15Rik/Snorc), , articular chondrocytes (Prg4, Cytl1, Wif1, Acvr1, and Dlk1), , enthesis cells (Aspn, Fstl1, Postn, Ptn, Lgals1, Vcan, and Mmp13), , endothelial cells (ECs, Kdr, Pecam1/Cd31, and Emcn), , mural cells (MCs, Des, Mcam, Tagln, and Notch3), hematopoietic cells (Ptprc and Spi1), , and erythron (Gypa). Subsets belonging to one cellular type had closer links shown by partition-based graph abstraction (PAGA) analysis ( E). MCs included with the vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs, Myh11, Acta2, and Tagln) and pericytes (Pdgfrb, Rgs5, Des, Abcc9, and Kcnj8) ( C and 1D). In the hematopoietic cells, several hematopoietic lineage commitment progenitors (HLCPs) were recognized, including dendritic cell lineage (Siglech, Ly6d, Ccr9, Sla2, Cox6a2, and Tlr7), mast cell lineage (Fcgr3, Cpa3, Gata2, Cd200r3, and Mcpt8), T cell lineage (Txk, Cd3d, Il2rb, Trbc1, Trbc2, and Cd28), monocyte lineage (Ccr2, Ly6c2, Ms4a6c, Ctsc, Cfp, and Htr7), neutrophil lineage (Mpo, Elane, Ms4a3, Prtn3, Cst7, and Ctsg), , and erythroid lineage (Gata1, Mfsd2b, Ache, Gfi1b, Samd14, and Epor) ( F–S1H). Accordingly, mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS; Cd68, Msr1, Csf1r, and Acp5), neutrophils (Wfdc21, S100a8/9, and Ly6g) and B cell lineage (Cd79a/b, Ebf1, Blnk, and Cd19) were also identified. In the MPS subset, pre-osteoclasts (pre-OC, Csf1r, Adgre1, C1qa, C1qb, C1qc, Aif1, Trem2, and C3ar1) , , and osteoclasts (OC, Acp5, Tnfrsf11a, Nfatc1, Mmp9, and Ctsk) were identified ( F–1G). The above subsets exhibited unevenly developed distribution at different ages ( E, 1H, I, and S1J). Briefly, most hematopoietic cell lineages concentrated at P28 when the SOC preliminarily matured; however, the osteoclast lineage generated at P01 and peaked at P14 ( H), and the ECs and MCs were expanded as early as P01 ( E), coincided with previous studies on epiphyseal cartilage remodeling mediated by osteochondroclasts and vascularization. 

## Integrated analysis of the GP, articular cartilage, and enthesis
GP, articular cartilage, and enthesis were characterized as the main limb connective tissues, which were extracted for further analysis. First, dimensionality reduction was performed and 18 subsets were delineated by UMAP visualization ( A). According to feature genes expression, small subsets of glial cells (Plp1, Mpz, Sox2, and Egfl8) and muscle cells (Myod1, Msc, and Des) were recognized ( A and B). PAGA analysis showed more strong corrections among subsets belonging to the same tissue type ( C). The GP chondrocytes, AC, and enthesis cells were ordered along a pseudotime trajectory. Overlapped distribution of AC with both GP chondrocytes and enthesis cells suggested their interconnections during limb development ( B), which was consistent with the pseudotemporal ordering of the feature genes ( D). 
As widely concerned, the expression pattern of key transcription factors (TFs) and signaling factors was analyzed. Five distinct gene expression patterns were identified after ordering all differentially expressed TFs along the trajectory axis ( C and E). TFs in pattern 1 were highly expressed in both GP and AC, which were required for chondrocyte lineage commitment, such as Sox9 or chondrocyte terminal differentiation, including Foxa3 and Foxc1. , TFs in pattern 2 were mostly restricted in GP and functioned as regulators of cartilage development including Barx2 and Runx3. 
Hmga genes were all ordered by pattern 3, which were highly expressed in AC and functioned in maintaining AC homeostasis. In pattern 4, TFs showed up-regulated in both AC and EN, including Cebpz, Mef2a, Tcf4i, and Zfp36l1/2, etc., which functioned in muscle and tendon development , , and osteoarthritis progression. , Genes in pattern 5 were primarily expressed in EN, which were proved involved in connective tissue development. It is to be highlighted that several TFs in pattern 2 (Mef2c, Runx2, and Shox2, etc.) and pattern 5 (Ebf1 and Maf, etc.) were enriched in both GP and EN and are recognized as regulators of chondrocyte hypertrophy, osteogenesis, and mineralization. For key signaling factors, 6 gene expression patterns were revealed ( D and F). In detail, Bmp signaling showed most intense expression in AC, with Bmp2, Bmp5, Bmp6, and Acvr1 being highly expressed. Tgfb factors showed increased expression in AC and EN, with low expression level in GP. However, Wnt ligands including Wnt4, Wnt5, and Wnt11 were enriched in GP, while Wnt inhibitors were highly expressed in AC and EN, including Notum and Wif1. Igf factors were primarily expressed in EN, except for Igf2 and Grb14, which were enriched in GP. Fgf pathways exhibited disparate patterns in AC (Fgf2 and Fgfr1), GP (Fgfr3), or EN (Fgf18 and Fgfr2). Egf and Notch signaling factors were enriched in AC, and Ihh and Pth1r signaling functioned mainly in GP and EN.
The aforementioned regulators weaved an intricate and precise network directing the specific tissue development. Nonetheless, elaboration of the common regulating patterns would be conducive to understanding the relevant biological process in both development and disease, including chondrocyte hypertrophy and extracellular matrix mineralization. Next, we analyzed each cell subset focusing on interpretation of the developmental and cell biology, with discussion of the correlation between development and degeneration.

## Interpretation of Cd34+ cell cluster and Ly6e+ cell cluster in developmental articular cartilage
As an intermediate tissue interconnecting GP and enthesis during development, AC were interpreted into 4 clusters ( A and A). Cluster 4 expressed both AC and EN feature genes (AC_EN), cluster 5 expressed both AC and GP feature genes (AC_GP), cluster 14 was in cell cycle (AC_Mki67+), and cluster 0 only highly expressed characteristic AC genes (AC_AC) ( A and S3B). Consistent with the characteristic gene expression pattern, when ordered along the pseudotime trajectory of cells from AC, EN, and GP, cells of AC_EN were mapped interconnected with AC and EN, cells of AC_GP were distributed to intermediate AC and GP, cells of AC_AC were restricted to AC, and the proliferating cells in cluster AC_Mki67+ showed scattered distribution overlapped with each of the 3 other clusters ( C). As articular cartilage matures, the fraction of AC_AC and proliferating chondrocytes was gradually declined, while the cell fraction of AC_EN was increased ( B). 
To understand the postnatal development of articular cartilage, the AC_AC were separated for further analysis, with identification of four cell sub-clusters ( C). The developmental progression was reconstructed by applying the RNA velocity ( D) and pseudotime trajectory analysis ( D). AC2 was revealed as the upstream subset, directing to two trajectories of AC3 and AC4. Identically, Gene Ontology (GO) analysis suggested that the biological process of AC2 was related with cartilage development and chondrocyte differentiation ( E). For feature genes expression analysis ( E), articular cartilage-specific genes, e.g., Col8a1, 
Vit, and Abi3bp, were highly expressed in AC1 and AC2 sub-clusters. In addition, AC2 expressed Gdf5 and Nt5e, which were respectively used to identify developmental joint progenitors and prechondrocytes. AC3 also expressed feature genes of GP chondrocyte, such as Epyc and Matn1, and suggested interconnection with AC_GP cells. The AC4 sub-cluster, as one trajectory developed from AC2 ( D), showed enriched gene sets in negative regulation of cell development. However, Cilp, a marker of intermediate zone of articular cartilage, was distributed mainly in AC4 subset, and characterization of this sub-cluster needed further exploration.
To further interpret properties of the AC2 and AC4 subsets, we searched the cell membrane protein encoding genes and identified Cd34 in the AC2 sub-cluster and Ly6e in the AC4 sub-cluster ( E). Then Cd34+ cells and Ly6e+ cells were screened out from the AC_AC cluster ( F). Thereinto, cell fraction of Cd34+ sub-cluster was gradually decreased as cells mature ( G). The evolutionary trajectory was consistent with that applied in the four AC_AC sub-clusters ( F), indicating the Cd34+ sub-cluster as upstream. The TF expression heatmap following pseudotime analysis showed that TFs related with stemness maintenance and modulation (Id2, Id3, Gata6, Foxd1, Tbx18, Pitx1, Junb, Jund, Prrx, Tcf4, etc.) and chondrocyte lineage commitment (Sox9 and Sox5) were clustered together with Cd34, and TFs functioned in stemness maintenance and modulation (Nfia, Nfib, Fosl1, Stat5a, Etv5, Barx1, Foxp1, Irf2, etc.) and chondrocyte terminal differentiation/osteogenesis (Irx3) were clustered with Ly6e ( H). Although, both sub-clusters expressed TFs related with stemness maintenance and modulation, the recognized cartilage stem/progenitor markers were more intensively expressed in Cd34+ sub-cluster ( I), which was aligned with the expression pattern in AC2 sub-cluster ( G), except that Ly6e+ cells highly expressed Ly6a and Pdgfra. Immunofluorescence staining showed that Ly6e localized mainly in the edge of articular cartilage and appeared with a distribution overlapped with Ly6a ( J and H). Ly6e+ cells appeared after embryonic joint morphogenesis and gradually decreased during postnatal development but would not vanish when the articular cartilage matures ( J). Cd34 was distributed in the surface zone and edge of articular cartilage after embryonic joint morphogenesis (P16.5) and gradually decreased to undetectable at 2 months old at which stage the articular cartilage becomes mature ( K). Together, these results suggest that Cd34 and Ly6e marked different subsets of articular cartilage progenitors, which play different roles on articular cartilage development.

## Interpretation of Cd34+ cell cluster and Ly6e+ cell cluster in developmental enthesis
Systematically, Cd34 was expressed mainly in AC, enthesis, ECs, and HLCPs, and Ly6e was distributed largely in ECs and hematopoietic system and marginally in GP, AC, and enthesis ( A). In joint tissues, 4 subsets of Cd34+ cells were visualized ( B), mainly derived from and characterized by enthesis and articular cartilage ( C). Similarly, 3 subsets of Ly6e+ cells were revealed in joint tissues ( D). Although more Ly6e+ cells were derived from GP compared with Cd34+ cells, they were mainly featured as enthesis and articular cartilage ( E). The above data showed the heterogeneity of Cd34+ sub-cluster and Ly6e+ sub-cluster in joint tissues, suggesting their primary involvement in the development of articular cartilage and enthesis. On this basis, we went on to analyze the cellular heterogeneity and lineage hierarchies within enthesis with focus on Cd34+ sub-cluster and Ly6e+ sub-cluster. 
In whole enthesis, 3 subsets were recognized and annotated based on marker gene expression, including one subset that aggregated with stem/progenitor cells (EN_SP, Tppp3, Pdgfra, Thbs4, Cxcl12, Cd55, and Cd248), one subset with moderate stem/progenitor marker gene expression (Tppp3, Pdgfra, Thbs4, and Cxcl12) but without terminal differentiation or mineralization (EN_unM, Csf1, Il1r1, Lhfpl2, Hmga1/2, and Itga5/6), and the last one showing terminal differentiation and mineralization (EN_M, Runx2, Alpl, Spp1, and Tnfsf11) ( F). Specifically, Cd34 and Ly6e were mainly expressed in subsets of EN_SP and EN_unM ( G). When plotting along the pseudotime trajectory, cells in EN_SP and EN_unM were separately plotted at upstream of two trajectories, which jointly terminated at EN_M stage. Cd34 and Ly6e were distributed at upstream of both trajectories, similar to the stem/progenitor marker genes like Tppp3 and Cd55 ( H and 4I), suggesting Cd34+ sub-cluster and Ly6e+ sub-cluster as heterogeneous stem/progenitor cell populations in enthesis.
To investigate Cd34+ and Ly6e+ cell subsets in enthesis, we screened out each subpopulation containing cells with double positive, single-positive or double-negative expression of Cd34 and Ly6e. Consistent with the pseudotime trajectory mapping, almost all of the Cd34+Ly6e+ and Cd34+ cells and about 80% of the Ly6e+ cells were distributed in subsets of EN_SP and EN_unM ( J), which were plotted upstream of both trajectories ( K). To investigate the dominant features of each subpopulation, the differentially expressed TFs were screened out and clustered in a heatmap following pseudotime analysis, showing five distinct gene expression patterns ( L). Consistent with pseudotime trajectory analysis, two developmental lineages were observed, both of which began with active expression of Tppp3, Cd34, Ly6e, and Ly6a, which were clustered with stemness regulators such as Klf family, Osr1/2, Zeb2, Foxd1, Hopx, etc., as shown in pattern 3. In pattern 1 and 2, Hmga1 and Hmga2, highly expressed in subset of EN_unM, were clustered with TFs, which sequentially regulate joint development (Cnbp and Smarcc1), , chondrocyte differentiation (Hivep3 and Ybx1), , and terminal differentiation (Foxk2, Runx2, and Runx3). For the other developmental lineage shown in pattern 4 and 5, TFs regulating tendon development (Scx, Foxp2, Nfact4, etc.) , were gradually activated. These results suggested that Cd34+ and Ly6e+ cell subsets in enthesis could be candidate progenitors involving in enthesis development. Both of them contained heterogeneous subpopulations with differential lineage commitment of chondrocyte and tendon, suggesting involvement in the development of different zones of enthesis. Consistently, immunofluorescence staining of developing joint tissues showed that Cd34+ and Ly6e+ cells existed in the margin of articular cartilage, which extended to synovium and periosteum ( J and 3K).

## Distribution of Cd34, Ly6e, and Ly6a in knee osteoarthritis
Because of the heterogeneous features of Cd34+ subset and Ly6e+ subset, their pathological involvement in osteoarthritis was investigated. The immunofluorescence staining results showed that Cd34+ cells were activated in osteoarthritic cartilage, however distributed scattered in all zones but not restricted in surface zone, suggesting that Cd34+ subset played different roles in development and osteoarthritis ( A). Ly6e, co-expressed with Ly6a ( B), was pathologically activated at early stage of osteoarthritis and specifically gathered in edge of the affected articular cartilage and extended to synovium, which is a susceptible site to form osteophytes. As recently reported, osteophytes were derived from Pdgfrα-expressing stem/progenitor cells, which would be activated during osteoarthritis. However, our data ( I) and previous studies showed that Pdgfra was expressed broadly in joint tissues, including articular cartilage, tendon, and synovium, , , , and Pdgfrα+ cells showed high heterogeneity. In the contrary, Ly6e+ subset, also highly expressed Pdgfra, showed restricted distribution in the edge of articular cartilage, suggesting Ly6e+ subset as candidate progenitors specifically contributing to osteophyte formation in osteoarthritis.

## Interpretation of the cellular diversity and developmental progression of GP
GP, landmark for limb endochondral bone development, is intricately composed but highly orchestrated, which also provides a vivid research model for both development and osteoarthritis. Therefore, we decoded the postnatal GP atlas reaching the interlinks with osteoarthritis. As shown before, nine subsets of GP chondrocytes were visualized ( A, S2B, and A). Based on the marker gene expression pattern, all subsets were integrated and clustered into 8 ones, including Ptch1+Mki67+ subset and Ptch1+ subset belonging to the proliferating zone in or out of the cell cycle (Mki67, Ptch1, Pkdcc, and Slc26a2), , , pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes (preHC, Wnt4, Panx3, Smpd3, Pth1r, and Ihh), , , , 
Col10a1+ hypertrophic chondrocytes (Col10a1+, Col10a1, and Alpl), Spp1+ subset (Spp1, Enpp1, Ank, Plaur, and Capg), the newly discovered Tnni2+ subset (Tnni2, Sfrp5, Runx1, Penk, and Srpx2), one subset aggregated with cells derived from P28 (P28s, Cd44, Pla2g5, etc.), and the last one exhibited low abundance of transcriptome (GP_LA) ( A, 5B, B, and S5C). It seems counterintuitive that cells of Spp1+ subset were not clustered with hypertrophic chondrocytes featured by Col10a1, although Spp1 was generally recognized as a marker for terminal hypertrophic chondrocytes. Actually, three developmental branches of Tnni2+ subset, Spp1+ subset, and Col10a1+ subset were identified by RNA velocity analysis ( C) and pseudotime trajectory mapping ( D), which were all originated from proliferating chondrocytes. In addition, when mapping marker genes onto the pseudo-timeline, Pth1r, a marker for pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes and retarder of chondrocyte differentiation, , was restricted in trajectory 1 along with Col10a1 ( D), suggesting that these branches went through different developmental progression. The above results revealed a more complicated cellular composition than recognized horizontal zones. 
In consideration of zonal re-arrangement and cell polarity regulation during SOC formation, the intermediate cells plotting in between articular cartilage and GP were analyzed by pseudotime trajectory ( D). It was unexpectedly indicated that mapping of the marker gene expression was slightly different with plotting of the specific subset, which showed that Tnni2, Spp1, and Col10a1 were all highly expressed in the intermediate cells without plotting of Col10a1+ subset. Further, it was revealed that Col10a1 and Spp1 were co-expressed at the downstream of each branch by marker gene expression embedded on UMAP visualization mapped with RNA velocity ( E). The above results suggested that each subset marked by Tnni2, Spp1, and Col10a1 differentially evolved as GP developed, while co-expression of Col10a1 and Spp1 existed in certain stages of each subset. To assess the distribution of Tnni2, Spp1, and Col10a1 in postnatal GP, we performed the immunofluorescence staining using murine limbs at different stages ( E–5G). Tnni2 showed a spatiotemporally variational distribution during limb development ( E). At P1 without SOC development, Tnni2 expressed mainly in the hypertrophic chondrocytes around the primary ossification center (POC). At P5 when the SOC starts formation, Tnni2 increased the expression around SOC until P14, from which time point Tnni2 declined expression in cells adjacent to articular cartilage. At P28 when the SOC gets mature, Tnni2 was reduced in all cells around SOC but kept high expression in cells around POC. It was suggested that the spatiotemporal variation of Tnni2+ cells seems related with the ossification center formation and maturation. Spp1 was remarkably expressed around SOC as it develops, which showed a stronger signal than the expression adjacent to POC ( F). Col10a1 was highly expressed in hypertrophic chondrocytes near both the POC and SOC, which was consistent with the previous reports ( G). Above all, each branch marked by Tnni2, Spp1, and Col10a1 exhibited specific distribution pattern. Although both Bmp3 and Sfrp5 were previously recognized as resting zone markers, the varied distribution of Tnni2+ subset indicated more possibilities than resting cells.
To reveal the developmental progression of each branch, pseudotime trajectory of each subset was performed. Similar to the RNA velocity analysis ( E), Col10a1 and Spp1 were highly co-expressed at the terminal stage of every branch ( A). However, when screening the marker genes of late hypertrophic chondrocytes in each subset ( B), Col10a1+ subset showed the most intensive expression. In the Spp1+ subset, although a set of genes regulating pyrophosphate levels (Ppa1, Enpp1, Ank, and Slc29a1) were highly expressed, the lack of Alpl expression would retard the extracellular matrix mineralization, which should not be the terminal state. To understand more accurately about the terminal state of hypertrophic chondrocytes, we screened out 7 independent subsets according to single-, dual-, or triple-positive expression of Col10a1, Spp1, and Tnni2 ( C and G). The Col10a1+Spp1+ subsets (cstP and csPtN) were indicated as the late hypertrophic chondrocytes with extensive expression of Runx2, Sp7, Irx3, Irx5, Alpl, Ibsp, etc. Although the TFs regulating terminal differentiation were also expressed in Col10a1+Spp1−subsets (ctPsN and cPstN), the extracellular matrix was likely unmineralized based on low expression of Ibsp. Nonetheless, the expression level of Tnni2 made little difference to the terminal state ( D). Therefore, it could be established that the double positive expression of Col10a1 and Spp1 could mark the terminal differentiated hypertrophic chondrocytes, which was in consistent with the immunofluorescence staining results ( E–5G). 
To understand the main features of each subset, the expression pattern of key regulating factors was inspected, including signaling factors ( A) and TFs ( H). Interestingly, apparently disparate regulating patterns were displayed among each subset. Thereinto, the Tnni2+ subset showed coinstantaneous inhibition of Bmp (Bmp3) and Wnt (Sfrp5) , with terminal differentiation ( B and S6C). High expression of Bmp3, an inhibitor of chondrocyte maturation, could explain the lack of Ibsp expression even in the late stage of Tnni2+ subset. The Spp1+ subset exhibited Bmp activation (increased Bmp7 and decreased Inhba) but Wnt inhibition (decreased Wnt7b and increased Notum) ( D and S6E). Unlike the other Bmp ligands, Bmp7 was reported suppressing hypertrophic differentiation, and Wnt7b oppositely functioned in inducing chondrocyte maturation. As a result, the terminal differentiation of Spp1+ subset was restricted. The Col10a1+ subset showed intense Bmp activation (increased Bmp2, Bmp6, and Bmp8a, and decreased Chrdl1) and Wnt inhibition (decreased Wnt4, Wnt10b, and Wnt11, and increased Frzb), concentrically leading to chondrocyte terminal differentiation. Similarly, the TFs highly expressed in each subset were specific. Along with Tnni2+ subset terminal differentiation, Runx1 and Mef2c were up-regulated ( I). In the Spp1+ subset, the recognized TFs regulating chondrocyte terminal differentiation, including Runx2 and Runx3, 
Irx3 and Irx5, 
Sp7 and Mef2c, were predominantly up-regulated at the terminal stage ( J). Most of the TFs highly expressed in the Spp1+ subset exhibited more extensive distribution along with the trajectory of Col10a1+ subset ( K). In spite of the similarities between Spp1+ subset and Col10a1+ subset, critical different regulating factors decided their specificity. Runx3, reported down-regulation at late hypertrophic chondrocytes, was down-regulated in the Col10a1+ subset but up-regulated at terminal stage of the Spp1+ subset, which was probably a switch controlling the terminal state of hypertrophic chondrocyte. In addition, Irx3 and Irx5 were reported promoting osteogenesis of hypertrophic chondrocytes as downstream of Wnt signaling, while plotted at different stages of Spp1+ subset and Col10a1+ subset. By plotting the subsets with positive expression of Col10a1, Spp1, and Tnni2 on pseudotime trajectory, it was shown that Irx3 was expressed mainly in the Spp1+ subset and Irx5 was expressed mainly in the Col10a1+ subset ( L), suggesting their specific roles on regulating differentiation of each subset. Above all, each developmental cell branch was specifically regulated by key factors. Next, we discuss the potential biological functions of each branch in inducing endochondral bone development.

## Biological functions of each developmental branch of GP
Vascularization coordinated by hypertrophic chondrocytes during endochondral bone development has been well studied. However, as mentioned above, different branches of GP chondrocytes could develop into terminal hypertrophic chondrocytes, yet their contribution to vascularization was unclear. GO enrichment analysis identified that the Tnni2+ subset was highlighted in regulating vascularization ( A). To reveal the global communications between each branch of GP chondrocytes and ECs, the receptor-ligand database was established by CellChat. The Tnni2+ subset and Spp1+ subset showed intensive receptor-ligand communications with ECs ( B). For the inferred angiogenic pathways, the Vegf (Vegfa-Vegfr1/Vegfr2) and Angptl pathways (Angptl2-Itga5/Itgb1) was comparatively active in each subset, the Sema3 pathway was primarily active in the Col10a1+ subset (Sema3d-Nrp1/Plxna2), and the Fgf pathway was most active in the Tnni2+ subset (Fgf2-Fgfr1) ( C). In addition, regulators of angiogenesis were identified in the highly differentially expressed genes, including Hif-1α signaling factors, angiogenic factors, and other regulators. The Tnni2+ subset revealed the most intense and gradually increased expression of the above genes, except for Sema3d ( D and 7E). In the Spp1+ subset, Vegfa, Sema3d, and F3 were prominently expressed, of which Sema3d showed increased expression at P28 ( D and 7E). In the Col10a1+ subset, Sema3d and Smoc2 were highly expressed, with a stable expression level during development ( D and 7E). Furthermore, in subsets with different marker gene expression, the Tnni2+ subset and Spp1+Tnni2+ subset revealed predominant expression of the above angiogenic regulators ( F). 
To discuss the correlation with vascularization, the distribution pattern of each subset and the type H vessels were detected ( ). Results showed that at P2, the Cd31hEmcnh vessels distributed in POC and emerged in the surrounding area of SOC at P5. At P14, the Cd31hEmcnh vessels gradually decreased in the lateral area of SOC adjacent to the articular cartilage and continued decreased in all surrounding areas of the SOC at P28. The distribution pattern of Cd31hEmcnh vessels was similar to the one of Tnni2. Therefore, we proposed the Tnni2+ subset as being key in inducing angiogenesis of the postnatal endochondral bone, especially of the SOC. 

## Distribution of Tnni2 and Spp1 in articular cartilage during osteoarthritis progression
Chondrocyte terminal differentiation is a landmark for endochondral bone development as well as cartilage degeneration in osteoarthritis. Research of postnatal GP development also provides a potential model for exploring the pathomechanisms of osteoarthritis. With continuation of the above results, we explored the distribution of Tnni2 and Spp1 in osteogenic joint. Immunofluorescence staining showed that the expression of Tnni2 increased during early osteoarthritis but gradually decreased later ( A). In contrast, the expression of Spp1 steadily increased with osteoarthritis progression ( B). Similar to postnatal limb development, Tnni2 was transiently highly expressed, while Spp1 expression gradually increased, suggesting each pathological contribution at different osteoarthritis stages.

## Discussion
As a connector of tissue morphogenesis and maturation, postnatal developmental stage is one important part of developmental biology. Postnatal limb development is one sophisticated system orchestrated with different types of tissue organization, maturation, and remodeling. In articular cartilage, chondrocytes perform zonal organization and maturation during postnatal stage, accompanied with losing of the self-renewing ability. In GP, all cellular stages would be observed from postnatal skeletal stem cells to terminal and mineralized chondrocytes. In addition, specific cellular biological clues could be provided by the occurrence of SOC in murine postnatal limbs, when the articular cartilage and subchondral bone develop, mature, and separate from one entire cartilage template.
In embryonic stage, the articular cartilage is developed from joint progenitor cells located in the intermediate compartment of the histological interzone, which is broadly labeled by Gdf5. , Over postnatal life, it is evidenced that embryonically derived progenitors remain present while dramatically decreased in articular cartilage. , , In adult articular cartilage, cell populations with progenitor or stem character are also discovered in the superficial zone. , Although it was verified that human superficial chondrocytes showed proliferative remodeling of the spatial organization in response to distant lesions of early osteoarthritis and synovial Prg4+ lineage progenitors at prenatal or juvenile stages contributed to repairment of adult articular cartilage injury, the intrinsic regenerative capacity of articular cartilage is quite limited once it has reached maturity. , By contrast, the juvenile articular cartilage was verified possessing potent self-repair potential. In addition, the super-healing MRL mouse strain had a remarkable healing response of damaged cartilage with more abundant chondrocytes and a richer extracellular matrix compared with non-healer strains. , And genes activating cell proliferation were discovered highly expressed in the super-healing mouse strains, which was correlated with the enhanced articular cartilage self-repair. , Above all, alterations of stem or progenitor cell pool at postnatal stage could be attributed to the declined regenerative capability. In the present study, the systematic mapping of AC during postnatal development is valuable for revealing the transition of its intrinsic repair capacity.
In the present study, two sub-clusters of candidate articular cartilage progenitors featured by Cd34 or Ly6e/Ly6a were discovered. Cd34 was first described on hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, and recently, considerable studies have demonstrated that Cd34 is expressed by a multitude of other non-hematopoietic cell types including fibrogenic/adipogenic progenitors, muscle satellite cells, corneal keratocytes, interstitial cells, epithelial progenitors, and vascular endothelial progenitors. It shows that Cd34+ cells discovered in various tissues are usually characterized with enhanced progenitor features. Therefore, it was exciting to detect Cd34+ cells in developmental articular cartilage. The transcriptome features and surface-zone distribution pattern indicated Cd34+ chondrocytes as the articular cartilage progenitors. Interestingly, we detected that Cd34+ chondrocytes arose after joint morphogenesis, which suggested the sub-cluster as a candidate progenitor subset contributing to postnatal articular cartilage development. Similarly, Ly6e+ cells, co-expressed with Ly6a, were transcriptionally characterized as progenitors. However, unlike Cd34+ chondrocytes, Ly6e+ cells were distributed mainly on the margin of articular cartilage with interconnection to the synovium, which suggested their distinct roles on articular cartilage development. However, before we make any conclusions, more precise experiments should be carried out especially using the lineage tracing mice models.
Interestingly, during enthesis development, both Cd34+ cells and Ly6e+ cells were characterized with two developmental lineages of mineralized chondrocyte and tendon. As a transitional fibrocartilaginous tissue between tendon and bone, enthesis occurs postnatally , and forms four distinct zones that create a structurally continuous gradient from tendon, fibrocartilage, and calcified fibrocartilage to bone. , , Besides the newly discovered progenitors marked by Cd34 and Ly6e, all the recognized progenitors marked by Tppp3, Cd55, and Cd247 developed into two trajectories. In addition, all the above marker genes were remarkably co-expressed in the progenitors of enthesis. Therefore, unlike the situation in postnatal articular cartilage with distinct progenitor subsets, the progenitors of enthesis showed multilineage potential while with similar marker gene expression.
During osteoarthritis progression, both Cd34+ cells and Ly6e+ cells were pathologically activated in articular cartilage. Cd34+ cells showed scattered distribution at all zones rather than surface-zone distribution, while Ly6e+ cells were intensively distributed in margin of articular cartilage, the susceptible sites for osteophytes. Previously, Roelofs et al. reported that osteophytes were derived from Pdgfra-expressing stem/progenitor cells in periosteum and synovium. However, Pdgfra is wildly expressed in the developing joint with a considerable heterogeneity. Our results indicated that Ly6e+ cells were also a sub-cluster of Pdgfra-expressing cells. Based on the particularly restrictive distribution pattern, Ly6e+ cells were likely the specific subset contributing to osteophyte formation. To clearly define the responsible pathological subset would expedite understanding of the pathomechanisms and stimulate promising treatment strategies. Therefore, deeper exploration is required to figure out the roles and regulating mechanisms of Cd34+ cells and Ly6e+ cells in both joint development and degenerative diseases.
In GP, three developmental branches marked by Tnni2, Spp1, and Col10a1 were interpreted in the present study. Conventionally, the knowledge of five-zone organization in GP cartilage has been established, which develops through a linear sequence from resting chondrocytes to terminally mineralized hypertrophic chondrocytes. , , The linear sequential developmental theory explains how long bones achieve elongation, contributed by proliferation of GP chondrocytes, increase of cell volume, deposition of extracellular matrix, and at last coordination with bone formation, which occurs mainly in POC. However, this theory is probably no longer fully applicable in postnatal stage concerning with SOC formation, which shows significantly developmental difference compared with POC. For example, as soon as SOC develops, the underlying chondroprogenitors start to renew themselves making contribution to the elongation of POC while influenced by SOC. , Therefore, it is suggested that these chondroprogenitors are named as “epiphyseal stem cells” and SOC as “epiphyseal stem cell niche,” indicating key developmental difference between POC and SOC. Nowadays, it is still largely unclear about the SOC developmental pattern, roles, and regulating mechanisms.
During postnatal limb development, the formation of SOC separates articular cartilage and GP into two distinct structures. As reported, SOC evolutionarily appears in animals conquering the land—amniotes, which correlates with the extent of mechanical loads and probably protect the GP from the high mechanical stress encountered in the terrestrial environment. , Consistently, subchondral bone, developmentally derived from SOC, is reported with similar bone mineral density with cortical tibial metaphysis, which is higher than the POC-derived cancellous metaphysis. The same happened to the epiphyseal bone plate, a flat bony structure located between the epiphysis and the metaphysis of the long bones that provides strength and firmness to the GP cartilage. Considered together, rather than elongation, the development of SOC is more focused on the extracellular matrix mineralization to reinforce the mechanical properties. In the present study, we discovered that cells around the SOC showed remarkably higher expression of Spp1 than cells adjacent to the POC, although both areas of cells expressed similar levels of Col10a1. The Col10a1+Spp1+ subset expresses highest levels of terminal differentiation marker genes and extracellular matrix mineralization regulating genes; however, higher expression of Spp1 may indicate increased bone mineral density and strengthened mechanical properties. These findings are valuable for studies in controlling artificial bone density.
What is even more surprising is that the newly discovered Tnni2+ subset, rather than Col10a1+ subset, showed the most powerful effect of promoting angiogenesis. Tnni2+ cells showed distinctive distribution changes, which seems related to the developmental activity of ossification centers. Consistently, type H vessels, coupling of angiogenesis and osteogenesis in bone, exhibited similar variation with Tnni2+ cells in POC and SOC. The above results suggest that Tnni2+ GP chondrocytes may bridge type H vessels with ossification centers during endochondral bone formation.
GP is also an elegant experimental model to study chondrocyte terminal differentiation, which is common in articular cartilage degenerative diseases including osteoarthritis. As a disease of mechanics, typical degenerative progression during osteoarthritis includes cartilage erosion, subchondral bone structure alteration, osteophyte formation, destruction of osteochondral junction, synovial hyperplasia, and systemic aseptic inflammation. , , , Thereinto, chondrocyte hypertrophic change would accelerate cartilage deterioration by inducing extracellular matrix degradation and calcification, vascular invasion, nerve innervation, and inflammation, , , , the cellular biological process of which is similar to endochondral bone development. , , In the present study, we interpreted the key regulators differentially expressed in the AC and GP chondrocytes, which provided more biological clues to maintain chondrocyte homeostasis. Moreover, similar to the spatial-temporal evolutionary pattern in GP development, Tnni2 showed transiently high expression in the early stage of osteoarthritic cartilage, while the expression of Spp1 gradually increased with osteoarthritis progression. These findings are helpful in deeply understanding the pathomechanisms of osteoarthritis. Yet, many unanswered questions remained, such as do lineage connections exist among different branches, whether and how the Tnni2+ subset induced vascularization in GP and osteoarthritic cartilage, and what regulators are shared in regulating each branch differentiation in GP development and osteoarthritis.
In conclusion, interpretation of articular cartilage progenitors and GP developmental branches in this study expanded the horizon of our knowledge about postnatal limb development. Reaching the inter-connections between postnatal limb development and osteoarthritis progression broadens our understanding about the pathomechanisms, which might stimulate promising treatment strategies in the future.

## Limitations of the study
This study is mainly based on high-throughput scRNA-seq technique, showing abundant information on the gene expression during the postnatal limb development. However, two major limitations should be considered in the interpretation of the results. First, the bioinformatic analysis is thorough but lacks integrated validation. Cd34+ cell subset and Ly6e+ cell subset in articular cartilage and enthesis are suggested as candidate progenitors based on the transcriptome features and distribution patterns. However, more functional and lineage tracing experiments should be performed to explicit the properties of these cell subsets. Similarly, three cellular developmental branches are interpreted in GP chondrocytes. Each branch shows specific transcriptome features and distribution patterns while with connections as terminal differentiation. Yet, the lineage specificity and connections among different branches and the biological functions of each subset need more exploration in the future. Second, it is difficult to highlight the inter-connections between postnatal limb development and osteoarthritis progression simply by observing the distribution of the annotated cell subsets in osteoarthritis mice. Co-analysis of scRNA-seq data from postnatal limbs and osteoarthritic articular cartilage, functional experiments, and lineage tracing in osteoarthritis mouse models are all required to lead to the identification of intrinsic connections between limb development, remodeling, and regeneration.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Zhiyu Zhou (zhouzhy23@mail.sysu.edu.cn).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Experimental model and subject details

## Animals
Mice were handled at Laboratory Animal Center of Sun Yat-sen University. All manipulations in the present study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (SYSU-IACUC-2020-000428). Mice utilized in this study were all C57BL/6J genetic background (). For sc-RNA seq, mice at four postnatal stages were selected, including points marking neonatal limb development without SOC formation (P1, n = 5, mixed gender), initiation of SOC formation (P5, n = 3, mixed gender), formation of SOC prototype (P14, n = 3, male), and progression of limb maturation (P28, n = 3, male). The experimental unit was the individual mouse and mice at each time point were from one cage to guarantee unconfused developmental stage in each group.
To verify the sc-RNA seq results, mixed gender mice at postnatal 1 day (P1), 2 days (P2), 4 days (P4), 5 days (P5), and 8 days (P8), and male mice at postnatal 14 days (P14), 28 days (P28), and 2 months (M2) of age (n = 4 in each group) were utilized in the immunofluorescence study. The experimental unit was the individual mouse and mice at each time point were from different cages. Embryonic mice at different stages were also used to study the evolution of specific cell clusters during before (E14.5, n = 6) and after joint cavitation and morphogenesis (E16.5, n = 5). The experimental unit was the individual pregnant mouse.
Male mice at 10 weeks of age were chosen for establishment of osteoarthritis model. Briefly, after inhalation anesthesia with isoflurane, the anterior cruciate ligament was transected (ACLT) surgically to induce mechanical instability–associated osteoarthritis of the left knee. Sham operations were performed on other groups of mice by cutting the knee capsule and infrapatellar fat pad without performance of anterior cruciate ligament transection (ACLT). For the time-course experiments, mice were euthanized at 1, 2, 4, or 8 weeks after surgery (n = 5 in ACLT group, and n = 4 in sham group). The experimental unit was the individual mouse. The randomized digital table was used during establishment of ACLT or sham model.

## Method details

## Preparation of single-cell suspension
Mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation. After cleaning the hindlimbs with 75% ethanol, cut off the skin and dissociate the limbs. Carefully remove the soft tissues under the stereoscope, and segregate tibia and femur by dissecting the connective ligaments using Vannas Spring Scissors (Fine Science Tools, 150008). Tissues containing the proximal tibial growth plate to knee articular cartilage, and distal femoral growth plate to knee articular cartilage were dissected for further experiments. Samples harvested from same age of mice were pooled together and transferred to digestion medium containing with 1 mg/mL Collagenase D (Roche, 11088866001), 1mg/mL STEMxyme1 (Worthington, LS004106), and 1 mg/mL Dispase II (ThermoFisher Scientific, 17105041) in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 2% FBS for pre-treatment for 1 hour at 37°C with agitation (180 rpm) to further eliminate the soft tissues. And then, tissues were minced into pieces of about 2 mm3 and digested in the freshly prepared digestion medium as above mentioned. After 20 mins of digestion, the isolated cells were collected and undissociated tissues underwent a second digestion. After 3-times repeat of digestion and collection, all dissociated cells of each group were mixed together and filtered through a 40 μm filter (Falcon, 352340) into a collection tube. Cell counting was performed both automatically (JIMBIO, Changzhou, China) and manually (BRAND, BR717810). Triple-staining using Hoechst 33342 (Invitrogen, R37605), calcein AM (Invitrogen, C1430), and propidium iodide (PI, Invitrogen, P3566) was applied to detect cell viability.

## Construction of scRNA-seq libraries, quality control, and sequencing
Construction of scRNA-seq libraries was strictly performed according to the instructions utilizing Chromium Single Cell 3' Reagent Kits v3 (PN-1000075, PN-1000073, PN-120262). Cell suspensions containing than 85% viable cells, less than 10% doublets and no large cell aggregates were identified as qualified samples. According to cell counting results, cells were resuspended at 1,000 cells/mL to prepare the reaction mix. After loading the Chromium Single Cell Chip B (10× Genomics, 2000060), the Chromium Controller was used to generate the Gel Bead-in-Emulsion (GEMs). Immediately following that, the reverse transcription (RT) was performed to produce the barcoded, full-length cDNA from poly-adenylated mRNA released from the captured cells. Then, the first-strand cDNA was purified and amplified to generate sufficient mass for library construction. Enzymatic fragmentation and size selection were used to optimize the cDNA amplicon size. After sequential adding of P5, P7, a sample index and TruSeq Read 2, the libraries were constructed. After quality control by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer, the libraries were sequenced on Illumina Hiseq X ten PE150 platform in 150 bp pair-ended manner (Novogene Technology Co., Ltd., Tianjin, China).

## Processing of scRNA-seq data
Sequencing data from 10× Genomics were processed with CellRanger (version 3.0.1) for demultiplexing, barcode processing, and single-cell 3' gene counting. the mm10 mouse transcriptome (UCSC) was used for sequence alignment. An internal collection of numerical multidimensional datasets by velocity from cellranger data was extracted as loom files. Only confidently mapped, non-PCR duplicates with valid barcodes and unique molecular identifiers were used to generate the gene-barcode matrix that contained 28,386 cells.
We used Scanpy package (version 1.7.2) for further analyzes and exploration of our single cell RNA sequencing data, such as quality filtering, dimension reduction using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP), unsupervised graph-based clustering, and so on. we only retained cells with more than 500 genes and less than 6,000 genes detected and less than 7% of mitochondrial genes. Then, 8,434 cells passed the filter standards. On average, we detected 3,282 genes expressed in each individual cell.
R package Monocle 2 (version 2.8) was used for pseudotime analysis. We limited the dataset to only interested cells for the analysis. We selected the high dispersion genes across cells with mean expression ≥ 0.1 and empirical dispersion ≥ 0.1 as the ordering genes for the trajectory reconstruction, using the nonlinear reconstruction algorithm DDRTree. Genes that varied across pseudotime were calculated using the Differential Gene Test function and a cutoff of adjusted p value <0.1 was applied. This was applied on the entire pseudotime range and also on the pseudotime intervals specific to limited cell clusters in order to avoid limitation to the genes characterized by monotonic changes across the inferred trajectory. Further branch analysis was applied using BEAM algorithms.
GO enrichment analyses were performed using ClusterProfiler in R package and a cutoff of adjusted p value <0.05 was applied, applying the Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate correction for multiple testing.
DEGs were identified by non-parametric Wilcoxon rank sum test and Logic regression analysis among individual clusters, and t-test was used when there were just two clusters. According to the filtered DEGs and the expression pattern, we then performed hierarchical clustering.
The Animal Transcription Factor DataBase (AnimalTFDB 3.0) was referenced to identify TFs among DEGs, and the Cell Surface Protein Atlas was applied in recognition of surfaceome proteins. 

## Limb tissue preparation and cryosection
To time mouse pregnancy accurately, one male mouse cohabited with 2 female mice in each cage for 16 hours until the next morning in addition to checking the vaginal plugs, and then separate the female ones. The day of separation was considered as E0.5. After 11 days, 13 days, and 16 days of separation, according to changes in appearance of the pregnant female mice, including more prominent nipples and expanded waistline, the pregnant mice were euthanized and embryos were isolated and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA, Biosharp, BL539A) overnight. After washing with 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Solarbio, P1000) for 3 times (20 min each), the hindlimbs were dissected under the stereoscope. Specimens of E16.5 was then decalcified overnight at 4°C in a solution containing 10% ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA, Leagene, DD0002). After washing with 1× PBS buffer, specimens were incubated into cryoprotectant solution containing with 20% (w/v) sucrose (Biofroxx, 1245GR500) and 1% (w/v) polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP, Sigma, P5288) for 24 hours for cryoprotection. At last, Tissue-Tek® O.C.T. Compound (Sakura Finetek, 4583) was used to embed the tissue specimens for further cryosections.
The postnatal mice at different ages, and the one utilized in establishment of osteoarthritis or Sham models were euthanized. 1× PBS buffer (100 mL) and 4% PFA solution (60 mL) were used in transcardial perfusion sequentially. Then the hindlimbs or experimental left hindlimbs were dissected and the soft tissues were removed. The specimens were transferred into 4% PFA solution for fixation followed by decalcification carried out overnight for neonates (postnatal 1–10 days), 24 h for juveniles (2–4 weeks old), and 48 hours for adults (8–18 weeks old). Cryoprotection, embedding, and cryosectioning were handled as above mentioned.

## Immunofluorescent staining
Remove the tissue sections from −20°C and allow to thaw at room temperature (RT) for 20 min. Dry the sections at 37°C for 1 h and recover to RT for 20 min. Rehydrate the sections by incubating in 1× PBS buffer for 15 min and draw margins around the tissue section using a ImmEdge Pen (Vector, H4000). Add 100 μL permeabilization solution containing with 0.3% (vol/vol) Triton X-100 (Sigma, T8787) in 1× PBS buffer and incubate at RT for 30 min followed by blocking with the solution containing with 5% BSA (Biofroxx, 4240GR100) or 10% donkey serum (Solarbio, SL050) and 0.1% Triton X-100. After removing the blocking solution, add 100 μL primary antibody solution immediately to each section and incubate at 4°C overnight. After primary antibody incubation, wash the sections with 1× TBST buffer (Biosharp, BL315B) at RT for three times (15 min each). Add 100 μL secondary antibody solution and incubate at RT for 1h. Wash with 1× TBST buffer at RT for three times (15 min each) and with 1× PBS buffer once shortly. Discard the PBS buffer from the sample and immediately add one drop of mounting medium containing with DAPI (Abcam, ab104139) avoiding air bubbles. Seal the edges with nail polish and keep the slides at −20°C until confocal imaging (LSM880, ZEISS).
The above procedures were referred to the protocol published by Anjali P Kusumbe et al. 

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Limbs at each postnatal stage were pooled for scRNA-seq. The cell fraction of different cell subsets at each time point and of cells from different time point in each subset was calculated, respectively. The Differential Expressed Genes (DEGs) were determined by the non-parametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test and Logic regression analysis as part of the Scanpy package, and t-test was used when there were just two clusters. When screening cells based on marker gene expression, the threshold was set to 1.5. Both the p values and the adjusted p values were reported in the scRNA-seq data.

 

## Supplemental information

## Documet S1. Figures S1–S7

## Data and code availability

All data reported in this article will be shared by the on request.
The single-cell RNA-seq raw data are available at the NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive (SRA) data repository with the accession ID PRJNA792884.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this article is available from the on request.

## Acknowledgments
The present study was supported by the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (31900583, U22A20162, 32071351, 81772400), the 10.13039/100016799Natural Science Foundation of Guangzhou City (201807010031), foundation of Shenzhen Committee for Science and Technology Innovation (JCYJ20190809142211354, GJHZ20180929160004704, JCYJ20210324102607021), 10.13039/501100012151Sanming Project of Medicine in Shenzhen (SZSM201911002), the 10.13039/501100005088Beijing Municipal Health Commission (Grant No. BMHC-2021-6, BMHC-2019-9, BMHC-2018-4, PXM2020_026275_000002), AOCMF Translational approaches for bone constructs CPP (AOCMF-21-04S), and Sun Yat-sen University Clinical Research 5010 Program (No. 2019009). We would like to thank Accuramed Technology (Shanghai) Limited (https://www.accuramed.com/) for the technical supports of the scRNA-seq (10x Single Cell sequencing), and special thanks are extended to Guangxu Zhang and Ruijuan Cheng for technical support.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization: M.M.G. and Z.Y.Z.; Methodology: M.M.G., Z.Y.Z., and X.N.Z.; Investigation: M.M.G., Z.Y.Z., X.Z.L., P.G., J.M.W., J.H.L., W.T.W., B.L.L., H.C.W., Z.Y.H., and S.Y.L.; Writing – Original draft: M.M.G. and Z.Y.Z.; Writing – Review and editing: M.M.G., Z.Y.Z., X.N.Z., M.S., S.G., and Z.L.; Supervision: Z.Y.Z., X.N.Z., D.F.C., and W.M.Z.; Funding acquisition: Z.Y.Z., S.Y.L., D.F.C., W.M.Z., and M.M.G.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## Inclusion and diversity
We support inclusive, diverse, and equitable conduct of research.

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.105808.