pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC9910735PMC9910735.1991073599107353675803110.1371/journal.pone.0281587PONE-D-22-300671Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsBacteriaLegionellaLegionella PneumophilaBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensBacterial PathogensLegionellaLegionella PneumophilaMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensBacterial PathogensLegionellaLegionella PneumophilaBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCell ProcessesCell DeathAutophagic Cell DeathResearch and Analysis MethodsSpecimen Preparation and TreatmentStainingImmunostainingBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsBacteriaLegionellaBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensBacterial PathogensLegionellaMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensBacterial PathogensLegionellaBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyImmune PhysiologyAntibodiesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune System ProteinsAntibodiesMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune System ProteinsAntibodiesBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsImmune System ProteinsAntibodiesResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesFluorescence ImagingBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensIntracellular PathogensLegionella longbeachae effector protein RavZ inhibits autophagy and regulates phagosome ubiquitination during infection
RavZLLO targets autophagy and ubiquitinationShiYunjiaData curationValidationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing LiuHongtaoData curationWriting – review & editing MaKelongData curation LuoZhao-QingMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7723-5073QiuJiazhangFunding acquisitionResourcesSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
State Key Laboratory for Zoonotic Diseases, Key Laboratory for Zoonosis Research of the Ministry of Education, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, China2
Purdue Institute for Inflammation, Immunology and Infectious Disease and Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, United States of AmericaSilvaAristóbolo MEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
Legionella are gram-negative bacteria ubiquitously found in natural environments [ ]. When contaminated aerosols are inhaled by humans, Legionella can cause a severe form of pneumonia termed Legionnaires’ disease, which can be fatal if not promptly and appropriately treated [ ]. To date, more than 60 Legionella species have been recognized, and almost half of them have been reported to cause human disease [ ]. Legionella pneumophila and Legionella longbeachae are the most frequently isolated species in cases of Legionnaires’ disease [ ]. L. pneumophila accounts for up to 90% of clinical disease worldwide [ ]. However, infections resulting from L. longbeachae were reported as often as those resulting from L. pneumophila in Australia and New Zealand [ ]. In addition, during the past decade, the incidence of L. longbeachae infection has increased markedly across regions of Europe and Asia [ ]. The clinical presentations of L. pneumophila and L. longbeachae infections are similar. However, these two species exhibit distinct features in their environmental niches, transmission routes, and epidemiology [ ]. L. pneumophila is primarily found in artificial and natural aquatic environments [ ], whereas L. longbeachae is mainly associated with compost and potting soils [ ]. The adoption of distinct ecological niches is determined by differences in the physiological and genetic features between the two species. For instance, L. longbeachae is encapsulated and encodes genes to produce proteins that are involved in the degradation of plant cell walls [ ]. Unlike L. pneumophila, L. longbeachae does not encode flagella biosynthesis genes, thus partly explaining the differences in mouse susceptibility between these two species [ , ]. Additionally, despite the presence of homologs of the regulatory genes that regulate the L. pneumophila biphasic lifestyle, global gene expression analysis revealed a significantly less pronounced life cycle switch in L. longbeachae [ ].
Legionella spp. replicates intracellularly in a wide range of host cells, including free-living protozoa and alveolar macrophages, in a membrane-enclosed compartment called the Legionella-containing vacuole (LCV). Upon phagocytosis by host cells, phagosomes containing Legionella undergo the endocytic maturation pathway by default and avoid subsequent degradation by lysosomes [ ]. Instead, LCVs extensively communicate with vesicles from the endocytic, secretory, and retrograde trafficking pathways [ ]. The LCV eventually develops into a compartment resembling the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that supports bacterial replication [ ]. A specialized type IV secretion system termed Dot/Icm (defect in organelle trafficking/intracellular multiplication) is highly conserved among Legionella species and is critical for LCV biogenesis and intracellular bacterial growth [ ]. This apparatus comprises 27 proteins and injects a set of effector proteins across both bacterial and vacuole membranes into the cytosol of infected host cells or the vacuole lumen [ ]. These effectors play important roles in the hijacking of a variety of host signaling pathways to create a safe intracellular environment for proliferation [ ]. Pathogenesis studies of Legionella infections are primarily based on L. pneumophila. To date, over 330 Dot/Icm substrates have been identified in L. pneumophila. Functional studies of these effector proteins have provided important mechanistic insights into the virulence strategies employed by L. pneumophila [ ]. For example, many effectors function to modulate host vesicle trafficking between the ER and Golgi apparatus, especially through the manipulation of Rab1 activity [ ]. Effector SidM/DrrA is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) that promotes the recruitment of Rab1 to the LCV membrane [ , ], whereas effector LepB acts as a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) to disassociate Rab1 from the LCV [ ]. In addition, Rab1 is also subjected to several reversible posttranslational modifications conducted by effector protein pairs DrrA/SidD [ – ], AnkX/Lem3 [ , ], and SidEs/Dups [ – ], which coordinately impact Rab1 dynamics on the LCV.
Unlike that in L. pneumophila, the molecular pathogenesis of nonpneumophila strains is not well studied. Several recent and extensive genomic analyses have revealed profound genetic variations among Legionella species [ – ]. Although the Dot/Icm secretion system is present in all sequenced Legionella strains, the effector repertoire differs surprisingly. Among the 18,000 Dot/Icm substrates identified in the Legionella genus genome, only 8 effectors were found to be shared by each species [ ]. Over 66% of reported L. pneumophila Dot/Icm effectors are absent in L. longbeachae, while 51 novel effectors have been identified [ ]. For instance, L. longbeachae lacks the Rab1 regulators SidM/DrrA, AnkX, SidD, and Lem3, but SidEs and LepB are present [ , ]. To date, little is known about the roles of effector proteins in L. longbeachae biology and infection processes. The only example is the effector protein SidC, which functions similarly to its homolog in L. pneumophila to promote the interaction of the LCV with the ER [ ]. Despite the translocation of a distinct set of effectors, a recent study illustrated that both L. pneumophila and L. longbeachae develop similar replicative vacuoles in infected cells, albeit through different mechanisms [ ].
Autophagy is a cellular process that occurs in eukaryotic cells and targets cytosolic proteins, lipids and organelles to lysosomes for degradation. During the process, sequestered cargoes are enclosed by a membrane-bound compartment termed the autophagosome [ ]. Following fusion with a lysosome, the cargoes are consumed in the autolysosome [ ]. Autophagy can be a nonselective process that degrades cytoplasmic components to offset the effects of starvation [ ]. In contrast, selective autophagy targets specific substrates for degradation and is divided into different types according to the sequestered cargo (e.g. mitophagy, pexophagy, reticulophagy and xenophagy) [ ]. Xenophagy is a host autophagic response for the degradation of invading microbes and is recognized as a conserved host immune response against intracellular pathogens [ ]. Moreover, many successful intracellular bacteria have evolved distinct mechanisms to avoid clearance by xenophagy [ ]. For example, L. pneumophila utilizes the effector protein RavZ, a cysteine protease, to inhibit autophagy through the irreversible deconjugation of LC3 from phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) [ ]. To date, the host autophagic response to L. longbeachae infection has not been reported. In this study, we found that the RavZ ortholog in L. longbeachae RavZLLO plays important roles in the inhibition of the host autophagy pathway. In addition, RavZLLO decreases cellular polyubiquitin levels when ectopically expressed in mammalian cells and regulates the association of polyubiquitinated species with the LCV in L. longbeachae-infected cells.

## Materials and methods

## Bacterial strains, plasmids, and growth conditions
The strains, plasmids, and primers used in this study are provided in – Tables, respectively. Escherichia coli strains were grown in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium or LB agar plates. When needed, ampicillin (100 μg/mL), kanamycin (30 μg/mL), or chloramphenicol (30 μg/mL) was added to the E. coli cultures. L. pneumophila (Lp02), L. longbeachaea ATCC33462, and their derivatives were cultured on charcoal yeast extract (CYE) agar plates or in N-(2-acetamido)-2-aminoethanesulfonic acid-buffered yeast extract broth (AYE) at 37°C. If needed, antibiotics were supplemented to the Legionella cultures at the following concentrations: ampicillin (100 μg/mL), kanamycin (20 μg/mL), streptomycin (50 μg/mL), and chloramphenicol (5 μg/mL). When necessary, thymidine was added at 200 μg/mL. The in-frame deletion mutants L. pneumophila ΔravZ, L. longbeachae ΔravZLLO, and L. longbeachae ΔdotB were generated by allelic exchange as described previously [ , ]. To determine the translocation of RavZLLO, fragments amplified from L. longbeachae genomic DNA were inserted into pXDC61m [ ], and the resulting plasmid was introduced into relevant Legionella strains by electroporation (2.5 kV; 200 Ω; 0.25 μF). pXDC61JQ was modified based on the backbone of pDXC61m and used for IPTG-inducible expression of Flag-tagged proteins in L. longbeachae. To achieve this goal, we inserted a NdeΙ-Flag-BamHΙ-BglΙΙ-SacΙ-XhoΙ-SalΙ-HindΙΙΙ polylinker into NdeΙ/HindIII-digested pDXC61m to remove the TEM gene. The ravZLLO gene was then cloned into pXDC61JQ and electroporated into L. longbeachae strains as described above. For complementation of L. pneumophila strains, ravZLP and ravZLLO were inserted into pZL507 [ ] and similarly transformed into L. pneumophila. For the expression of proteins in mammalian cells, amplified DNA products were cloned into pCMV-4×Flag [ ] or peGFPC1 by standard cloning methods. For protein expression in E. coli, genes were inserted into pET28a.
Site-directed mutagenesis of ravZLLO was performed by the Quikchange kit (Agilent) with primers designed by the QuikChange Primer Design program (https://www.agilent.com.cn/store/primerDesignProgram.jsp). The integrity of all plasmids was confirmed by DNA sequencing.

## Recombinant protein purification and in vitro deubiquitination assay
E. coli BL21 (DE3) harboring pET28-RavZ was cultured to an OD600 of 0.6–0.8 at 37°C in LB broth. After isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was added at a final concentration of 0.5 mM, the culture was further incubated in a shaker (220 rpm/min) at 16°C for 16–18 h. The bacterial cells were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, pH 8.0). Cells were lysed twice using a JN-Mini Low Temperature Ultrahigh Pressure Continuous Flow Cell Cracker (JNBIO, Guangzhou, China). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 12000×g for 20 min. The supernatant containing the protein of interest was mixed with Ni2+-NTA beads and incubated at 4°C for 1 h with end-to-end rotation. The beads were washed with 10 bead volumes of washing buffer (50 mM NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, pH 8.0), and 6×His-tagged proteins were eluted with elution buffer (50 mM NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole, pH 8.0). Eluted proteins were dialyzed twice to remove imidazole in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl and 10% (v/v) glycerol. Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford assay using BSA levels for normalization.
During the diubiquitin cleavage assay, 1 μM purified His6-RavZLLO was incubated with each diubiquitin (1 μM, Boston Biochem) in 20 μL DUB buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, and 1 mM DTT). The reaction was allowed to proceed for 2 h at 37°C and was stopped by the addition of 5×SDS loading buffer. The cleavage of diubiquitin was analyzed by Coomassie brilliant blue staining.

## Cell culture, transfection, and immunoprecipitation
HEK293T, HEK293, human lung epithelial cells (A549) and HeLa cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified minimum Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Transfection was conducted using Lipofectamine 3000 (Life Technology) when the cells grew to approximately 80% confluence following the manufacturer’s instructions. RAW264.7 and U937 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% FBS. At 36 h prior to bacterial infection, U937 cells were differentiated with phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) as described earlier.
To determine the deubiquitination or deneddylation activity of RavZ in cells, HA-Ub or Flag-Nedd8 was cotransfected with GFP-RavZLP, GFP-RavZLLO or GFP-RavZLLOC251A into HEK293T cells. GFP-SdeADub and GFP-SENP8 were used as positive controls for deubiquitination and deneddylation, respectively. Twenty-four hours after transfection, transfected cells were harvested and lysed in NP40 lysis buffer for 10 min on ice. Then, the lysates were centrifuged at 12,000×g at 4°C for 10 min to remove insoluble fractions. Polyubiquitinated and polyneddylated species were enriched by anti-HA and anti-Flag agarose beads at 4°C for 8 h on a rotatory shaker, respectively. After washing 3 times with lysis buffer, the beads were resuspended in 50 μL of 1×SDS loading buffer and boiled for 5 min at 100°C.
To detect the cellular localization of RavZLLO, HeLa cells were transfected with GFP-RavZLLO for 24 h. Samples fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde were immunostained with organelle-specific primary antibodies. To investigate the influence of RavZ on LC3 puncta formation under transfection conditions, HEK293 cells were cotransfected with GFP-LC3 and 4×Flag-tagged RavZLP, RavZLLO or RavZLLOC/A for 24 h. After the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, the percentage of LC3 puncta was measured under a fluorescence microscope.

## Bacterial infections
During infection experiments, overnight liquid cultures of stationary-phase Legionella bacteria (OD600 = 3.3–3.8) were used to infect cells at the indicated MOIs. To evaluate the translocation of RavZLLO, RAW264.7 cells seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 1×106 cells/well were infected with relevant Legionella strains expressing TEM-RavZLLO at an MOI of 50. At 2 h post-infection, cells washed with Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) were treated with HBSS containing 20 μL of 6×CCF4/AM solution (LiveBLAzer-FRET B/G Loading Kit, Invitrogen). After incubation in the dark for 2 h, translocation of the TEM fusion protein was inspected under a fluorescence microscope (IX83, Olympus) equipped with a β-lactamase FL-Cube (U-N41031, Chroma Technology Corp, Bellows Falls, VT).
To assess the intracellular replication of L. longbeachae, U937-derived macrophage cells seeded in 24-well plates were challenged with WT L. longbeachae, ΔdotB, and ΔravZLLO at an MOI of 10 in triplicate. At 2 h post-incubation, extracellular bacteria were removed by washing the samples with warm PBS three times. After fresh culture medium was added, the infections were allowed to proceed for 24, 48, and 72 h. Cells were collected at each assay time point and lysed with 0.2% saponin. Serial dilutions of the lysates were plated on CYE plates and grown for 4 days at 37°C before the CFUs were enumerated.
To inspect LCV-associated RavZLLO or polyubiquitinated species, 4×105 PMA-differentiated U937 cells seeded on glass coverslips in 24-well plates were infected with relevant Legionella strains at an MOI of 10 for 2 h. After they were extensive washed with PBS, samples fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde were immunostained using the indicated antibodies specific for L. longbeachae, Flag, or polyubiquitin.
To assess the impact of RavZ on LC3-II levels in infected cells, HEK293 cells transfected to express the FcγII receptor were infected with the indicated opsonized Legionella strains at an MOI of 50 for 2 h in the presence of 160 nM bafilomycin A1 (Sigma) as described earlier. Lysates were prepared by lysing the cells with NP40 lysis buffer, and the level of LC3-II was measured by immunoblotting analysis. To assess the formation of LC3 puncta in infected cells, A549 cells were transfected with mCherry-LC3 and FcγII receptor. At 24 h post-transfection, anti-Legionella antibody opsonized bacteria were added to the cells supplemented with 160 nM bafilomycin A1. After 2 h of infection, samples fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde were immunostained with the appropriate antibodies.

## Antibodies, Western blot analysis and immunostaining
For Western blot analysis, proteins were separated by SDS–PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Pall Life Sciences). The membrane was blocked with 5% nonfat milk in PBS for 1 h at room temperature prior to incubation with primary antibodies. Antibodies recognizing RavZLLO were produced by the immunization of rabbits with purified His6-RavZLLO following a standard protocol and diluted at 1:2,000 (AbMax Biotechnology Co., LTD, Beijing, China). The source and dilutions for other primary antibodies used in this study were as follows: anti-TEM1 (Abcam, ab12251, 1:3,000), anti-Flag (Sigma, F1804, 1:3,000), anti-LC3 (Sigma, SAB5701328, 1:3,000), anti-GFP (Sigma, G7781, 1:5,000), anti-HA (Santa Cruz, sc-7392, 1:1,000), anti-His (Proteintech, 66005-1-Ig, 1:10,000), anti-ICDH (1:20,000) [ ], and anti-tubulin (DSHB, E7, 1:10,000). After the primary antibodies were removed, the membrane was further probed with appropriate fluorescence dye-conjugated secondary antibodies (Li-Cor). The Odyssey CLx system (Li-Cor) was used to detect and acquire the protein band signals.
During the immunostaining experiments, the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 30 min at room temperature (RT). After permeabilization with 0.2% Triton X-100 for 5 min, the samples were stained with the appropriate antibodies for 1 h at RT. Rat and rabbit anti-L. longbeachae antibodies were commercially generated by AbMax Biotechnology Co. (Beijing, China) and diluted at 1:2,000 for immunostaining. Other primary antibodies used in this study were as follows: anti-L. pneumophila (1:10,000), anti-Flag (Sigma, cat# F1804, 1:200), anti-FK1 (Enzo, cat# BML-PW8805, 1:1,000), and anti-calnexin (Abcam, ab22595, 1:100). After the samples were washed with PBS 3 times, they were incubated with appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to specific fluorescent dyes for 1 h at RT. Fluorescent images were acquired by an Olympus IX-83 fluorescence microscope.

## Bioinformatics
RavZLLO (LLO_2508) was analyzed by the HHpred server using default parameters (https://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/#/tools/hhpred) [ ].

## Data analysis
ImageJ was used to quantify protein abundance. Prism 8.0 (GraphPad, USA) with two-tailed Student’s t test was used to analyze the data. Results with P values less than 0.05 were considered significant.

## Results

## RavZLLO is translocated into host cells by the Dot/Icm secretion system
L. pneumophila effector protein RavZ is a cysteine protease that functions to inhibit the host autophagy response by the deconjugation of lipidated LC3 [ ]. Genes coding for RavZ are present in 4 out of the 41 sequenced genomes covering 38 Legionella species [ ]. Although more than 66% of L. pneumophila effectors are missing in L. longbeachae [ ], the RavZ ortholog exists in L. longbeachae and is encoded by llo_2508 (ravZLLO). RavZLLO shares 59.4% overall sequence identity with RavZ from L. pneumophila, and the catalytic cysteine residue for the enzymatic activity is conserved between the two proteins ( ). To determine whether RavZLLO is a bona fide Dot/Icm substrate of L. longbeachae, we employed the β-lactamase reporter assay that has been successfully applied to identify and validate effector proteins of Legionella spp. [ , , ]. Infection of RAW264.7 cells with L. longbeachae producing TEM-RavZLLO led to obvious translocation of the fusion protein, which was evidenced by 27% of the cells showing blue fluorescence signals emitted by the β-lactamase substrate CCF4-AM ( ). In addition, samples infected by the wild-type L. pneumophila strain harboring TEM-RavZLLO displayed blue cells at a proportion of 35% ( ). In contrast, despite producing considerable levels of TEM-RavZLLO, translocation of the fusion protein did not occur when cells were challenged with the dot/icm-deficient strains ( ). Taken together, our data demonstrated that RavZLLO is an effector protein recognized by the Dot/Icm machinery of both L. longbeachae and L. pneumophila.
 

## RavZLLO is associated with the LCV and is dispensable for the intracellular growth of L. longbeachae
To test whether RavZLLO is targeted to any specific organelles in human cells, we generated green fluorescence protein (GFP)-tagged RavZLLO and ectopically expressed the construct in HeLa cells by transfection. The subcellular localization of RavZLLO was analyzed under fluorescence microscopy after cells were immunostained with antibodies specific for different organelle markers. GFP-RavZLLO expression showed extensive overlap with the ER-resident protein calnexin, suggesting that RavZLLO is targeted to the ER ( ).
 Next, we investigated the cellular distribution of RavZLLO during infection. We generated a plasmid bearing Flag-tagged RavZLLO and transformed it into both WT and dotB- mutant L. longbeachae strains. U937 cells were then infected with these strains and immunostained with Flag antibodies. After 2 h of infection, Flag-RavZLLO staining signals were detected in 84% of the LCVs harboring WT L. longbeachae ( ). In contrast, despite similar Flag-RavZLLO expression levels, few LCVs were positively stained with Flag antibody when the cells were infected with the L. longbeachae strain lacking a functional Dot/Icm system ( ). These data indicate that RavZLLO is associated with the LCV after being translocated into infected cells by L. longbeachae.
To characterize the role of RavZLLO in bacterial infection, we first made a ravZLLO deletion mutant of the L. longbeachae strain by allelic exchange. Then, the intracellular replication of the mutant strain was monitored in U937 cells. After 3 days of infection, approximately 3 orders of magnitude more WT L. longbeachae were recovered, whereas strains with the absence of dotB failed to replicate in the host cells ( ). Notably, the deletion of ravZLLO in L. longbeachae did not cause a significant growth defect at any assayed time point ( ). These results suggest that ravZLLO is dispensable for the intracellular proliferation of L. longbeachae.

## Ectopic expression of RavZLLO in mammalian cells inhibits host autophagy
Considering that RavZ inhibits the host autophagy response and the high sequence similarity between RavZLP and RavZLLO, we reasoned that RavZLLO and RavZLP may exhibit identical biological functions. To this end, we cotransfected HeLa cells with GFP-LC3 and Flag-tagged RavZ, and the formation of LC3 puncta was measured under a fluorescence microscope. In the absence of RavZ, 75% of the cells showed punctate LC3-positive autophagosomes (APs), which was a result of basal levels of autophagy ( ). In contrast, the percentage of cells with LC3 puncta was reduced to 9% when RavZLP was coexpressed ( ). Similarly, the number of LC3 puncta-containing cells was significantly decreased in the presence of RavZLLO ( ). Additionally, mutation of Cys251 to Ala in RavZLLO remarkably alleviated its ability to inhibit host autophagy ( ).
 RavZ behaves as a cysteine protease that irreversibly uncouples PE-conjugated LC3 on AP membranes. Therefore, we further evaluated RavZLLO-mediated autophagy evasion by measuring the levels of the lipidated form of LC3 (LC3-II) by Western blot analysis. Notably, although less prominent than RavZLP expression, the expression of GFP-RavZLLO indeed significantly reduced endogenous LC3-II levels in cells treated with bafilomycin A1 ( ). The cysteine protease activity of RavZLLO was responsible this decrease since the expression of the catalytically inactive mutant resulted in a considerable level of LC3-II as the GFP control ( ).

## RavZLLO inhibits autophagy in Legionella infection
Having proven the functional role of RavZLLO in autophagy inhibition in transfected cell lines, we further investigated its biological relevance in L. longbeachae infection. To this end, we infected HEK293 cells with L. longbeachae strains and monitored the LC3-II levels. Similar to L. pneumophila, samples infected with the WT L. longbeachae strain showed a significant blockage of LC3-II generation ( ). However, the LC3-II level was not affected when the cells were challenged with the dotB deletion mutant, suggesting Dot/Icm-dependent inhibition of the host autophagy system by L. longbeachae ( ). Consistent with this observation, infection of A549 cells stably expressing mCherry-LC3 with virulent L. longbeachae led to a considerably lower percentage of cells containing punctate LC3-positive APs than infection with the Dot/Icm-deficient mutant ( ). The autophagy inhibition that is mediated by L. longbeachae could be attributed to the activity of RavZLLO because a similar level of LC3-II and percentage of punctate LC3-positive APs in infected cells were detected in samples receiving L. longbeachae ΔdotB and ΔravZLLO ( ). Autophagy inhibition was completely restored by the introduction of a plasmid encoding ravZLLO into the ΔravZLLO mutant ( ). However, complement of the mutant strain with catalytically inactive RavZLLO failed to suppress the autophagic response in either assay ( ). Hence, RavZLLO is necessary to block autophagy during L. longbeachae infection.
 Since RavZLLO was also recognized by the L. pneumophila Dot/Icm system, we analyzed whether the defect in autophagy inhibition displayed by L. pneumophila ΔravZ could be complemented by RavZLLO. Consistent with previous observations [ ], the ΔravZ mutant and ΔdotA mutant of L. pneumophila were equally defective in autophagy inhibition, which was determined by the levels of lipidated LC3 as well as the proportion of LC3 puncta-positive cells ( ). Interestingly, both phenotypes were fully restored by the production of not only RavZLP but also RavZLLO from plasmid-borne genes ( ). Taken together, our data indicate that L. longbeachae RavZ suppresses the host autophagic response during bacterial infection, while RavZLP and RavZLLO are functionally redundant.
 

## Expression of RavZLLO in mammalian cells decreases cellular polyubiquitination and polyneddylation
Previous structural studies showed that the N-terminal domain of RavZ harbors a fold similar to that of the Ubl-specific protease (Ulp) family deubiquitinase (DUB) [ ]. In addition, bioinformatics analysis of both RavZLP and RavZLLO using HHpred revealed distant homology of these proteins with known bacterial DUBs, including SseL from Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium ( ). The His-Asp-Cys catalytic triad critical for SseL function is conserved in RavZLLO ( ). These observations together illustrate the potential role of RavZLLO in hydrolyzing polyubiquitin chains. To test this hypothesis, we cotransfected HEK293T cells with GFP-RavZ and human influenza hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged ubiquitin and assayed the polyubiquitinated protein levels by immunoblotting. In vivo production of RavZLLO but not RavZLP significantly reduced the levels of cellular polyubiquitinated species, which was shown by the decreased expression of the high-molecular-weight ubiquitin ladder detected by the anti-HA antibody ( ). Surprisingly, the substitution of Cys251 to Ala led to a similar decrease in polyubiquitin signals as that observed in the WT RavZLLO ( ). Similarly, ectopic expression of RavZLLO but not RavZLP decreased cellular polyneddylation, a ubiquitin-like modification, in a Cys251-independent manner ( ). These data indicate that RavZLLO can cleave polyubiquitin and polynedd8 chains, and the catalytic cysteine responsible for deconjugating LC3-PE is not important for such activity.
 Next, we aimed to characterize the DUB activity of RavZLLO in in vitro biochemical reactions using a panel of diubiquitins linked by different lysine residues. However, recombinant RavZLLO obtained from E. coli failed to hydrolyze any of the tested diubiquitins ( ). Therefore, it is possible that RavZLLO requires a cofactor to activate its DUB activity, as it is ectopically expressed in mammalian cells. Alternatively, RavZLLO might activate the DUB activity of host proteins to decrease cellular polyubiquitination and polyneddylation.

## RavZLLO reduces the association of polyubiquitinated species with the LCV
During L. pneumophila infection, the LCVs are known to be decorated with polyubiquitinated protein by a process depending on the Dot/Icm system [ ]. Despite the lack of established DUB activity, RavZ could interfere with ubiquitin accumulated on Salmonella-containing vacuoles in a Legionella and Salmonella coinfection system [ ]. However, RavZ did not affect ubiquitin recruitment to LCVs, which may be attributed to an unknown antagonistic mechanism mediated by Legionella [ ]. Considering the polyubiquitin deconjugating activity of RavZLLO in mammalian cells and its localization on bacterial phagosomes during L. longbeachae infection, we speculated that this protein might play a role in the regulation of ubiquitin association on the LCV. To test this hypothesis, we infected U937 cells with relevant L. longbeachae strains followed by immunostaining with an FK1 antibody that specifically recognizes ubiquitinated proteins. Similar to L. pneumophila infection, vacuoles harboring virulent L. longbeachae were also enriched with polyubiquitinated species, and 66% of the LCVs were positively stained with FK1 antibodies at 2 h post-infection ( ). Importantly, the absence of ravZLLO resulted in a significant increase in the proportion of ubiquitin-positive vacuoles ( ). Moreover, expression of RavZLLO from a plasmid in the L. longbeachae ΔravZLLO mutant restored ubiquitin association with the LCV ( ). Interestingly, although challenging U937 cells with the L. pneumophila strain lacking the ravZ gene was able to promote the recruitment of ubiquitinated proteins to the bacterial phagosomes as efficiently as challenge with the WT L. pneumophila, complement of the L. pneumophila ΔravZ mutant with a plasmid-borne ravZLLO appeared to considerably decrease the percentage of ubiquitin-positive LCVs ( ). These results suggest that RavZLLO contributes to the removal of ubiquitin from bacterial phagosomes.
 

## Discussion
The host autophagy pathway not only plays vital roles in maintaining intracellular homeostasis but can also serve as an important cell autonomous immune response that eliminates intracellular bacteria to counteract infection [ ]. As a successful intracellular pathogen, L. pneumophila has developed various effector-driven mechanisms that may interplay to promote the evasion of bacterial clearance by the host xenophagic response. These strategies include the prevention of autophagosome formation via cleavage of LC3-PE by RavZ [ ], disturbance of sphingolipid biosynthesis through the Legionella effector sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase (LpSpl) [ ], and degradation of syntaxin 17 via the serine protease activity of effector Lpg1137 [ ]. Moreover, a panel of effector proteins could indirectly impact host autophagy through interference with mTORC1 signaling. The SidE effector family and SetA are inhibitors of mTORC1 that can promote the translocation of transcription factor EB (TFEB) into the nucleus [ , ]. In contrast, the glucosyltransferases in Legionella (Lgt1, Lgt2, and Lgt3) activate the mTORC1 pathway by inhibiting translation by targeting host elongation factor 1A [ ]. In addition, a recent report illustrated an epigenetic mechanism that suppresses the host autophagic response mediated by the effector Lpg2936, which reduces the expression of autophagy-related genes ATG7 and LC3 during L. pneumophila infection [ ]. Interestingly, L. pneumophila Dot/Icm substrate LegA9 appears to promote recognition of LCV for autophagy uptake and elimination via the induction of ubiquitin accumulation and association of the adaptor protein p62 on the vacuoles [ ]. These previous observations revealed the extensive effector cohort and the sophisticated mechanisms that L. pneumophila has developed to manipulate host autophagy.
In this study, we demonstrated that, similar to most intracellular pathogens, such as S. Typhimurium and L. pneumophila, L. longbeachae also actively suppresses host autophagy during infection in a Dot/Icm-dependent manner. RavZLLO in L. longbeachae is responsible for autophagy inhibitory activity and may act in the same manner as RavZLP. Indeed, RavZLLO and RavZLP are functionally redundant, as the complement of L. pneumophila ΔravZ with RavZLLO efficiently restores its capability to inhibit autophagy. This finding is consistent with an earlier observation that the deficiency in ER recruitment displayed by L. pneumophila ΔsidC/sdcA can be fully complemented by SidCLLO, albeit they share only 40% sequence identity [ ]. The deletion of ravZLLO did not affect the intracellular proliferation of L. longbeachae, suggesting the presence of other effector proteins that promote bacterial evasion of the host autophagy system. Comparative analysis of the effector repertoires revealed that orthologous proteins were found for RavZ, SidEs, Lpg2936, and Lpg1137 but not for Lgts, LpSpl, LegA9, and SetA in L. longbeachae ( ), which is indicative of both potential similarities and distinctions between L. longbeachae and L. pneumophila in the modulation of autophagy.
Previous structural analyses of RavZ uncovered the similarity of its N-terminal domain with that in the Ulp family DUB-like enzymes [ ]. Furthermore, coinfection of L. pneumophila and S. Typhimurium demonstrated the roles of RavZ in preventing ubiquitin recruitment to SCVs [ ]. Paradoxically, RavZ cannot reduce the levels of ubiquitin on the LCVs in L. pneumophila-infected cells, possibly due to the presence of an antagonistic strategy used in LCVs to protect against RavZ [ ]. These observations raise the possibility that, in addition to targeting LC3-PE, RavZ may possess DUB activity to deconjugate certain ubiquitinated substrates on SCVs. However, the DUB activity of RavZ was not established, as ectopic expression of RavZ did not affect cellular polyubiquitin levels, indicating an indirect role of RavZ in ubiquitin removal from SCVs [ ]. Intriguingly, although it is not conclusive that RavZLLO is a canonical DUB, ectopic expression of RavZLLO in mammalian cells could decrease the levels of polyubiquitinated proteins through a mechanism that is independent of the catalytic cysteine essential for uncoupling LC3-PE. Consistently, RavZLLO has been shown to regulate the association of polyubiquitinated species with LCVs during L. longbeachae and L. pneumophila infection. The ubiquitin feature of LCVs creates a signaling platform that promotes the recruitment of autophagy adaptors, including p62/SQSTM1, NDP52, NBR1, and optineurin [ ]. Notably, changes in the level or nature of the polyubiquitin on the LCV reasonably affects adaptor recruitment. SidE family effector proteins can exclude adaptor proteins associated with the LCV, possibly by the generation of noncanonical ubiquitin linkages [ ]. In contrast, LegA9 targets LCVs for autophagy uptake through increased ubiquitin labeling and p62/SQSTM1 recruitment of the LCV [ ]. Hence, in addition to promoting the deconjugation of LC3-PE, RavZLLO may facilitate autophagy evasion by reducing the levels of ubiquitinated proteins on the bacterial phagosome.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Sequence alignment of RavZLP and RavZLLO.
Alignment was performed by Clustal Omega (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalo/) and ESPript 3.0 (https://espript.ibcp.fr/ESPript/cgi-bin/ESPript.cgi). The catalytic residues Cys258 in RavZLP and Cys251 in RavZLLO are highlighted by a black box.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## RavZLLO is dispensable for the intracellular replication of L. longbeachae.
U937 cells seeded in 24-well plates were challenged with WT, ΔdotB, and ΔravZLLO
L. longbeachae strains at an MOI of 10. At the indicated timepoints, infected cells were lysed by saponin and plated on CYE plates. The CFUs were counted after growing the bacteria at 37°C for 4 days. The results are from one representative experiment performed in triplicate from three independent experiments. Data are presented as the mean ± SD.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Sequence alignment of RavZLLO with the S. Typhimurium effector protein SseL.
The alignment was generated by HHpred, and the catalytic His-Asp-Cys residues are highlighted by red boxes.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## Expression of RavZLLO in mammalian cells reduces cellular polyneddylation.
HEK293T cells were transfected to coexpress Flag-Nedd8 and each of the indicated GFP fusion proteins. At 24 h post-transfection, cells were lysed and subjected to immunoprecipitation by anti-Flag agarose. The levels of cellular polyneddylated proteins were measured by Western blot with the Flag antibody. Anti-GFP and anti-tubulin blots were performed to confirm the expression of the GFP fusion proteins and ensure equal loading of proteins, respectively. GFP-SENP8 was included as the positive polyneddylation control. The data shown are representative of three independent experiments.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Bacterial strains used in the study.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Plasmids used in the study.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Primers used in the study.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Table

## Bioinformatics analysis of RavZLLO via HHpred.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Table

## L. longbeachae effector proteins potentially modulate host autophagy pathway.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Raw images(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0281587.r001Decision Letter 0
SilvaAristóbolo MAcademic Editor© 2023 Aristóbolo M Silva2023Aristóbolo M Silvahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
12 Dec 2022

PONE-D-22-30067Legionella longbeachae effector protein RavZ inhibits autophagy and regulates phagosome ubiquitination during infectionPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Qiu,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Your manuscript has now been reviewed and the reviewer comments are appended below. You will see that they have raised points that need to be addressed by a minor revision.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 26 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Aristóbolo M Silva
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match. 
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
3. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: 
"This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant #: 31970134 and 32170182 to Jiazhang Qiu); the Thousand Young Talents Program of the Chinese government (Jiazhang Qiu) and startup fund from Jilin University and the First Hospital of Jilin University."
  
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript." If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels. 
  
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
5. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The manuscript describes the functional characterization of RavZ protein from Legionella longbeachae (RavZLLO) and its comparison with the RavZ ortholog from L. pneumophila (RavZLP). The authors demonstrate that RavZLLO is a secreted effector and interfere with host autophagy by removing the lipid anchor from LC3 protein, similarly to RavZLP. Moreover, RavZLLO can substitute for RavZLP in L. pneumophila. Next, the authors show that presence in the human cell RavZLLO but not RavZLP, either through direct expression or by infection with bacteria, decreases the level of polyubiquitination and polyneddylation and hypothesize that RavZLLO has deubiquitination activity. They support this view by noting that the N-terminal domain of RavZ displays fold similarity to Ubl-specific cysteine proteases, including well characterized Salmonella Typhimurium SseL.
While they observe decrease in the polyubiquitinated proteins in the human cell when RavZLLO is present, the same effect is caused by the mutant in which the active site Cys251 is replaced by Ala. In the alignment with SseL, Cys251 corresponds to active site cysteine in SseL. Moreover, no activity on various di-ubiquitins was demonstrated in vitro. The authors suggests that an association with an unknown host protein activated its deubiquitination activity. This is hand waving argument, and a more likely scenario is that RavZLLO stimulated deubiquitinase activity of another protein. That seems to me more reasonable explanation since RavZLP does not show this behavior, has closely similar N-terminal domain and differs in the C-terminal segment.
My other comment is to the discussion section. The first few pages repeat some of the introduction and are not relevant to the presented results, which are only discussed on pp.18-19.
Figures:
Figure 2B – what is shown in the panels - a single cell or an LCV? Please indicate in th e legend.
Figure 2D – what is shown in fist lane?
Figure3A – very low resolution, not clear what the red dot (arrow?) points to. What is depicted in the panels? Multiple cells? To my eye there is little difference between the panels. What is EV, please indicate.
Figure 3D – what is in first lane?
Figure 4C – what is shown in the panels, full cells or LCVs?
Figure 5C – same question as above
Figure 5E – no indication of expression of RavZLP.
Figure 6A – what are the different bands in the gel image? Please mark them In the last 5 lanes there is a strong band at ~25 kDa that appears to correspond to GFP but free GFP is only indicated in the first of these lanes. What is the band around 30 kDa in the first five lanes? There are double bands in the last five lanes where we would expect RavZ that seem to be interpreted as RavZLP and RavZLLO but they should not be in the same lanes.
Figure 7A, 8A – as above
Reviewer #2: This manuscript provides a comprehensive exploration of the role of the Dot/Icm effector RavZ during Legionella longbeachae infection. The L. pneumophila homologue is a cysteine protease that hydrolyzes lipidated LC3 to block autophagic maturation. Here the researchers demonstrate that the longbeachae homologue is also an effector and likely functions in the same way to suppress autophagy during infection. Interestingly the abundance of polyubiquitinated species on the LCV appears to be regulated by RavZ LLO but not RavZ LP indicating the possibility of a species specific function of this protein.
The study is comprehensive and scientifically sound and therefore entirely appropriate for publication in PLoS One. I have just a few minor suggestions:
* line 65-66: while flagellin is a key difference between longbeachae and pneumophila species it doesn't seem to account for the different infection outcomes in mice (consider Massis et al - J Infect Dis - where a pneumophila flagellin mutant still has different outcomes to longbeachae.
* line 81: "This apparatus comprises 25 proteins" - this is outdated given new publications Sheedlo et al and a couple of others
* Figure 3A - the quality of these IF images is unacceptable - it is impossible to determine any features within these images - they need to be higher resolution and perhaps also show a zoomed in section for the reader to deliniate LC3 puncta.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0281587.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
18 Jan 2023

Authors’ responses to comments
Responses to Reviewer #1:
The manuscript describes the functional characterization of RavZ protein from Legionella longbeachae (RavZLLO) and its comparison with the RavZ ortholog from L. pneumophila (RavZLP). The authors demonstrate that RavZLLO is a secreted effector and interfere with host autophagy by removing the lipid anchor from LC3 protein, similarly to RavZLP. Moreover, RavZLLO can substitute for RavZLP in L. pneumophila. Next, the authors show that presence in the human cell RavZLLO but not RavZLP, either through direct expression or by infection with bacteria, decreases the level of polyubiquitination and polyneddylation and hypothesize that RavZLLO has deubiquitination activity. They support this view by noting that the N-terminal domain of RavZ displays fold similarity to Ubl-specific cysteine proteases, including well characterized Salmonella Typhimurium SseL.
1. While they observe decrease in the polyubiquitinated proteins in the human cell when RavZLLO is present, the same effect is caused by the mutant in which the active site Cys251 is replaced by Ala. In the alignment with SseL, Cys251 corresponds to active site cysteine in SseL. Moreover, no activity on various di-ubiquitins was demonstrated in vitro. The authors suggests that an association with an unknown host protein activated its deubiquitination activity. This is hand waving argument, and a more likely scenario is that RavZLLO stimulated deubiquitinase activity of another protein. That seems to me more reasonable explanation since RavZLP does not show this behavior, has closely similar N-terminal domain and differs in the C-terminal segment.
Response: Thanks for your suggestion. We have made the following revision. Lines 512-516: Therefore, it is possible that RavZLLO requires a cofactor to activate its DUB activity, as it is ectopically expressed in mammalian cells. Alternatively, RavZLLO might activate the DUB activity of host proteins to decrease cellular polyubiquitination and polyneddylation.
2. My other comment is to the discussion section. The first few pages repeat some of the introduction and are not relevant to the presented results, which are only discussed on pp.18-19.
Response: Thanks for your valuable suggestions. We have deleted the first two paragraph of the discussion section.
Figures:
3. Figure 2B – what is shown in the panels - a single cell or an LCV? Please indicate in the legend.
Response: Thanks for your comments. Figure 2B are the representative images showing the association of RavZLLO with the LCV. The LCVs formed in the infected cells were immunostained by anti-L. longbeachae antibodies. We have made the following revision. Lines 364-365: Representative LCVs with positive-association of RavZLLO during L. longbeachae infection.
4. Figure 2D – what is shown in fist lane?
Response: Thanks for the comment. The first lane shows the molecular weight marker (1610363, Bio-rad) in kDa.
5. Figure3A – very low resolution, not clear what the red dot (arrow?) points to. What is depicted in the panels? Multiple cells? To my eye there is little difference between the panels. What is EV, please indicate.
Response: Thanks for your advice. We apologized for the low resolution of the figures. And we have regenerated all figures at higher resolution which we hope to meet the standard. The red arrows indicate LC3 puncta (dots within the cells). The images were taken to show the effect of ectopically expressed RavZ on host autophagic responses which are represented by the formation of LC3 puncta. These images were taken to allow the inspection of multiple cells. In in cells transfected with empty vector, we can see multiple cells possessing LC3 puncta (dots) in the visual field. While in cells expressing RavZLP and RavZLLO, the LC3 puncta was barely detected. EV indicates empty vector, and we have descripted EV in the revised manuscript. Please see the line 407.
As also suggested by another reviewer, we have zoomed in the dots to see clear LC3 puncta. Please see our revised Fig 3A.
6. Figure 3D – what is in first lane?
Response: Thank you for your guidance. The first lane shows the molecular weight marker (1610363, Bio-rad) in kDa.
7. Figure 4C – what is shown in the panels, full cells or LCVs?
8. Figure 5C – same question as above
Response for Q7 and Q8: Thanks. Figure 4C and Figure 5C showed the A549 cells successfully infected with Legionella strains. Actually, these panels show both the cell and LCV. The LCVs were immunostained with anti-Legionella antibodies, whereas the cells were displayed by the expression of mCherry-LC3. These representative images were used to indicate the alteration in LC3 puncta formation after infected with Legionella.
9. Figure 5E – no indication of expression of RavZLP.
Response: Thanks for your careful review. In Fig 5E, the expression of RavZLP in L. pneumophila strains was determined by Western blot with the RavZLLO-specific antibody. It is possible that RavZLLO-specific antibody cannot recognize RavZLP. Since both RavZLLO and RavZLP genes were inserted into pZL507 which contains an N-terminal His tag in the plasmid. We further probed the expression of RavZLP and RavZLLO by probing the bacterial lysates with anti-His antibodies. As shown in the following Re-fig 1, RavZLP is indeed expressed in this strain. We have added this blot into revised Fig 5E.
Re-fig 1. The expression of RavZLP in L. pneumophila strains was determined by Western blot with the anti-His antibody.
10. Figure 6A – what are the different bands in the gel image? Please mark them In the last 5 lanes there is a strong band at ~25 kDa that appears to correspond to GFP but free GFP is only indicated in the first of these lanes. What is the band around 30 kDa in the first five lanes? There are double bands in the last five lanes where we would expect RavZ that seem to be interpreted as RavZLP and RavZLLO but they should not be in the same lanes.
Response: Thanks. We guess the ~25 kDa bands you have mentioned is on the left gel of the Fig 6A. The last 5 lanes are actually anti-HA IP products. The left gel was blotted with anti-HA antibody. Therefore, the ~25 kDa bands in the last 5 lanes are actually light chain released from the anti-HA agarose and recognized by the anti-HA antibody. We have marked the left gels in our revised Fig 6A. As to the 30 kDa bands shown in the first five lanes, we believed that they are protein in the cell lysates non-specifically recognized by anti-HA antibody. We guess the double bands in the last five lanes you mentioned are the bands around ~100 kDa of the left gel. This is anti-HA blot, therefore, GFP-tagged RavZ should not be shown in this gel. One explanation for these bands is that they are unknown proteins conjugated with HA-Ub. We have revised this figure to mark the heavy chain and light chain.
11. Figure 7A, 8A – as above
Response: Thanks for your comment. Fig 7A and Fig 8A are representative immunofluorescence images showing positive-association of ubiquitinated species with the LCVs. We have revised the figure legends of Fig 7A and Fig 8A. Lines 557-560: (A) Representative images of polyubiquitinated proteins associated with LCVs. U937 cells infected for 2 h with the indicated L. longbeachae strains were sequentially immunostained with antibodies specific for L. longbeachae and polyubiquitin (FK1). Lines 568-569: Representative images of polyubiquitinated proteins associated with LCVs. U937 cells were challenged with WT L. pneumophila, dotA- mutant, ∆ravZ, or ∆ravZ complemented with RavZLP/RavZLLO for 2 h.
Responses to Reviewer #2:
This manuscript provides a comprehensive exploration of the role of the Dot/Icm effector RavZ during Legionella longbeachae infection. The L. pneumophila homologue is a cysteine protease that hydrolyzes lipidated LC3 to block autophagic maturation. Here the researchers demonstrate that the longbeachae homologue is also an effector and likely functions in the same way to suppress autophagy during infection. Interestingly the abundance of polyubiquitinated species on the LCV appears to be regulated by RavZLLO but not RavZLP indicating the possibility of a species specific function of this protein.
The study is comprehensive and scientifically sound and therefore entirely appropriate for publication in PLoS One. I have just a few minor suggestions:
1. line 65-66: while flagellin is a key difference between longbeachae and pneumophila species it doesn't seem to account for the different infection outcomes in mice (consider Massis et al - J Infect Dis - where a pneumophila flagellin mutant still has different outcomes to longbeachae.
Response: Thanks for your careful review and valuable comment. We also read the J infect Dis paper by Massis et al. One of the major differences between L. pneumophila and L. longbeachae is their ability to colonize the lungs of mice. While only A/J mice are permissive for replication of L. pneumophila, A/J, C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice are all permissive for replication of L. longbeachae [1, 2]. Resistance of C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice to L. pneumophila has been attributed to polymorphisms in Nod-like receptor apoptosis inhibitory protein 5 (naip5) allele [3, 4]. The current model states that L. pneumophila replication is restricted due to flagellin dependent caspase-1 activation through Naip5-Ipaf and early macrophage cell death by pyroptosis. Later on, the genomic sequencing analyses reveal that L. longbeachae does not encode flagella biosynthesis genes, thereby providing a possible explanation for differences in mouse susceptibility to infection between the two species [5, 6]. In Massis’s study, they found that L. longbeachae is more virulent than L. pneumophila strain lacking flagellin in a mouse model of infection, the reduced activation of the innate immunity and reduced induction of cytokines during L. longbeachae infection may contribute to increased bacterial colonization of the lungs, replication, and dissemination, a process that may be critical for the pathogenesis and induction of death in the infected individuals.
We have revised this sentence. Lines 63-65: “Unlike L. pneumophila, L. longbeachae does not encode flagella biosynthesis genes, thus partly explaining the differences in mouse susceptibility between these two species”.
2. line 81: "This apparatus comprises 25 proteins" - this is outdated given new publications Sheedlo et al and a couple of others
Response: Thanks for your valuable suggestions. We have revised our manuscript according to Sheedlo et al. “This apparatus comprises 27 proteins and injects a set of effector proteins across both bacterial and vacuole membranes into the cytosol of infected host cells or the vacuole lumen.” Please see the lines 81-83 in the revised manuscript.
3. Figure 3A - the quality of these IF images is unacceptable - it is impossible to determine any features within these images - they need to be higher resolution and perhaps also show a zoomed in section for the reader to deliniate LC3 puncta.
Response: Thanks for your advice. We apologized for the low resolution of the figures. And we have regenerated all figures at higher resolution which we hope to meet the standard. The images were taken to show the effect of ectopically expressed RavZ on host autophagic responses which are represented by the formation of LC3 puncta. In cells transfected with empty vector, we can see multiple cells possessing LC3 puncta (dots) in the visual field. While in cells expressing RavZLP and RavZLLO, the LC3 puncta was barely detected. We have zoomed in the dot regions as your suggestion. Please see our revised Fig 3A.
References
1. Asare R, Santic M, Gobin I, Doric M, Suttles J, Graham JE, et al. Genetic susceptibility and caspase activation in mouse and human macrophages are distinct for Legionella longbeachae and L. pneumophila. Infection and immunity. 2007;75(4):1933-45 https://doi.org/10.1128/iai.00025-07. PMID: 17261610.
2. Gobin I, Susa M, Begic G, Hartland EL, Doric M. Experimental Legionella longbeachae infection in intratracheally inoculated mice. Journal of medical microbiology. 2009;58(Pt 6):723-30 https://doi.org/10.1099/jmm.0.007476-0. PMID: 19429747.
3. Molofsky AB, Byrne BG, Whitfield NN, Madigan CA, Fuse ET, Tateda K, et al. Cytosolic recognition of flagellin by mouse macrophages restricts Legionella pneumophila infection. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2006;203(4):1093-104 https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20051659. PMID: 16606669.
4. Wright EK, Goodart SA, Growney JD, Hadinoto V, Endrizzi MG, Long EM, et al. Naip5 affects host susceptibility to the intracellular pathogen Legionella pneumophila. Current biology : CB. 2003;13(1):27-36 https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01359-3. PMID: 12526741.
5. Cazalet C, Gomez-Valero L, Rusniok C, Lomma M, Dervins-Ravault D, Newton HJ, et al. Analysis of the Legionella longbeachae genome and transcriptome uncovers unique strategies to cause Legionnaires' disease. PLoS genetics. 2010;6(2):e1000851 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000851. PMID: 20174605.
6. Kozak NA, Buss M, Lucas CE, Frace M, Govil D, Travis T, et al. Virulence factors encoded by Legionella longbeachae identified on the basis of the genome sequence analysis of clinical isolate D-4968. Journal of bacteriology. 2010;192(4):1030-44 https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.01272-09. PMID: 20008069.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0281587.r003Decision Letter 1
SilvaAristóbolo MAcademic Editor© 2023 Aristóbolo M Silva2023Aristóbolo M Silvahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
27 Jan 2023

Legionella longbeachae effector protein RavZ inhibits autophagy and regulates phagosome ubiquitination during infection
PONE-D-22-30067R1
Dear Dr. Qiu,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Aristóbolo M Silva
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors responded in an adequate manner to my comments. The changes have been made in the text of the manuscript.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0281587.r004Acceptance letter
SilvaAristóbolo MAcademic Editor© 2023 Aristóbolo M Silva2023Aristóbolo M Silvahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
1 Feb 2023

PONE-D-22-30067R1 
Legionella longbeachae effector protein RavZ inhibits autophagy and regulates phagosome ubiquitination during infection 
Dear Dr. Qiu:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Aristóbolo M Silva 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE