pmcBMJ MedBMJ Med4373bmjmed9918487584306676bmjmedicineBMJ Medicine2754-0413BMJ Publishing GroupPMC12164325PMC12164325.112164325121643254051951010.1136/bmjmed-2023-000733bmjmed-2023-0007331Original ResearchResearch1506Pregnant women admitted to hospital with covid-19 in 10 European countries: individual patient data meta-analysis of population based cohorts in International Obstetric Survey Systems
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1582-4283EngjomHilde Marie de BruinOdette RamakrishnanRema AabakkeAnna J M ÄyräsOuti Deneux-TharauxCatherine DonatiSerena https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1984-4575KnightMarian JonasdottirEva SvanvikTeresia VercoutereAn https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5216-8268VousdenNicola https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1377-4625BloemenkampKitty WM on behalf of the INOSS covid-19 in pregnancy working groupVercoutereAnVandenbergheGrietZinaJoelDaelemansCarolineRoelensKristienBenoitKarolienAabakkeAnnaKrebsLoneÄyräsOutiVarpulaReettaGisslerMikaDeneux-TharauxCatherineSecoAurelienAncelPierre-YvesJonasdottirEvaDonatiSerenaCorsi DecentiEdoardoSalvatoreMichele AntonioBloemenkampKittyde BruinOdetteOvertoomEvelienEngjomHilde MarieKlungsøyrKariNyfløtLillVangenSiriSvanvikTeresiaKällénKarinKanervaJuliaJonesElinPettersonKarinThurnLarsKnightMarianRamakrishnanRemaVousdenNicola1Division of Mental and Physical Health, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Bergen, Norway2National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK3Department of Obstetrics, Birth Centre Wilhelminas Children's Hospital, Division Woman and Baby, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands4Department of Biostatistics and Research support, Julius Centre for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Centre, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands5Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Copenhagen University Hospital-Holbæk, Kobenhavn, Denmark6Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Kobenhavn, Denmark7Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland8Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland9Obstetric, Perinatal and Paediatric Epidemiology, Centre for Research on Epidemiology and Statistics, National Institute of Health and Medical Research, Paris, France10Institute Santé des Femmes, Universite Paris Cite, Paris, France11National Centre for Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Istituto Superiore di Sanità - Italian National Institute of Health, Rome, Italy12Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Landspitali National University Hospital of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland13Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Goteborg, Sweden14Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Hopital Erasme, Bruxelles, Belgium15Chair, International Obstetric Survey Systems, Utrecht, NetherlandsSupplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been peer-reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
Additional supplemental material is published online only. To view, please visit the journal online (https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjmed-2023-000733).
All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/disclosure-of-interest/ and declare: support from the European Medicines Agency, Belgian Federal Public Service of Health, French Ministry of Health, Norwegian Research Council, Nordic Federation of Societies of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research Fund, Region of Southern Denmark and Region Zealand’s shared fund for joint health research projects, EasyTrial, Finnish Medical Society, Helsinki University, National Institute for Health and Care Research Health and Social Care Delivery Research programme, and Wellbeing of Women for the submitted work; no financial relationships with any organisations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three years; no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.
Dr Hilde Marie Engjom, Division of Mental and Physical Health, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Postboks 973 Sentrum, Bergen 5808, Norway; HildeMarie.Engjom@fhi.noHME and OdB are joint first authors.
20241212202431454029e000733238202314102024121220241306202517012026Copyright © Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published by BMJ.2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits others to copy, redistribute, remix, transform and build upon this work for any purpose, provided the original work is properly cited, a link to the licence is given, and indication of whether changes were made. See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.Impact of national pandemic policies on maternal health
3112122024e001235BMJ Medicine10.1136/bmjmed-2024-001235PMC1216431540519512

## Abstract

## Objectives
To assess the incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 disease in pregnant women, severity of covid-19 disease, and medical treatment provided to pregnant women with moderate to severe covid-19 during the first 10 months of the pandemic.

## Design
Individual patient data meta-analysis of population based cohorts in International Obstetric Survey Systems.

## Setting
10 European countries with national or regional surveillance within the International Obstetric Survey Systems (INOSS) collaboration using aligned definitions and case report forms: Belgium, France (regional), Italy, the Netherlands, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden (regional), and the UK. The dominant variant of the SARS-CoV-2 virus was the wild-type variant in all countries during the study period (1 March 2020 to 31 December 2020).

## Participants
The source population was 1.7 million women giving birth (maternities) from 1 March 2020 to 31 December 2020; pregnant women were included if they were admitted to hospital and had a positive polymerase chain reaction test for the SARS-CoV-2 virus ≤7 days before hospital admission, during admission, or up to two days after giving birth. We further categorised the hospital admission in two groups; covid-19 admission (hospital admission due to covid-19 or with reported symptoms of covid-19 disease) or non-covid-19 admission (admission to hospital for obstetric healthcare or no symptoms of covid-19 disease).

## Main outcome measures
Incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 per 1000 maternities, frequency of moderate to severe covid-19 disease, and number of women who received specific medical treatment for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Moderate to severe covid-19 disease was defined as maternal death, admission to an intensive care unit, or need for respiratory support.

## Results
Among 1.7 million maternities, 9003 women were included in the study: 2350 (26.1%) were admitted to hospital because of covid-19 disease or had symptoms of disease. The pooled incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 per 1000 maternities was 0.8 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.5 to 1.2, τ2=0.44), ranging from no hospital admissions in Iceland to 1.7 in France and 1.9 in the UK. 13 women died due to covid-19. Among 2219 women admitted to hospital for covid-19 in countries with complete information on respiratory support, 820 women (39.5%, 95% CI 34.6% to 44.4%, τ2=0.02) had moderate to severe covid-19 disease. At most, 16.8% (95% CI 7.7% to 32.9%, I2=81.8%, τ2=0.7) of women with moderate to severe covid-19 received specific medical treatment for SARS-CoV-2 infection with corticosteroids, although 66.6% (59.4% to 73.2%, I2=50.1, τ2=0.06) were given thromboprophylaxis.

## Conclusions
Population based surveillance in 10 European countries during the first 10 months of the covid-19 pandemic showed variations in the risk of hospital admissions for covid-19 in pregnant women. This finding indicates that national public health policies likely had a substantial and previously unrecognised role in protecting pregnant women. Few pregnant women with moderate to severe covid-19 were given specific medical treatment for SARS-CoV-2 disease, even when there were no or minor safety concerns. Lessons for future pandemics include the importance of rapid, robust surveillance systems for maternal and perinatal health, and of including use for pregnant women early in the development and testing of medicines and vaccines for public health emergencies.

COVID-19Pregnancy complicationsPublic health
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100008723Suomen Lääketieteen Säätiö

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100005416Norges Forskningsråd
320181
Ministry of Health, France
IDRCB: 2020-A01388-31
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100013120European Medicines Agency
EMA/2018/28/PE
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001923Health Services Research Programme
11/46/12
Nordic Federation of Societies of Gyncology and Obstetrics
6506
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100011091FOD Volksgezondheid, Veiligheid van de Voedselketen en Leefmilieu
'OVEREENKOMST BETREFFENDE HET PILOOTPROJECT “REG
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100008376Helsingin ja Uudenmaan Sairaanhoitopiiri

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100024075Region Syddanmark
A767
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000325Wellbeing of Women
RCG-19pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY

## WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC

## WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS
Large variations in the incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 were seen in different European countries with comparable public obstetric healthcare systems, suggesting that public health policies, such as early suppression of viral transmission, might protect pregnant women from severe disease
The study highlighted persistent medical under-treatment of pregnant women with moderate to severe disease during the initial pandemic waves, including when there were few safety concerns about the use of available medicines

## HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH, PRACTICE, OR POLICY
Investment in rapid, robust surveillance is urgently needed to monitor the effects on pregnant women and their infants during outbreaks or other health emergencies
Earlier availability of population based data of high quality could have informed health policies, provided better information for pregnant women and their partners, and informed advice and medical care provided by clinicians
Further joint efforts are needed to address the substantial inequity in receipt of evidence based treatment by pregnant women in public health emergencies

## Introduction
 The covid-19 pandemic evolved over multiple phases and was a worldwide health challenge for more than three years. Currently, the emphasis globally is evaluation and preparedness for future emergencies. In hindsight, covid-19 went on to become the most common cause of maternal deaths in the UK during the period 2019-21. Public health interventions to limit viral transmission are continously discussed and evaluated, along with personal protection such as vaccination and early treatment for people at risk of severe disease. Europe had two waves of the pandemic during 2020, and strategies to contain transmission differed across European countries, such as early suppression (in Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Italy), mitigation (in Sweden and the UK), late suppression (in France), and intermediate solutions (in the Netherlands and Belgium). 
According to surveillance by the World Health Organization, the pandemic epicentre moved from China to Europe to the US during 2020, but few of the first studies of covid-19 in pregnancy were from Europe, and even fewer studies were population based. The WHO living systematic review of clinical manifestations, risk factors, and maternal and perinatal outcomes of covid-19 disease in pregnancy summarised the literature published up to 27 April 2021. Most of the studies included in the review were from countries outside of Europe, were hospital based, and often lacked clear discrimination between hospital admissions for covid-19 and admissions for other pregnancy related healthcare, such as obstetric emergencies or labour. Although many studies looked at individual maternal risk factors, limited information was provided about the source populations or population denominator, and therefore comparison of the incidence of covid-19 in pregnancy in different countries has been lacking.
Evidence from earlier outbreaks, epidemics, and pandemics indicated that pregnant women were susceptible to severe outcomes, and frequently could not access medical treatment prescribed to women who were not pregnant or access vaccines. Experiences from the UK Obstetric Surveillance System (UKOSS) during the 2009-10 H1N1 pandemic showed that early antiviral treatment in pregnant women admitted to hospital was associated with a reduced odds of admission to an intensive care unit, but few pregnant women started treatment before hospital admission. At the start of the covid-19 pandemic, knowledge about effective treatment of the SARS-CoV-2 virus was lacking, particularly for pregnant women, and in national studies the proportion of pregnant women who received medical treatment was low. Most of the larger international treatment trials, such as WHO Solidarity Therapeutics Trial, initially excluded pregnant women, with the RECOVERY (Randomised Evaluation of Covid-19 Therapy) trial in the UK as one of the exceptions. Consequently, little information was available about the use of medical treatments directed at the SARS-CoV-2 disease in pregnant women.
The aim of our study was to describe the incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 disease in pregnant women, severity of covid-19 disease, and medical treatment provided to pregnant women with moderate to severe covid-19 disease, in 10 European countries with different public health containment strategies. Our ultimate aim was to inform future responses to similar situations.

## Methods

## Study population
The source population was women who gave birth (maternities) from 1 March to 31 December 2020, based on national population sources or hospital records. Information about self-reported gender was not collected. The population based surveillance was implemented nationally in Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, and the UK, and regionally in France, where 60% of the maternity population was included in this study, and in Sweden, where three regional university hospitals and two regions represented 31% of the national maternities ( ). and a previous publication have further details about the study populations and organisation of surveillance, including testing strategies. All participating countries had public healthcare for pregnant women, with tax based or insurance based funding.
Pregnant women were included in the study if they were admitted to hospital between 1 March and 31 December 2020 with a positive reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for the the SARS-CoV-2 virus ≤7 days before or during admission in pregnancy, and up to two days after giving birth. Further categorisation was based on the cause of admission, or covid-19 symptoms if the cause of admission was not known. The covid-19 admission group comprised pregnant women admitted to hospital for covid-19 or those who were reported to have symptoms of covid-19 disease. The non-covid-19 admission group was women admitted to hospital for healthcare not related to covid-19, such as obstetric emergencies or labour, or who were reported to be asymptomatic.

## Outcomes
The primary outcomes were incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19, frequency of moderate to severe covid-19, and frequency of medical treatments specific to covid-19 in pregnant women. Moderate to severe covid-19 was defined as maternal death, admission to an intensive care unit for covid-19, or respiratory support with either oxygen supplementation, high flow nasal oxygen or continuous positive airway pressure, mechanical ventilation, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Only extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, mechanical ventilation, or continuous positive airway pressure was recorded in Belgium, and not oxygen supplementation, and in Sweden only mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was recorded.
Medical treatment specific to covid-19 was defined as one or more of the following: antiviral treatment (oseltamivir, lopinavir-ritonavir, or remdesivir), hydroxychloroquine, corticosteroids for a maternal indication (any treatment with steroids with a stated maternal indication, or treatment with more than the two doses usually recommended for a fetal indication in preterm birth ), low molecular weight heparin for thromboprophylaxis or for treatment of thromboembolism, and other covid-19 specific medical treatments, such as anti-interleukin 6 (eg, tocilizumab) and intravenous immunoglobulin G. Use of antibiotics for any indication was also reported but included all indications and was not limited to azithromycin directed at covid-19 disease.
Secondary outcomes for women were preterm birth before 37 weeks' gestational age and mode of birth (vaginal birth, assisted vaginal birth, or caesarean birth). Caesarean births also included indications unrelated to covid-19 disease. Discriminating between spontaneous preterm birth and medically indicated preterm birth was not possible because the clinical definitions varied between countries (eg, preterm rupture of membranes and subsequent medical indication for induction). Secondary perinatal outcomes were stillbirth, neonatal death before discharge after birth, and admission to a neonatal unit.
Descriptive characteristics included as covariates were gestational age at admission, parity (number of previous births at gestational ages ≥22 weeks or ≥24 weeks in the UK), maternal age at admission, obesity (body mass index ≥30), non-European migrant or ethnic minority background, chronic disease before pregnancy (diabetes or hypertension), and diseases in pregnancy (gestational diabetes and pre-eclampsia). Ethnic minority or non-European migrant background was combined because the availability of information varied across countries. Some countries do not register ethnic group, whereas other countries had no information about the mother's country of birth. Non-European migrant background was defined as the mother's country of birth outside of Europe in all countries except the UK. In the UK, ethnic minority background was defined by self-reported ethnicity as black, Asian, mixed, or other ethnic backgrounds. The respective comparison groups were European born mothers or women with an ethnic group categorised as white.

## Statistical analyses
Because reliable estimation of the number of pregnant women in a population is difficult, we used pregnant women giving birth during the study period as the denominator population. Denominator sources were national registries, population statistics, or hospital records, for total maternities and average number of maternities per month.
We conducted a one-stage individual participant data meta-analysis of binomial data to estimate the pooled incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 per 1000 maternities and the pooled proportion of moderate to severe infection and medical treatment for pregnant women. For this purpose, we used the metapreg Stata package for meta-analysis of binomial data with hierarchical modelling, with Wilson's estimation of confidence intervals (CI) due to small proportions, and specifying the power option in Stata to obtain estimates on a per 1000 or per cent scale.
Heterogeneity was assessed with the I2 statistic, τ2, and prediction intervals. I2 measures the percentage of total variance in the study estimates that is caused by heterogeneity between studies. The I2 statistic used in metapreg is based on a population parameter I2 statistic proposed by Zhou and Dendukuri for binomial normal data. This statistic takes into account the mean-variance relation across studies and the sample size of studies included in the meta-analysis. Therefore, it tends to perform better than the I2 statistic proposed by Higgins and Thompson. Prediction interval as a measure of heterogeneity denotes the range of probability that can be expected in a new study that is similar to the studies included in the meta-analysis. We grouped incidence by admission group (covid-19 or non-covid-19). Because of the heterogeneity in the group of non-covid-19 admissions and to avoid misclassification of severe outcomes related to obstetric emergencies in asymptomatic women, further analyses of covid-19 severity, medical treatment, and secondary maternal and perinatal outcomes were reported for women in the covid-19 admission group only.
Sensitivity analyses of incidence were performed by including only countries with national data (excluding regional data from Sweden and France), and also by using proportional meta-analysis by Freeman-Tukey double arcsine transformation (metaprop) and Wilson's estimation of confidence intervals so that the results could be compared with "metapreg." Among pregnant women in the covid-19 admission group in countries where complete information about respiratory support was available (excluding Belgium and Sweden), the risk ratio for moderate to severe covid-19 was estimated grouped by selected risk factors identified from the literature and in the national data : maternal age (≥35 years v <35 years), obesity (obese v not obese), and migrant or ethnic minority background (maternal country of birth outside Europe v European born, or ethnic minority (black, Asian, mixed, or other ethnic) background v white) using a two stage meta-analysis with the random effect maximum likelihood model and the Hartung-Knapp-Sidik-Jonkman variance estimator. The two stage model was used for this meta-analysis because of national data protection regulations that restricted international sharing of individual health data. Also, because of the small numbers of events and concerns about identifiability, aggregate data from Denmark, Finland, and Norway were combined into one geographic category.
Not all countries had sufficient events to compute adjusted risk estimates. Therefore, sensitivity analyses of adjusted risk ratios were performed with the largest datasets (France, Italy, and the UK). The risk ratio associated with age ≥35 years was adjusted for non-European migrant or ethnic minority background, obesity, and hypertension and diabetes before pregnancy. The risk ratio associated with obesity was adjusted for age (continuous), and hypertension and diabetes before pregnancy. The risk ratio for moderate to severe covid-19 in women from a non-European migrant or ethnic minority background was adjusted for age (continuous) only. The pooled proportions of medical treatments (%) in women with moderate to severe infection were estimated with a meta-analysis of binomial data, as described above, with no sensitivity analyses. Meta-analysis of the observational national studies was registered in EU PAS (EUPAS40489).

## Patient and public involvement
No patients or public representatives were involved in the meta-analysis because the international collaboration group did not have any patient or public representatives. Several of the participants in INOSS have national user representatives providing input to study planning or presentation of the national studies. INOSS members will follow their respective plans for dissemination to patients, clinicians, and the public, through public media and online as applicable.

## Results
Among a source population of 1.7 million women who gave birth between 1 March 2020 and 31 December 2020, 9003 pregnant women were admitted to hospital and had a SARS-CoV-2 infection ( ), of whom 2350 were in the covid-19 admission group ( ). In the covid-19 admission group, mean maternal age ranged from 31.0 (standard deviation 4.6) years in Finland to 33.1 (4.6) years in Norway. Median gestational age at admission ranged from 27 (interquartile range 24-36 weeks) in Sweden and 27 (20-32 weeks) in Denmark to 34 (28-38 weeks) in the UK. The proportion of nulliparous women ranged from 20% in Norway and Sweden, to 36.5% in the UK and 37.5% in Finland.
 shows the characteristics of pregnant women in the covid-19 admission group, by severity of disease (moderate to severe covid-19 or mild covid-19) and country. Women with chronic diseases before pregnancy (hypertension and diabetes) or gestational disease (gestational diabetes and pre-eclampsia) represented <10% of those with moderate to severe covid-19 in all countries, except for gestational diabetes. provides further details.
 The estimated pooled incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 disease was 0.8 (95% CI 0.5 to 1.2) per 1000 maternities (I2=87.2%, τ2=0.44, prediction interval 0.25 to 2.30). Iceland recorded no hospital admissions for covid-19. The incidences in other countries were 0.2 (95% CI 0.1 to 0.4) in Norway, 0.4 (0.3 to 0.7) in Finland, 0.7 (0.6 to 0.9) in Belgium, 0.7 (0.5 to 1.0) in Denmark, 0.9 (1.5 to 1.8) in Italy, 0.9 (0.8 to 1.1) in the Netherlands, 1.7 (1.5 to 1.8) in France, and 1.9 (1.8 to 2.0) in the UK per 1000 maternities ( ). When only data from national surveillance were included, the pooled incidence estimate was 0.6 (95% CI 0.4 to 1.0, I2=84.5, τ2=0.41, prediction interval 0.2 to 2.0). The pooled incidence estimate did not change when we used a model with Freeman-Tukey double arcsine transformation for the meta-analysis of proportions (0.8 per 1000 maternities, 95% CI 0.5 to 1.2, I2=98.0%, ).
 The incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 disease varied over time and by country. shows hospital admissions for covid-19 by the average number of maternities per month, by month of a positive PCR test result and by country. The highest peaks were found during both waves of the pandemic in the French and Swedish regions and in the UK, and the lowest levels in the other four Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, and Norway).
 

## Moderate to severe covid-19 disease
Among 2350 women in the covid-19 admission group, 13 women died and 294 were admitted to an intensive care unit ( ). Admission to intensive care ranged from 7.8% in Italy to 18.0% and 19.6% in Sweden and France, respectively. Mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was reported for 2-8% of hospital admissions for covid-19, whereas the proportion of women who received respiratory support with oxygen supplementation, continuous positive airway pressure, or high flow nasal cannula ranged from 13% in the UK to 41% in France. Among women in the covid-19 admission group, 39.1% had moderate to severe infection (95% CI 34.8% to 43.5%, I2=47.1%, τ 2=0.02, prediction interval 32.1 to 46.5), ranging from 33.5% in the UK to 47.2% in the Netherlands ( ).
 shows that the distribution of maternal characteristics varied across countries. In meta-analyses stratified by age, obesity, and migrant or ethnic minority background at country level, we found an increased risk of moderate to severe disease in women aged ≥35 years compared with women aged <35 years (pooled risk ratio 1.32, 95% CI 1.12 to 1.55, I2=9.4%, τ2<0.001), in women with obesity compared with women who were not obese (1.60, 1.44 to 1.78, I2=0%, τ2<0.001), and for women from a non-European migrant or ethnic minority background compared with women from a white (majority) or European born background (1.21, 95% CI 0.97 to 1.51, I2=40.8, τ2=0.003) ( ). Sensitivity analyses of risk ratios with adjustment for potential confounders based on larger datasets from France, Italy, and the UK showed minimal changes (to the second decimal) in adjusted risk ratios.
 

## Medical treatment
 outlines the main categories of medical treatment given alone or in combination to women in the covid-19 admission group by severity of covid-19 disease. gives more specific details. Information about corticosteroids for maternal indications was not available for Italy and Sweden.
 Prophylactic anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin (thromboprophylaxis) was the most frequent medical treatment. Hydroxychloroquine was most frequently used in Italy and some Belgian regions but rarely in the other countries. Even among women with moderate to severe covid-19, few received other specific medical treatments for covid-19, with notable variations across countries ( ). Information about oxygen supplementation was not available in Belgium, and in Sweden data on respiratory support other than mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, were not available. In countries where information about all modalities of respiratory support was available, 2219 women had moderate to severe covid-19; about one in six women received corticosteroids for a maternal indication (pooled proportion 16.8%, 95% CI 7.7% to 32.9%, I2=81.8, τ2=0.7), one in seven received antiviral treatment (14.8%, 7.4% to 27.3%, I2=81.9, τ2=0.7), and two of three women received thromboprophylaxis (66.6%, 59.4% to 73.2%, I2=50.1, τ2=0.06).
 

## Maternal secondary outcomes
Information about birth was available for 2214 (96.5%) women out of the 2350 covid-19 admissions. Median gestational age at birth for women in the covid-19 admission group was 38-39 weeks in all countries. Nevertheless, preterm birth before 37 weeks' gestational age was more common among women with moderate to severe covid-19, ranging from 26.7% in the Netherlands to 34.5% in the UK, noting that information about birth was missing for some women discharged with ongoing pregnancies in the Netherlands and Italy. has more details about preterm birth and mode of delivery by severity of covid-19. The pooled proportion of preterm birth before 34 weeks' gestation was 16.7% (95% CI 14.3% to 19.4%, τ2<0.001, prediction interval 12.9 to 21.2) in women with moderate to severe infection and 3.3% (1.6% to 6.4%, τ2=0.2, prediction interval 0.9 to 11.1) in women with mild infection.
Caesarean births included all indications, also indications not related to covid-19 disease. The pooled proportion of caesarean births was 52.9% (95% CI 46.3% to 59.5%, I2=42.2, τ2=0.05, prediction interval 41.6 to 64.0) in women with moderate to severe covid-19, and 31.6% (24.5% to 39.7%, I2=68.9, τ2=0.12, prediction interval 18.8 to 47.8) in women in the covid-19 admission group who did not need respiratory support.

## Perinatal secondary outcomes
Information was available for 2283 infants born after 22 weeks' gestational age. Stillbirths and neonatal deaths were rare, with no events in many countries ( ). Half of the stillbirths were reported for women with moderate to severe covid-19 (13/24), but with potential bias because some missing information about births to women discharged while still pregnant in Italy and the Netherlands. Among infants with available outcome information, admission to a neonatal ward was more common in infants born to women with moderate to severe infection (32.8%, 95% CI 25.9% to 40.5%, τ2=0.09, prediction interval 20.9 to 47.4 v 13.3%, 11.7% to 15.3%, τ2<0.0001, prediction interval 10.6 to 16.5, for admission to the neonatal ward for infants born to women with mild infection).

## Discussion

## Principal findings
This study showed large variations in the incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 disease in pregnant women in 10 European countries. The incidence of admissions ranged from no admissions to almost 2 per 1000 maternities during the study period, with the lowest estimates in four Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, and Norway) and the highest in Sweden, France, and the UK. Few of the pregnant women with moderate to severe disease received medical treatment specific to SARS-CoV-2 infection, such as antiviral medicines or corticosteroids.

## Strengths and limitations of this study
Whilst the first published studies of pregnant women with covid-19 were small, the following emphasis of larger studies and greater numbers of individuals had the potential to overlook important lessons from countries with a low risk of hospital admissions for covid-19 disease. The population based approach in our study reduced the risk of several biases, such as selection bias, and also of publication bias, where studies from smaller populations would be less likely to be published. Aligned definitions of cases (ie, exposure to the virus and cause of admission),outcomes, and covariates added to the comparability of the national results, including the active surveillance to identify all maternal deaths. 
Although pregnant women might need healthcare related to the pregnancy, many previous studies have not clearly discriminated between hospital admissions for pregnancy related healthcare and admissions for covid-19 disease. The availability of clinical information about the cause of hospital admission or symptoms was essential for better categorisation and to avoid incorrectly attributing severe pregnancy outcomes in asymptomatic women with obstetric complications to infection with the SARS-CoV-2 virus. All of the countries participating in INOSS had policies to test pregnant women with symptoms of covid-19 disease during the study period ( ), and we assumed that public health interventions to reduce personal movement did not affect access to necessary healthcare. However, the testing strategies would impact the detection of asymptomatic infection among pregnant women in need of pregnancy related healthcare in labour or obstetric emergencies. Therefore, a strength of our study was that we could evaluate risk depending on symptom status. Stratification of analyses by country accounted to some extent for differences in the risk of infection, social support, and population density, as well as the characteristics of the study population and national care practices, such as baseline caesarean birth rates.
Strict national regulations in some countries following the European General Data Protection Regulation (published in 2016) prevented international sharing of individual health information, thus requiring a two stage approach to some analyses, with national analyses performed with the teams' preferred statistical analysis programme. Regional data were available from France (60% of national births) and Sweden (31% of national births), indicating that more caution is needed with regards to national generalisability and selection bias in these countries. All countries and regions were likely to identify pregnant women in need of hospital care, however, and all countries had systems in place to ascertain complete reporting.
Our study had several limitations. Firstly, we could not describe the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection in pregnant women who were not admitted to hospital. Secondly, severe perinatal outcomes were rare, and were not restricted to covid-19 disease as the main cause, even among women with moderate to severe disease. Thirdly, for the available covariates, age was categorised in our study based on published research and national results. The cut-off point at age 35 years was arbitrary and age would be better modelled as a continuous covariate in future studies. Although non-European migrant background was not equivalent to ethnic minority background, we had to adapt to different practices for recording and reporting this information in different countries. Lastly, limited information was available for some risk factors that could be important in the interpretation of the results, such as socioeconomic status.

## Comparison with other studies
Although few studies have reported population based estimates for the incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 disease in the pregnant population, other population based sources have described a similar distribution of incidence of severe covid-19 and deaths related to covid-19 disease in different countries. Based on data from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the European Centre for Disease Control, Denmark, Finland, and Norway were among the countries with the lowest number of deaths per million inhabitants in 2020, and Sweden, France, UK, Italy, and Belgium were among the countries with the highest mortality. Sweden, France, UK, Italy, and Belgium also had the highest estimates for the total population infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The Oxford stringency index was developed as a summary description of government responses to covid-19, and a high early index was associated with reduced mortality. According to the government response tracker used for the stringency index, Italy was the first to implement measures resulting in a stringency index >50 on 24 February 2020, and the UK and Sweden were the last to implement such measures, on 21 March and 26 March 2020, respectively. Denmark, Finland, Iceland, and Norway reached a stringency index of >50 on 13-17 March 2020.
When interpreting differences in the incidence of hospital admissions related to covid-19 disease, the distribution of risk factors for covid-19 in the pregnant population must also be considered. Women aged ≥35 years, with obesity, or from a non-European migrant or ethnic minority background were at greater risk for moderate to severe covid-19 in our study. The risk ratio estimates were lower than the pooled odds ratios reported in the WHO systematic review, as expected when moderate to severe covid-19 was common among the included women. Comparison with studies included in the WHO review is difficult because the definitions of causes of admissions to hospital or an intensive care unit were not always clear.
The sociodemographic characteristics and risk factors among women in the source populations in participating countries varied to some extent according to European perinatal surveillance and official statistics. People from a migrant or ethnic minority background have been shown to be over-represented in hospital admissions for covid-19, and this trend was also seen in our study for most of the countries. However, differences in age, obesity, and non-European migrant or ethnic minority background in pregnant populations in each country are unlikely to explain the observed variation in incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 across the countries. The variation in the prevalence of risk factors in different countries indicates the need for careful consideration of factors such as baseline risk in pooling and analyses of multi-country studies. 
Population density, social security system, and social inequalities might also have a role in viral transmission and risk of disease. Although the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development inequality indices (Gini index) for the Nordic countries are among the lowest in Europe, social inequality indicators or European population density studies do not seem to fully explain the observed difference in incidence. 
During the first and second waves of the pandemic, pregnant women with moderate to severe covid-19 did not receive medical treatment specific to covid-19 disease, even when there were few safety concerns and after the RECOVERY trial indicated a reduction in severe morbidity and death with early corticosteroid treatment in adults needing respiratory support. The apparent under-treatment aligns with previous experiences with epidemic threats, with persisting bias for vaccine development and vaccination, medical treatment, and also in the development of clinical guidelines. 
Maternal and perinatal outcomes were secondary outcomes in our study, the observation time was relatively short, and information about birth and infant outcomes was not complete in some countries for women who were discharged with an ongoing pregnancy and gave birth in a different hospital. However, the available information about outcomes from the index admission suggest a higher risk of preterm birth, caesarean birth, and admission to a neonatal ward in women with moderate to severe infection. Although our study cannot offer conclusive evidence, these results indicate the merit of nuanced analyses, taking severity of covid-19 into account when assessing maternal and perinatal outcomes in future studies.
In summary, the highest incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19 disease was seen in countries with a high burden of disease and was unlikely to reflect higher thresholds for hospital admission or lower capacity for admission to the intensive care unit in countries with a low incidence. The observed differences were unlikely to be explained only by differences in the distribution of risk factors in the pregnant source populations, or by other societal factors, such as population density and social inequality. The surveillance was based on a joint protocol and aligned definitions of cases, outcomes, and covariates. Although minor adaptations had to be made in different countries, methodological differences are unlikely to explain the observed difference in incidence of hospital admissions for covid-19. Our study indicates that public health policies might have had a largely unacknowledged role in protecting pregnant women from severe disease. The considerable under-treatment of pregnant women raises concerns for future outbreaks, epidemics, and pandemics.

## Study implications for research and practice
Although our study was conducted in high income countries, the meta-analysis from Europe might be relevant for future analysis and interpretation of multi-country studies, particularly for differences in incidence potentially related to health policies. Previous studies, such as the multinational cohort INTERCOVID study, reported an increased risk of maternal and neonatal mortality in low and middle income settings, but information about the source populations were not available, and the studies were hospital based. The INOSS surveillance model has been successfully applied in South Africa and India. The South African Obstetric Surveillance system reported high fatality rates among pregnant women admitted to hospital for covid-19. In India, lockdowns were associated with reduced access to essential reproductive healthcare and an increase in severe maternal morbidity and case fatality from complications related to pregnancy. 
The meta-analysis indicates that public health measures aimed at reducing deaths and limiting viral transmission in the society might also protect pregnant women. Combining data from several countries at a European level allowed insights into national trends, with the potential to inform national policies on surveillance of incidence and severe outcomes, medical treatment of pregnant women, and personal protection by vaccination. 
The difference in incidence indicates that national policies might have had a substantial role on the risk of hospital admissions for covid-19. If this knowledge had been available before the second wave of the pandemic in 2020 and before the alpha and delta variant dominant periods of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, severe maternal disease and deaths might have been prevented. Several INOSS countries used preliminary results from the national surveillance to inform national guidelines for the care of pregnant women, but national guidelines continued to vary widely during the pandemic. In future epidemics or pandemics, rapid and robust population based surveillance might also inform international treatment guidelines for pregnant women.
Our study identified several challenges in providing timely, robust information about the effect of the pandemic on pregnant women. outlines the surveillance models implemented in each country. Slow approval and data collection processes hampered the response, and organisational challenges, such as lack of funding for data collection and analysis, and lack of capacity and staff, were further barriers to rapid analysis and dissemination. Similarly, a survey of perinatal health surveillance in Europe during the pandemic reported large variations in the availability of routine surveillance data for perinatal health, and in some countries perinatal health surveillance was delayed as a result of core staff being allocated to other pandemic related tasks. 
Several INOSS countries concluded their surveillance early or late in the alpha variant dominant period of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in spring 2021 because of lack of capacity and funding. The INOSS countries with ongoing surveillance when the delta variant of the SARS-CoV-2 virus was the dominant strain could rapidly compile and share results about severe covid-19 and vaccination status, showing that most women admitted to intensive care units had not been vaccinated. Some countries followed up on vaccination status and outcomes during the period when the omicron variant of the SARS-CoV-2 virus was the dominant strain. 
Covid-19 went on to become the most common cause of maternal deaths reported in the Confidential Enquiry for the triennium 2019-21 in the UK, and most of the women who died were not vaccinated. Robust and reliable information about the consequences of disease is essential for pregnant women and their partners in seeking care and deciding about personal protection, such as vaccination. Consequently, European investment in robust surveillance systems is urgently needed to provide timely and relevant information to authorities and pregnant women and their partners.

## Future research
Further confidential enquiries into maternal deaths and severe disease could provide important learning for clinical care and emergency preparedness. Future work should aim to develop robust surveillance and systems to rapidly compare findings in different countries. With combined efforts, we can ensure that pregnant women benefit from at least the same level of prevention, detection, and care as the general populations during health emergencies. 

## Conclusions
Population based surveillance in 10 European countries during the first 10 months of the covid-19 pandemic showed large variations in the risk of hospital admissions for covid-19 in pregnant women. This finding indicates that national public health policies likely had a substantial and previously unrecognised role in protecting pregnant women. Few pregnant women with moderate to severe covid-19 disease were given specific medical treatment for SARS-CoV-2 infection, even when no or minor safety concerns existed. Lessons for future pandemics include the importance of rapid, robust surveillance systems for maternal and perinatal health, and using pregnant women early in the development and testing of medicines and vaccines for public health emergencies.

## Supplementary material
10.1136/bmjmed-2023-000733online supplemental file 110.1136/bmjmed-2023-000733Uncited online supplemental file 110.1136/bmjmed-2023-000733Uncited online supplemental file 2

## Acknowledgements
The authors thank the reporting clinicians in all of the International Obstetric Survey Systems (INOSS) countries, without whom this study would not have been possible; the "Covid-19 infection and medicine in pregnancy" (CONSIGN) consortium for evaluation and feedback on preliminary analyses, provided by Miriam Sturkenboom, University of Utrecht and her team; and Reem Malouf, National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University of Oxford, for evaluation and feedback for the meta-analysis. The French team thank Unité de Recherche Clinique Centre d’Investigation Clinique Paris Descartes Necker-Cochin (URC/CIC Necker-Cochin), GHU Paris Centre Université Paris Cité (C Larrieu), for implementation and monitoring of the study "Covid-19 et grossesse: une cohorte en population de femmes et de nouveau-nés" (COROPREG).
Funding: This multinational study has received support to the Covid-19 infections and medicines in pregnancy (CONSIGN) consortium from the European Medicines Agency (EMA) under the framework service contract No EMA/2018/28/PE. The content of this paper expresses the opinion of the authors and should not be understood or quoted as being made on behalf of or reflecting the position of the EMA or one of its committees or working parties. The research leading to these results was conducted as part of the activities of the EU PE&PV (Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacovigilance) Research Network, a public academic partnership coordinated by the Utrecht University, Netherlands. Funding of national studies: The Belgian Obstetric Surveillance System (B.OSS) is funded by the Belgian Federal Public Service of Health (Overeenkomst Betreffende Het Pilootproject Registratie, Evaluatie En Audit Van Zeldzame Ernstige Obstetrische Complicaties En Maternale Mortaliteit), but the Belgian team had no specific funding for covid-19 surveillance. The COROPREG study in France received funding (CD-T, PYA) from the French Ministry of Health (grant IDRCB: 2020-A01388-31). HME participated in this work with international mobility funding from the Norwegian Research Council (grant No 320181). The Nordic Obestetic Surveillance Studies (NOSS) collaboration (principal investigators AJMA, OÄ, EJ, HME, TS) was supported by the Nordic Federation of Societies of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research Fund (grant No 6506, 2020). NOSS-Denmark was supported by grants to AJMA from the Region of Southern Denmark and Region Zealand’s shared fund for joint health research projects (registration No A767), and EasyTrial provided the data collection software without charge. NOSS-Finland (OÄ) received grants from the Finnish Medical Society, and from Helsinki University research grants. The UK Obstetric Surveillance System (UKOSS) study was part funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Health and Social Care Delivery Research programme (project No 11/46/12) and Wellbeing of Women (grant reference RGC-19) to MK. MK is an NIHR senior investigator. The views expressed are not necessarily those of the NHS, NIHR, or Department of Health and Social Care. The national studies in Italy and the Netherlands were not supported by a funding body. The funders had no role in considering the study design or in the collection, analysis, interpretation of data, writing of the manuscript, or decision to submit the article for publication.
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Patient consent for publication: Not applicable.
Data availability free text: National data cannot be shared publicly because of confidentiality issues and potential identifiability of sensitive individual health information. Requests to access the data can be made by contacting national teams or registry governing bodies.
Collaborators: International Obstetric Survey Systems (INOSS) covid-19 in pregnancy working group: Belgium: An Vercoutere, Griet Vandenberghe, Joel Zina, Caroline Daelemans, Kristien Roelens, Karolien Benoit; Denmark: Anna Aabakke, Lone Krebs; Finland: Outi Äyräs, Reetta Varpula, Mika Gissler; France: Catherine Deneux-Tharaux, Aurelien Seco, Pierre-Yves AncelIcel, Eva Jonasdottir; Italy: Serena Donati, Edouardo Corsi Decenti, Michele Antonio Salvatore; Netherlands: Kitty Bloemenkamp, Odette de Bruin, Evelien Overtoom; Norway: Hilde Marie Engjom, Kari Klungsøyr, Lill Nyfløt, Siri Vangen; Sweden: Teresia Svanvik, Karin Källén, Julia Kanerva, Elin Jones, Karin Petterson, Lars Thurn; UK: Marian Knight, Rema Ramakrishnan, Nicola Vousden.
Ethics approval: This meta-analysis was evaluated by the medical review committee at University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands, and exempt from ethical review due to the use of anonymous, aggregated national level data (protocol No 21/682, 4 October 2021). All relevant ethical guidelines have been followed and necessary ethics committee approvals have been obtained according to national regulations in each INOSS country and European regulations, including data sharing agreements for anonymous, aggregated data if required. Data were managed and stored in accordance with national regulations and the European General Data Protection Regulation. Numbers from national datasets from Denmark, Finland, Iceland, and Norway were merged to avoid reporting of exceedingly small numbers. National approvals in detail: The B.OSS received central ethical approval at the University Hospital Ghent. In France, the study was approved by Ile de France IV Committee for the Protection of Research Subjects (ID-2020-A01388-31May 29 2020). All women were individually informed, but there was no need for a written signed consent (non-opposition principle). The Ethics Committee of the Italian National Institute of Health approved the ItOSS project (protocol No 0010482 CE 01.00, Rome, 24 March 2020) and informed consent was acquired from any woman upon enrolment. The NethOSS registration system is part of the National Perinatal Registry foundation in the Netherlands (Perined) and did not require specific ethical approval and informed consent of participants. Ethical approval in Denmark was obtained by the Danish Patient Safety Authority (regulation No 31-1521-252, 24 April 2020) and the regional Data Protection Agency in Region Zealand (regulation No REG-022-2020, 23 March 2020). Finland received ethical approval from the Helsinki University hospital (regulation No HUS1624/2020, 13 May 2020). Landspitali University Hospital obtained approval from the National Bioethics Committee (regulation No VSNb2020050016/03.0I, 25 June 2020) and the Icelandic Data Protection Authority (regulation No 20-106, 9 June 2020). The Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Data Protection Officer (regulation No 20_11054, 3 April 2020) and the Northern Regional Ethics Committee (regulation No 125890, 26 March 2020) granted approval in Norway. The Swedish Ethical Review Authority (regulation No 2020-03012, 11 August 2020 for Sahlgrenska University Hospital and Skåne University Hospital and regulation No 2020-01499, 22 April 2020 for Karolinska University Hospital). In Denmark, Iceland, and Norway, ethical approval exempted the studies from individual consent. In Finland, individual consent is not required in register-based studies. In Sweden, women received written information about the study, including an opt-out possibility. No women opted out following information about the study. The UKOSS study was approved by the HRA NRES Committee East Midlands-Nottingham 1 (reference No 12/EM/0365) and individual consent was not required for the collection of pseudo-anonymised routine data.
Correction notice: This article has been corrected since it published. The collaborator's name, Edoardo Corsi Decenti, has been updated.
 

## Data availability statement
No data are available.

Review Process File
12122024