pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC13029805PMC13029805.113029805130298054189446910.1371/journal.pone.0345743PONE-D-25-503381Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthMaternal HealthPregnancyMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthObstetrics and GynecologyPregnancyMedicine and Health SciencesEndocrinologyEndocrine DisordersDiabetes MellitusGestational DiabetesMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsMetabolic DisordersDiabetes MellitusGestational DiabetesResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentSystematic ReviewsMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthMaternal HealthBirthPreterm BirthMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthObstetrics and GynecologyBirthPreterm BirthMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthMaternal HealthPregnancyPregnancy ComplicationsPreterm BirthMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthObstetrics and GynecologyPregnancyPregnancy ComplicationsPreterm BirthMedicine and Health SciencesEndocrinologyEndocrine DisordersDiabetes MellitusType 2 DiabetesMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsMetabolic DisordersDiabetes MellitusType 2 DiabetesBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyNeonatesMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthMaternal HealthNeonatal CareMedicine and Health SciencesPediatricsNeonatologyNeonatal CareMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareNeonatal CareResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesStatistical MethodsMetaanalysisPhysical SciencesMathematicsStatisticsStatistical MethodsMetaanalysisOutcomes of hyperglycaemia in pregnancy in Africa: Systematic review and meta-analysis
Outcomes of hyperglycaemia in pregnancy in Africa: Systematic review and meta-analysishttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9995-8080MusaEzekielConceptualizationData curationMethodologySoftwareWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing ChiveseTawandaData curationFormal analysisMethodologyWriting – review & editing WerfalliMahmoudData curationFormal analysisMethodologyWriting – review & editing SoepnelLarske M.Data curationMethodologyWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4895-6752NicolaouVeroniqueData curationMethodologyWriting – review & editing MatjilaMushiMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing NorrisShane A.SupervisionWriting – review & editing LevittNaomi S.ConceptualizationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa2
Chronic Disease Initiative for Africa, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa3
Department of Internal Medicine, Kaduna State University, Kaduna, Nigeria4
North Cumbria Integrated Care NHS Foundation Trust, Carlisle, United Kingdom5
Department of Science and Mathematics, School of Interdisciplinary Arts and Sciences, University of Washington Tacoma, Tacoma, Washington, United States of America6
Department of Family and Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Benghazi, Benghazi, Libya7
SAMRC/Wits Developmental Pathways for Health Research Unit, Department of Paediatrics, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa8
Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa9
Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands10
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa11
School of Human Development and Health, University of Southampton, Southampton, United KingdomCardosoMarly A.Editor files.

## Data Availability
relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
While the number of people with diabetes globally has increased considerably over the past few decades, so too has the incidence of diabetes-complicated pregnancies [ ]. Hyperglycaemia in pregnancy (HIP), defined by the WHO in 2014, includes diabetes first detected at any time during pregnancy, sub-classified as overt diabetes in pregnancy (DIP), gestational diabetes (GDM) and preexisting diabetes [ ]. HIP is regarded as the most common metabolic complication encountered during pregnancy [ ]. This is in part driven by the rising prevalence of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and its risk factors and by changes in diagnostic criteria for GDM [ – ]. The latest global estimates reported by the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) in 2021 indicated that 15.6% of live births to women of reproductive age (16–49 years) were complicated by HIP, with known or previously undiagnosed type 1 diabetes (T1DM) and T2DM accounting for about 16% [ , ].
Although the extent of the burden of HIP in Africa is unknown, a recent systematic review reported that the pooled prevalence of T2DM among women of childbearing age across the continent as 7.2% [ ]. Further, a systematic review of the prevalence of GDM in Africa found a pooled prevalence of 13.6%, with the prevalence in Sub-Saharan Africa reported at 9% and 14.8% by different groups [ , ].
HIP is associated with adverse maternal and foetal outcomes during pregnancy. These include increased caesarean delivery rate, preeclampsia, difficult labour, macrosomia, shoulder dystocia, increased perinatal mortality, neonatal hypoglycaemia and congenital malformations [ – ]. In addition, there are accumulating global data on the long-term impact of GDM on maternal health, childhood adiposity and glucose tolerance [ – ]. There are isolated reports on pregnancy outcomes of women with pregestational diabetes in Africa [ – ]. In a systematic review of the burden, risk factors and outcomes of GDM pregnancies in SSA, Natamba et al. found that up to 2018, 6 studies reported pregnancy-related outcomes and that GDM was associated with an increased risk of macrosomia (RR: 2.19, 95% CI: 1.08–4.43) and a non-significant risk of caesarean delivery [ ].
Many countries on this continent are experiencing an increasing prevalence of non-communicable diseases (NCDs), compounded by persistent high rates of infectious diseases and weak health systems. The rates of complications of different types of HIP are largely unknown, creating a significant knowledge gap essential for informed, effective health systems planning and strengthening in Africa. This systematic review examined the maternal, foetal, neonatal, childhood, and long-term maternal and offspring outcomes of HIP in Africa. Specifically, the study estimated the prevalence of adverse pregnancy outcomes for the main types of HIP in Africa, i.e., preexisting T1DM and T2DM, and GDM.

## Methods
This systematic review was conducted according to the recommendations of Cochrane Systematic Reviews, and our findings are reported in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA). The study was prospectively registered in the international database of prospectively registered systematic reviews (PROSPERO CRD42020184573), and the study protocol was published in a peer-reviewed journal [ ].

## Design
This research utilised a systematic review of all literature published between January 1998 and February 2025. A meta-analysis was carried out where sufficient data with low heterogeneity were available.

## Inclusion criteria
Studies reporting the outcomes of HIP among women resident in Africa published between January 1998 and February 2025 were included as current criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes and have been widely accepted since 1998. Participants were included irrespective of age, ethnicity, educational and socioeconomic status, gestational age, and study setting. Diagnosis of pregestational diabetes (T1DM or T2DM) and GDM was defined according to WHO 1999/2013, ADA and IADPSG diagnostic criteria or definition [ – ].
All published and unpublished population-based studies, cohort or cross-sectional studies and baseline data from randomised controlled trials conducted in Africa reporting on the prevalence of HIP outcomes were included. Published multicentre studies involving African patients were also included. Studies that included either hospital settings or community settings were included. Studies were excluded if they included non-human participants, were carried out outside Africa or in Africans in the diaspora, did not contain primary data, or were qualitative studies.

## Study outcomes

## Primary Outcomes.
Primary outcomes included both maternal short-term outcomes (preeclampsia, caesarean delivery) and foetal/neonatal short-term outcomes, specifically macrosomia, congenital anomalies, intrauterine foetal death, shoulder dystocia, neonatal morbidity (hypoglycaemia, sepsis, respiratory immaturity, jaundice, neonatal ICU admission and duration of neonatal hospital stay), perinatal mortality (early neonatal death (ENNDs)) and stillbirth (SB) rates.

## Secondary outcomes.
Secondary outcomes included: 1. maternal short-term outcomes of miscarriage, preterm birth, antepartum and puerperal sepsis, gestational hypertension; 2. foetal/neonatal outcomes of birth trauma, small for gestational age (SGA) babies, and infant death; 3. long-term maternal outcomes of T2DM, metabolic syndrome, CVD risk factors; 4. long-term offspring outcomes of childhood overweight, obesity, pre-diabetes and diabetes, in addition to NCDs in adulthood (hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, peripheral artery disease and cerebrovascular accidents).

## Definition of outcomes.
Definitions for key outcomes, where different criteria exist, are given below. 1. Preeclampsia: a multisystem progressive disorder characterised by the new onset of hypertension and/or worsening hypertension superimposed on chronic hypertension and proteinuria or the new onset of hypertension and significant end-organ dysfunction with or without proteinuria in the last half of pregnancy or postpartum [ , ]. 2. Primary caesarean delivery: the delivery by caesarean section (CS) for the first time [ ]. 3. Congenital malformations: any single or multiple defects of the morphogenesis of organs or body regions identifiable at birth or during intrauterine life [ ]. 4. Spontaneous abortion/miscarriage; any pregnancy loss before the 28th week of gestation (this is relevant for low and middle-income countries (LMIC) settings) or loss of foetus less than 500g [ – ]. 5. Perinatal mortality: a combination of stillbirths and early neonatal death (death before 7 days) (this is relevant for an LMIC setting) [ , ].

## Search strategy for the identification of relevant studies
Using the updated African search filter [ ], a sensitive search strategy was applied to retrieve all published studies of diabetes outcomes in pregnancy which were indexed in PubMed-MEDLINE, Cochrane Library, Scopus, CINAHL (EBSCOhost), Embase and Web of Science databases. There was no language restriction imposed on the literature searches. Our search strategy utilised Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) and free text. Unpublished literature was sought from experts in the field. At the same time, grey literature, such as reports, was also reviewed for relevant information from other organisational websites such as WHO, IDF, Google Scholar, and Pan African Clinical Trials Registry (PACTR). The support of an experienced Librarian was sought to validate and cross-examine our search strategy.

## Study selection for this review
Two reviewers (EM and TC) independently screened titles and abstracts of articles to identify eligible studies. Discrepancies and disagreements were addressed via group discussion and consultation between the two reviewers (EM, TC). A third reviewer (NL) arbitrated when needed. Where necessary, further information was sought from the studies’ authors. Reasons for excluding articles were recorded.

## Data extraction
The Burden of Disease (BOD) Review Manager, developed by the South African Medical Research Council, was utilised to extract and record research data by four independent reviewers (EM and LS) and TC and VL [ ]. The data extracted include study details:- publication date, title, design, period and objective; population- country, setting, and sample size; response rate; case definition of outcomes reported in the study; and study population characteristics. After the data extraction, the two reviewers addressed the identified differences or consulted a third reviewer (NL). Where there was missing information, the study’s corresponding author was contacted to request the missing details. No response to a maximum of three emails over two weeks sent to the corresponding author to request additional information led to the exclusion of the study. For studies appearing in more than one published article, we considered the most recent, comprehensive and one with the largest sample size. For surveys appearing in one article with multiple surveys conducted at different time points, we treated each survey as a separate study. For multinational studies, data were separated to show the country-level estimate.

## Assessment of risk of bias of studies
Two reviewers (MW and EM) independently evaluated and reported on the risk of bias as described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions according to the criteria and associated categorisations contained therein for randomised trials and using the Risk of Bias in Nonrandomized Studies of Interventions (ROBINS-I) tool for non-randomised studies [ , ]. A consensus was reached after discussion and consultation with a third reviewer (NL).
A checklist for observational studies, adapted from the risk of bias tool for population-based studies and the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale, was used to assess the quality of non-randomised studies with standardisation in the BOD review manager.

## Data synthesis and heterogeneity assessment
Crude numerators and denominators from the individual studies were used to recalculate the study-specific prevalence. Prevalence estimates were summarised by geographic region and outcome. A meta-analysis was performed on variables that were similar across the included studies.
For the meta-analysis, variances of proportions were stabilised using the Freeman-Tukey double arcsine transformation [ , ], and then the inverse variance heterogeneity model was used to synthesise overall prevalence estimates. Heterogeneity was assessed using Cochrane’s Q p-value and quantified by the I2 statistic [ ]. Analysis was carried out by the type of HIP, i.e., preexisting T1DM and T2DM, and GDM. The publication bias was assessed using Egger’s test and Doi and funnel plots [ ]. All analyses were performed using the “Metan” package in Stata version 18. Results were reported as proportions with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Heterogeneity was assessed using the I2 statistic and categorised as low heterogeneity (<50%), moderate heterogeneity (50–75%), and high heterogeneity (>75%).

## Ethics
Ethical approval was not required for this study, as it was a systematic review that utilised only published data.

## Results

## Selected Studies
The search strategy identified 3138 studies published between January 1998 and February 2025. Forty-five studies remained after removing duplicates and screening titles and abstracts. A total of 30 studies met the inclusion criteria and were included in the meta-analysis after excluding full texts with the incorrect study population, outcomes not included in the protocol, outdated diagnostic criteria for GDM, and systematic reviews ( ).
 

## Characteristics of Included Studies
The 30 published studies included in the review had a total of 9742 participants ( ). These studies were conducted across the following countries (South Africa (n = 11), Ethiopia (n = 4), Nigeria (n = 3), Sudan (n = 3), Uganda (n = 2), Ghana (n = 1), Algeria (n = 1), Morocco (n = 1), Democratic Republic of Congo (n = 1), Zimbabwe (n = 1) Togo (n = 1), and Egypt (n = 1). Various study types were included in the review. The number of participants in each study type were: retrospective cohort (n = 6124), prospective cohort (n = 2868), cross-sectional (n = 440), and randomised control trials (n = 310). Overall, adverse outcomes for HIP (i.e., combined pregestational T1DM and T2DM) and GDM were reported in 5202 participants. Studies which reported data on GDM alone had 3544 participants. Meanwhile, only one study each reported outcomes for GDM/ hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy (HFDP) (n = 443) and T2DM (n = 379), respectively. These studies reported various maternal and neonatal short-term pregnancy adverse outcomes, 13 of which are summarised in this review and are among the most common in the literature.
 The studies in this review used different diagnostic criteria for GDM, which included the International Association of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups Consensus Panel, 2010 (IADPSG; n = 5), American Diabetes Association (ADA; n = 3), NICE 2008 (n = 3), WHO 2010 (n = 5), WHO 1998/1999 (n = 7) and other (n = 1), while diagnostic criteria were not available for 6 studies. Fifteen studies in the review were retrospective, and some included studies, which defined one or more adverse outcomes; however, definitions and/or cut-offs varied across studies.

## Quality assessment of included studies

## Risk of bias for non-RCT studies.
A summary of the risk of bias for the 28 non-RCT studies using the ROBINS-I tool is illustrated in A. A serious risk of bias was assessed for all studies for the following domains: confounding, selection of participants, classification of interventions, measurement of outcomes, and selection of the reported results. As a result, 15 studies had severe risks of bias; for 9 studies, the risks of bias were moderate, and 4 studies had a low risk of bias. Most of the studies included in this review were retrospective and could not control for confounders. All studies were included for analysis despite their risk of bias rating.

## Risk of bias for RCT studies.
A summary of the risk of bias of included RCT-selected studies using the Cochrane tool is shown in B. One study (Maged et al. 2016) failed to report random sequence generation and allocation concealment details [ ]. Only one study (Utz et al. 2018) described blinding of participants. Further, the outcomes assessor was reported to be blinded in the same study (Utz et al. 2018) [ ]. Only one study (Utz et al. 2018) described the reasons for participants’ withdrawals [ ]. In the GRADE analysis, three studies were judged as having high quality (Maged et al. 2016; Utz et al. 2018; Muche et al. 2020) [ , , ]. Ten studies were considered moderate quality, and 15 were considered low or deficient quality ( ).

## Outcomes in pregnancies with GDM
As seen in , the most common reported pregnancy outcomes for GDM were CS (overall prevalence 46.0%, 95% CI 35.7–56.4, I2 = 95.6%), preterm delivery (overall prevalence 25.2%, 95% CI 12.7–40.2, I2 = 96.7%) and NICU admission (with overall prevalence 25.9%, 95% CI 13.7–40.2, I2 = 85.7%). The least prevalent outcomes were miscarriage, neonatal death, congenital malformation, stillbirth, perinatal death and shoulder dystocia. Other adverse outcomes reported included macrosomia (overall prevalence 17.7%, 95% CI 12.4–23.7, I2 = 92.2%), neonatal hypoglycaemia(overall prevalence 15.0%, 95%CI 6.8–25.5, I2 = 95.0%), neonatal jaundice, (overall prevalence 12.4%, 95%CI 0.0–36.7, I2 = 90.4%), preeclampsia (overall prevalence 11.7%, 95%CI 4.1–22.1, I2 = 94.5%), pregnancy-induced hypertension (overall prevalence 11.3%, 95%CI 4.7–20.0, I2 = 91.0%), and respiratory distress syndrome (RDS with overall prevalence of 7.3%, 95%CI 5.0–10.0, I2 = 0.0%) ( ). There was significant heterogeneity across all the outcomes ( ).
 Subgroup analysis by country showed that the prevalence of CS was highest in South Africa (62.5%, 95%CI 53.6–71.0, I2 = 90.3%), with lower but varied prevalence across the other countries ( ). The prevalence of preterm birth was also highest in South African studies (33.2%, 95%CI 24.1–43.1, I2 = 85.3%). There was no notable variation across the other countries for the remaining outcomes ( ).

## Outcomes in pregnancies with T2DM
Caesarean section (overall prevalence 60.6%, 95% CI 45.5–74.8, I2 = 93.6%), preterm delivery (overall prevalence 35.2%, 95% CI 29.5–41.1, I2 = 49.3%), and neonatal RDS (prevalence 19.4%, 95% CI 7.1–35.4, one study) were the most prevalent adverse pregnancy outcomes for women with preexisting T2DM. The least prevalent adverse outcomes were shoulder dystocia, neonatal death, congenital malformation, miscarriage and stillbirth, all with prevalence below 3% ( ). Again, there was significant heterogeneity across all outcomes, except for the related outcomes of perinatal death, miscarriage, stillbirth and outcomes with single studies. However, there were not enough studies to explore heterogeneity by subgroup.
 

## Outcomes in pregnancies with T1DM
The most common adverse pregnancy outcomes for women with preexisting T1DM were CS (overall prevalence 57.5%, 95% CI 44.9–69.7, I2 = 81.2%), preterm delivery (overall prevalence 50.7%, 95% CI 16.3–84.8, I2 = 92.6%), neonatal hypoglycaemia (overall prevalence 20.2%, 95%CI 0.0–61.4, I2 = 94.6%), neonatal jaundice (overall prevalence 16.1%, 95% CI 4.9–31.5, one study) and neonatal RDS (prevalence 13.2%, 95% CI 4.0–26.1, one study). Similar to outcomes for T2DM, the least prevalent outcomes were neonatal death, congenital malformation, and shoulder dystocia ( ). There was considerable heterogeneity across all outcomes, except for the related outcomes of stillbirth, perinatal death and neonatal death. There was also low heterogeneity for two other related outcomes, macrosomia and shoulder dystocia. As with T2DM, there were not enough studies to explore the sources of heterogeneity in the outcomes, given the high I2 values.
 

## Long-term maternal and foetal outcomes for HIP
Only a few studies reported data on medium- to long-term outcomes after pregnancies complicated by HFDP, so no meta-analyses were conducted for these outcomes. The most frequently reported long‑term maternal outcome among women with GDM or HFDP was progression to T2DM. Four studies reported the prevalence of T2DM after HFDP, with three from South Africa reporting a prevalence of 21%−48%, and a single study from Ethiopia reporting a prevalence of 6.8%. One South African study reported a metabolic syndrome prevalence of 40.8% in women with prior HFDP. One South African study assessed long‑term outcomes in offspring and reported a prevalence of 26.5% for overweight/obesity at preschool age ( ).
 

## Discussion
This systematic review and meta-analysis, consisting of 30 studies from 12 countries in Africa, revealed that HIP is associated with high rates of adverse maternal and foetal outcomes. The most predominant maternal pregnancy outcome of HIP was CS, while the commonest adverse foetal outcomes were preterm delivery, neonatal hypoglycaemia, and neonatal jaundice. Few studies have reported long-term outcomes for the mother and/or offspring with considerable heterogeneity in the overall prevalence across most of the outcomes.
While CS was the most common adverse outcome in HIP, the overall prevalence was lower among women with GDM (46.0%) than among women with T2DM (60.6%) or T1DM (57.5%). These findings are consistent with those from studies conducted outside of Africa. However, there are conflicting reports about the prevalence of CS in GDM compared to pregestational diabetes in Africa. For example, Huddle et al. reported higher rates of CS among women with GDM compared to pregestational T1DM but similar rates in pregestational T2DM [ – ]. The high rates of CS in pregnant women with diabetes in Africa are similar to global figures. This signals the widespread adoption of global surgical strategies to mitigate the human and infrastructure challenges the continent faces in providing safe and timely CS. Generally, clinical practice is to induce labour in women with HIP but no macrosomia at 38 weeks (on treatment) or 40 weeks (on dietary control) and to proceed to CS where there is no active labour or failure of progression of labour. Women with HIP and macrosomia are delivered via elective CS to obviate the risk of birth complications such as obstructive labour and shoulder dystocia. The high rates of CS partly reflect this clinical practice, limited obstetric resources, and early elective CS for diabetes. Additionally, effective management of major contributing factors to CS, such as maternal weight gain, obesity and preeclampsia, is essential.
The prevalence of preterm delivery was highest in T1DM, followed by T2DM, and lastly, GDM, following the same trend as for CS. These findings are consistent with the systematic review conducted by Malaza et al., who found six studies reporting higher rates of preterm birth in pregestational T1DM and T2DM than in GDM [ ]. However, Stogianni et al. reported the highest prevalence of preterm delivery in T2DM, followed by T1DM and then GDM [ ]. Whether the severity of hyperglycaemia and poor glycaemic control are potential factors underlying the higher frequency of premature delivery in pregestational diabetes types compared to GDM is speculative, and the actual mechanism underpinning these findings requires further investigation. Preterm delivery, defined as the delivery of a baby before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy, is associated with higher morbidity and mortality in infants, particularly in Africa, where most facilities and expertise for managing premature babies are inadequate [ ]. Furthermore, the significant prevalence of premature delivery associated with HIP in Africa poses a greater risk of long-term poor neurodevelopment, behavioural difficulty and cognitive disability in surviving preterm children [ , ]. This highlights the need to improve the management of HIP in Africa by implementing specialised services encompassing pregnancy and early neonatal life.
Neonatal hypoglycaemia, defined as plasma glucose of less than 2.5 mmol/L, is a significant cause of morbidity in newborns and a preventable cause of poor neurodevelopment [ ]. This was most common in T1DM in this review, in keeping with a study by Yamamoto et al [ ]. The placental transfer of exogenous insulin from the mother to the foetus is the likely major mechanism. In HIP, in general, hyperinsulinaemia resulting from the placental transport of nutrients, mainly glucose, from the mother to the foetus, is proposed to be the primary physiological mechanism underlying neonatal hypoglycaemia in offspring [ , ]. Interestingly, neonatal hypoglycaemia was more common in GDM than in T2DM. The 2023 American Diabetes Association (ADA) guidelines utilising findings from a real-world study of a Swedish T1DM cohort and the CONCEPTT trial in women with TIDM suggest that real-time continuous glucose monitoring (rt-CGM) can decrease the incidence of neonatal hypoglycaemia in pregnancy complicated by GDM [ – ]. Similarly, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines in 2020 and 2023 Korean Diabetes Association suggest that rt-CGM should be offered to all pregnant people with type 1 diabetes [ , ]. In keeping with this suggestion, Yu et al. reported a significantly lower frequency of neonatal hypoglycaemia in GDM women who used CGM compared to standard blood glucose monitoring [ ]. These data point to the inclusion of CGM in the glycaemic management of pregnant women with HIP, regardless of the type of diabetes, to prevent and or easily identify and correct maternal hypoglycaemia, thereby limiting unnecessary overuse of insulin and resultant hypoglycaemia in neonates, however in most LMIC including in Africa the limited access to and costs of CGM will see very few women receive this technology.
Similar to findings in neonatal hypoglycaemia, neonatal jaundice was most common in T1DM, followed by GDM and lastly, T2DM. Neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia, associated with a shortened erythrocyte lifespan, could be explained by hyperglycaemia-associated lipid peroxidation, which induces changes in red cell membrane fluidity and structural alterations [ ]. Additional significant contributors to neonatal jaundice in infants of mothers with diabetes are poor glycaemic control and decreased polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) [ ], while potential intrauterine hypoxia and neonatal sepsis are other potential factors [ ]. Neonatal jaundice is associated with bilirubin-induced neurologic dysfunction (BIND) due to neurotoxicity to critical areas in the brain, with other complications of neonatal jaundice, including failure to thrive and deficiency of fat-soluble vitamins [ ].
Intriguingly, NICU admissions were very common in GDM, with approximately 26% of 688 infants in four studies from South Africa, Egypt, Algeria and Uganda being admitted to the NICU. The reasons for admission, however, were not provided. Notably, no studies reported on NICU admissions in offspring of women with T1DM and T2DM [ , , , ]. Studies conducted outside the African continent have reported high rates of NICU admissions in T1DM (55%) and T2DM (66.7%), with lower admission rates in GDM [ , ]. Our findings of common NICU admissions in infants of women with GDM call for synergistic and collaborative care of women with GDM as well as their newborns to minimise mortality, particularly in Africa, where facilities for NICU care are limited. It was surprising that there were no reports of NICU admission in T1DM and T2DM, suggesting an interesting area to interrogate in future research. Other expected short-term adverse outcomes of HIP in this systematic review were preeclampsia, PIH, macrosomia, and neonatal RDS. The prevalence of macrosomia in women with GDM in our review was 17.7%, which appears to be lower than in high‑income countries, where macrosomia among women with GDM is commonly reported between 20–30%. These differences may be largely due to high rates of maternal obesity, excessive gestational weight gain, or widespread use of IADPSG diagnostic criteria in higher-income countries rather than higher biological risk [ , ]. HIP was associated with miscarriage, stillbirth, perinatal death, neonatal death, congenital malformation and shoulder dystocia, with a prevalence of less than 5%.
In this systematic review, only seven studies reported long-term maternal-foetal outcomes of HIP. Three studies reported a wide range in the prevalence of T2DM in HIP of between 6.8% and 48%, from 6 weeks up to 10 years postpartum. The highest prevalence was reported by Chivese et al., particularly in women with HFDP. These data support the wide range in the incidence of T2DM among women with GDM, as reported in the systematic review by Kim et al., which ranged from 2.6% to over 70% across 28 studies from 6 weeks to 28 years postpartum [ ]. A number of studies/systematic reviews reported a peak increase in T2DM in the first 5 years postpartum, with a plateau at 10 years after delivery [ ]. Recently, another systematic review by Vounzoulaki et al. reported that T2DM was approximately 10 times higher in women with past GDM than in healthy controls and T2DM cumulative incidences of 16.46%, 15.58% and 9.91% in women of mixed ethnicity, non-white, and white populations, respectively [ ]. Similarly, Juan et al. reported that GDM women diagnosed with IADPSG criteria were about 6 times more likely to progress to T2DM than the controls, with a cumulative incidence of T2DM of 12.1% [ ]. The risk of T2DM in women with GDM is most significant within the first five years after pregnancy and plateaus at about ten years, with fasting plasma glucose levels >5.9 mmol/L during pregnancy being the most significant predictor of future T2DM development [ , ]. Given that the risk of developing T2DM is highest in the first 5 years postpartum, it is important to ensure that diabetes is assessed at regular intervals: within the first 6 weeks and then annually, to enable early diagnosis and management. Our study further provides data suggesting that T2DM may potentially be regarded as an epidemic, particularly in Africa, where health systems are weak, non-communicable diseases are poorly managed, and there are high personal and societal costs of treatment. This potential public health disaster requires a multidisciplinary approach to mitigating the rising prevalence of T2DM. Current trials suggest that postpartum, T2DM progression can be reduced with both lifestyle and pharmacological interventions [ ]. Consequently, there is a profound need for well-designed controlled trials utilising either pharmacological or lifestyle modification interventions for T2DM prevention in GDM or non-GDM women in Africa.
Our findings of the high prevalence of overweight/obesity among offspring of women with HFDP are in keeping with the increased risk of metabolic syndrome in studies [ ]. In a systematic review and meta-analysis conducted by Pathirana et al., GDM-exposed offspring in utero had a greater risk of developing metabolic syndrome in comparison with non-GDM exposed offspring in utero [ ]. Similarly, Wan Mahmud Sabri et al. found that approximately 70% of the children with metabolic syndrome were born to mothers with GDM and that children born to non-GDM women had about a 50% reduction in the odds of having metabolic syndrome in comparison to those born to GDM mothers [ ]. The mechanisms underpinning overweight/obesity and metabolic syndrome include foetal hyperinsulinaemia, metabolic memory and epigenetic changes. GDM is characterised by hyperinsulinemia-induced foetal overgrowth and gluco- and lipotoxic milieu, creating a cascade of metabolic programmes, which may persist postpartum, leading to obesity and or metabolic syndrome in the offspring [ – ]. Furthermore, Sauder et al. showed that children exposed to intrauterine hyperglycaemia had increased Homeostatic Model Assessment of Insulin Resistance (HOMA-IR) irrespective of their body mass index [ ]. Meanwhile, Kelstrup et al. demonstrated a lower expression of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator-1α (PPARGC1A), a major mediator of insulin sensitivity, in skeletal muscle of offspring exposed to GDM [ ]. These childhood cardiovascular risk factors can be significantly prevented by effective care of women with HIP and lifestyle modifications in their offspring.
This review has a number of limitations. Some outcome findings were based on only a few studies, with many confounding factors; outcomes were not stratified by treatment due to inconsistent reporting. Even when meta-analysis was performed, considerable heterogeneity remained due to clinical and methodological diversity across the included studies; therefore, interpretation should be cautious. This is likely because different studies could have reported different prevalences of pregnancy adverse outcomes due to varying distributions of maternal obesity, hypertension, age or parity. This could have been better addressed using subgroup analyses rather than adjusted estimates or meta-regression. However, most of the studies we included did not provide subgroup estimates for any of these variables; therefore, we could not address this concern. Furthermore, most included studies originated from South Africa, where health system capacity, screening practices, and treatment protocols differ from those in other African countries; therefore, the generalisability of the results is limited. This underscores the necessity for more robust, high-quality research on the outcomes of HIP in Africa. In particular, future research should evaluate effective interventions to prevent progression to T2DM among African women with GDM, examine how social determinants such as rural residence and limited antenatal care shape HIP outcomes, and assess the cost‑effectiveness of universal versus risk‑based screening in resource‑constrained settings.”
In conclusion, the prevalence of adverse outcomes of HIP in Africa is high. Notably, T2DM prevalence in women who have had GDM is up to 50% by 6 years, highlighting the urgent need for well‑designed prospective cohort studies with systematic postpartum screening to better characterise long‑term risks. Substantial heterogeneity was observed in estimates across most outcomes, suggesting variation in the prevalence of the adverse outcome across settings and populations. Concerted efforts by healthcare professionals, governments and charitable organisations are required to improve care for women with HIP to curtail the high rates of their complications. Effective pre-conception counselling and care for T1DM and T2DM are essential; however, these are often absent or poorly implemented in the region. Additionally, optimising metabolic control during pregnancy, combined with multidisciplinary care of all women with pregestational diabetes and GDM, is crucial in reducing adverse outcomes of HIP. Importantly, screening for diabetes in women post-GDM, initially from 6 weeks to 6 months and then annually for the first 5 years, is essential for early diagnosis and management. Similarly, postpartum interventions for mothers to decrease the risk of developing T2DM and lifestyle changes to prevent cardiometabolic risk in the offspring are crucial.

## Research in context

## Why was this study done?
The pooled prevalence of GDM in Africa was reported as 13.6%.
Limited reports exist on pregnancy outcomes for women with pregestational diabetes in Africa, with GDM linked to increased macrosomia and a non-significant rise in caesarean deliveries in a systematic review.
What is the prevalence of adverse outcomes of hyperglycaemia in pregnancy (HIP) in Africa?

## What did the researchers do and find?
We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of outcomes of HIP in Africa, including studies published from January 1998 to February 2025.
The study provides updated evidence on the prevalence of maternal, foetal, neonatal, childhood and long-term maternal and offspring outcomes of HIP in Africa.
We found a high prevalence of adverse outcomes of HIP, including increased rates of caesarean sections, preterm deliveries, neonatal hypoglycaemia, and jaundice.
For the first time, notably, up to 50% of women with previous GDM develop type 2 diabetes within six years. Metabolic syndrome is the most common long-term outcome among offspring of women who had hyperglycaemia during pregnancy.

## What do these findings mean?
The findings emphasise the importance of more coordinated efforts among healthcare professionals, policymakers, and organisations to improve care for women with HIP and reduce complications, ultimately enhancing maternal and child health in Africa. Additionally, there is a pressing need for more high-quality research to further advance HIP-related maternal and child health in the region.

## Strengths and limitations of this study
The study provided updated evidence on the prevalence of maternal, foetal, neonatal, childhood and long-term maternal and offspring outcomes of hyperglycaemia in pregnancy in Africa.
The study adhered to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA).
Meta-analysis was not possible for some specific outcomes due to a limited number of included studies.
The review exhibited significant heterogeneity across most outcomes, indicating considerable variability in study methods, populations, and effect estimates, which limits the generalisability of the findings.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## A and B. The Risk of Bias in Non-Randomised Studies – (ROBINS-I) assessment tool and Risk of bias for included RCTs.
(DOCX)
S2 Table

## Assessment of quality of evidence (GRADE) in the included studies.
(DOCX)
S1 File

## Supplementary subgroup analyses.
(PDF)
S2 File

## HIP SR data extraction_combined.
(XLSX)
S3 File

## HIP SR results-metaanalysis.
(PDF)
S4 File

## PRISMA_2020_checklist.
(DOCX)

 10.1371/journal.pone.0345743.r001Decision Letter 0
CardosoMarlyAcademic Editor© 2026 Marly CardosoMarly Cardoso2026Marly CardosoMarly Cardosohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
11 Nov 2025

Dear Dr. Musa,
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 26 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols ..
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Marly A. Cardoso, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. In this instance it seems there may be acceptable restrictions in place that prevent the public sharing of your minimal data. However, in line with our goal of ensuring long-term data availability to all interested researchers, PLOS’ Data Policy states that authors cannot be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-acceptable-data-sharing-methods).
Data requests to a non-author institutional point of contact, such as a data access or ethics committee, helps guarantee long term stability and availability of data. Providing interested researchers with a durable point of contact ensures data will be accessible even if an author changes email addresses, institutions, or becomes unavailable to answer requests.
Before we proceed with your manuscript, please also provide non-author contact information (phone/email/hyperlink) for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent. If no institutional body is available to respond to requests for your minimal data, please consider if there any institutional representatives who did not collaborate in the study, and are not listed as authors on the manuscript, who would be able to hold the data and respond to external requests for data access? If so, please provide their contact information (i.e., email address). Please also provide details on how you will ensure persistent or long-term data storage and availability.
3. If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.-->
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
Reviewer #1: Thank you for inviting me to be the reviewer of this manuscript “Outcomes of Hyperglycaemia in Pregnancy in Africa: Systematic Review and Meta- analysis”
Ezekiel Musa et al. has submitted a Systematic review and Meta analysis of literature on outcomes of Hyperglycaemia in Pregnancy in African countries. Given the increasing burden of Diabetes and diabetes related complications, the chosen topic gains significance. I am giving my observations and comments for the author to consider:
Introduction:
The references on IDF data, GDM prevalence in Africa are outdated. Suggest to replace with up to date data and references – e.g IDF Diabetes Atlas 2021, 2024 regional fact sheet for Africa
Methodology:
This systematic review is observed to have followed rigorous methodology, have applied relevant search strategies and analysis methods.
The authors have provided an approved protocol (PROSPERO) along with the methods employed for article inclusion. However, PROSPERO CRD 42020184573 shows review end date as August 2020. Pl add amendment.
The manuscript incorporates detailed descriptions of the search methodology, study selection, and data extraction procedures. PRISMA checklist, ROB for quality of included studies, Heterogeneity tests has been performed and shared.
Methods:
The types of studies included in this systematic review are thoroughly described. The PRISMA flow diagram is easy to follow and complete. ROB for the quality of studies was performed and the details are shared.
Discussion:
The strength and limitations of the study are well thought and documented. I recommend to accept the manuscript with minor revision as suggested
Reviewer #2: I. Grammar and Orthographical Errors
The manuscript is clearly written overall, but several grammatical, syntactic and formatting issues need revision to meet the editorial standards of PLOS ONE:
• Subject–verb agreement and awkward phrasing: The Introduction repeatedly uses singular/plural mismatches (e.g., “the incidence of diabetes‑complicated pregnancies have increased”). Sentences such as “HIP is regarded as the most common metabolic complication encountered during pregnancy. This is in part driven by the rising prevalence of type 2 diabetes and its risk factors and changing diagnostic criteria for GDM” would read more smoothly if rephrased: the final clause should begin “and by changes in diagnostic criteria…”. Long sentences with multiple subordinate clauses occur frequently; breaking them into shorter statements would improve clarity.
• Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation: British spellings (“foetal,” “caesarean,” “preeclampsia”) are used alongside American variants (“fetal,” “cesarean,” “preeclampsia”). The journal prefers consistency (UK or US). Hyphenation is also inconsistent: “pre‑existing,” “pregestational” and “pre gestational” appear interchangeably. Terms like “hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy” are abbreviated as “HFDP,” yet elsewhere the same condition is referred to without the acronym.
• Use of conjunctions: Several sentences use “and or” rather than the proper “and/or” (e.g., “long‑term outcomes in the mother and or offspring”). Also, “so too has the incidence” is a colloquialism that could be simplified.
• Punctuation and parentheses: The results tables contain typographical errors. In Table 4 the neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) row reads “7.3 (5.0‑10.0” without a closing parenthesis. In Table 6 the pre‑eclampsia row lists “10.7 (0.0‑31.7”; the closing parenthesis is missing. Such errors impede comprehension and should be corrected.
• Numerical inconsistencies: In Table 4 the range of raw prevalence for pregnancy‑induced hypertension (PIH) is 19–23.8%, yet the pooled prevalence is reported as 11.3%. The pooled estimate should logically fall within the range of observed values; this discrepancy suggests either a transcription error or miscalculation. Similar inconsistencies appear in other rows (e.g., neonatal jaundice is reported with a prevalence of 12.4% and 0–36.7% confidence interval, but the number of studies and participants is not provided). All numerical entries should be double‑checked and aligned with the underlying meta‑analysis calculations.
• Spacing and formatting: There are occasional double spaces and misaligned text (e.g., extra space between words in the abstract and financial disclosure section). References within sentences are sometimes placed without appropriate punctuation (e.g., “GDM is characterised by hyperinsulinemia‑induced foetal overgrowth and gluco‑ and lipotoxic milieu”). Ensure all acronyms are defined at first use and that abbreviations such as “CS,” “PIH,” and “NICU” are consistently formatted.
II. Errors in Figures and Statistical Analyses
The authors used an inverse variance heterogeneity model for meta‑analysis, assessed heterogeneity via the I² statistic and evaluated publication bias using Doi plots. These methods are appropriate for prevalence data, but several issues merit attention:
1. Inconsistent ranges versus pooled estimates: As noted, several pooled prevalence estimates fall outside the reported range of raw prevalence (e.g., PIH in Table 4). Recalculate these figures to ensure consistency; if a transformation (e.g., Freeman‑Tukey) was applied, explain this clearly in the methods and reflect it in table footnotes.
2. High heterogeneity: Many pooled estimates have extremely high I² values (>90%). For example, macrosomia (I² = 92.2%), neonatal hypoglycaemia (I² = 95.0%) and preterm delivery (I² = 96.7%). Such heterogeneity suggests that pooling may not be meaningful. The authors should explore sources of heterogeneity (differences in diagnostic criteria, study design, country, or year) via subgroup analyses or meta‑regression and interpret pooled estimates with caution.
3. Incomplete rows: Several entries are missing data. In Table 4 the “Neonatal jaundice” and “NICU admission” rows are incomplete (the number of studies, participants or I² values are missing). Likewise, in Table 5 the “NICU admission” row is left blank. All outcomes included in the analysis should provide complete information or be removed.
4. Possible typographical errors: The confidence interval for neonatal jaundice under GDM is given as 0–36.7%, suggesting an impossible negative lower bound (0.0) and extremely wide interval for a prevalence estimate of 12.4%. Similarly, the range for neonatal hypoglycaemia in the T2DM group spans 7.5–22.6%, but the pooled estimate is reported as 11.9% with a confidence interval of 0.7–30.6%. These wide intervals raise questions about the robustness of the meta‑analysis and may indicate data extraction errors.
5. Graphical representation: Because the main figure (flow diagram) and forest plots are provided as separate TIFF files not embedded in the PDF, they were not reviewable. Ensure that all figures are embedded in the manuscript or provided in an easily accessible format. Based on the text description, the flow diagram should clearly show the number of records identified, screened, excluded (with reasons) and included. The currently reported numbers (e.g., 45 studies after screening leading to 30 included) should be reconciled with the numbers provided in the figure caption and tables.
6. Statistical interpretation: The manuscript states that “T2DM was the most common long‑term adverse outcome of women who had GDM or hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy, with prevalence ranging from 6.8% to 48%”. However, Table 7 lists one study with 6.8%, two with ~21–48% prevalence, and a sample size of only 220 participants for the highest estimate. Such variability suggests that the pooled long‑term risk cannot be accurately estimated. A pooled estimate (with a confidence interval) should be presented if meta‑analysis is feasible; if not, the results should be described qualitatively.
III. Questions and Remarks on Scientific Content
The review covers a critical topic in obstetrics and public health, and the focus on African populations is timely. Nevertheless, several points warrant clarification or further discussion:
1. Variation in diagnostic criteria: The studies included used various diagnostic criteria for gestational diabetes (WHO 1998/1999, WHO 2010/2013, IADPSG, ADA, NICE). These thresholds differ substantially and could influence prevalence estimates. Did the authors perform subgroup analyses or sensitivity analyses based on diagnostic criteria? How might the adoption of IADPSG criteria, which generally lower the glucose threshold, affect the reported prevalence?
2. Adjustment for confounding factors: Many included studies are retrospective cohorts or case–control designs. The pooled estimates of adverse outcomes (e.g., caesarean section, preterm delivery, neonatal hypoglycaemia) could be confounded by maternal obesity, hypertension, age or parity. Were any adjustments made for these variables either in the original studies or via meta‑regression? Without adjustment, some of the associations may be overestimated.
3. Heterogeneity across countries and healthcare systems: Most included studies originate from South Africa, Ethiopia and Nigeria. Health‑system capacity, screening practices and treatment protocols differ widely across African countries. The authors should discuss whether the pooled estimates are dominated by data from South Africa and to what extent results can be generalised to lower‑resource settings.
4. Classification of hyperglycaemia subtypes: The manuscript groups diabetes first diagnosed in pregnancy as “HFDP,” yet some included studies may refer to overt diabetes or previously undiagnosed pre‑gestational diabetes. Clarify whether HFDP refers exclusively to hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy or includes overt diabetes in pregnancy (DIP). This distinction is important because outcomes differ between true gestational hyperglycaemia and pre‑existing (but previously undiagnosed) diabetes.
5. Impact of treatment: Several studies likely included women receiving different management (diet, metformin, insulin). Were treatment modalities considered in the analysis? For instance, did women who achieved glycaemic control have lower rates of macrosomia or NICU admission? Randomised evidence from outside Africa suggests that treatment of mild GDM reduces adverse outcomes; discussing whether included studies stratified by treatment would be informative.
6. Long‑term maternal and offspring follow‑up: Only seven studies reported long‑term outcomes. The review emphasises a high risk of type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome, but the studies had small sample sizes and varying follow‑up durations. Given the paucity of African data, the conclusion that “T2DM prevalence in women post‑GDM is up to 50%” may be overstated. Consider qualifying this statement and highlighting the need for prospective cohort studies with systematic postpartum screening.
7. Comparison with global literature: Throughout the discussion, the authors refer to studies from Asia, Europe and North America. It would strengthen the manuscript to explicitly compare the magnitude of adverse outcomes in African settings with those reported elsewhere. For example, macrosomia prevalence of 17.7% is lower than some high‑income settings, possibly reflecting differences in obesity or treatment; conversely, the very high caesarean section rates may reflect limited obstetric resources or early elective CS for diabetes. Discussing these contrasts could aid readers in interpreting the findings.
8. Research gaps and future directions: The authors call for more high‑quality studies, which is appropriate. Specific research questions include: (a) what interventions (e.g., lifestyle, pharmacological, postpartum screening) are effective at reducing the progression to T2DM among African women with GDM? (b) How do social determinants, such as rural residence or limited access to antenatal care, influence HIP outcomes? (c) What is the cost‑effectiveness of universal versus risk‑based GDM screening in resource‑constrained settings? Addressing these questions in the discussion would provide clearer guidance for researchers and policymakers.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .-->
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
To ensure your figures meet our technical requirements, please review our figure guidelines: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures
You may also use PLOS’s free figure tool, NAAS, to help you prepare publication quality figures: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-tools-for-figure-preparation.
NAAS will assess whether your figures meet our technical requirements by comparing each figure against our figure specifications.
10.1371/journal.pone.0345743.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
3 Feb 2026

Responses to Reviewers' comments
Reviewer #1: Thank you for inviting me to be the reviewer of this manuscript “Outcomes of Hyperglycaemia in Pregnancy in Africa: Systematic Review and Meta- analysis”
Ezekiel Musa et al. has submitted a Systematic review and Meta analysis of literature on outcomes of Hyperglycaemia in Pregnancy in African countries. Given the increasing burden of Diabetes and diabetes related complications, the chosen topic gains significance. I am giving my observations and comments for the author to consider:
Introduction:
The references on IDF data, GDM prevalence in Africa are outdated. Suggest to replace with up to date data and references – e.g IDF Diabetes Atlas 2021, 2024 regional fact sheet for Africa
Author’s response: Thank you. More recent references have been added, and estimates have been revised, as noted in the main text.
Methodology:
This systematic review is observed to have followed rigorous methodology, have applied relevant search strategies and analysis methods.
The authors have provided an approved protocol (PROSPERO) along with the methods employed for article inclusion. However, PROSPERO CRD 42020184573 shows review end date as August 2020. Pl add amendment.
The manuscript incorporates detailed descriptions of the search methodology, study selection, and data extraction procedures. PRISMA checklist, ROB for quality of included studies, Heterogeneity tests has been performed and shared.
Methods:
The types of studies included in this systematic review are thoroughly described. The PRISMA flow diagram is easy to follow and complete. ROB for the quality of studies was performed and the details are shared.
Discussion:
The strength and limitations of the study are well thought and documented. I recommend to accept the manuscript with minor revision as suggested
Author’s response: Thank you for the kind comments
Reviewer #2: I. Grammar and/orthographical Errors
The manuscript is clearly written overall, but several grammatical, syntactic and formatting issues need revision to meet the editorial standards of PLOS ONE:
• Subject–verb agreement and awkward phrasing: The Introduction repeatedly uses singular/plural mismatches (e.g., “the incidence of diabetes complicated pregnancies have increased”). Sentences such as “HIP is regarded as the most common metabolic complication encountered during pregnancy. This is in part driven by the rising prevalence of type 2 diabetes and its risk factors and changing diagnostic criteria for GDM” would read more smoothly if rephrased: the final clause should begin “and by changes in diagnostic criteria…”. Long sentences with multiple subordinate clauses occur frequently; breaking them into shorter statements would improve clarity.
Author’s response: Thank you. We have revised the manuscript in accordance with your suggestions and made the necessary changes.
• Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation: British spellings (“foetal,” “caesarean,” “preeclampsia”) are used alongside American variants (“fetal,” “cesarean,” “preeclampsia”). The journal prefers consistency (UK or US).
Author’s response: Thank you. I have reviewed the manuscript and can confirm that the spellings are predominantly British. Terms like "fetal" and "cesarean" appear in references rather than the main text.
Hyphenation is also inconsistent: “pre existing,” “pregestational” and “pre gestational” appear interchangeably. Terms like “hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy” are abbreviated as “HFDP,” yet elsewhere the same condition is referred to without the acronym.
Author’s response: Thank you. All inconsistencies have been revised as seen in the main text.
• Use of conjunctions: Several sentences use “and/or” rather than the proper “and/or” (e.g., “long term outcomes in the mother and/or offspring”). Also, “so too has the incidence” is a colloquialism that could be simplified.
Author’s response: Thank you. These have been revised across the manuscript.
• Punctuation and parentheses: The results tables contain typographical errors. In Table 4 the neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) row reads “7.3 (5.0 10.0” without a closing parenthesis. In Table 6 the pre eclampsia row lists “10.7 (0.0 31.7”; the closing parenthesis is missing. Such errors impede comprehension and should be corrected.
Author’s response: Thank you. These have been revised.
• Numerical inconsistencies: In Table 4 the range of raw prevalence for pregnancy induced hypertension (PIH) is 19–23.8%, yet the pooled prevalence is reported as 11.3%. The pooled estimate should logically fall within the range of observed values; this discrepancy suggests either a transcription error or miscalculation. Similar inconsistencies appear in other rows (e.g., neonatal jaundice is reported with a prevalence of 12.4% and 0–36.7% confidence interval, but the number of studies and participants is not provided). All numerical entries should be double checked and aligned with the underlying meta analysis calculations.
Author’s response: Thank you so much for these important observations. These have been revised in the manuscript.
• Spacing and formatting: There are occasional double spaces and misaligned text (e.g., extra space between words in the abstract and financial disclosure section). References within sentences are sometimes placed without appropriate punctuation (e.g., “GDM is characterised by hyperinsulinemia induced foetal overgrowth and gluco and lipotoxic milieu”). Ensure all acronyms are defined at first use and that abbreviations such as “CS,” “PIH,” and “NICU” are consistently formatted.
Author’s response: Thank you. Minor revision in the abstract; however, our manuscript does not have a “financial disclosure” section. Spacing and formatting issues are rectified.
II. Errors in Figures and Statistical Analyses
The authors used an inverse variance heterogeneity model for meta analysis, assessed heterogeneity via the I² statistic and evaluated publication bias using Doi plots. These methods are appropriate for prevalence data, but several issues merit attention:
1. Inconsistent ranges versus pooled estimates: As noted, several pooled prevalence estimates fall outside the reported range of raw prevalence (e.g., PIH in Table 4). Recalculate these figures to ensure consistency; if a transformation (e.g., Freeman Tukey) was applied, explain this clearly in the methods and reflect it in table footnotes.
Author’s response: Thank you. We have added information that the Freeman-Tukey double arcsine transformation was used to stabilize variances. Notably, the range of the overall estimates does not necessarily correspond to the range of raw prevalences, as the overall is a precision-weighted average, and in this case, the weighting depends on the standard errors of the included studies. The 95% confidence interval reflects the uncertainty in the synthesised overall prevalence estimate, not how the prevalence varies across the individual included studies.
2. High heterogeneity: Many pooled estimates have extremely high I² values (>90%). For example, macrosomia (I² = 92.2%), neonatal hypoglycaemia (I² = 95.0%) and preterm delivery (I² = 96.7%). Such heterogeneity suggests that pooling may not be meaningful. The authors should explore sources of heterogeneity (differences in diagnostic criteria, study design, country, or year) via subgroup analyses or meta regression and interpret pooled estimates with caution.
Author’s response: We appreciate the reviewer’s thoughtful observation regarding the high heterogeneity across several pooled outcomes. We fully agree that I² values exceeding 90% warrant careful interpretation and typically call for exploration of potential sources of variability. In the context of our review, the heterogeneity reflects the diversity of the underlying evidence base. As the reviewer notes, the included studies differed substantially in their diagnostic criteria, study designs, geographical settings, and publication periods. These variations are inherent to the global literature on this topic and were anticipated at the outset of the review.
We carefully considered subgroup analyses and meta‑regression as potential approaches to explore heterogeneity. However, for most outcomes, and especially for T1D and T2D, there were very few studies; therefore, subgroup analyses were not possible.
However, we carried out subgroup analyses by country for the GDM studies with sufficient data; these are included in Supplementary Document 2, and the results are summarised under the GDM section of the results. This has been clearly highlighted in our limitations section.
3. Incomplete rows: Several entries are missing data. In Table 4 the “Neonatal jaundice” and “NICU admission” rows are incomplete (the number of studies, participants or I² values are missing). Likewise, in Table 5 the “NICU admission” row is left blank. All outcomes included in the analysis should provide complete information or be removed.
Author’s response: Thank you. The missing data in Table 4 have been added as mentioned previously, and the “NICU admission” row has been removed because there was no data on this across all studies.
4. Possible typographical errors: The confidence interval for neonatal jaundice under GDM is given as 0–36.7%, suggesting an impossible negative lower bound (0.0) and extremely wide interval for a prevalence estimate of 12.4%. Similarly, the range for neonatal hypoglycaemia in the T2DM group spans 7.5–22.6%, but the pooled estimate is reported as 11.9% with a confidence interval of 0.7–30.6%. These wide intervals raise questions about the robustness of the meta analysis and may indicate data extraction errors.
Author’s response: Thank you for highlighting the issues related to the confidence intervals reported for neonatal jaundice and neonatal hypoglycaemia. We appreciate the opportunity to clarify these points. The wide confidence intervals observed for some outcomes reflect substantial variability and the limited number of contributing studies rather than typographical or data-extraction errors. For several neonatal outcomes, only a small subset of studies met the inclusion criteria, and these studies often had markedly different sample sizes and event rates. When pooled under a random‑effects model appropriate given the heterogeneity, this combination can produce broad confidence intervals, particularly when between‑study variance is high. Regarding the lower bound of 0% for neonatal jaundice in the GDM group, this value is mathematically possible within the random‑effects framework when the pooled estimate is low and the variance is large. It does not indicate a negative prevalence; rather, it reflects the statistical uncertainty inherent in the available evidence. We have re‑checked the extracted data and the pooled estimates to ensure accuracy and confirm that the reported values are correct. Similarly, the wide interval for neonatal hypoglycaemia in the T2DM group arises from substantial heterogeneity and the small number of studies contributing to this outcome. These intervals, therefore, represent true imprecision in the underlying evidence base rather than errors in analysis.
5. Graphical representation: Because the main figure (flow diagram) and forest plots are provided as separate TIFF files not embedded in the PDF, they were not reviewable. Ensure that all figures are embedded in the manuscript or provided in an easily accessible format. Based on the text description, the flow diagram should clearly show the number of records identified, screened, excluded (with reasons) and included. The currently reported numbers (e.g., 45 studies after screening leading to 30 included) should be reconciled with the numbers provided in the figure caption and tables.
Author’s response: Thank you for this helpful comment. We have now embedded the main flow diagram and forest plots in the PDF format. We have also carefully reviewed and reconciled the numbers presented in the flow diagram and tables. The reasons for study exclusion at each screening stage are clearly documented in the revised flow diagram. We trust that these revisions address the reviewer’s concerns and enhance the clarity and usability of the graphical materials.
6. Statistical interpretation: The manuscript states that “T2DM was the most common long term adverse outcome of women who had GDM or hyperglycaemia first detected in pregnancy, with prevalence ranging from 6.8% to 48%”. However, Table 7 lists one study with 6.8%, two with ~21–48% prevalence, and a sample size of only 220 participants for the highest estimate. Such variability suggests that the pooled long term risk cannot be accurately estimated. A pooled estimate (with a confidence interval) should be presented if meta analysis is feasible; if not, the results should be described qualitatively.
Author’s response: Thank you for this insightful comment. We agree that the substantial variability in long‑term T2DM prevalence—ranging from 6.8% to 48% across studies with differing sample sizes, follow‑up durations, and diagnostic criteria—precludes a meaningful pooled estimate. After careful evaluation, a meta‑analysis was deemed methodologically inappropriate due to the small number of studies and the pronounced clinical and methodological heterogeneity.
We have revised the manuscript to clarify that long‑term outcomes are presented narratively rather than quantitatively pooled. The text now reads “The most frequently reported long‑term maternal outcome among women with GDM or HFDP was progression to T2DM. Four studies reported prevalence estimates ranging from 6.8% to 48%. Three studies from South Africa documented higher rates (21%–48%), whereas the single study from Ethiopia reported a prevalence of 6.8%. One South African study reported metabolic syndrome in 40.8% of women with prior HFDP. Two South African studies assessed long‑term outcomes in offspring, reporting a prevalence of 26.5% for overweight/obesity and 60.9% for metabolic syndrome (Table 7)”.
III. Questions and Remarks on Scientific Content
The review covers a critical topic in obstetrics and public health, and the focus on African populations is timely. Nevertheless, several points warrant clarification or further discussion:
1. Variation in diagnostic criteria: The studies included used various diagnostic criteria for gestational diabetes (WHO 1998/1999, WHO 2010/2013, IADPSG, ADA, NICE). These thresholds differ substantially and could influence prevalence estimates. Did the authors perform subgroup analyses or sensitivity analyses based on diagnostic criteria? How might the adoption of IADPSG criteria, which generally lower the glucose threshold, affect the reported prevalence?
Author’s response: Thank you for highlighting the important issue of variation in diagnostic criteria across the included studies. We agree that differences in thresholds used by WHO (1998/1999; 2010/2013), IADPSG, ADA, and NICE can influence the reported prevalence of GDM and HFDP and contribute to between‑study heterogeneity.
We carefully considered conducting subgroup or sensitivity analyses based on diagnostic criteria. However, this was not feasible for several reasons: insufficient distribution of studies across diagnostic categories; many criteria were represented by few studies, resulting in subgroups too small to support meaningful statistical comparisons; overlap of multiple sources of heterogeneity: diagnostic criteria varied alongside other factors, such as study design, population characteristics, and time period, making it difficult to isolate the effect of diagnostic thresholds alone. Subgroup analyses with very small cell sizes would have produced imprecise and potentially unreliable results, which we felt would not strengthen the evidence base. Given these limitations, we opted not to perform subgroup analyses and instead addressed this issue through transparent reporting and cautious interpretation. The manuscript has been revised to more clearly acknowledge that variability in diagnostic criteria is a key contributor to heterogeneity, with implications for prevalence estimates. Regarding the adoption of IADPSG criteria, we agree that this can lead to lower glucose thresholds and, t
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Responses to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0345743.r003Decision Letter 1
CardosoMarlyAcademic Editor© 2026 Marly CardosoMarly Cardoso2026Marly CardosoMarly Cardosohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
3 Mar 2026

Dear Dr. Musa,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 17 2026 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols ..
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Marly A. Cardoso, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS One
Journal Requirements:
If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Although the authors have revised the manuscript following the initial reviewers´ comments, the revision on the high heterogeneity found across the studies were poorly addressed in the current version. This point needs major improvement and revision not only on Discussion section but also in Abstract, Limitations in the Scientific context section, and presentation of the results.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
To ensure your figures meet our technical requirements, please review our figure guidelines: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures
You may also use PLOS’s free figure tool, NAAS, to help you prepare publication quality figures: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-tools-for-figure-preparation.
NAAS will assess whether your figures meet our technical requirements by comparing each figure against our figure specifications.
10.1371/journal.pone.0345743.r004Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
8 Mar 2026

Additional Editor Comments:
Although the authors have revised the manuscript following the initial reviewers´ comments, the revision on the high heterogeneity found across the studies were poorly addressed in the current version. This point needs major improvement and revision not only on Discussion section but also in Abstract, Limitations in the Scientific context section, and presentation of the results.
Author’s response: We thank the reviewer for highlighting the need to improve and revise the high heterogeneity observed across the included studies in our review. We have substantially revised the manuscript to address this point. Find revisions in Lines 68 – 79, 86 – 88; 132 - 134; 293 – 294; 331, 363 – 365, 367 – 372, 387 – 388, 392 – 394, 404 – 413; and lines 438 – 439, 596 – 598. These revisions clarify how heterogeneity impacts the interpretation of our findings and strengthen the review's transparency.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Responses_to_Reviewers_auresp_2.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0345743.r005Decision Letter 2
CardosoMarlyAcademic Editor© 2026 Marly CardosoMarly Cardoso2026Marly CardosoMarly Cardosohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
10 Mar 2026

Outcomes of Hyperglycaemia in Pregnancy in Africa: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis
PONE-D-25-50338R2
Dear Dr. Musa,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. For questions related to billing, please contact  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. For questions related to billing, please contact billing support ..
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Marly A. Cardoso, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS One
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0345743.r006Acceptance letter
CardosoMarlyAcademic Editor© 2026 Marly CardosoMarly Cardoso2026Marly CardosoMarly Cardosohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-25-50338R2
PLOS One
Dear Dr. Musa,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS One. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Marly A. Cardoso
Academic Editor
PLOS One