358wtpaNature human behaviourNat Hum BehavPMC761423976142397614239EMS1599743648207910.1038/s41562-022-01482-9A genetically informed Registered Report on adverse childhood
experiences and mental health
BaldwinJessie R SallisHannah M SchoelerTabea TaylorMark J KwongAlex S F TielbeekJorim J BarkhuizenWikus WarrierVarun HoweLaura D DaneseAndrea McCroryEamon RijsdijkFruhling LarssonHenrik LundströmSebastian KarlssonRobert LichtensteinPaul MunafòMarcus PingaultJean-Baptiste 
1Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, Division
of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London, London, UK
2Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College London, London,
UK
3MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit at the University of Bristol,
Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
4School of Psychological Science, University of Bristol, Bristol,
UK
5NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, University Hospitals Bristol NHS
Foundation Trust and University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
6Centre for Academic Mental Health, Population Health Sciences,
Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
7Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska
Institutet, Nobels väg 12A, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden
8Division of Psychiatry, Edinburgh Medical School, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH10 5HF, UK
9CNCR, Amsterdam Neuroscience Campus, VU University, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands
10Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK
11Department of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College London, London
SE5 8AF, United Kingdom
12National and Specialist CAMHS Trauma, Anxiety, and Depression
Clinic, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
13Anna Freud National Centre for Children and Families, London,
UK
14Psychology Department, Faculty of Social Sciences, Anton de Kom
University, Paramaribo, Suriname
15School of Medical Sciences, Örebro University,
Örebro, Sweden
16Gillberg Neuropsychiatry Centre, Institute of Neuroscience and
Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
17Centre for Ethics, Law and Mental Health (CELAM), Institute of
Neuroscience and Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden✉Correspondence: Dr Jessie R. Baldwin, Department of Clinical,
Educational and Health Psychology, 26 Bedford Way, University College London,
London, WC1H 0AP, j.baldwin@ucl.ac.uk
✉Corresponding author.
812202272269269–2902522023This work is licensed under a CC BY
4.0 International license.The publisher's version of this article is available at Nat Hum Behav

## Abstract
Children who experience adversities have an elevated risk of mental
health problems. However, the extent to which adverse childhood experiences
(ACEs) cause mental health problems remains unclear, as previous associations
may partly reflect genetic confounding. In this Registered Report, we used DNA
from 11,407 children from the UK and USA to investigate gene-environment
correlations and genetic confounding of the associations between ACEs and mental
health. Regarding gene-environment correlations, children with higher polygenic
scores for mental health problems had a small increase in odds for ACEs.
Regarding genetic confounding, elevated risk of mental health problems in
children exposed to ACEs was at least partially due to pre-existing genetic
risk. However, some ACEs (e.g., childhood maltreatment, parental mental illness)
remained associated with mental health problems independent of genetic
confounding. These findings suggest that interventions addressing heritable
psychiatric vulnerabilities in children exposed to ACEs may help to reduce their
risk of mental health problems.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2022 Dec 8.

## Introduction
Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) are well established risk factors for
mental health problems. For example, a wealth of research has shown that children
exposed to abuse, neglect, and dysfunctional home environments (such as domestic
violence, parental separation, parental mental illness, criminal behaviour, or
parental substance abuse) have a higher risk of developing internalising disorders
such as depression and anxiety – , and
externalising disorders such as conduct disorder and attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) – . However, as highlighted recently by
policy makers , charities , and scientists , , the extent to which ACEs cause mental health problems is
not known. This is because ACEs are not randomly distributed in the population, and
children exposed to ACEs are likely to have other risk factors for mental health
problems. In addition to wider environmental risks, one key potential vulnerability
is genetic liability to mental health problems .
There are at least two reasons why children exposed to ACEs might have an
elevated genetic liability to mental health problems. First, parents with mental
health problems may pass on genetic variants conferring psychopathology risk to
their child and provide them with an adverse rearing environment. This represents a
‘passive gene-environment correlation’ , , and is
plausible as parental mental illness is considered to be an ACE, and other ACEs
often occur in families where parents have mental health difficulties . Second, a child with early
phenotypic expressions of genetic liability to mental health problems might be more
likely to elicit harsh parenting or stress responses in their parents (e.g.,
depressive symptoms). This represents an ‘evocative gene-environment
correlation’ , and has been evidenced in adoption
studies, where children at genetic risk of externalising problems were more likely
to experience negative parenting from adoptive parents , .
Importantly, if children with increased genetic liability to mental health problems
have an elevated risk of experiencing ACEs, the association between ACEs and mental
health problems may partly reflect genetic confounding.
It is important to investigate the extent to which genetic influences
contribute to associations between ACEs and mental health to provide insights into
causality and interventions. For example, if the associations are partly confounded
by genetic influences, then the causal contribution of ACEs to mental health is
likely to be lower than estimated in non-genetically informative studies. If this is
the case, then even if we succeeded in implementing effective primary prevention of
ACEs, this would only partly reduce children’s risk of mental health
problems. In addition, secondary preventative strategies that support exposed
children and address heritable vulnerabilities to psychopathology would be needed to
reduce their risk of developing mental health problems. For example, this could
include skills building components to manage negative emotions and behaviours as
part of trauma-focused cognitive behavioural therapy . Of course, there is a moral imperative to reduce
the likelihood that children will experience ACEs, regardless of the degree to which
they impact mental health. However, this research can improve our mechanistic
understanding of the relationship between ACEs and mental health in ways that can
help optimise approaches to prevention and intervention.
To examine the extent to which genetic influences contribute to associations
between ACEs and mental health, particular genetically informed methods are needed.
Twin methods (which have traditionally been used to test for genetic
confounding) , can be limited because many ACEs
affect all children in a family, and thus, twins typically do not differ for the
exposure. In addition, the adoption design (which can rule out genetic confounding
due to passive gene-environment correlation) has limited utility because ACEs are
rare in adoptive families .
Fortunately, recent advances in genome-wide association studies have allowed us to
assess genetic influences in samples of unrelated individuals though polygenic
scores. Polygenic scores capture common genetic influences by summing the effects of
many genetic variants (known as single nucleotide polymorphisms; SNPs) on a trait
into a single individual-level score. Through using polygenic scores, we can test
whether (1) children with increased genetic liability to mental health problems are
more likely to be exposed to ACEs (i.e., gene-environment correlation), and (2) such
genetic influences contribute to the associations between ACEs and mental health
(i.e., genetic confounding).
To examine gene-environment correlation, we can test whether a child’s
polygenic score for a mental health problem (e.g., depression) predicts their
exposure to ACEs. Three prospective studies employing this method have suggested
that children with genetic liability to mental health problems may be more likely to
experience ACEs. First, Sallis and colleagues found that children with higher polygenic scores for
schizophrenia, ADHD, bipolar disorder, depression, and neuroticism had greater risk
of exposure to broadly defined childhood trauma (including maltreatment, bullying,
and domestic violence), with each standard deviation increase in the polygenic score
predicting childhood trauma with odds ratios ranging between 1.07 (bipolar disorder)
to 1.16 (depression). Second, Zwicker and colleages found that young people exposed to higher levels
of broadly defined childhood adversity (including maltreatment, bullying and
domestic violence) had higher polygenic scores for ADHD (standardised
β=0.24), but not schizophrenia. Third, Schoeler and colleagues found that polygenic scores for
depression, ADHD and risk taking (as well as body mass index and intelligence)
independently predicted exposure to bullying victimisation in a multi-polygenic
score model (with standardised βs ranging from 0.04 [risk taking] to 0.07
[depression]). These findings are also consistent with evidence from retrospective
studies showing that adults reporting childhood maltreatment had higher polygenic
scores for depression, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder (with odds ratios ranging
from 1.03 [bipolar disorder] to 1.20 [depression]) , as well
as autism (standardised β=0.03) . However, no study has systematically tested whether polygenic
scores for a range of mental health problems predict a range of different ACEs,
including indicators of household dysfunction (e.g., domestic violence, parental
separation, parental mental illness, criminal behaviour, or parental substance
abuse) as well as maltreatment. As such, it is not known whether some ACEs are more
strongly linked to genetic risk of mental health problems than others, and whether
certain genetic liabilities are particularly important in risk of exposure to
ACEs.
To examine genetic confounding, we can test the extent to which the
associations between ACEs and mental health are reduced when accounting for
children’s polygenic scores for mental health problems . To date, no study has examined
whether this is the case for the associations between ACEs and mental health.
However, studies have examined whether this is the case for related environmental
experiences, such as adoption and parenting. With regard to adoption, Lehto and
colleagues found that
the associations between adoption and mental health-related outcomes in adulthood
(depressive symptoms, bipolar disorder, neuroticism, and life satisfaction) were
attenuated by between 3% (for bipolar disorder) to 18% (for life satisfaction) when
controlling for the respective polygenic scores. With regard to parenting, Wertz and
colleagues found that
the associations between cognitive stimulation, warm, sensitive parenting, household
chaos, and a safe, tidy home environment with child educational attainment were
reduced by approximately 8% when controlling for the child’s polygenic score
for education. Furthermore, Krapohl and colleagues found that the associations between parental
slapping/smacking with ADHD and conduct problems were attenuated by 6% and 7%,
respectively, when controlling for the child’s polygenic score for
educational attainment.
Controlling for polygenic scores for mental health problems in this manner
can indicate whether there is likely to be a genetic contribution to the association
between ACEs and mental health. However, one limitation of this methodological
approach is that polygenic scores only capture a small proportion of heritability,
and thus do not fully account for genetic confounding. This can be addressed by a
newly developed genetic sensitivity analysis which estimates shared genetic effects under scenarios in
which the polygenic score captures additional genetic variance in the outcome (i.e.,
SNP- and/or twin-based heritability; see ‘Analysis plan’ section in
the Methods for a detailed description of this method). A recent application of this
genetic sensitivity analysis found that the associations between maternal education
with offspring ADHD, educational achievement, and body mass index (BMI) were
moderately explained by shared genetic effects , consistent with findings from Children of Twins studies
and adoption designs . For
example a latent polygenic score that captured SNP-based heritability in educational
achievement (i.e., 31% )
explained 50% of the association between maternal education and child educational
achievement . However,
this approach has never been applied to assess the extent to which genetic
influences contribute to the associations between ACEs and mental health.
In this study, we systematically investigated the role of genetic liability
in the associations between ACEs and mental health problems. To do so, we used data
from more than 11,000 genotyped children from two cohorts in the United Kingdom (the
Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children [ALSPAC]) and the United States (the
Adolescent Brain and Cognitive Development [ABCD] Study), with prospective measures
of ACEs and mental health. (Note that the ABCD Study was not originally included in
the Stage 1 pre-registration, but we used it because the original dataset, the Child
and Adolescent Twin Study in Sweden [CATSS], was not accessible after Stage 1
acceptance [detailed in “Methods”]). We addressed the following aims
and hypotheses (summarised in Table 1).
To examine gene-environment correlations, we investigated whether children
with genetic liability to mental health problems are more likely to be exposed to
ACEs (Aim 1). We addressed this by testing three hypotheses. First, we tested
whether polygenic scores for mental health problems (e.g., depression, ADHD,
schizophrenia, and others) are associated with exposure to ACEs. We hypothesised
that polygenic scores for mental health problems would be associated with an
increased risk of exposure to ACEs (Hypothesis 1a). Second, we tested whether
polygenic scores for certain mental health problems are more strongly associated
with ACEs than other polygenic scores. We hypothesised that there would not be
evidence for differential associations between polygenic scores for different mental
health problems with ACEs (Hypothesis 1b), given that previous research has
identified similar size bivariate associations between a range of polygenic scores
and ACEs . Third, we tested
whether certain ACEs are linked to greater polygenic risk for mental health problems
than other ACEs. We hypothesised that parental mental illness, parental substance
abuse, and parental criminality would be associated with higher polygenic risk for
mental health problems relative to maltreatment, domestic violence, and parental
separation (Hypothesis 1c), because the former exposures are most likely to be
linked to intergenerational transmission of genetic risk for psychopathology.
To examine genetic confounding, we investigated the extent to which genetic
liability to mental health problems contributes to the associations between ACEs and
mental health (Aim 2). We addressed this by testing two hypotheses. First, we
examined the proportions of the associations between ACEs and internalising and
externalising problems that are explained by observed polygenic scores for mental
health problems. We hypothesised that observed polygenic scores would explain a
small proportion (between 5% to 20%) of the associations between ACEs and
internalising and externalising problems (Hypothesis 2a) , given that a similar
proportion of covariation between other early environments (adoption and parental
discipline) and psychopathology were captured by polygenic scores , . Second, we estimated the proportions of the associations
between ACEs and internalising and externalising problems that would be explained by
latent polygenic scores which capture additional heritability in mental health
problems. We hypothesised that polygenic scores that capture SNP heritability in
internalising and externalising problems would explain a moderate proportion
(between 20% to 40%) of the associations between ACEs and these outcomes (Hypothesis
2b). This is based on evidence showing that accounting for SNP heritability in an
outcome can increase the covariance captured in an association by more than double,
relative to a standard polygenic score .
 

## Results

## Sample description
After imputation, the samples included 6,411 participants from ALSPAC
and 4,996 participants from the ABCD Study. (Note that the ABCD Study was not
originally included in the Stage 1 pre-registration, but we used it because the
original dataset, the Child and Adolescent Twin Study in Sweden [CATSS], was not
accessible after Stage 1 acceptance. Further information on the change in sample
from CATSS to ABCD is reported in “Methods – Change in replication
cohort”). Descriptive statistics are shown in .
Below we report results for the imputed samples, before testing whether findings
replicate in the complete case samples (n=4,106 in ALSPAC and n=4,662 in
ABCD).

1a).

## Do children with genetic liability to mental health problems have an
increased risk of ACEs?

## ALSPAC
We first tested the associations between polygenic scores for mental
health problems (depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, autism, ADHD,
antisocial behaviour, alcohol use disorder, and schizophrenia) and
individual ACEs (maltreatment, domestic violence, parental mental illness,
parental substance abuse, parental separation, and parental criminality). To
obtain a single effect size reflecting the average association between
polygenic scores for mental health problems and ACEs, we pooled the results
across all individual associations. On average, we found that children from
ALSPAC with higher polygenic scores for mental health problems had a small
increase in odds of ACEs (pooled OR=1.05, 95% CI=1.01-1.10, p=0.0081; ). To examine whether this
effect size was trivially small, we performed equivalence tests, which
assess whether the 90% confidence intervals for the effect size lie entirely
within pre-specified equivalence bounds of OR=0.94-1.06 (indexing the
smallest effect size of interest; see Methods, “Analysis
plan”). The 90% CIs for the pooled association between polygenic
scores for mental health problems and ACEs (1.02-1.09) did not fall
completely within the equivalence bounds, suggesting the association was of
meaningful magnitude. In contrast, negative control polygenic scores for
handedness and cataracts were not associated with ACEs (pooled OR=0.98, 95%
CI=0.94-1.02, p=0.39; ).
 

## ABCD
Similar to the ALSPAC Study, children in the ABCD cohort with
greater polygenic scores for mental health problems had a small increase in
odds of ACEs (pooled OR=1.09, 95% CI=1.03-1.15, p=0.0021, ), and the 90% CIs (1.04-1.14)
did not fall completely within the equivalence bounds (0.94-1.06).
Conversely, negative control polygenic scores were not associated with ACEs
(pooled OR=1.02, 95% CI=0.97-1.07, p=0.52; ).
 Taken together, findings from both cohorts pooled across ACEs
support the hypothesis that polygenic scores for mental health problems are
associated with an increased risk of exposure to ACEs.

1b).

## Are polygenic scores for certain mental health problems more strongly
associated with ACEs than other polygenic scores?

## ALSPAC
Next, we examined whether polygenic scores for mental health
problems differed in their average associations with ACEs. In ALSPAC, we
found that polygenic scores for various mental health problems were
differentially associated with ACEs (Wald-test F (7,
16,573)=2.62, p=0.011). Pairwise comparisons showed that the polygenic
scores for depression, ADHD and schizophrenia predicted average risk of ACEs
more strongly than various other polygenic scores (particularly for autism
and alcohol dependence; ). The
90% CIs for these differences did not fall entirely within the pre-specified
equivalence bounds (-0.10 to 0.10 on the log odds scale; ), suggesting that the
differences were of a meaningful size.
 

## ABCD
In the ABCD Study, polygenic scores for various mental health
problems also showed different associations with ACEs (Wald-test
F (7, 436,521)=7.68, p=2.60x10-9).
Consistent with the ALSPAC findings, polygenic scores for depression, ADHD,
and schizophrenia showed stronger average associations with ACEs than
various other polygenic scores (particularly for autism and alcohol
dependence; ). However, in
contrast to ALSPAC, polygenic scores for antisocial behaviour and bipolar
disorder were more strongly associated with ACEs than some other polygenic
scores (particularly autism and alcohol dependence). The 90% CIs for these
differences did not fall within the equivalence bounds. Therefore, findings
from both cohorts do not support the hypothesis that polygenic scores for
different mental health problems would be equally associated with ACEs.

1c).

## Are some ACEs linked to greater polygenic risk for mental health problems
than other ACEs?

## ALSPAC
We next examined whether the associations between polygenic scores
for mental health problems and ACEs differed across ACEs. There was no
evidence to suggest that average polygenic risk for mental health problems
differed across ACEs (Wald-test F (5, 5,319)=1.07, p=0.37).
Furthermore, equivalence tests suggested that the majority of ACEs were
associated with similar polygenic risk of mental health problems, as the 90%
CIs for the differences between most ACEs fell inside the equivalence bounds
(-0.05 to 0.05 on the log odds ratio scale; ).
 

## ABCD
Similar to ALSPAC, in the ABCD cohort, average polygenic risk for
mental health problems was not significantly different across ACEs
(Wald-test F (5, 246,200)=2.00, p=0.08). Equivalence tests
also suggested that the majority of ACEs were associated with equal
polygenic risk of mental health problems, as the 90% CIs for most
differences between ACEs fell inside the equivalence bounds ( ). Therefore, findings from both
cohorts did not support the hypothesis that parental mental illness,
parental substance abuse, and parental criminality would be associated with
higher polygenic risk for mental health problems than other ACEs.

2a).

## What proportions of the associations between ACEs with internalising and
externalising problems are explained by observed polygenic scores for mental
health problems?

## ALSPAC
To test genetic confounding, we next examined the proportion of the
associations between ACEs and childhood mental health problems that were
explained by polygenic scores for mental health problems (depression,
anxiety, bipolar disorder, autism, ADHD, antisocial behaviour, alcohol use
disorder, and schizophrenia) using a structural equation model ( ). In ALSPAC, polygenic scores
for mental health problems explained a very small average proportion of the
associations between ACEs and internalising problems at age 10 (4.4%, 95%
CI=1.9-6.8%, p=0.0004). These polygenic scores also explained a small
average proportion of the associations between ACEs and externalising
problems at age 10 (5.8%, 95% CI=3.4-8.2%, p=3.18x10-6). Results
for associations between specific ACEs with internalising and externalising
problems are shown in (red
points for adjusted associations) and . In contrast, negative control polygenic scores for handedness
and cataracts did not explain any part of the associations between ACEs with
internalising problems (average proportion=0.0%, 95% CI= -0.6;0.5, p=0.91)
or externalising problems (average proportion= -0.1%, 95% CI= -0.5;0.4,
p=0.77).
 

## ABCD
Similar to ALSPAC, in the ABCD Study, polygenic scores for mental
health problems explained a very small average proportion of the
associations between ACEs and internalising problems at age 9/10 (3.0%, 95%
CI=1.0-4.9%, p=0.003), and a small average proportion of the associations
between ACEs and externalising problems at age 9/10 (5.0%, 95% CI=3.3-6.7%,
p=6.38x10-9). Results for associations between specific ACEs
with internalising and externalising problems are shown in (red points for adjusted
associations) and . Negative control polygenic scores did
not explain any of the associations between ACEs with internalising problems
(average proportion=0.0%, 95% CI= -0.3%;0.4%, p=0.90) or externalising
problems (average proportion=0.1%, 95% CI= -0.3%;0.5%, p=0.56). Taken
together, these findings broadly support the hypothesis that observed
polygenic scores account for a small proportion (defined as 5-20%) of the
average association between ACEs and mental health problems, although the
proportion captured for internalising problems was slightly smaller
(<5%) than hypothesised.

2b).

## What proportions of the associations between ACEs with internalising and
externalising problems are explained by latent polygenic scores capturing
additional heritability in mental health problems?
Because polygenic scores for mental health problems only captured a very
small proportion of variance in internalising problems (<1%) and
externalising problems (1.6%; ), the previous analyses likely underestimated
the magnitude of genetic confounding. To address this, we conducted a genetic
sensitivity analysis , which
estimates genetic confounding using latent polygenic scores capturing SNP
heritability in outcomes (6% and 9% for internalising and externalising
problems, respectively , ).

## ALSPAC
In ALSPAC, the genetic sensitivity analysis suggested that a large
average proportion of the associations between ACEs and internalising
problems was explained by genetic confounding (90.3%, 95% CI=80.1-100%,
p=1.76x10-68), with proportions ranging from 56.9% for
parental mental illness to 100% for domestic violence, parental substance
abuse, criminality, and separation ( ; [blue points for adjusted associations]). Similarly, a
large average proportion of the associations between ACEs and externalising
problems was accounted for by genetic confounding (76.5%, 95%
CI=59.5%-93.6%, p=1.43x10-18), with proportions ranging from
49.4% for child maltreatment to 100% for parental substance abuse ( ; [blue
points]). However, confidence intervals could not be reliably computed for
some individual estimates (where the genetic confounding effect explained
100% of the associations; ; ) and therefore such estimates should be interpreted with
caution.

## ABCD
In the ABCD Study, the genetic sensitivity analysis suggested that
genetic confounding accounted for a large average proportion of the
associations between ACEs and internalising problems (68.6%, 95%
CI=55.5%-81.7%, p=1.07x10-24), with proportions ranging from 22%
for parental mental illness to 100% for parental criminality and separation
( ; [blue points
for adjusted associations]). Similarly, a large average proportion of the
associations between ACEs and externalising problems was captured by genetic
confounding (60.3%, 95% CI=48.7%-71.9%, p=2.22x10-24), with
proportions ranging from 30.2% for parental mental illness to 100% for
parental criminality ( ; [blue points]). These results indicate that the proportion of
the associations between ACEs and mental health explained by genetic
confounding is greater than the moderate amount (between 20% to 40%)
hypothesised.

## Robustness analyses
To assess the robustness of our results, we conducted three sets of
analyses. First, because reliable confidence intervals could not be computed for
some results in the genetic sensitivity analysis ( ),
we were concerned that these results might have biased the pooled estimates of
genetic confounding. We therefore re-estimated the average proportions of
genetic confounding after excluding these results with unreliable confidence
intervals. The average proportion of the associations between ACEs and
internalising problems explained by genetic confounding was attenuated but still
large (ALSPAC: 70.8%, 95% CI= 40.4-100%, p=4.88x10-6; ABCD: 52.9%,
95% CI=33.2-72.6%, p=1.33x10-7). This was also the case for the
associations between ACEs and externalising problems (average proportion
genetically confounded: 71.8% in ALSPAC [95% CI=51.4-92.3%,
p=6.01x10-12] and 52.4% in ABCD [95% CI=38.5-66.3%,
p=1.66x10-13]).
Second, we repeated all analyses in the complete case samples from
ALSPAC and ABCD (N=4,106 and N=4,662, respectively) and observed largely
consistent results ( ).
Third, because we constructed the polygenic scores for bipolar disorder
from an updated GWAS that
differed from the older GWAS 
that we proposed to use in the Stage 1 pre-registration ( ),
we repeated the analyses with polygenic scores for bipolar disorder derived from
the pre-registered GWAS. The results were consistent with the main findings
( ).

## Discussion
This Registered Report examined the genetic contribution to the associations
between adverse childhood experiences and mental health, in two prospective cohorts
of over 11,000 children from the UK and US. Our findings provide insight into
gene-environment correlations and genetic confounding of the relationship between
ACEs and mental health.
With regard to gene-environment correlations, there are three key findings.
First, children with higher polygenic scores for mental health problems had an
elevated risk of ACEs. This gene-environment correlation was small but robust
(replicating across cohorts) and negative control polygenic scores were not
associated with ACEs. This supports our hypothesis and other (largely
non-pre-registered) research showing that polygenic scores for mental health
problems are associated with greater risk of exposure to childhood
adversities – , , . Importantly,
this does not suggest that exposure to ACEs is determined by genes, is the fault of
the child, or is not preventable. Rather, the findings suggest that children with
higher genetic liability to mental health problems are on average, slightly more
likely to experience ACEs. However, ACEs are influenced by many factors (including
social and environmental risks )
and can be effectively prevented through social interventions , .
Second, in both cohorts, polygenic scores for ADHD, depression, and
schizophrenia were more strongly associated with risk of exposure to ACEs than some
other polygenic scores (particularly alcohol use and autism). In the ABCD Study,
polygenic scores for antisocial behaviour and bipolar disorder also showed stronger
associations with ACEs. These results do not support our hypothesis that there would
be no differences between polygenic scores, but broadly align with evidence showing
that polygenic scores for ADHD, depression, and schizophrenia are independently
associated with child maltreatment and bullying victimisation , while polygenic scores for other psychiatric disorders are
not. This finding should be interpreted with caution as it may reflect differences
in predictive power of polygenic scores, given that the most predictive polygenic
scores tended to be based on large GWAS samples and have higher SNP heritability
( ). Alternatively, such differences might be because genetic liabilities to
ADHD, depression, and schizophrenia have greater causal effects on exposure to ACEs
than other genetic liabilities (e.g., because of stronger passive or evocative
gene-environment correlations).
Third, different ACEs were associated with similar genetic risk of mental
health problems in both cohorts. This was contrary to our hypothesis that parental
mental illness, parental substance abuse, and parental criminality would be
associated with greater (child) genetic risk of psychopathology than other ACEs, due
to intergenerational genetic transmission. While these ACEs (originating in the
parents) are likely to be linked to child genetic risk of psychopathology largely
via passive gene-environment correlation, other ACEs might be related to genetic
risk of psychopathology in part via evocative gene-environment correlation. Indeed,
evidence suggests that children at genetic risk for externalising problems are more
likely to experience negative parenting via evocative gene-environment
correlation , , and evocative gene-environment
correlations were found to partly underlie risk of maltreatment . Importantly, evidence of such
evocative gene-environment correlation does not mean children are to blame for ACEs
– rather, parents are responsible for protecting them and reacting to their
behaviour in an appropriate way .
Evidence of evocative gene-environment correlation would therefore highlight the
importance of family-based interventions to help parents respond effectively to
their child’s behaviour, and support children with vulnerabilities.
With regard to genetic confounding, we first found that observed polygenic
scores for mental health problems explained on average, 3-5% of the associations
between ACEs and internalising problems and 5-6% of the associations between ACEs
and externalising problems. In contrast, negative control polygenic scores did not
account for any of the associations between ACEs and mental health problems. These
results broadly support our hypothesis that a small proportion (defined as 5-20%) of
the associations between ACEs and mental health would be captured by polygenic
scores for psychopathology. However, these results likely under-estimate the
magnitude of genetic confounding as the polygenic scores for mental health problems
only captured a very small amount of variation (<1% and <1.6%,
respectively) in internalising and externalising outcomes.
To address this, we conducted a genetic sensitivity analysis using latent polygenic scores
capturing SNP heritability in internalising and externalising problems (6% and 9%,
respectively). This analysis suggested that genetic confounding accounted for a
large average proportion of the associations between ACEs with internalising and
externalising problems, in both cohorts. However, we caution against drawing strong
conclusions based on the specific proportions of genetic confounding, for three
reasons. First, the precise magnitude of genetic confounding varied between cohorts,
and point estimates were greater in ALSPAC than in the ABCD Study. This is likely to
be because ACEs had weaker associations with mental health problems in ALSPAC ( ), increasing the likelihood that genetic
confounding could account for the association. In contrast, the magnitude of
associations between polygenic scores and ACEs did not differ between both cohorts
( ). Second, confidence intervals could not be reliably estimated for some
specific estimates of genetic confounding, in particular for proportions of 100%
(largely observed for internalising outcomes in ALSPAC), suggesting that these
proportions may not be reliable. Third, the genetic sensitivity analysis is best
suited for scenarios in which the polygenic score strongly and specifically predicts
the outcome . Given the lack of
available GWASs for both child internalising and externalising problems, we used
polygenic scores for adult psychiatric disorders, which showed similar or stronger
magnitude associations with ACEs as with child internalising and externalising
problems ( ). The use of a polygenic score that is not specific to the outcome may
result in overestimated genetic confounding (discussed in detail in the ).
Therefore, it will be important to repeat the genetic sensitivity analysis with
future GWASs of child internalising and externalising problems, when available.
Despite our cautious interpretation surrounding specific estimates of
genetic confounding, the overall pattern of results supports findings from other
genetically informed designs, with different assumptions and sources of bias. For
example, we found that child maltreatment was largely associated with internalising
and externalising problems, independent of genetic confounding. This is consistent
with evidence of causal effects of maltreatment on psychopathology from Mendelian
Randomisation , co-twin
control , and other
quasi-experimental studies . We
also found that parental mental illness was associated with internalising and
externalising problems independent of genetic confounding, which supports evidence
from Children-of-Twins (CoT) and adoption studies – .
In contrast, we found that parental substance abuse, parental criminality, and
parental separation were predominantly associated with internalising and
externalising problems via genetic confounding. Notably, similar genetically
confounded associations with psychopathology have also been reported for parental
substance abuse in CoT , and adoption studies , for parental criminality in an
adoption study , and for parental
separation in some (though not
all ) CoT studies.
We acknowledge some limitations. First, it is possible that observed
associations might be inflated by reporting bias, as parents with genetic liability
to psychopathology might be more likely to perceive ACEs and child psychopathology, as well as transmit
genetic liability to their children. Future studies using different informants to
measure ACEs and psychopathology (e.g., from objective records to more subjective
self-reports) are needed to map the impact of reporting biases on observed
gene-environment correlations , and estimates of genetic
confounding. Second, ALSPAC and the ABCD Study differed in various ways, such as the
country of origin (UK vs USA), historical context (born in 1991-1992 vs 2006-2008),
and prevalence of ACEs (e.g., higher rates of maltreatment and parental criminality
in ALSPAC, perhaps due to repeated assessments [vs a single assessment in ABCD]).
The ABCD analysis is therefore not a direct replication of the ALSPAC findings, and
any differences in findings might be attributable to these cohort differences.
However, the overall pattern of results was consistent across both cohorts,
indicating that the findings are robust. Third, as discussed, it was not possible to
infer whether differential associations between polygenic scores for psychiatric
disorders and ACEs reflected specific genetic liabilities underlying risk of ACEs,
or differences in the predictive power of polygenic scores (e.g., due to different
GWAS discovery sample sizes). Fourth, our analysis was limited to individuals of
European descent to match the ancestry of the GWAS discovery samples . Once large-scale trans-ancestry
GWASs become available, it will be important to replicate our findings in
ancestrally diverse samples, to ensure greater representation in research . Finally, these findings reflect
average population effects, and do not preclude the existence of causal effects of
certain ACEs (e.g., parental substance abuse, parental criminality, and parental
separation) on child psychopathology in subpopulations.
Our findings have implications for future research. First, to understand the
extent to which the observed gene-environment correlations are passive or evocative
in nature, future studies should integrate polygenic scores into family-based
designs (e.g., parent-offspring trios) . Second, to the extent that ACEs are causal risk factors for
psychiatric disorders, genetic variants influencing exposure to ACEs (i.e. gene
environment correlations) might be captured in GWASs of those disorders , . If GWASs of ACEs were to become available, future
genetically informed studies could test whether this reflects one of the origins of
the observed associations between polygenic scores for psychiatric disorders and
ACEs. Third, the gene-environment correlations observed here challenge the
assumption in gene-environment interaction (GxE) studies that genetic influences on
psychopathology and ACEs are independent , . Future GxE
studies on childhood adversity and psychopathology should adopt methods that account
for such gene-environment correlations to mitigate bias , . Lastly,
this study suggests that non-genetically informative studies are likely to have
overestimate the causal contribution of ACEs to mental health problems. To provide
accurate estimates on the causal effects of ACEs, future studies should employ
methods that account for genetic confounding, and triangulate evidence across
methods with different assumptions and sources of potential bias , . More broadly, combining genetically informed methods with
open science practices (e.g., pre-registration / Registered Reports) will help to
address multiple sources of bias (e.g., genetic confounding, researcher
bias , and publication
bias ) to enable rigorous
evidence on the effects of ACEs on health.
Our findings also have implications for interventions. Because child
maltreatment and parental mental illness were largely associated with child
psychopathology independent of genetic influences, preventing these ACEs may not
only improve child welfare and family functioning, but may also help to prevent
child psychopathology in the population. Such interventions could include parenting
support programmes to prevent maltreatment , and more accessible psychiatric treatment for parents with
mental health problems. In contrast, preventing ACEs with entirely genetically
confounded effects is unlikely to substantially impact child psychopathology at the
population level, although such interventions are likely to have other important
positive outcomes (e.g., for child welfare, family functioning, and potentially
physical health – ). Furthermore, because polygenic
scores for mental health problems accounted for at least part of the associations
between all ACEs and psychopathology, strategies that address heritable psychiatric
vulnerabilities in children exposed to ACEs (e.g., through skills building or fostering positive family
interaction) should reduce their risk of developing psychopathology.

## Methods

## Change in replication cohort
As stated in our Stage 1 protocol (https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.13580777.v1), this
Registered Report originally proposed to replicate findings from ALSPAC in the
Child and Adolescent Twin Study in Sweden (CATSS) dataset, and not the ABCD
Study. However, after receiving Stage 1 in-principle acceptance, we experienced
two unforeseen issues which meant that we could not use the CATSS dataset: (1)
data could not be accessed in a timely manner because of covid-related travel
restrictions for Sweden, and (2) data access restrictions from the Swedish
National Board of Health and Welfare meant that we could not use national
registry data to measure ACEs, as originally proposed. We therefore proposed and
received permission to use the ABCD Study as an alternative replication sample
to CATSS (after peer review of the protocol for analysis on ABCD). Importantly,
we had not accessed data from either CATSS or the ABCD Study at the time in
which we proposed to use the ABCD Study, so we were blind to the results in
these cohorts (though we had undertaken analysis in ALSPAC). To provide
transparency about what we intended to do in the Stage 1 protocol, we report all
details about the CATSS dataset in .

## Ethics information
Ethics approval for ALSPAC was obtained from the ALSPAC Ethics and Law
Committee and the Local Research Ethics Committees. Informed consent for the use
of data collected via questionnaires and clinics was obtained from participants
following the recommendations of the ALSPAC Ethics and Law Committee at the
time. Consent for biological samples has been collected in accordance with the
Human Tissue Act (2004). Ethics approval for the ABCD Study was given by a
central Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the University of California, San
Diego, and in some cases by individual site IRBs (e.g. Washington University in
St. Louis) . Parents or
guardians provided written informed consent after the procedures had been fully
explained and children assented before participation in the study .

## Design
ALSPAC and the ABCD Study are prospective longitudinal cohort studies. A
description of these datasets and their measures is below.

## The Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children

## Sample
The Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC) is a
longitudinal study of children born in the United Kingdom in 1991-1992.
ALSPAC sought to recruit all pregnant women in the former county of Avon,
United Kingdom, with an expected due date between April 1, 1991 and December
31, 1992. The initial sample consisted of children of 14,541 mothers.
Children have been followed-up and assessed repeatedly across development
through questionnaires, face-to-face interviews and physical and
psychological assessments (including biological assays) – . The study website contains details of all
the data that is available through a fully searchable data dictionary and
variable search tool (http://www.bristol.ac.uk/alspac/researchers/our-data/). 49%
of the analytic sample was female.

## Measures

## Adverse childhood experiences
We examined six ACEs: maltreatment, domestic violence, parental
mental illness, parental substance abuse, parental separation, and
parental criminality. These experiences all involve adversity in the
family context, and were included in the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention Adverse Childhood Experiences Study , and the World Health Organization ACE international
questionnaire . In ALSPAC, these ACEs were assessed prospectively
through parent and child reports via questionnaires at multiple
assessment phases from birth to age 9 years (115 months). Details of
these assessments are provided in . We derived binary measures reflecting exposure to each ACE
according to definitions shown in and recommended by a previous ALSPAC Data Note on ACE
measures .
Note that sub-types of maltreatment (physical, sexual, and emotional
abuse, and neglect) were combined into a single measure due to low
individual prevalence and high co-occurrence , . Measures of each ACE were derived for participants
with responses to ≥50% of the questions assessing that ACE
between birth to age 9 years. We used multiple imputation to estimate
ACE exposure in participants with responses to <50% but
≥10% of questions assessing the ACE (see for further details of the multiple imputation
procedure).

## Mental health problems
Internalising problems and externalising problems were assessed
through parent reports on the Development and Wellbeing Assessment
(DAWBA) at
age 10 years. The DAWBA is a semi-structured interview assessing
multiple domains of child psychopathology with good validity and
reliability .
Items from the DAWBA used to derive the mental health measures are
presented in .
Internalising problems were assessed through
modules on separation anxiety (11 items, scale from 0-20), social
anxiety (6 items, scale from 0-12), generalised anxiety (15 items, scale
from 0-28), and major depression (15 items, scale from 0-15). We derived
one overall measure of internalising problems through the following
steps. First, we calculated the mean for each of the four modules
(separation anxiety, social anxiety, general anxiety, and major
depression) for participants with data for ≥50% of the items,
before standardising the scores. Next, we summed the scores across the
anxiety sub-scores and standardised the measure, so we have one overall
measure of anxiety, and one for major depression. Last, we summed these
anxiety and depression scores, before standardising the overall single
measure.
Externalising problems were assessed through
modules on hyperkinesis/ADHD (18 items, scale from 0-36) and
conduct/oppositional disorders (17 items, scale from 0-34). To derive
one overall measure of externalising problems, we first calculated the
mean for each of the two modules for participants with data for
≥50% of the items. We then standardised the two scores and summed
them, before standardising the overall single measure.

## Genotyping and quality control
ALSPAC children have been genotyped using the Illumina
HumanHap550 quad chip genotyping platforms by 23andme subcontracting the
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK and the Laboratory
Corporation of America, Burlington, NC, US. Quality control (QC) was
carried out in PLINK , adhering to standard guidelines , which have been previously used
effectively for analysis of genetic data in ALSPAC , , . Specifically, samples were removed on the basis of
(1) low call rate (poor DNA quality), (2) outlying heterozygosity across
autosomes, (3) relatedness (based on identity-by-state), (4) gender
mismatches, and (5) non-European population ancestry. SNPs were removed
on the basis of (1) low call rate, (2) extreme deviation from
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, and (3) low minor allele frequency. Further
details are provided in .

## Polygenic scores
We derived polygenic scores for mental health problems; namely,
major depressive disorder, anxiety disorder, bipolar disorder, autism,
ADHD, antisocial behaviour, alcohol use disorder, and schizophrenia. We
selected these polygenic scores because they (i) index genetic liability
to a range of mental health problems, and (ii) have been found to be
associated with ACEs – , 
and/or psychopathology in young people – . We also derived negative control polygenic
scores for traits with no known association with ACEs or mental health
(namely, handedness and cataracts). All polygenic scores were generated
using GWAS summary statistics which (i) were derived from European
samples that did not include ALSPAC and ABCD participants (to avoid
sample overlap), and (ii) had N > 16,000 in the discovery sample
(to ensure adequate power). provides details of the GWAS
summary statistics which were used to derive polygenic scores.
In our Stage 1 protocol, we specified that if new, larger GWASs
were published after submission, we would use the updated summary
statistics to benefit from greater power (and report any such changes in
the Stage 2 submission). Since the Stage 1 submission, new, larger GWASs
were published for bipolar disorder (N=413,466 versus N=51,710 in the original
GWAS ) and
antisocial behaviour problems (N=83,674 versus N=16,400 in the original
GWAS ), and
so we derived polygenic scores from these updated summary statistics for
our main analyses. For transparency, we also report the results using
the originally pre-registered GWAS summary statistics to derive the
polygenic score for bipolar disorder. We did not do this using the older
GWAS for antisocial behaviour , as we realised that there was sample overlap
for ALSPAC, which could have led to biased estimates .
Polygenic scores were derived in PRSice software , , using the following method: First,
SNPs from participants were matched with SNPs reported in the GWAS
summary statistics for each phenotype (e.g., each mental health
problem). Clumping was conducted to remove SNPs in linkage
disequilibrium (r >0.1 within a 250–base pair window). Next,
we summed the alleles associated with the phenotype and weighted them by
their effect sizes reporting the corresponding GWAS, to compute
polygenic scores. We included all matched SNPs regardless of the nominal
significance for their association with ACEs. To control for population
stratification, we residualised polygenic scores for the first 10
principal components estimated from the genome-wide SNP data. To
facilitate interpretability, all polygenic scores were standardised to
have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.

## The Adolescent Brain and Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study

## Sample
The Adolescent Brain and Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study is a
prospective cohort of 11,878 children born during the period 2006-2008, and
their parents from 21 sites in the United States. The 21 geographic
locations of the ABCD research sites are nationally distributed and
generally represent the range of demographic and socio-economic diversity of
the U.S. birth cohorts comprising the ABCD study population . Full details on the
recruitment strategy are available elsewhere . Briefly, children aged 9-10 years were
recruited through probability sampling of public and private elementary
schools within the catchment areas of the 21 research sites. School
selection was based on gender, race and ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and
urbanicity. Inclusion criteria were the child’s age and attending a
public or private elementary school within the catchment areas. Exclusion
criteria for children were limited to not being fluent in English, having a
parent not fluent in English or Spanish, major medical or neurological
conditions, gestational age <28 weeks or birthweight <1200 g,
contraindications to MRI scanning, a history of traumatic brain injury, a
current diagnosis of moderate/severe autism spectrum disorder, intellectual
disability, schizophrenia, or alcohol/substance use disorder . Assessments were made
through in-person visits. This study used data from the baseline assessment
(ages 9-10) and 1-year follow-up (ages 10-11), from ABCD Data Release 3.0.
47% of the analytic sample was female.

## Measures

## Adverse childhood experiences
Consistent with the ALSPAC cohort, we assessed six ACEs
(maltreatment, domestic violence, parental mental illness, parental
substance abuse, parental separation, and parental criminality) between
birth and age 9-10 years. These ACEs have been assessed through parent
and child reports from validated questionnaires at the baseline and
1-year follow-up assessment . Details of these assessments are reported in
 . In brief, maltreatment was assessed using the
parent-reported Kiddie-Structured Assessment for Affective Disorders and
Schizophrenia module for post-traumatic stress disorder , (KSADS-PTSD; with 8 items for
physical, sexual, and emotional abuse) and the Children’s Report
of Parental Behavioral Inventory (with 5 items for neglect), consistent with
previous studies .
Domestic violence was assessed using parent reports on the KSADS-PTSD,
and parent and child reports on the Family Environment Scale –
Family Conflict Subscale , .
Parental mental illness and substance abuse were assessed via parent
reports on the Family History Assessment Module and the Adult Self
Report , . Parental
criminality was assessed through parent reports on the Adverse Life
Events Scale , and
parental separation was assessed through parent reports on the
Demographic Survey. Measures of each ACE were derived for participants
with responses to ≥50% of the questions assessing that ACE
between birth to age 9-10 years.

## Mental health problems
Internalising problems and externalising problems were assessed
using parent reports on the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) from the baseline
assessment at age 9/10. The CBCL is a 119-item, 3-point scale
questionnaire which measures problems occurring in the past 6 months,
with excellent reliability and validity . Items from the CBCL used to derive
the mental health measures are presented in .
Internalising problems were assessed through
the anxious/depressed, withdrawn/depressed, and somatic complaints
subscales (32 items), as recommended . Externalising
problems were assessed through the rule-breaking behaviour,
aggressive behaviour, and attention problems subscales (45 items). These
subscales broadly map onto the DAWBA subscales used to assess
internalising and externalising problems in ALSPAC, maximising
consistency between the samples. To derive composite scores of
internalising and externalising problems, we summed scores across the
relevant items (for participants with data for >50% of the items)
before standardising the summary measures.

## Genotyping and QC
Children from the ABCD Study have been genotyped from blood and
saliva samples using the Affymetrix NIDA SmokeScreen Array . Sample preparation
and genotyping was performed by Rutgers RUCDR. Initial QC was performed
by the ABCD Data Analysis, Informatics & Resource Center
following the Ricopili pipeline (see for details). Imputation was
then performed on genotype data using the TOPMed imputation server,
following pre-imputation steps instructed at: https://topmedimpute.readthedocs.io/en/latest/prepare-your-data/.
In line with previous ABCD studies , , , we performed
additional QC on the imputed genetic data ( ), including removing samples with high relatedness and
non-European population ancestry, and removing SNPs which deviate from
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, have a low minor allele frequency, and poor
imputation quality.

## Polygenic scores for mental health problems
We derived polygenic scores for mental health problems and
negative controls using the same procedure as described for ALSPAC
participants. We also residualised polygenic scores for genotyping batch
as ABCD participants have been genotyped in multiple batches.

## Analysis plan
We conducted all statistical analyses in R Version 3.6.2 , focusing first on the
ALSPAC cohort before testing whether the findings replicate in the ABCD Study
(originally planned to be the CATSS dataset). Below we describe the statistical
analyses that we will use to test each of our aims and hypotheses (summarised in
 ). The multiple imputation
procedure for ALSPAC and ABCD data is described in the - .

## Aim 1: Investigate whether children with genetic liability to mental
health problems are more likely to be exposed to ACEs

## Hypothesis 1a
We first tested the associations between polygenic scores for
mental health problems and ACEs through logistic regression models. We
ran separate models for each ACE and each polygenic score (including
negative controls). Log odds coefficients were exponentiated to obtain
odds ratios reflecting odds of exposure to each ACE per one standard
deviation increase in the polygenic score. These models (and all further
analyses) controlled for sex and were two-sided. To account for multiple
testing, we computed false discovery rate corrected
p-values .
In order to obtain a single effect size reflecting the average
association between polygenic scores for mental health problems and
ACEs, we pooled the results across all logistic regression models within
each cohort. This procedure was performed using the ‘agg’
function in the MAd package , which accounts for correlations
across effect sizes (as a function of the same sample). We pooled two
sets of results: 1) for associations between polygenic scores for mental
health problems and ACEs, and 2) for associations between negative
control polygenic scores and ACEs.
Because null hypothesis significance testing cannot enable
substantive interpretation of statistically non-significant findings, we
conducted an equivalence test to quantify support for the null hypothesis.
This involves assessing whether the 90% confidence intervals for the
effect size lie entirely inside pre-specified equivalence bounds
indexing the smallest effect size of interest. If the confidence
intervals lie inside the equivalence bounds, the effect size can be said
to be no more than trivially small. If the confidence intervals are not
inside the equivalence bounds, the effect size can be said to be of
meaningful magnitude. Note that the 90% (rather than 95%) confidence
intervals are used, corresponding to (1–2α) × 100%,
because the effect size is tested against two equivalence bounds
separately (i.e., the upper and lower bound).
To select equivalence bounds, we followed guidance to use the
lower confidence interval of a meta-analytic estimate of the effect of
interest , . Because no such
meta-analysis exists, we conducted a meta-analysis of all
studies – that to our knowledge, have tested the association
between polygenic scores for mental health problems (see https://osf.io/2uc4p/?view_only=2d9afc1b072b4507ba11ba8771aaab62
for code and results). The pooled association between polygenic scores
for mental health problems and ACEs was OR=1.10 (95% CI=1.06-1.14). We
thus selected equivalence bounds of 0.94-1.06 on the odds ratio scale,
because 1.06 was the lower confidence interval of the meta-analytic
effect and 0.94 is the equal delta of 1.06 in the opposite direction on
the log odds ratio scale.
We proposed to infer support for Hypothesis 1a (that children
with greater genetic liability to mental health problems would have a
higher risk of experiencing ACEs) if 1) the pooled odds ratio for the
association between polygenic scores for mental health problems and ACEs
was greater than 1 and statistically significant, 2) the 90% confidence
interval for this effect was not within the equivalence bounds, and 3)
the pooled odds ratio for the association between negative control
polygenic scores and ACEs was non-significant. The interpretation of
alternative patterns of results is shown in .

## Hypothesis 1b
We next tested whether polygenic scores for certain mental
health problems are more strongly associated with ACEs than other
polygenic scores. To do so, we first used a structural equation model to
estimate the associations between each polygenic score and each ACE
( ). This model accounted for correlations between
polygenic scores, allowing us to estimate the independent effect of each
polygenic score on each ACE. From the model, we calculated the average
effect of each polygenic score across all ACEs, estimated as:
 for the first polygenic score
(“PGS_1” in ) for the second polygenic score
(“PGS_2” in ), and so forth for each
polygenic score. These analyses were conducted using the
lavaan package , using the WLSMV estimator with robust
standard errors, and the ‘ordered’ argument (for the
binary ACE endogenous variables). To aid interpretation, we converted
the resulting probit coefficients into odds ratios using the formula:
exp(probit × 1.8) , . We then conducted a Wald test (using the
“lavTestWald” function) to test whether the average effect
of each polygenic score on all ACEs varied across polygenic scores. If
the Wald test was statistically significant (p<0.05), we
conducted pairwise comparisons to assess which polygenic scores differ
in prediction of ACEs.
Lastly, we tested for statistical equivalence between different
polygenic scores in their average association with ACEs by (1)
calculating differences in the average effects of polygenic scores,
expressed as (log) odds ratios , and (2) assessing whether 90% confidence
intervals for these differences fall within equivalence bounds of -0.10
to 0.10. We selected these equivalence bounds by identifying the
smallest effect size that we have 95% power to detect (log odds
difference = 0.10, 95% CI=0.07-0.13). This approach is recommended in
the absence of a strong theoretical justification for equivalence
bounds ,
which was the case as no previous study has formally tested differences
between polygenic scores in the association with ACEs.
We proposed to infer support for Hypothesis 1b (that polygenic
scores for different mental health problems would equally predict
exposure to ACEs) if the Wald test was statistically non-significant
(p>0.05) and the 90% confidence intervals
for the differences between polygenic scores (in their associations with
ACEs) fell within the equivalence bounds. The interpretation of
alternative patterns of results is shown in .

## Hypothesis 1c
Next, we tested whether some ACEs were associated with higher
polygenic risk of mental health problems than other ACEs. To do so, we
used the same structural equation model as estimated for Hypothesis 1b
(shown in ), and calculated the average effect of
all polygenic scores for mental health problems on each ACE, estimated
as: for the first ACE
(“ACE_1”), for the second ACE
(“ACE_2”), and so forth for each ACE. We converted results
to odds ratios using the formula: exp(probit
 × 1.8) , . We then used a Wald test to test whether the
average effect of all polygenic scores for mental health problems on
each ACE varies across ACEs. Lastly, we tested for statistical
equivalence between different ACEs in their association with polygenic
scores by (1) calculating differences in (log) odds ratios between ACEs,
and (2) assessing whether 90% confidence intervals for these differences
fall within equivalence bounds of -0.05 to 0.05. We selected these
equivalence bounds because 0.05 is the smallest effect size that we have
95% power to detect (log odds difference = 0.05, 95% CI=0.03-0.07). We
adopted this approach in the absence of theoretical justification for
equivalence bounds , as no previous study has tested for differences
between ACEs in their association with polygenic scores for
psychopathology.
We proposed to infer support for Hypothesis 1c (that parental
mental illness and parental substance abuse would be associated with
higher polygenic risk for mental health problems) if 1) the Wald test
was significant (p<0.05) and further pairwise
comparisons (between parental mental illness, parental substance abuse,
and parental criminality with all other ACEs) showed that these ACEs
were associated with higher polygenic risk than other ACEs, and 2) the
90% confidence intervals for these differences were not within the
equivalence bounds. Interpretation of alternative patterns of results is
shown in .

## Aim 2: Investigate the extent to which genetic liability explains the
associations between ACEs and mental health

## Hypothesis 2a
To test the proportion of the associations between ACEs and
mental health (internalising and externalising problems) explained by
observed polygenic scores, we used structural equation models in the
lavaan package. depicts these models, with panel A showing the underlying
conceptual model, panel B showing the statistical model with one
polygenic score, and panel C showing the statistical model with multiple
polygenic scores. As shown in panels B and C, polygenic scores were
treated as mediators, as mediation and confounding are statistically
equivalent . The genetic confounding effect was therefore
calculated as the indirect effect of the ACE on mental health through
the polygenic scores: (a1 * b1) + (a2 * b2) + … + (a8 * b8),
based on . Notably, this
estimate does not conflate genetic confounding with genetic effects on
mental health mediated via exposure to ACEs (see and https://osf.io/2uc4p/?view_only=2d9afc1b072b4507ba11ba8771aaab62
for further explanation and simulations demonstrating this). In turn,
the proportion of the association between the ACE and mental health
outcome explained by the polygenic scores was calculated as:
 
For this analysis, we included all polygenic scores (i.e., 8
mediators) and estimated separate models for each ACE and each mental
health outcome (internalising and externalising problems). As a quality
control check, we estimated a separate model including only negative
control polygenic scores ( ).
To obtain a single estimate reflecting the proportion of the
associations between ACEs and mental health outcomes captured by
observed polygenic scores, we averaged the results across 6 models for
all ACEs (for internalising and externalising problems, separately).
This was performed using the ‘agg’ function from the
MAd package . Prior to aggregating the results, we planned
to transform proportions using the Freeman-Tukey double arcsine
transformation to normalise and stabilise the variance of the
sampling distribution. However, it was not possible to apply this
transformation across the results as several proportions were less than
zero – which can arise when the direct and indirect effects are
in different directions. We therefore used the raw proportions for
consistency across all models. We pooled two sets of results, reflecting
proportions of the associations between ACEs and mental health captured
by: 1) polygenic scores for mental health problems, and 2) negative
control polygenic scores.
We proposed to infer support for Hypothesis 2a (that a small
proportion of the associations between ACEs and mental health problems
would be explained by polygenic scores) if 1) polygenic scores for
mental health problems explained, on average, between 5% to 20% of the
associations, and 2) the average proportion of the association explained
by negative control polygenic scores was not significantly different
from zero. We proposed to interpret alternative proportions of less than
5% as “very small”, proportions between 20% and 40% as
“moderate”, and proportions of more than 40% as
“large”, broadly in line with guidance for interpreting
effect sizes .

## Hypothesis 2b
Lastly, we estimated the proportion of the associations between
ACEs and mental health problems explained by a latent polygenic score
which captures SNP heritability in the mental health outcome. This
genetic sensitivity analysis , 
involves estimating the structural equation model shown in from a correlation matrix.
This matrix includes correlations between the polygenic score and the
ACE (a path), the polygenic score and the mental health
outcome (b path), and the ACE and the mental health
outcome (cp path). Critically, this correlation matrix
can be modified to reflect additional genetic variance captured in the
outcome. For example, as the SNP-based heritability of parent-reported
childhood internalising problems is 6% , the correlation coefficient from the
polygenic score to internalising problems (b path) can
be changed to r = 0.24 (calculated by taking the
square-root of 0.06). The correlation coefficient for the
a path between the polygenic score and the ACE
(a path) will also increase to
 , where k reflects the
ratio between the path from the polygenic score to the ACE, and the path
from the polygenic score to internalising problems (k =
a / b). Note that the SNP
heritability estimate for childhood externalising problems that was used
for this analysis is 9% (hence, r = 0.30). shows the method for estimating each of the original paths
included in the correlation matrix.
To obtain a single estimate reflecting the proportion of the
associations between ACEs and mental health outcomes captured by
polygenic scores capturing SNP-based heritability, we averaged the
results across 6 models for all ACEs (for internalising and
externalising problems, separately). As described above for Hypothesis
2a, this was performed using the MAd package .
We proposed to infer support for Hypothesis 2b (that a moderate
proportion of the association is explained by polygenic scores) if
polygenic scores capturing SNP-based heritability explained between 20%
to 40% of the associations between ACEs and mental health outcomes on
average. We planned to interpret alternative proportions of less than 5%
as “very small”, proportions between 5% and 20% as
“small”, and proportions of more than 40% as
“large”.

## Sampling plan

## Inclusion criteria and sample size

## ALSPAC
We planned to include ALSPAC children if they had data on
genotype that passed QC (see QC exclusions in ), ACEs (defined as responses to ≥ 50% of the
questions in the assessments between birth and age 9 years for each
ACE), internalising problems at age 10 (defined as responses to ≥
50% of items assessing separation anxiety, social anxiety, general
anxiety, and major depression on the Development and Wellbeing
Assessment [DAWBA]) and externalising problems at age 10 (defined as
responses to ≥ 50% of items assessing hyperkinesis/ADHD and
conduct/oppositional disorders on the DAWBA). Based on a previous ALSPAC
study using data on genotype and the DAWBA at age 10 , we expected the
sample of complete cases to be N~5,900. However, to maximise
sample size and reduce selection bias due to attrition, we proposed to
use multiple imputation to impute missing values in the ACEs and
internalising and externalising problems measures (see for details of the inclusion criteria for imputation).

## ABCD
We planned to include children from the ABCD Study if they had
data on genotype that passed QC (see QC exclusions in ), ACEs (defined as responses to ≥ 50% to items
assessing each ACE), internalising problems, and externalising problems
at age 9/10 (defined as responses to ≥ 50% of relevant items on
the CBCL). Based on previous ABCD studies using genotype data and
ACEs/CBCL data, we expected the sample size to be between
4,700-5,400 , . However, because we
anticipated that the sample size may vary across different assessments
(used to derive measures of ACEs and mental health), we proposed to use
multiple imputation to maximise the sample size by imputing missing
values in measures of ACEs and mental health (see for details of the inclusion criteria for imputation).

## Power calculations
We calculated power to test each of our hypotheses assuming a
conservative minimum sample size of N=4,700, as the minimum expected
sample sizes were 4,700 for the ABCD Study and 5,900 for ALSPAC. (Note
that the ABCD Study was not originally included in the Stage 1
pre-registration, but we used it because the original dataset, the Child
and Adolescent Twin Study in Sweden [CATSS], was not accessible after
Stage 1 acceptance. The expected sample size for CATSS was 11,000). We
conducted each power analysis using simulation (1,000 simulated
datasets) in the MASS and stats 
packages, and set the alpha level for statistical significance to 0.05.
As described below, power to test each hypothesis was ≥0.95.

## Hypothesis 1a
We calculated power to obtain a single effect size reflecting
the average association between polygenic scores for mental health
problems and ACEs across 48 logistic regression models (i.e., 8
polygenic scores x 6 ACEs). This analysis showed that power will be 0.96
to detect an average odds ratio of 1.04 for the effect of polygenic
scores on ACEs using the ‘agg’ function in the
MAd package (accounting for dependent effect sizes). An
odds ratio of 1.04 is a conservative estimate as the average odds ratio
for the associations between polygenic scores for mental health problems
and ACEs in previous research – was 1.10 (see https://osf.io/2uc4p/?view_only=2d9afc1b072b4507ba11ba8771aaab62
for details).

## Hypothesis 1b
We calculated power to detect a significant difference in the
associations between polygenic scores and ACEs according to the type of
polygenic score, using a Wald test in lavaan . This
analysis showed that we will have 1.00 power to detect a difference
across 8 effect sizes (reflecting the average effect of each polygenic
score on ACEs), when the smallest and largest odds ratios differ by 0.11
(e.g., odds ratio=1.05 versus 1.16), with other effect sizes taking
intermediate values. A simulation using a structural equation model
(shown ) showed that these odds ratios are plausible assuming
previously observed effects of polygenic scores on ACEs (odds ratios of
between 1.03 and 1.16 ), and average correlations of r =
0.06 between polygenic scores and r = 0.30 between ACEs in
ALSPAC .

## Hypothesis 1c
Similarly to Hypothesis 1b, we calculated power to detect a
significant difference in the associations between polygenic scores and
ACEs according to the type of ACE, using a Wald test in
lavaan . This analysis showed that we will have 1.00
power to detect a difference across 6 effect sizes (reflecting the
average effect of all polygenic scores on each ACE), when the smallest
and largest odds ratios differ by 0.10 (e.g., odds ratio = 1.05 versus
1.15), with other effect sizes taking intermediate values. As described
above, these effect sizes were found to be plausible in a simulation
based on the structural equation model in , assuming previously observed odds ratios for the effects
of polygenic scores on different ACEs varying between 1.03 to
1.16 and
average correlations of r = 0.06 between polygenic
scores and
r = 0.30 between ACEs in ALSPAC .

## Hypothesis 2a
We calculated power for two analyses: (i) a structural equation
model to estimate the proportion of the association between (individual)
ACEs and mental health outcomes explained by polygenic scores, and (ii)
an aggregate model to average the results across individual structural
equation models. For the structural equation model (shown in ), power was 0.95 to detect
the proportion of the association between ACEs and mental health
explained by observed polygenic scores. This is assuming previously
observed small independent effects of polygenic scores for mental health
problems on ACEs (r = 0.03-0.07) and internalising and
externalising problems (r = 0.01-0.05) , small effects of
individual ACEs on internalising and externalising problems
(r=0.06) ,
and average correlations between polygenic scores of r
= 0.06 . For the
aggregate model, power was 1.00 to detect an average proportion of 5%
(of the association between ACEs and mental health explained by
polygenic scores), assuming correlations of r = 0.30
between effect sizes. We consider 5% to be a conservative estimate of
the likely proportion of the association between ACEs and mental health
explained by multiple polygenic scores, given that prior studies have
found that a single polygenic score can account for larger proportions
of the associations between environmental exposures and mental health
(e.g., 6% and
18% ).

## Hypothesis 2b
We calculated power for a structural equation model with a
single mediator (i.e., a polygenic score capturing additional genetic
variance in the outcome), as shown in . Power was 1.00 to detect the proportion of the
association between ACEs and mental health explained by a polygenic
score that captures SNP heritability in the outcome. This is assuming a
path from the polygenic score to internalising problems of
r = 0.24 (i.e., the square root of 0.06, as the
SNP-based heritability of internalising problems is 6% ), a path from the
polygenic score to the ACE of r = 0.07 (assuming that
k=0.33, i.e., that the effect of the observed
polygenic score on the ACE is a third of the size as the effect of the
observed polygenic score on internalising problems), and a path from the
ACE to internalising problems of r = 0.06 (as observed
previously ). Note that power will be equally high for analyses on
externalising problems because the SNP-based heritability of
externalising problems is slightly higher than for internalising
problems (9% versus 6% ). Furthermore, note that power will be ≥0.96
to aggregate these results to obtain an average proportion across
models, assuming that the proportion will be 5% or greater (as tested
above for Hypothesis 2a). This is because as the strength of the
association between polygenic scores and mental health outcomes
increases, the proportion of the association between ACEs and mental
health explained by polygenic scores will increase .

## Protocol registration
The Stage 1 protocol for this Registered Report was accepted in
principle on 4 January 2021. The protocol, as accepted by the journal, can be
found at https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.13580777.v1

## Supplementary Material
Supplement

## Acknowledgements
ALSPAC. We are extremely grateful to all the ALSPAC families who
took part in the study, the midwives for their help in recruiting them, and the
whole ALSPAC team, which includes interviewers, computer and laboratory technicians,
clerical workers, research scientists, volunteers, managers, receptionists and
nurses. The UK Medical Research Council and Wellcome (Grant Ref: 102215/2/13/2) and
the University of Bristol provide core support for ALSPAC data collection. A
comprehensive list of grant funding is available on the ALSPAC website. GWAS data
was generated by Sample Logistics and Genotyping Facilities at Wellcome Sanger
Institute and LabCorp (Laboratory Corporation of America) using support from
23andMe.
ABCD. Data used in the preparation of this article were obtained
from the Adolescent Brain Cognitive DevelopmentSM (ABCD) Study (https://abcdstudy.org), held in the NIMH Data Archive (NDA). This is
a multisite, longitudinal study designed to recruit more than 10,000 children age
9-10 and follow them over 10 years into early adulthood. The ABCD Study® is
supported by the National Institutes of Health and additional federal partners under
award numbers U01DA041048, U01DA050989, U01DA051016, U01DA041022, U01DA051018,
U01DA051037, U01DA050987, U01DA041174, U01DA041106, U01DA041117, U01DA041028,
U01DA041134, U01DA050988, U01DA051039, U01DA041156, U01DA041025, U01DA041120,
U01DA051038, U01DA041148, U01DA041093, U01DA041089, U24DA041123, U24DA041147. A full
list of supporters is available at https://abcdstudy.org/federal-partners.html. A listing of
participating sites and a complete listing of the study investigators can be found
at https://abcdstudy.org/consortium_members/. ABCD consortium
investigators designed and implemented the study and/or provided data but did not
necessarily participate in the analysis or writing of this report. This manuscript
reflects the views of the authors and may not reflect the opinions or views of the
NIH or ABCD consortium investigators. We are extremely grateful to Dr Gustavo Sudre
for his support with the quality control of the ABCD genetic data.

## Authors’ funding
This research was funded in whole, or in part, by the Wellcome Trust [grant
215917/Z/19/Z]. For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a CC BY
public copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from
this submission. L.D.H is supported by a Career Development Award fellowship
from the UK Medical Research Council (MR/M020894/1). H.M.S, A.S.F.K, M..M and
L.D.H work in a unit that receives funding from the University of Bristol and
the UK Medical Research Council (MC_UU_00011/5, MC_UU_00011/7). H.M.S and M.R.M
are supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical
Research Centre at the University Hospitals Bristol National Health Service
Foundation Trust and the University of Bristol. M.R.M and H.M.S are members of
the UK Centre for Tobacco and Alcohol Studies, a UKCRC Public Health Research:
Centre of Excellence. A.D was funded by the Medical Research Council (MRC; grant
no. P005918) and by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical
Research Centre at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and
King’s College London. The views expressed are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health and
Social Care. The funders have/had no role in study design, data analysis,
decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.

## Footnotes

Author contributions

Author contributions are presented according to the CRediT (Contributor
Roles Taxonomy). J.R.B: Conceptualisation, methodology, formal analysis, data
curation, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing, project
administration, funding acquisition. H.M.S: Software, data curation, writing -
review & editing. T.S: Software, data curation, writing - review &
editing. M.J.T: Software, data curation, writing - review & editing.
A.S.F.K: Writing - review & editing. J.T: Software, resources, writing -
review & editing. W.B: Software, resources, data curation, writing -
review & editing. V.W: Software, writing - review & editing.
L.D.H: Software, data curation, writing - review & editing. A.D:
Conceptualisation, writing - review & editing. E.M: Writing - review
& editing. F.R: Methodology. H.L: Investigation, writing - review
& editing. S.L: Investigation, writing - review & editing. R.K:
Software, data curation. P.L: Conceptualisation, investigation, writing - review
& editing. M.M: Conceptualisation, writing - review & editing,
supervision. J-B.P: Conceptualisation, methodology, formal analysis, data
curation, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing,
supervision.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

## Data availability
The ABCD Study anonymized data, including all assessment domains, are
released annually to the research community. Information on how to access ABCD data
through the NDA is available on the ABCD Study data-sharing webpage: https://abcdstudy.org/scientists_data_sharing.html. Instructions on
how to create an NDA study are available at https://nda.nih.gov/training/modules/study.html. The ABCD data
repository grows and changes over time. The ALSPAC data are not publicly available
as informed consent for public data-sharing, and ethical approval for public
data-sharing were not obtained from participants. Researchers can find details of
how to apply for access to the ALSPAC dataset here: http://www.bristol.ac.uk/alspac/researchers/access/.

## Code availability
Analysis code can be found on https://github.com/jr-baldwin/ACEs_mental_health_RR.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Supplement

## Data Availability Statement
The ABCD Study anonymized data, including all assessment domains, are
released annually to the research community. Information on how to access ABCD data
through the NDA is available on the ABCD Study data-sharing webpage: https://abcdstudy.org/scientists_data_sharing.html. Instructions on
how to create an NDA study are available at https://nda.nih.gov/training/modules/study.html. The ABCD data
repository grows and changes over time. The ALSPAC data are not publicly available
as informed consent for public data-sharing, and ethical approval for public
data-sharing were not obtained from participants. Researchers can find details of
how to apply for access to the ALSPAC dataset here: http://www.bristol.ac.uk/alspac/researchers/access/.
Analysis code can be found on https://github.com/jr-baldwin/ACEs_mental_health_RR.