pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospathplosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC12151486PMC12151486.112151486121514864049367510.1371/journal.ppat.1013210PPATHOGENS-D-25-000211Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsParasitic DiseasesMalariaMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsTropical DiseasesMalariaMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsParasitic DiseasesBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaProtozoansParasitic ProtozoansMalarial ParasitesBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionBiology and Life SciencesParasitologyParasite GroupsApicomplexaPlasmodiumResearch and Analysis MethodsImmunologic TechniquesImmunoassaysEnzyme-Linked ImmunoassaysBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyImmune PhysiologyAntibodiesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune System ProteinsAntibodiesMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune System ProteinsAntibodiesBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsImmune System ProteinsAntibodiesBiology and life sciencesMolecular biologyMolecular biology techniquesSequencing techniquesDNA sequencingGene SequencingResearch and analysis methodsMolecular biology techniquesSequencing techniquesDNA sequencingGene SequencingPlasmodium falciparum expresses fewer var genes at lower levels during asymptomatic dry season infections than clinical malaria cases
P. falciparum var gene expression in asymptomatic infections and clinical malaria casesCeesaySukaiConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing KampmannMartinConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing Votborg-NovélLasseConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing HanssonHelle SmedegaardData curationInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing JensenRasmus WeiselData curationInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing CarrasquillaManuelaInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing CisseHamidouInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing TurnerLouiseInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing DabbasUsamaInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing NtallaChristinaInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing BandermannSilkeInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing DoumboSafiatouResourcesWriting – review & editing DoumtabeDidierResourcesWriting – review & editing OngoibaAissataInvestigationResourcesWriting – review & editing KayentaoKassoumResourcesWriting – review & editing TraoreBoubacarProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing CromptonPeter D.Funding acquisitionProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing LavstsenThomasConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologySupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4567-9101PortugalSilviaConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Max-Planck-Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany2
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany3
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany4
Centre for Translational Medicine and Parasitology, Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen and Department of Infectious Diseases, Righospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark5
Mali International Centre of Excellence in Research, University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako, Bamako, Mali6
Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Division of Intramural Research, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United States of AmericaDzikowskiRonEditor ]. To evade host immunity and potentiate persistent infections, parasites possess several multicopy gene families encoding variant surface antigens (VSAs), of which the P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) are particularly important as they mediate the cytoadhesion of the late stage infected red blood cells (iRBC) to specific receptors on the host endothelium [ – ]. Sequestration of iRBCs allows the parasite to avoid the splenic clearance of rigid and deformed iRBCs [ – ], and thus potentiates parasitaemia as well as malaria pathogenesis through blood occlusion and local inflammatory responses to iRBCs [ – ]. Expression on the iRBC surface makes PfEMP1 an immune target and entails switching of expressed variants to evade immunity and prolong infection [ ]. Each parasite encodes ~60 var genes that are monoallelically expressed [ ]. The overall repertoire is extensive [ , ], with new gene variants shuffled through meiotic recombination in the mosquito, and acquisition of mutations and mitotic recombination within the human host [ – ]. Nevertheless, each parasite repertoire is composed of similar var gene types, conferring similar repertoires of PfEMP1 phenotypes.
var genes consist of a highly variable Exon 1, encoding the protein’s N-terminal extracellular part and the transmembrane domain, and a shorter more conserved Exon 2 encoding the protein’s intracellular portion [ ]. Most PfEMP1 contain an N-terminal head structure with a Duffy-binding-like (DBL)α domain followed by a Cysteine-rich-interdomain-region (CIDR) domain, followed by 2–6 C-terminal DBL and CIDR domains, a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular acidic terminal segment (ATS) at the C-terminus [ ]. Based on chromosomal arrangement and upstream sequence (UPS), vars are classified into UPS groups A, B, C, and E [ , ], with each genome typically containing ~10% UPSA, ~ 75% UPSB and C genes [ ] and one UPSE gene also known as var2csa. This grouping also reflects the clinical association and the primary receptor binding phenotype of the encoded PfEMP1, determined by the protein´s N-terminal domain composition. Thus, var2csa PfEMP1 binds placental chondroitin sulphate A and is associated with placental malaria [ , ]. Severe malaria outcomes are linked to PfEMP1 binding endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) via their CIDRα1 domains [ , – ], which are encoded by approximately half of the UPSA var genes and a small subset of UPSB var genes, which likely arose from UPSB/A recombination events. Most UPSB and UPSC var genes encode PfEMP1s that bind CD36 through their CIDRα2–6 domains, and have been linked to uncomplicated malaria [ – ]. Expression of var genes in P. falciparum asymptomatic infections is scarcely studied. A few studies suggest a potential association of in asymptomatic infections with UPSC var genes [ , ], or report a reduction of UPSA and B but not UPSC in asymptomatic infections vs clinical malaria [ ], suggesting a link between var gene regulation and asymptomatic infections. Others associate malaria immunity with expression of a restricted var repertoire in asymptomatic infection [ ], although var gene switching appears to continue in longitudinally monitored samples [ ]. The ordered nature of PfEMP1 phenotypes and corresponding acquisition of antibodies underlie the quick acquisition of immunity after few severe malaria or pregnancy malaria cases [ , ]. This highlights that host immunity inhibits the growth of parasites expressing certain vars, and raises the question of whether, and how, the parasite´s var repertoire is utilized to facilitate asymptomatic infections bridging wet seasons several months apart.
In areas where malaria is seasonal, transmission is interrupted when mosquito breeding sites are unavailable due to lack of water; and clinical cases are rare [ , – ]. During a months-long period, asymptomatic infections form the reservoir that restarts transmission in the ensuing wet season [ – ]. These infections exhibit extended circulation of iRBCs compared to those of clinical cases, evidenced by the presence of late ring and trophozoite stages in circulation [ ], that is suggestive of reduced cytoadhesion. How the parasite addresses the challenge of persisting silently during periods free of mosquitos, until seasonal rains allow renewed transmission is not known. Here, to interrogate var gene expression in subclinical infections and clinical malaria cases of Malians collected during the dry and wet seasons, respectively, we sequenced RT-PCR-amplified var cDNA of 82 samples collected from 67 individuals throughout the year.

## Results

## Expressed DBLα-tag sequencing in a longitudinal cohort in Kalifabougou, Mali
In Kalifabougou, an area of Mali with intense seasonal malaria transmission, we investigated P. falciparum parasites from individuals enrolled in a previously described cohort study comprising ~600 individuals from 3 months to 45 years of age [ ]. As typical for the region, in 2019, clinical episodes of malaria (≥2,500 asexual parasites per μl of blood and axillary temperature ≥37.5 °C) were frequent during the wet season (June–December), whereas nearly all individuals remained free of malaria symptoms during the dry season (January–May) ( ). The prevalence of P. falciparum asymptomatic infection was cross-sectionally examined in January, at the beginning (startDry), and in May, at the end (endDry) of the dry season by PCR [ ], finding 18% and 10% of positive individuals, respectively. In October (midWet), during the ensuing wet season, 36% of cross-sectionally examined individuals tested positive ( ), in line with previous descriptions [ , ]. In the cohort, individuals presenting with clinical malaria (MAL) were younger (median 9 years, IQR 3 – 14) than those with asymptomatic infections in dry (startDry median 14 years, IQR 3 – 16, p = 0.0049, and endDry median 15 years, IQR 12 – 16, p < 0.0001) or transmission season (midWet median 11 years, IQR 4 – 16, p = 0.0067, Dunn’s Kruskall-Wallis test). Parasitaemia of 104 samples from 86 individuals, depending on genomic DNA availability, was determined by qPCR of multicopy locus varATS [ ]. This revealed higher parasitaemia in clinical malaria cases (MAL), intermediate levels in individuals with asymptomatic infections during the wet season (midWet), and lower parasite densities in the dry season samples (startDry and endDry) ( ), as previously described [ ]. Amplicon sequencing of the polymorphic parasite gene ama1 was used to determine the complexity of infection (COI) of each sample. One to 11 different haplotypes were detected per sample. We observed a higher proportion of monoclonal infections and lower COI in clinical malaria cases (MAL) than in asymptomatic infections (startDry, endDry and midWet) ( ). The individuals’ age correlated negatively to parasitaemia (Spearman’s cor -0.39, p = 0.000123) ( ); and positively to COI, when the analysis was done with all samples of all time-points (Spearman’s cor. 0.329, p = 0.00375) ( ), but significance was lost when correlations were investigated individually within each timepoint ( ).
 To conduct DBLα-tag sequencing, we obtained parasites throughout the year from 118 rapid diagnostic test-positive (RDT+) samples of 96 individuals, aged 1–29 years. Samples were collected in the beginning (startDry n = 31) and end (endDry n = 28) of the dry season from asymptomatically infected individuals; and in the ensuing wet season from participants exhibiting their first symptomatic malaria episode of the season (MAL n = 29), and from asymptomatic individuals during a cross-sectional timepoint in the middle of the wet season (midWet n = 28). Following RNA extraction of all 118 samples, we assessed RNA content by qRT-PCR of two P. falciparum housekeeping genes, and selected 93 samples with sufficient expression for DBLα-tag sequencing (startDry n = 20, endDry n = 28, MAL n = 25, midWet n = 20), of which 60 samples were prepared in duplicates. DBLα-tags were amplified using a pair of degenerate primers [ ]. Samples with <500 sequencing reads across available replicates were excluded, resulting in 82 samples from 67 individuals (startDry n = 17, endDry n = 24, MAL n = 24, midWet n = 17, ) with 510–107496 reads per sample (median 27467, IQR 14729 – 46464).
Sequencing tags from all 82 samples were pooled and clustered by at least 96% sequence similarity, resulting in 917 unique DBLα-tags ( ). Technical variation between replicates was assessed comparing samples with PCR replicates each comprising > 500 reads (n = 60). Replicates showed a very strong correlation in reads mapping to specific DBLα-tags (Pearson’s cor 0.97, p < 2.2e-16, ). Of the variants found in the 60 duplicated samples, less than 2% of DBLα-tags were not shared between replicates; hence for all subsequent analyses, replicates, whenever available, were pooled.
The distribution of expressed var genes was determined by quantifying the number sequence reads mapping to each of the 917 DBLα-tags. After removal of DBLα-tags with <1% of the total read count in a sample, we obtained a range of 1–35 different DBLα-tags per infection (median 13, IQR 8–18). To validate the DBLα-tag sequencing, we designed three primer-pairs targeting highly and lowly expressed DBLα-tags in eight samples and quantified the var transcript levels by qRT-PCR. The sequenced read counts correlated with the qRT-PCR quantification ( , Spearman’s cor 0.824, p = 2.21e-6), confirming that DBLα-tag sequencing could identify var gene sequences with good representation of their proportional expression.
Then, we investigated whether DBLα-tag sequences were uniformly distributed throughout the year. We found significantly higher number of different DBLα-tags per sample in clinical malaria cases (MAL) than in dry season asymptomatic infections (startDry, endDry); and a higher number of different DBLα-tags per sample in wet season asymptomatic infections (midWet) compared to the asymptomatic infections from the end of the dry season (endDry) ( ). First, to rule out a possible sequencing-based systematic bias, we assessed the sequencing reads and found no differences in read counts between timepoints ( ). Additionally, we examined whether higher numbers of DBLα-tags were driven by more sequencing reads, but found only a weak negative association between read count and number of DBLα-tags per sample (Pearson’s cor -0.265, p = 0.016, ). The number of DBLα-tags per sample correlated negatively to the individuals’ age (Pearson cor -0.53, p = 3.025e-07, ). However, when timepoints were individually considered, the significant negative correlation between number of DBLα-tags and age was observed only among asymptomatic infections at the start of the dry season (startDry, Spearman’s cor 0.57, p = 0.018, ).
To assess whether progression through the 48 h IDC led to systematic changes in DBLα-tag expression, we sequenced DBLα-tags on 20 malaria cases (MAL) and 16 asymptomatic infections during the wet season (midWet) following ~12h of in vitro culture to compare with the corresponding ex vivo data of the same samples. We observed a high agreement between ex vivo and ~12h-cultured samples, with a median of 77.5% (IQR 61–84) and 82% (IQR 67–89) of DBL⍺-tags shared in the asymptomatic and clinical cases, respectively ( ). DBLα-tags lost during the 12h of culture showed significantly lower expression levels in the corresponding ex vivo sample (median 1.7% of reads IQR 1.3 - 2.7) than those DBLα-tags maintaining detection (median 3.3% of reads IQR 1.8 - 6.5, p < 0.0001 Kruskall-Wallis test). This suggested that differences between ex vivo and 12h-cultured samples likely resulted from selection of sub-populations of parasites during culture, or differences in detection of low abundance DBLα-tags, and likely not due to variations of developmental stage between dry and wet season samples impacting the DBLα-tag profiles.

## Parasites express more var genes in malaria cases than in dry season asymptomatic infections
The number of DBLα-tags seen per sample correlated positively with parasitaemia (Spearman’s cor 0.46, p = 2.54e-5, ), but no association between the number of DBLα-tags and the sample’s COI was observed ( ). When timepoints were considered separately, we observed a significant positive correlation between number of DBLα-tags and parasitaemia among asymptomatic infections from the start of the dry season (startDry, Spearman’s cor 0.57, p = 0.017, ), while other timepoints did not afford statistically significant associations. Among clinical malaria cases, the number of DBLα-tags was positively correlated with COI (Spearman’s cor 0.52, p = 0.017, ).
 We then investigated proportions of different DBLα-tags identified. This showed that the most abundant DBLα-tag in each clinical malaria case (MAL) comprised a lower proportion of reads compared to the most abundant DBLα-tags in dry season asymptomatic infections (startDry, endDry) ( ). Accordingly, a higher number of DBLα-tags was required to attain 65% of the DBLα-tag reads in malaria cases compared to asymptomatic infections ( ). This suggests that the parasite population in clinical malaria cases express many PfEMP1 variants at similar proportions, compared to asymptomatic dry season infections, where a single or few var genes dominate expression. Wet season asymptomatic infections showed an intermediate state between the two extremes. Indeed, when we calculated the Simpson Diversity Index of each sample based on the proportions of different DBLα-tags, we found significantly higher values in wet season clinical cases (MAL) compared to dry season asymptomatic infections (startDry, endDry) ( ).
Our approach allowed tracking of DBLα-tags, as well as ama1 haplotypes across samples within the population. 131 of 917 DBLα-tags occurred in more than one sample, most of those (n = 102) were found in two samples; while the most frequent DBLα-tag was found in 20 samples and likely corresponded to var1, a conserved, truncated var pseudogene ( ). We did not find an association between samples sharing a DBLα-tag and a particular ama1 haplotype (Chi-squared, p = 0.98); and we determined that pairs of samples within a timepoint were not more likely to share a DBLα-tag than pairs of samples from different times of the year (Chi-squared, p = 0.73).
Next, we used a database of var genes [ ] to annotate our DBLα-tag sequences to DBLα types 0, 1 and 2 [ ] by BLAST comparison, based on their best DBLα hit in the database. We found that DBLα0 was the most represented DBLα type at all timepoints, followed by DBLα1 and DBLα2 types ( , and C), which is in line with the three type’s proportion in P. falciparum genome [ ]. Comparing the reads counts to the different DBLα types, we observed high variability between samples ( ), but overall, DBLα0 var genes were the most abundant, followed by DBLα1 and DBLα2, and no statistically significant difference was seen among the proportion of the three DBLα types across the timepoints ( ).
For nine of the individuals analysed, paired samples were collected at the beginning (startDry) and end (endDry) of the dry season, when re-infection is unlikely [ , ], prompting us to investigate var-gene expression longitudinally. First, we interrogated COI and clonal persistence between the two timepoints using ama1 sequencing data. Out of eight individuals where ama1 amplicon sequencing data was obtained at both timepoints, COI was maintained in paired samples over the course of the dry season (startDry 2.5 IQR 2–5; endDry 2 IQR 1–3, Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test, p = 0.66). Importantly, in six of the eight individuals (75%), shared clones were detected between the two time points, while random chance of haplotype sharing was ~ 26%. In four out of the eight samples, ama1 haplotypes found at the end of the dry season were all already detected at its beginning ( ). Still, four sample-pairs we also identified potential appearances of new haplotypes at the end the dry season ( ), which may be attributed to the limit of detection of the method used due to low parasitaemia, and/or cytoadhesion of particular parasite clones at the time of blood draw [ ]. DBLα-tag comparisons between samples of the same individual at the beginning and end of the dry season revealed a comparable number of DBLα-tags at the two dry season extremes (startDry 8 IQR 8–11, endDry 12 IQR 10–13, ), without significant changes in paired samples (Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test, p = 0.23). However, the DBLα-tag expression patterns were highly divergent between paired samples of the two timepoints, indicative of var gene switching. In fact, only in one individual (K181, 11.1%), the same DBLα-tag was detected at both time points ( ), similar to the ~ 13% chance of finding the same DBLα-tag in two randomly picked samples. In the four paired samples where the ama1 data revealed that all clones seen at the end of the dry season were present in its beginning, we did not observe any shared DBLα-tags, and no significant difference in the number of DBLα-tags between the two timepoints was observed ( , startDry range 8–14, endDry range 10 – 13, Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test, p = 0.41), supporting switching of the var genes expressed.

## Similar var gene types and PfEMP1 binding phenotypes predicted in asymptomatic infections and clinical malaria cases
Next, we predicted the domain composition C-terminal to the DBLα domain using Varia [ ], and the var UPS group using cUPS [ ] and the new tool upsAI (Thomas Otto personal communication and https://github.com/sii-scRNA-Seq/upsAI). These bioinformatic tools use DBLα-tag sequences and databases of annotated var genes to make probabilistic or machine learning predictions about the var-encoded domains and UPS region. First, var genes were analysed by their mutually exclusive binding phenotypes defined by their predicted N-terminal CIDR domain. var transcripts predicted to encode a CIDRα1 domain were classified as EPCR-binding [ , ], and as CD36-binding if a CIDRα2–6 domain was predicted [ ]. var genes predicted to encode CIDRβ, γ or δ domains and var1 were classified as having an unknown binding phenotype (n = 107, ). For 20% (n = 229) of the DBLα-tags the CIDR domain could not be predicted. This analysis revealed no difference in expression of binding phenotypes between any of the sampling times ( ). Despite heterogeneity between samples, predicted CD36 binding var genes were the most abundant at all timepoints, followed by EPCR-binders ( ). We then used Varia to predict domains downstream of the first CIDR to identify putative ICAM-1-binding PfEMP1s. These were predicted by the presence of CIDRα1 and DBLβ1/3, and CIDRα2–6 and DBLβ5, representing group A and group B ICAM-1-binders, respectively [ ]. Putative ICAM-1-binders were very low or absent at all time points, but we detected statistically significant higher expression of group-B ICAM-1-binders in clinical malaria compared to end-dry season infections ( ). We also quantified expression levels of vars encoding DBLδ and DBLγ domains ( ). As expected, vars encoding DBLδ domains found in most vars were highly expressed at all timepoints, whereas vars predicted to encode DBLγ domains were rare, though a large proportion (45%, n = 504) of DBLα-tags remained unannotated.
 We used the cUPS and upsAI tools to assign 68% (n = 772) and 99% (n = 1112), respectively, of the DBLα-tags and to UPSA, B or C ( ). Both tools predicted similar tags as UPSA var genes and gave similar proportions for UPS subtypes but disagreed about assignment of genes between UPSB and UPSC groups. Neither tool resulted in significant differences in abundance between timepoints. In line with genomic proportions [ ], UPSB genes were the most expressed at all timepoints, followed by UPSA and UPSC ( and ).
To complement the prediction of the domain type composition, we measured expression of a subset of var domain types using var type-specific primers directly by qRT-PCR in 66 samples (startDry n = 16, endDry n = 24, MAL n = 16, midWet n = 10) for which we also sequenced DBLα-tags. We quantified levels of loci encoding CIDRα3.1/2 domains as a proxy for CD36-binding vars, DBLα2/1.1/2/4/7/9 for group A EPCR-binding vars, and DBLα1.5/6/8 for group A non-EPCR binding var-genes. We observed large variability between samples and mostly non-statistically significant differences in expression level of individual var gene types between samples collected in the dry season (startDry and endDry) or during clinical malaria cases in the wet season (MAL) ( Eand D), in agreement with the DBLα-tag observations. The only significant difference observed was a higher expression level of group A EPCR-binding vars in clinical malaria cases compared to infections at the end of the dry season ( ). Comparing qRT-PCR measurements and Varia domain predictions in the same samples, we found a significant correlation between relative expression by qRT-PCR and the percentage of reads matching same domain type in DBLα-tag sequencing (CD36-binder: Spearman’s cor 0.492, p = 0.000182; EPCR-binder: Spearman’s cor 0.323, p = 0.0183; non-EPCR-binder: Spearman’s cor 0.441, p = 0.00096, ). We also quantified var2csa expression by qRT-PCR and detected increased transcript levels in samples of clinical malaria cases in the wet season (MAL n = 15) compared to asymptomatic timepoints of the dry (startDry n = 4, endDry n = 11) and the wet season (midWet n = 10). However, the high var2csa level in ex vivo malaria cases was not observed after 12h of in vitro culture of the sample (MAL 12h) ( ), suggesting that it may be driven by differences in parasite staging [ ].

## Asymptomatic parasites have lower total var transcript levels than clinical malaria parasites
We then investigated the overall var transcript level per parasite in clinical malaria cases compared to asymptomatic infections using qRT-PCR primers targeting the acidic terminal segment (varATS) [ ] in 66 samples collected along the year (startDry n = 17, endDry n = 16, MAL n = 19, midWet n = 14). This showed a significantly higher level of varATS transcripts in clinical malaria cases (MAL) compared to asymptomatic infections from the end of the dry season (endDry) and mid of the wet season (midWet), and also compared to all asymptomatic samples combined ( ). Additionally, we quantified expression of ruf6, a non-coding RNA known to regulate transcription of the var gene family [ ], and observed similar trends to those seen for varATS quantification, albeit without statistical significance between any of the individual groups; and with borderline significant differences between ruf6 in clinical malaria cases (MAL) versus all asymptomatic samples combined ( ). A strong correlation between ruf6 expression and the expression of varATS was detected (Spearman’s cor 0.37, p = 0.0073, ). Expression of varATS and ruf6 did not significantly correlate with the number of DBLα-tags found (Spearman’s cor varATS 0.24, p = 0.085, ruf6 0.16, p = 0.25, ), suggesting that the difference in number of DBLα-tags between samples collected at different times of the year was not explained by differences in total var gene expression per iRBC.
 

## Antibody recognition of iRBCs correlates negatively with the number of expressed DBLα-tags
We hypothesized that the more restricted diversity of expressed var genes in asymptomatic carriers, compared to clinical cases, was linked to broader and more developed acquired immunity in the older study participants with asymptomatic infections. While we could not quantify antibody responses to the specific PfEMP1 encoded in individual infections, we used three methods to assess humoral immunity to P. falciparum antigens. We measured antibodies to AMA1 (a known marker of cumulative malaria exposure [ ]) by ELISA, antibodies to VSAs on PfFCR3 iRBCs predominantly expressing the CD36 and ICAM1-binding IT4VAR16 PfEMP1 variant through a flow cytometry-based surface recognition assay (SRA, gating strategy in ), and antibodies to 35 PfEMP1 CIDR domains representing CD36 (n = 12) and EPCR (n = 17) binding CIDR domains and n = 6 other CIDR of group A PfEMP1, through a multiplex bead array [ ]. Plasma from asymptomatic dry and wet season samples (startDry n = 17, endDry n = 10, midWet n = 17), and from clinical malaria cases in the wet season (MAL n = 10) revealed anti-AMA1 antibodies in most individuals, with significantly higher titers in those maintaining asymptomatic infections during the dry season compared to individuals with clinical malaria or asymptomatic infections in the wet season ( ). Consistent with the hypothesis that dry season asymptomatic carriers have an increased ability to restrict PfEMP1s, we detected higher surface recognition of VSAs ( ), and a broader recognition of CD36-, EPCR- and other group A PfEMP1-binders ( ) in plasma of the dry season asymptomatic infections than in those of clinical malaria cases. Titres of anti-AMA1 antibodies, levels of iRBC surface recognition, and the breadth of the anti-PfEMP1 immune response were highly correlated to each other ( ) and associated with age ( ). Plasma AMA1 antibody titers, iRBC surface recognition, and broader recognition of PfEMP1 domains of any binding phenotype correlated negatively with the number of DBLα-tags detected in its sample (AMA1: Spearman’s cor -0.492, p = 0.0001; SRA: Spearman’s cor -0.592, p = 2.41e-6, CD36 binders: Spearman‘s cor -0.55 p = 5.248e-06, EPCR binders: Spearman‘s cor - 0.71p = 3.177e-10, other group A Spearman‘s cor -0.51 p = 3.134e-05) ( - ).
 

## Single-cell RNAseq data supports restricted expression of var genes in dry season asymptomatic infections
Finally, we used single-cell SMART-Seq to characterize var transcripts and domain architecture obtained from RNA libraries of single FACS-sorted iRBCs of one clinical malaria case (MAL) and one end of the dry season asymptomatic infection (endDry) collected in 2020. Contrasting to DBLα-tag sequencing, SMART-Seq generates reads across the whole var gene [ ], and hence allowed detecting domains downstream of DBLα without bioinformatic predictions. Both samples were processed ex vivo, and parasites from the clinical malaria case was additionally examined following ~16h of in vitro culture (MAL16h). A total of 115 single FACS-sorted iRBCs (endDry n = 54, MAL n = 31, MAL16h n = 31) were sequenced, and the reads obtained were mapped to a combined P. falciparum and human reference. After quality filtering, 111 iRBCs with >100 P. falciparum genes and >1000 P. falciparum reads, remained for further analyses (endDry n = 51, MAL n = 29, MAL 16h n = 31). First, we assessed whole transcript nucleotide variation across all variant and invariant sites in P. falciparum genome using GATK4 [ ] to determine the pairwise nucleotide similarity between iRBCs. By hierarchical clustering, iRBCs of the clinical malaria case, independent of culturing, clustered with each other and apart from iRBCs from the end of dry season infection, indicative of one clone in the clinical malaria case and another in the end of the dry season asymptomatic infection ( ). Parasites were staged by comparison to a single-cell atlas [ ], reproducing previously described circulation of older stages in dry-season asymptomatic infections [ ]. We then mapped the 111 quality-filtered iRBC transcriptomes to the annotated var database of 200.000 vars and one million var domains [ ] used by the Varia and cUPS tools, as limited sequencing coverage precluded de-novo assembly of the full var genes. Cells were defined as var-expressing when more than three reads mapped to the var reference and coverage of domains other than the ATS were detected, resulting in 48 and 41 var-expressing iRBCs in the dry season and in clinical malaria samples, respectively. We further clustered cells based on var domain expression and found 7 clusters of iRBCs expressing similar var domains in the end of the dry season iRBCs ( ) and 22 in the clinical malaria case ( ), which likely correspond to groups of cells, each expressing a shared var gene. This highlighted a higher number of var domain clusters in the clinical malaria case (5.4 per 10 iRBCs), compared to a lower number of var domain clusters per 10 iRBCs in the end of the dry season sample (1.5 per 10 iRBCs). Similarly, 50% of iRBCs covered a minimum of 2 different var domain clusters in the dry season sample, while they covered at least 7 different var domains in the clinical malaria case, indicating a higher diversity of var gene expression in clinical malaria compared to end of the dry season, as was found by DBLα-tag sequencing ( and ).
 For most var domain clusters, we detected DBLα, CIDRα and further downstream domains, though in most clusters at least some domains of a full var gene were missing ( ). In several clusters, we observed mapping to multiple var domains of the same domain type, which could appear inconsistent with monoallelic expression. We observed 11 of these instances in clusters of the end-dry season sample, and 24 instances in the clinical malaria case’s clusters. In var cluster 1 of the end-dry season sample, we identified reads of one iRBC mapping to two distinct DBLα0 sequences, however, the coverage of these two domains did not overlap, suggesting that the sequenced DBLα domain was a combination of separate DBLα sequences found in the database ( ). More frequently, however, there was ample overlap in the covered regions of similar domain types, indicating multiple highly similar var domains in the database, indicating that the specific var genes circulating in the samples are not present in the database used for var gene mapping, hence our reads mapped to multiple var domains of the same domain type within highly similar reference sequences. Indeed, in seven out of ten instances in the end of the dry season clusters ( A and B Fig), and in all instances in the clinical malaria case’ clusters ( ), pairwise sequence comparison by BLAST revealed high sequence similarity of the covered regions within each instance (median: 99.85%, IQR 98.67-100.00 for the end of the dry season, and median: 99.61%, IQR 96.32-100.00 for the clinical malaria case). In three further instances of mapping to different domains of the same domain type in the end of dry season sample, coverage of one domain type variant was found in the majority of cells in the respective cluster, including a single cell which exclusively also showed lower coverage of another domain type variant. This other domain type variant was also found covered in multiple cells of another cluster with high coverage, suggesting minor cross-contamination between few cells ( ). All DBLα domains identified in the dry season sample were DBLα0, while in the malaria case all three types of DBLα were seen, with a minority of DBLα1 and 2, and the majority of DBLα0s ( and ). We found CIDRα2.3/5/8, 3.1/2 and 6 at the end of the dry season, while in the clinical malaria case CIDRα2.1/2/3/4/9, 3.4, 4, and 5 domains was found ( and ).

## Discussion
Studies of var expression in clinical cases have linked genes encoding EPCR-binding PfEMP1 to severe malaria, and those encoding CD36-binding PfEMP1 to uncomplicated clinical malaria [ , , – ]. However, if and how specific var gene and PfEMP1 subsets play a role in the persistence of infection in asymptomatic hosts remains poorly understood. Ruybal-Pesántez and colleagues sequenced DBLα domains of over 1000 parasite genomes of asymptomatic individuals in Ghana, identifying more than 40000 DBLα sequences without reaching coverage saturation of the full var gene population, and reported high DBLα diversity in both the wet and the dry seasons [ ], suggesting that seasonal selection at the genomic level was unlikely, but expression patterns were not investigated. In this study, we examined expression of P. falciparum var genes through sequencing of expressed DBLα-tags in 82 samples of 67 Malian children. We identified 917 different DBLα-tags (var genes) and validated the relative and absolute transcript levels using primers specific to individual DBLα-tags and the shared var exon2 region (varATS qRT-PCR). Overall, parasites from asymptomatic individuals expressed fewer DBLα-tags ( ), showed higher dominance of the most expressed var gene ( ) - without preference for a specific var UPS type or PfEMP1 binding phenotype ( ) - and had lower total var transcripts compared to clinical malaria cases ( ).
Detection of a higher number of different var transcripts in clinical malaria cases and its correlation with parasitaemia, was unlikely due to PCR bias [ ], as this was minimized by ensuring consistent housekeeping gene expression and gel electrophoresis validation, leading to similar read depths ( ), strong congruency between replicates ( ), with findings supported by both qRT-PCR ( , and E) and SMART-Seq single-cell sequencing ( ).
Few studies have analysed the expressed var diversity in asymptomatic individuals. Mugasa and colleagues examined full-length var mRNA isolated by magnetic beads tagged with a varATS probe, followed by cloning into vectors and sequencing to compare expression between severe malaria and asymptomatic infections of infants [ ]. The authors found no difference in the number of distinct DBLα sequences per isolate between the clinical groups. With the same approach, Falk and colleagues investigated var expression in severe, uncomplicated, and asymptomatic children from Papua New Guinea. Also they reported a similar number of DBLα sequences between the three conditions [ ]. This method of amplification, cloning, transfection and sequencing may introduce bias, as the number of unique sequences to be discovered depends on the number of clones sequenced, which is limited and variable between samples, especially since saturating coverage within individuals was not met. The method used in the present study more robustly avoids sampling bias, as the number of potential novel sequences is only limited by sequencing depth and presented no correlation between number of DBLα-tags and sequencing read counts.
In addition to the studies by Mugasa et al. [ ] and Falk et al. [ ], which reported mixed var gene types with a predominance of vars encoding CD36-binding group B and C genes, only a few studies have attempted to define the var and PfEMP1 types expressed in asymptomatic carriers. Kaestli et al. [ ] investigated var expression in asymptomatic and clinical malaria in Papua New Guinea using qRT-PCR assay targeting var UPS and reported increased UPSC levels in asymptomatic compared to clinical cases. The capture method used to enrich var transcripts precluded direct normalization of their expression data, and they instead used genomic DNA of cultured lab strains to calculate var copy numbers, which may have introduced bias. In Mkumbaye et al., a lower level of transcripts encoding EPCR-binding PfEMP1 was found in asymptomatic Tanzanian children by qRT-PCR targeting these genes [ ]. These studies could not quantify the number of expressed vars or the total var expression level. The combined DBLα-tag sequencing and var type prediction approach used in the present study allowed a higher resolution and more accurate annotation of the expressed var genes. However, our approach has limitations as it relies on semi-quantitative PCR amplification using degenerate primers and annotated var genes [ ] from genomes of the Pf3K and MalariaGEN projects [ ]. Nevertheless, we could annotate the majority of amplified tags and found no significant difference in var UPS type expression between clinical and asymptomatic infections. Although UPSC var genes were the most frequently observed in end of the dry season asymptomatic infections and lowest in clinical malaria by cUPS, these were not statistically significant and not corroborated by upsAI ( ). Similarly, we observed transcripts representing all PfEMP1 phenotypes, albeit with a dominance of genes encoding CD36-binding PfEMP1 in both asymptomatic and clinical cases. These profiles resemble those previously observed in uncomplicated malaria, and indicate that persistent, asymptomatic infections are not linked to separate var gene subset or PfEMP1 phenotype, but is likely associated with the immune status of the individual. Indeed, the present asymptomatic carriers were significantly older and had higher levels of antibodies to both merozoite and VSA antigens, including PfEMP1, than individuals with clinical infections ( ). Warimwe and colleagues have shown in Kenyan children more homogeneous var expression in asymptomatic infection associated with a broader host antibody response of slightly older children [ ].
IgG targeting and inhibiting PfEMP1 contributes to malaria immunity [ ]; and controlled [ ] and natural infections [ ] of less immune individuals have been linked to expression of a higher number of var genes, which is restricted in individuals with higher immunity. Protection from severe malaria is rapidly acquired after a few episodes in areas of high transmission [ ], likely due to development of cross-reactive antibodies recognizing PfEMP1-variants associated with severe disease [ ]. Thus, acquisition of PfEMP1 antibodies recognising PfEMP1 is ordered, with earlier responses to pathogenic EPCR binding PfEMP1 variants [ , ]. Longer periods of multiple infections seem required to accumulate antibodies recognizing PfEMP1 associated with uncomplicated malaria, finally resulting in mostly avirulent infections in clinically-immune adolescents and adults [ , , ]. The var variants expressed in asymptomatic individuals may represent gaps in the immune coverage of those hosts. However, since we observed all types of var genes—including those frequently recognized by exposed individuals—expressed in both clinical and asymptomatic infections, it is plausible that parasites persisting asymptomatically over extended periods survive not only by randomly switching to antigenically distinct variants [ ], but also by reducing the overall PfEMP1 presentation and cytoadhesion efficiency, rather than relying on specific PfEMP1 types. In support of this notion, we found indications of reduced overall var expression in asymptomatic vs clinical malaria cases reported by varATS qPCR primers targeting the semi-conserved and shared var exon 2 ( ). Decreased overall var expression is also supported by lower the ruf6 transcripts detected in asymptomatic infections compared to clinical malaria cases ( ). This is in line with findings by Guillochon and colleagues, who assembled de novo var gene expression from RNA-seq of cerebral versus uncomplicated malaria cases and reported lower overall var gene expression in uncomplicated cases [ ]. Also, a trend of reduced expression of the top var gene in asymptomatic end of dry season infections compared to clinical malaria cases described in [ ]. Nevertheless, the varATS primers coverage across the var family is only ~40%, leaving the possibility of a skewed and not reduced var expression. The single cell approach used to validate expression of var genes of dry and wet season infections ( ) was also not ideal to corroborate the overall expression level of var due to the very small number of cells available and low coverage of var genes.
Reduction of adhesin expression and endothelial cell binding capacity in P. falciparum has been documented in a splenectomized patient [ ], similarly var expression can be lost in vitro [ ] just as surface expression of PfEMP1 was recently shown to vary independent of var transcript level [ ].
We also observed higher levels of var2csa transcripts in clinical malaria cases compared to dry season asymptomatic infections ( ). This var2csa expression appeared to be transient as it was lost after a short time of in vitro culture. The difference in var2csa expression may be driven by differences in parasite stage between clinical and asymptomatic infections, as var2csa has also been shown in vitro to peak earlier in its expression than other var genes [ ]. In vitro, var2csa expression depends on the intracellular levels of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) [ ], and its expression has been suggested to play a central role in var gene switching [ ]; requiring further investigations in natural infections. If, and to what extent, parasites released from the liver include both high and low PfEMP1 expressors, or if such phenotypic variation can arise in blood-stage progeny, remains unclear. Additionally, it is uncertain how low cytoadhesive parasites would survive in individuals with a functioning spleen.
In conclusion, we found that P. falciparum parasites from asymptomatic individuals exhibited var expression profiles with fewer, more dominant variants compared to clinical infections, likely influenced by host immunity. However, the lower overall var transcript abundance and presence of all var gene types in asymptomatic carriers suggest that these parasites may represent a subset with particularly efficient switching or reduced cytoadhesion due to lower PfEMP1 presentation.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Heidelberg University Hospital; the Faculty of Medicine, Pharmacy and Odontostomatology at the University of Bamako; and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the National Institutes of Health Institutional Review Board, and is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT01322581). All study participants or their parents/guardians gave written informed consent to acquisition of samples and clinical data.

## Study site and sample collection
Samples and clinical data were obtained in 2019 from a longitudinal cohort study of ~600 individuals aged 3 months to 45 years in Kalifabougou, Mali, as described elsewhere [ , ]. Clinical malaria cases were defined as Plasmodium infection with parasitaemia >2500 parasites/μl blood and an axillary temperature >37.5°C and no other apparent cause of fever and were treated according to national guidelines with a 3-day course of artemether and lumefantrine. Study exclusion criteria were haemoglobin <7 g/dl, axillary temperature ≥37.5 °C at enrolment and acute systemic illness or use of antimalarial or immunosuppressive medications in the 30 days preceding enrolment.
Samples used in this study were collected at scheduled cross-sectional timepoints in January, May and October 2019, and in July 2020 as well as during passive surveillance of clinical malaria episodes in 2019 and 2020. At cross-sectional visits and from study participants presenting their first clinical malaria episode during the transmission season 2019, dried blood spots on filter paper (Protein Saver 903, Whatman), thick blood smears and venous blood (4 ml from study participants 4 years or younger, 8 ml from older study participants) were collected. Venous blood was drawn by venipuncture, collected in sodium citrate-containing cell preparation tubes (Vacutainer CPT Tubes, BD) and separated into plasma and RBC pellets through centrifugation. Subsequently samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and transported to Heidelberg/Berlin for further analysis.

## Detection of clinical malaria and subclinical P. falciparum infection
At sample collection timepoints during cross-sectional visits, venous blood samples were tested for subclinical P. falciparum infection by rapid diagnostic test (RDT; SD BIOLINE Malaria Ag P.f test of histidine-rich protein II) prior to freezing. Clinical malaria cases were detected by microscopy in Giemsa-stained thick blood smears by light microscopy. P. falciparum infection was confirmed retrospectively by nested PCR for the P. falciparum 18S rRNA as described elsewhere [ ].

## P. falciparum short-term culture
Part of RBC pellets of RDT+ asymptomatic samples at the October 2019 cross-sectional timepoint and clinical malaria cases during the transmission season 2019 were cultured prior to freezing at 2% haematocrit in RPMI 1640 (Gibco) complete medium (with L-glutamine and HEPES), 7.4% sodium bicarbonate (Gibco), 100 μM hypoxanthine (C.C.Pro) and 25 mg/ml gentamycin (Gibco) added with 0.25% Albumax II (Gibco) for 12 h at 37°C in a candle jar as previously described [ ]. After 12 h of short-term culture, pellets were collected, frozen in liquid nitrogen and shipped to Heidelberg/Berlin.

## Parasitaemia measurement by varATS qPCR
DNA was extracted from frozen RBC pellets using the QIAGEN DNeasy Blood & tissue kit according to manufacturer specifications. qPCR for the varATS locus was performed as previously described [ ], using the TaqMan Multiplex Master Mix (Applied biosystems). Quantification was performed based on a standard curve prepared by serial dilution of in vitro cultured ring stage P. falciparum parasites of a Malian parasite isolate in RBC. Concentrations below 0.1 parasites/μl, the lower limit of the standard curve’s dynamic range, were considered below the limit of detection.

## ama1 amplicon sequencing
DNA was extracted from frozen RBC pellets using the QIAGEN DNeasy Blood & tissue kit. ama1 amplicon sequencing was performed as previously described [ ]. Clusters present in both PCR replicates of a sample and a total read count >500 were included in the analysis.

## RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis
RNA was extracted using the phenol-chloroform method performed over 2 days. Frozen RBC pellets were quickly thawed at room temperature and 750 μl Trizol LS reagent (ambion) added to up to 250 μl RBCs pellet. The RBC pellet with Trizol mixture was thoroughly mixed by vortexing and the resulting emulsion which was immediately spun at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The resulting separated top aqueous layer only (without the inter- and organic phase) was transferred into a tube already containing 500 μl Isopropanol and 3 μl GlycoBlue and stored overnight at -20 °C. On day 2, the RNA pellet was separated by spinning tubes for 60 min at 12,000 g and at 4 °C. This is followed by washing twice in cold ethanol and complete drying of the ethanol from the tube. RNA pellet was resuspended in 20 μl RNase-free water. Genomic DNA was removed with Amplification grade DNase 1 (invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. To check for effective removal of genomic DNA, 1 μl of RNA was ran in a qPCR with primers for two P. falciparum genes, P61 (fructose-bisphosphate aldolase, PF3D7_1444800) and P90 (serine-tRNA ligase, PF3D7_0717700) using previously designed primers [ , ]. Reactions were set up with Power SYBR Green Master (Applied biosystems), primers were used at a final primer concentration of 1 μM. Cycling conditions were 10 min 95°C, followed by 30 cycles of 30 sec at 95°C, 40 sec and 50°C, 50 sec at 65°C, and a final elongation of 40 sec at 68°C, followed by a melt curve. qPCRs were run on a QTower3 (Analytic Jena). cDNA was synthesized with the Superscript IV vilo cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (invitrogen) using 1 μg of template RNA according to manufacturer specifications.

## DBLα-tag sequencing
First, P. falciparum transcript abundance in cDNA samples was quantified by qPCR for P61 and P90 housekeeping genes as described above with 2 μl of cDNA as input volume and 40 cycles. Amplification using P61 primers provided higher yield of nucleic acid (lower Ct value) as compared to P90 for the same sample. Therefore, Ct values of P90 primer reactions were used to exclude samples deemed to have too little material for sequencing. Samples with Ct-values >30 for the P90 housekeeping gene were excluded and for samples with Cts between 21–29 subsequent steps were performed in duplicates. As for the samples with Cts of 12 -14.8, the cDNA was diluted 1:100 and for those with Cts > 12 they were diluted 1:1000 prior to subsequent steps. Pre-amplification of DBLα-tag sequencing was performed with the varF_dg2 and Brlong primers. Per reaction, 1 μl of cDNA was mixed with KAPA HiFi fidelity buffer (Roche, 1x final concentration), dNTPs (Roche, final concentration each 0.3 μM), the abovementioned primers (final concentration each 2 μM), at KAPA HiFi Hotstart polymerase (Roche) and run with the following cycling conditions ( ).
 2 μl of PCR product were run on an agarose gel to inspect product size and primer dimer noise. The expected amplicon size was 350 – 500 bp, samples without a visible band at the expected size were excluded. After amplification DBLα-tag sequencing samples were pooled and sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq with 2 × 300 paired-end cycle protocol. Only samples with >500 reads across replicates after quality filtering were included in subsequent analysis ( ).
 

## DBLα-tag sequencing bioinformatics
Primer sequences were removed, and adapter and quality trimming performed using trim-galore (https://github.com/FelixKrueger/TrimGalore?tab=readme-ov-file, v. 0.6.10). Processing and filtering of DBLα-tag sequencing followed the steps of the DBLaCleaner pipeline (https://github.com/UniMelb-Day-Lab/DBLaCleaner/) [ ]. Briefly, paired-end reads were merged using PEAR (v. 0.9.6; -v 10 -n 200) [ ]. Merged reads from all samples were concatenated, filtered (--fastq_filter --fastq_maxee 1.0), and overlapping reads collapsed excluding sequences with < 2 reads support (--derep_prefix --minuniquesize 2), and chimeric reads removed (--uchime_denovo) using vsearch v2.15.2 [ ]. Remaining sequences were clustered with a 96% nucleotide identity threshold to obtain representative sequence clusters (--cluster-fast –id 0.96). DBLα-tag clusters are referred to as DBLα-tags throughout the manucript. Non-DBLα-clusters were identified with hmmsearch (HMMER3.3.2, hmmer.org) and excluded, the hmmfile was taken from (https://github.com/UniMelb-Day-Lab/DBLaCleaner/). Filtered reads in individual samples were mapped back to remaining DBLα-clusters using vsearch (--usearch_global –id 0.96) to quantify cluster abundance by sample. DBLα-tag sequence clusters were annotated with Varia [ ] in GEM mode with default parameters.
Simpson index for a sample was calculated as . DBLα-tag sequences were translated into amino acids and annotated with cUPS [ ] and upsAI (Thomas Otto personal communication and https://github.com/sii-scRNA-Seq/upsAI) in tag mode using default parameters. 0.95 probability cutoff was used to assign clusters to upsA, upsB or upsC groups based on the cUPS prediction.

## qRT-PCR validation of specific DBLα-tag sequences primer sequences design
For a subset of samples primers specific for individual DBLα-tag-sequences were designed using NCBI primer BLAST [ ] by providing the sequence cluster of interest as PCR template. In the primer pair specificity parameters, under database, the option “custom (use your own sequence accession, assembly accession, etc)” was selected and the DBLα-tag sequences of the corresponding sample provided as a fasta file. Plasmodium (Laverania) falciparum (taxid:5833) was selected under organism name for exclusion. All other parameter values remained as default. The same process was carried out for the highest, one medium, and one low abundance sequence cluster per sample. Even though the default number of designed primers is 10, the first 4 primers were tested in the qRT-PCR validation.

## qRT-PCR validation of specific DBLα-tag sequences
For each sequence cluster, 4 different forward and reverse primers were evaluated. All qRT-PCR were performed in 20 μl reaction volume, primer concentrations of 1 μM. Each cluster was quantified relative to P90 and P61 housekeeping genes. For each DBLα-tag sequence cluster, a cDNA master-mix for the total number of reactions was prepared containing Power SYBR-green Master Mix 2X, the total required volume of cDNA and nuclease-free water to make up the volume to 18 μl. The required cDNA volume used was based on the previous P90 housekeeping gene qRT-PCR performed prior to the DBLα-tag sequencing. Samples which had P90 Cts of <15, 1.125 μl cDNA was added per reaction, those with Cts of 15–19 had 1.25 μl per reaction and finally the rest of the samples had previous Cts of 22–26 for which 2 μl of cDNA was added to each reaction. PCR cycling conditions were 10 min at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles of 30 sec at 95 °C, 40 sec at 50 °C, and 50 sec at 65 °C, with final elongation of 40 sec at 68 °C followed by a melt curve. All qPCRs were run on a QTower3.
For each DBLα- tag cluster, primer pairs which amplified in reactions with only one melting peak were considered to calculate an average gene Ct relative to their average of Ct P90 and P61 genes.

## var domain type qPCR
var-domain type qPCR was performed as described in [ ]. Primers for the different domain types were pre-mixed as described in , to a final total primer concentration of 20 μM for forward and reverse primers. Primers sequences are found in the Key Resources Table. PCR cycling conditions were 15 min at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles of 30 sec at 95 °C, 40 sec at 50 °C, and 50 sec at 65 °C, with final elongation of 40 sec at 68 °C.
 

## Total var expression by varATS and RUF6 qPCR
Ruf6 and varATS were quantified relative to the housekeeping gene P61. All three genes were quantified on the same day without re-freezing cDNA. P61 qPCR was performed as described above. varATS qPCR was performed using the protocol outlined in [ ], using a total reaction volume of 20 μl and 2 μl of cDNA as input. Ruf6 qPCR was performed in 20 μl reaction volume using Power SYBRgreen Master Mix with 2 μl cDNA and the primers Ruf6 A fwd, Ruf6 A rev, Ruf6 B fwd, Ruf6 B rev at a final concentration of 117 nM each. Cycling conditions for Ruf6 qPCR were 10 min at 95°C followed by 40 cycles of 15 sec at 95°C, 20 sec at 54°C, 7 sec at 56.5°C, 7 sec at 59°C and 20 sec at 62°C followed by a melt curve. All qPCRs were run on a QTower3.

## AMA1-ELISA
Plasma antibody levels to Ama1 were measured as previously described [ ]. Samples were measured in duplicates; quantification was performed relative to a standard curve comprised of wells coated with 250 – 0.244 ng human IgG (biotechne, human IgG Control). Detection was performed using goat-anti Human IgG coupled with alkaline phosphatase (Invitrogen) and 1-Step PNPP solution (Thermo Scientific). All samples were measured at a 1:100 dilution, if samples were outside the dynamic range of the assay, measurements were repeated at higher dilutions (1:200, 1:500, 1:1000) and the average of all dilutions falling in the assay’s dynamic range used. Four plasmas of malaria naïve German donors were used as negative controls. Readout was performed using a SpectraMax 190 plate reader (Molecular Devices) at 405 nm wavelength.

## Surface recognition assay
For surface recognition assay, plasmas were heat inactivated for 30 min at 56°C and pre-depleted with uninfected RBCs. FCR3 parasites were panned using HDMEC cells as previously described [ ] and used within a week and mainly expressing IT4var16. Plasmas were incubated at a 1:10 dilution in PBS with FCR3 parasites at 4% Haematocrit, ~ 2% parasitaemia overnight. Then, parasites were washed three times in PBS and stained with 1:50 anti-human IgG APC (Biolegend) and 1:2000 SYBR green (Invitrogen) in PBS/2%FCS for 30 min at room temperature. After 3x washes in PBS, samples were read in the FITC and APC channels of a flow cytometer (LSR II, BD). A hyperimmune pool and plasmas from two malaria naïve donors were included as positive and negative controls. Analysis was performed using the FlowJo software.

## PfEMP1 domain antibody reactivity
Recognition of PfEMP1 domains by plasma antibodies was measured as described in [ ]. Briefly, plasma samples were spun down and incubated at 1:40 dilution with PfEMP1 coupled beads for 30 min, followed by 30 min incubation with 1:3000 human secondary F(ab′)2 Goat Anti-Human IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch) and fluorescence measurement on a Bio-Plex 2000 system. Recognition of individual PfEMP1 domains was defined as fluorescence intensity greater than the average of 6 German malaria-naïve control plasmas plus two standard deviations.

## SMART-Seq single-cell RNA-seq
Glycerolyte-frozen RBC pellets of one persisting dry season sample collected at scheduled cross-sectional timepoint in July 2020 and one clinical malaria case in the 2020 wet season were thawed and stained in 1:2000 SYBR green (Invitrogen), 1:25 APC anti-human CD71, clone OKT9 (Invitrogen,), and 1:50 APC anti-human Lineage Cocktail (BioLegend) in PBS for 30 min at 37 °C, followed by 3x washes in PBS. Part of the RBC pellet of the clinical malaria case were in vitro cultured at 1–2% haematocrit in RPMI 1640 (Gibco) complete medium (with L-glutamine and HEPES), 7.4% sodium bicarbonate (Gibco), 100 μM hypoxanthine (C.C.Pro) and 25 mg ml − 1 gentamycin (Gibco) added with 0.25% Albumax II (Gibco) and 10% heat-inactivated ORH+ plasma for ~16h at 37°C in a CO2 incubator (HeraCell VIOS 250i, ThermoFisher) with a gas mixture of 5% O2, 5% CO2 and 90% N2, before staining.
In a flow cytometer (Aria III, BD), FITC-positive and APC-negative iRBCs were single-cell sorted into 96-well PCR plates with lysis buffer (TakaraBio) and flash-frozen on dry-ice followed by storage at -70 °C until further processing. Sequencing libraries were prepared from the cells using the SMART-Seq Single Cell PLUS kit (TakaraBio) and according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with 20–21 cycles of cDNA amplification, and 12–16 cycles of library amplification. Quality and quantity of cDNA and libraries were assessed using the Qubit 4.0 1X dsDNA high sensitivity assay (ThermoFisher) and the Bioanalyzer high sensitivity DNA kit (Agilent). The libraries were sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq with 2 × 300 paired-end cycle protocol using the MiSeq Reagent Kit v3 (600-cycle) (Illumina).

## Single-cell transcriptome variant analysis
Raw sequencing reads were trimmed for Illumina adapters using cutadapt [ ] (-a AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCA -A AGATCGGAAGAGCGTCGTGTAGGGAAAGAGTGT -q 30 --pair-filter = any -m 100) and mapped to P. falciparum 3D7 (PlasmoDB v60) [ ] and human (USCS hg38) [ ] using STAR [ ] using the ‘--quantMode GeneCounts’ flag to create a gene count matrix, and the ‘--outSAMtype BAM SortedByCoordinate’ to sort the resulting bam file. Gene annotations were obtained from PlasmoDB (v60) and GENCODE (release 34) [ ]. The gene count matrix were used to quality-filter the cells (n = 186), keeping cells with >100 Pf genes and >1.000 Pf reads (n = 111), and to determine the parasite developmental stage using the scmapCell function of scmap [ ] and the single cell reference atlas of Dogga et al [ ]. The Bam files were filtered for mappings to the Pf genome and analysed for nucleic acid variations using GATK (v4) [ ] with the following series of commands: AddOrReplaceReadGroups (--RGPL ILLUMINA --RGPU MiSeq --RGSM $cell_id --RGLB $sample_id), MarkDuplicates, SplitNCigarReads, BaseRecalibrator (--known-sites 3d7_hb3.vcf --known-sites 7g8_gb4.vcf --known-sites hb3_dd2.vcf) [ ], ApplyBQSR, HaplotypeCaller (-stand-call-conf 20 --emit-ref-confidence GVCF). The resulting vcf files were analysed using VarClust [ ] with modifications in the script. In brief, each cell was profiled by all variant and non-variant positions with a homozygous call and coverage of at least 5 reads. The profiles were pairwise compared to generate a distance matrix based on matching variant or non-variant calls relative to the overall overlap of positions (1 – matches/overlap). All pairwise comparisons had > 5.000 overlapping positions. The varclust_heatmap function was used to generate a heatmap with hierarchical clustering based on the distance matrix.

## Single-cell var gene expression analysis
Trimmed reads of quality-filtered cells (n = 111) were mapped to the varDB also used for Varia (https://github.com/ThomasDOtto/varDB/tree/master/Datasets/Varia). FeatureCount [ ] (-p --primary -M -O -f) was used to generate a var domain count matrix, and the cells were filtered by at least 3 mapped reads (n = 90) and coverage of more than just ATS domains (n = 89). In R, the count matrix was normalized by relative counts and a scaling factor of 10.000, and the var domains were filtered by >100 summed normalized reads across cells in a sample. Then, a distance matrix was generated using binary metrics and used for hierarchical clustering using ward.D2 method [ ]. The cells were split into 8 (dry season sample) or 24 (clinical malaria case) clusters, and clusters with similar coverage of NTS, DBLα and/or CIDRα domains were manually collapsed to a total of 7 and 22 clusters, respectively. The covered regions of similar domains were tested for sequence similarity by megablast [ ] (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PROGRAM=blastn).

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## DBLα-tag sequencing in clinical and asymptomatic infections from across the year.
(A) Correlation of parasitaemia and participant age in October 2019 in 91 samples from beginning of the dry season (startDry n = 30), end of the dry season (endDry n = 28) and clinical malaria cases (MAL n = 24) and the wet season (midWet n = 22). (B) Correlation of complexity of infection (COI) and participant age in 79 (startDry (n = 20), endDry (n = 23) and midWet (n = 15)) asymptomatic infections and clinical malaria cases (MAL n = 21). (C) Correlation between DBLα-tag abundance between clusters in 60 samples with duplicates of > 500 reads. (D) Read count in 82 samples (startDry = 17, endDry n = 24, MAL n = 24, midWet n = 17) from the four timepoint after quality filtering. (E) Correlation between read count and number of DBLα-tags in a sample with color indicating timepoint. (F) Correlation between number of DBLα-tag clusters in the same samples and participant age with color indicating timepoint.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## DBLα-tag sequencing in clinical and asymptomatic infections after short term culture.
Comparison of DBLα-tags in 16 wet season asymptomatic (midWet) samples (left) and 20 MAL (right) ex vivo samples (0h) and the corresponding short-term culture timepoints (12h). Individual clusters are plotted on the y-axis with lines connecting clusters detected at the 0h and 12h timepoint. Dot size indicates proportion of reads in sample mapping to the cluster. DBLα-tags were annotated with DBLα subtype by best BLAST hit in a database of annotated var genes.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## DBLα-tag cluster distribution in clinical and asymptomatic infections.
(A) Minimum number of DBLα-tags in 65% of reads in 82 samples from clinical malaria cases and asymptomatic infections (startDry = 17, endDry n = 24, MAL n = 24, midWet n = 17). Median and IQR are shown with dot size indicating participant age. Kruskall-Wallis test with Bonferroni multiple comparison correction (B) Simpson diversity index of read distribution in the same 82 samples. Median and IQR are shown with dot size indicating participant age. Kruskall-Wallis test with Bonferroni multiple comparison correction. (C) Proportion of DBLα-tags annotated to DBLα-subtypes. Annotation is based on the best Blast hit in an annotated var database (min e-value 1e-02). Shown is the proportion of clusters detected at each of the timepoints belonging to the three DBLα-subtypes. (D) Proportion of DBLα-tag sequencing reads mapping to DBLα-tag clusters annotated as DBLα0 (left panel), DBLα1 (middle panel) or DBLα2 (right panel) in 82 samples across the four timepoints (startDry = 17, endDry n = 24, MAL n = 24, midWet n = 17). Annotation as described above, median and IQR are indicated on the plot with dot size showing participant age. Kruskall-Wallis test with Bonferroni multiple comparison correction.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## AMA1 amplicon sequencing and DBLα-tag sequencing in paired samples from Jan and May.
(A) AMA1 haplotype sharing between paired samples of 8 study participant at the beginning (startDry) and end of the dry season (endDry) 2019. Each box corresponds to a study participant, participant ID is shown in the gray shaded area. Dots represent a haplotype, identifiers are listed on the y-axis, with dot size indicating cluster abundance as proportion of reads. Clusters present at both timepoints are connected by a line. Two replicates per sample, haplotypes were clustered by 0.989 similarity and had to be present in both replicates. Red boxes indicate samples were all haplotypes present at the end of the dry season are also detected at the season’s start. (B) DBLα-tag sharing between paired samples of 9 study participants at start and end of the 2019 dry season, each box corresponds to a study participant with ID shown in the gray shaded area. Dots represent a DBLα-tag, shared tags between timepoints are connected by a line. Color indicates annotation by best BLAST hit (min value 1e-02) in an annotated var database, abundance as proportion of reads in the sample is shown as dot size. Samples of study participants are shown in the same position in A and B panels.
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## Var-gene types across timepoints.
(A) Expression of putative ICAM1-binding var genes in 82 samples (startDry = 17, endDry n = 24, MAL n = 24, midWet n = 17). var genes with predicted CIDRα1 plus DBLβ1/3, were assigned to group A and CIDRα2 – 6 plus DBLβ5 domains to group B ICAM-1-binders. (B) Expression level of DBLδ and DBL𝛾 containing var genes in the same samples. (C) Sankey plot of comparing annotation of DBLα-tags with cUPS and upsAI. (D) Relative expression of different var-gene domain types quantified in 54 samples (startDry n = 15, endDry n = 24, MAL n = 15, midWet = 10) by qPCR normalized to a housekeeping gene (Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase, PF3D7_1444800). (E) Correlation of relative expression of different var-gene domain types measured by RT-qPCR in 54 samples (startDry n = 15, endDry n = 24, MAL n = 15, midWet = 10) and proportion of reads in DBLα-tag clusters belonging to var-genes with the equivalent domain types based on Varia prediction in the same samples. Color indicates timepoint. (F) var2csa expression in clinical and asymptomatic infections (startDry n = 4, endDry n = 11, MAL n = 15, Oct n = 10) and clinical malaria cases after short time of in vitro culture (MAL 12h, n = 15). B, C, E and G Kruskall-Wallis test with Bonferroni multiple comparison correction.
(TIF)
S6 Fig

## DBLα-tag sequencing and immunity.
(A) Gating strategy of surface recognition assay (SRA) with FCR3 iRBC incubated with plasma of pooled plasma of Malian individuals and stained with SYBRgreen, first gated on single cells based on forward and side scatter (top two small plots each panel) and then on infected RBC based on SYBRgreen staining in the FITC channel (bottom small plot each panel). Surface recognition was identified by staining with an anti-human IgG APC antibody and detected in the APC channel (big plot each panel). (B) Correlation of humoral immunity measured by SRA (left) and AMA1 ELISA (right) in plasmas from dry and wet season (startDry 19 n = 17, endDry n = 10, midWet n = 17, MAL n = 10) to participant age with color indicating timepoint. (C) Correlation of humoral immunity measured by and AMA1 ELISA (top) and SRA (bottom)in the same plasmas and breadth of recognition of var domains measured in Luminex. (D) Correlation between the different measures of humoral immunity and participant age. (E) Correlation of humoral immunity measured by AMA1 ELISA (left) and SRA (right) and parasitaemia.
(TIF)
S7 Fig

## Sequence comparison of var mapping reads in smart-seq data.
(A) Comparison of regions with sequencing coverage by smart-seq of an end-Dry season asymptomatic infection. Cells were clustered by var expression into 7 clusters indicated by color, and coverage of individual var domains in a reference database shown by cluster. The y-axis delineates identifiers of the individual domains with mapping reads, the x-axis shows sequencing coverage by region of the respective domains. Number of cells with coverage of a specific domain type is shown next to the sequence identifier. 11 instances of reads mapping to different reference domains of the same domain type in the same cluster were detected, highlighted by brackets on the plot. Overlapping regions with coverage in the same cluster (indicated by arrows) were compared by BLAST, sequence similarity of sequences in percent is shown on the right of the respective sequence. In cluster 1, we observed mapping to different regions of different sequences of the same domain type (indicated by dashed line). In cluster 2 and 4, mapping across the majority of cells was congruent, only a single cell showed a divergent expression pattern. (B) Proposed var gene domain architecture of clusters obtained by single-cell RNAseq of end-dry season sample. Top panel shows domain composition of var genes overall, below reference domains detected by single-cell RNAseq are listed in the corresponding positions for each cluster. (C) Equivalent plot to A describing var read mapping in a clinical malaria case.
(TIF)
S1 Table

## Expression and annotation of individual DBLα-tags in 82 clinical and asymptomatic infections.
DBLα-tag sequences were clustered by 0.96 similarity and expression level in individual samples determined. DBLα-tags were annotated using the Varia [ ] and cUPS [ ] tools, and by the best BLAST hit in an annotated var gene database [ ]. COI, measured by ama1 amplicon sequencing and parasitaemia by varATS qPCR are also shown in the table.
(XLSX)
S2 Table

## var gene expression in single cells from an asymptomatic infection at the end of the dry season by SMARTSeq.
Only cells with more than three var mapping reads were included. Expression of var domains included in a database of 200.000 vars and one million var domains [ ] in the 48 iRBCs collected at the end pf the dry season.
(XLSX)
S3 Table

## var gene expression in single cells from a clinical malaria case in the wet season by SMARTSeq.
Only cells with more than three var mapping reads were included. Expression of var domains included in a database of 200.000 vars and one million var domains [ ] in the 41 iRBCs collected during a clinical malaria case in the wet season.
(XLSX)
S4 Table

## Key resources table.
(DOCX)

We thank the residents of Kalifabougou, Mali, for their participation in the study. Recombinant AMA1 protein was kindly provided by Karthik Gunalan and Louis H Miller, NIH. Katrin Lehmann and Mir-Farzin Mashreghi at DRFZ assisted the sequencing of the SMART-seq libraries on the MiSeq. We thank Aaron Pangilinan and Thomas Otto (University of Glasgow) for sharing upsAI tool prior to its publication. We acknowledge the use of PlasmoDB (https://plasmodb.org) throughout this study and thank its team for maintaining this valuable resource.
 10.1371/journal.ppat.1013210.r001Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version0
7 Jan 2025

10.1371/journal.ppat.1013210.r002Decision Letter 0
PhillipsMargaret ASection EditorDzikowskiRonAcademic Editor© 2025 Phillips, Dzikowski2025Phillips, Dzikowskihttps://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Submission Version0
30 Jan 2025

PPATHOGENS-D-25-00021
Plasmodium falciparum expresses fewer var genes at lower levels during asymptomatic dry season infections than clinical malaria cases
PLOS Pathogens
Dear Dr. Portugal,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Pathogens. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Pathogens publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript within 30 days Mar 31 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plospathogens@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/ppathogens/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to any formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Ron Dzikowski
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Margaret Phillips
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

Additional Editor Comments:

As you can see all 3 reviewers (and myself included) who are experts in the field have positive opinion on this study. In your revision please address all their comments and primarily those which are listed as major points by reviewers #1. If the data is available please include it but if not please refer to it in the text as requested.

Journal Requirements:

1) Please ensure that the CRediT author contributions listed for every co-author are completed accurately and in full.
At this stage, the following Authors/Authors require contributions: Sukai Ceesay, Martin Kampmann, Lasse Votborg-Novel, Helle Smedegaard Hansson, Rasmus Weisel Jensen, Manuela Carrasquilla, Hamidou Cisse, Louise Turner, Usama Dabbas, Christina Ntalla, Silke Bandermann, Safiatou Doumbo, Didier Doumtabe, Aissata Ongoiba, Kassoum Kayentao, Boubacar Traore, Peter D Crompton, Thomas Lavstsen, and Silvia Portugal. Please ensure that the full contributions of each author are acknowledged in the "Add/Edit/Remove Authors" section of our submission form.
The list of CRediT author contributions may be found here: https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/s/authorship#loc-author-contributions
2) We ask that a manuscript source file is provided at Revision. Please upload your manuscript file as a .doc, .docx, .rtf or .tex. If you are providing a .tex file, please upload it under the item type u2018LaTeX Source Fileu2019 and leave your .pdf version as the item type u2018Manuscriptu2019.
3) Please provide an Author Summary. This should appear in your manuscript between the Abstract (if applicable) and the Introduction, and should be 150-200 words long. The aim should be to make your findings accessible to a wide audience that includes both scientists and non-scientists. Sample summaries can be found on our website under Submission Guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/s/submission-guidelines#loc-parts-of-a-submission

4) Please upload all main figures as separate Figure files in .tif or .eps format. For more information about how to convert and format your figure files please see our guidelines: 

https://journals.plos.org/plospathogens/s/figures

5) We notice that your supplementary Figures are included in the manuscript file. Please remove them and upload them with the file type 'Supporting Information'. Please ensure that each Supporting Information file has a legend listed in the manuscript after the references list.
6) Please amend your detailed Financial Disclosure statement. This is published with the article. It must therefore be completed in full sentences and contain the exact wording you wish to be published.
1) State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."

Reviewers' Comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: In this manuscript, the authors investigated the expression of parasite virulence genes in a Malian cohort with seasonal malaria. In particular, they sought to explain the differences in circulating parasite stages between wet and dry season parasites observed in a previous publication, suggesting differences in cytoadhesion of infected cells as the cause. In this work, they included samples of clinical cases from the wet season and samples from asymptomatic patients at the beginning and end of the dry season, but also from the middle of the rainy season as an additional control. First, the cohort is characterized in terms of parasite prevalence, parasitemia, complexity of infection, age and later the degree of immunity and these parameters are linked to the expression pattern of the var genes of the parasites, which they determined using an expressed sequence tag approach (DBLa-tag) in conjunction with previously published bioinformatics tools to predict the full-length encoded PfEMP1 protein (Varia) and its var group identity (cUPS) by its upstream region. In addition, they performed SMART scRNAseq on one isolate each from the wet and dry seasons, a method that generates reads from the full-length var genes and enables the determination of the composition of the encoded domains. In principle, methods and tools used are well established in the field, but their application to a seasonal malaria cohort is novel. From their data, they conclude that the diversity of var gene expression is limited in asymptomatic cases, with the samples at the end of the dry period showing the most extreme phenotype of very homogeneous expression of mostly a single variant and the clinical cases representing the other extreme with very diverse var gene expression. In addition, the overall level of var gene expression is reduced in asymptomatic cases. But apart from finding more EPCR-binding variants associated with severity in clinical cases, no difference in predicted binding phenotype or var group could be detected that could account for the reduced cytoadhesion.
Overall, this is a very convincing study that confirms an earlier publication by Warimwe et al. 2013 (PMID: 23922996), in which the authors described the same trend of asymptomatic infections having parasites with less diverse var expression, lower parasitemia, being older and having a higher proportion of infected erythrocyte surface-recognizing antibodies compared to non-severe and severe cases. However, as this older data set was generated by DBLa tag PCR with cloning and Sanger sequencing of a limited number of clones, the data presented is of significantly higher quality, and samples from the end of the dry season may even have a stronger “asymptomatic” phenotype. Especially, the controls included by the authors in the experimental design are very useful, such as the confirmation of DBLa-tag results with a subset of samples and genes using variant-specific qPCR primers, doing technical replicates or the exclusion of samples falling below a certain threshold for parasite RNA content to ensure comparability. The scRNA data strongly support the differences in var expression diversity between asymptomatic and clinical cases, although the overall level of var gene expression was not analyzed using this method, only a limited number of cells were analyzed and the data are likely to be difficult to grasp for non-var experts.
Reviewer #2: The submission from Ceesay and colleagues describes a detailed examination of var gene expression in individuals infected by P. falciparum in Mali. The authors analyzed samples at different points in the transmission season and in individuals that had different levels of anti-malaria immunity. The study site is particularly interesting due to the stark differences in transmission rates across the length of the year, with 6 months of intense transmission and 6 months of very little transmission. This provided the authors with the ability to investigate how var gene expression changes with the acquisition of immunity. They are also able to examine infections that they could be certain had not been recently obtained. In addition, they could compare symptomatic and asymptomatic infections. The authors obtained data indicating that as individuals acquire greater anti-PfEMP1 immunity, var expression levels fall, the number of var genes that are detectably expressed decreases, and symptoms similarly decrease. Many of these conclusions were anticipated and make sense base on current models of immunity, nonetheless validation by this study is valuable. The more provocative conclusions are that parasites might respond to anti-PfEMP1 immunity by reducing total var gene expression, something that has been hinted at in laboratory studies but not be described in the field. In addition, the authors found no correlation with PfEMP1 type and dry vs wet season transmission, which contrasts with some previous predictions. Overall, this is a valuable dataset from an interesting study that will be valuable to researchers interested in the dynamics of PfEMP1/var expression during natural malaria transmission.
Reviewer #3: The study “Plasmodium falciparum expresses fewer var genes at lower levels during asymptomatic dry season infections than clinical malaria cases” by Ceesay et al. investigated var gene expression in asymptomatic infections and clinical malaria cases among Malian children during dry and wet seasons. Sequencing and bioinformatics analyses revealed that parasites from asymptomatic infections expressed fewer var genes, with transcripts dominated by one or a few var types, while clinical cases exhibited broader var gene expression at lower levels. Parasites from asymptomatic carriers expressed a mix of CD36- and EPCR-binding PfEMP1, with CD36-binding variants dominating in non-severe cases. The findings suggested that host immunity was key in limiting var transcript diversity.
The manuscript is well written, uses state-of-the-art techniques and provides novel insights into malaria pathogenesis and persistence. It thus is of interest for a broader community. I only have some minor remarks.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: 1. My main concern is the claim that the overall level of var expression decreases during the dry season to sustain long-term infections. This data point is based solely on qPCR results using an ATS primer designed for diagnostic purposes, which according to the original paper (PMID: 25734259) only covers 40% of all variants and mainly B-type var genes (17 out of 19 genes in 3D7 that can be amplified from 3D7 according to Primer3 Blast). Instead of a decrease in the total amount, this could also be interpreted as a shift towards other var groups that are not covered by the primer. Especially since clinical cases are younger and less immune, I would assume that they express many B-types and may therefore be better covered by the primer. Therefore, I would be cautious to draw conclusions about the total var value solely based on this primer. Do the authors have additional data to support this point? I suggest backing this up with another approach such as the scRNAseq data. Can the authors infer anything from their scRNAseq data, e.g. more var reads in the malaria case, higher coverage of the LARSFADIG motif (as in PMID: 38270586)? Otherwise, this needs to be toned down.
2. The prediction of the upstream region and associated var gene groups from DBLa tags using cUPS is not reliable, especially the distinction between B and C types (accuracy of 48.3 %) (Preprint Tan et al 2023; doi: 10.1101/2023.11.05.565723). Thus, it remains unclear whether a specific var group signature is associated with asymptomatic infections, as this question cannot be answered with the chosen approach and requires the development of new methods. Unfortunately, this technical limitation is not discussed.
Reviewer #2: None
Reviewer #3: None
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: Unfortunately, the lines in the manuscript are not numbered, which makes it somewhat difficult to refer to specific text passages.
1. Abstract: There is evidence for older stages in the circulation, which might indicate reduced cytoadhesion – as stated at the end of intro –, not vice versa as stated in the abstract: “(…) shows reduced cytoadhesion of infected erythrocytes, evidenced by the circulation of further developed parasite stages (…)”.
2. Abstract: “However, by RNAseq and qRT-PCR we also observed significantly higher total var transcript levels in malaria cases compared to asymptomatic carriers.” As far as I have seen, var levels were only assessed by RT-qPCR, not by RNAseq. Please clarify!
3. Please add reference PMID: 14651636 for var subgrouping (together with Lavstsen 2003, ref29) in the introduction.
4. Please add studies on var gene expression in asymptomatic infections in the introduction and discussion: PMID: 15122533 (even a longitudinal study) and PMID: 23922996. Please specify which studies suggest a link between asymptomatic infections and varC expression.
5. To further improve the quality of the assumptions that can be made, the duration of infection should be assessed as an additional variable. Can the authors use regularly collected dried blood spots/venous blood samples and determine the COI/genotype and assess how long the individuals were infected and also correlate this with var gene expression, parasitemia, etc. as they have done in PMID: 39284949?
6. Parasites from clinical cases that had been cultured for 12 (DBLa-tag) or 16 hours (scRNAseq) served as controls in some experiments. However, the difference in the mean age of wet and dry season parasites is only about 6 hours, as shown in a previous publication (PMID: 35927582). Please comment!
7. It has already been shown that changes in var gene expression can occur during short-term in vitro cultivation in samples, although these cannot be predicted (PMID: 38270586). This could serve as an additional argument on page 6 (section before Figure 1).
8. Figure 1F: A Blant-Altman plot should be used to compare two methods, please replace.
9. It would be helpful if the pseudotimes for the parasites analyzed by RNAseq could be provided to assess the homogeneity of the developmental age of the parasites within the asymptomatic and clinical sample.
10. Please provide details of the primers used in the study. Currently there is not even a reference in the methods section for the P61, P90 and no details at all for the qPCR primers used to validate the DBLa tag results.
11. On page 4 it is stated that RNA was assessed with two housekeeping genes to select samples with sufficient parasite RNA. However, the “Methods” section (page 22) states that only P90/seryl-tRNA was used to select samples (<ct30). at="" did="" fba="" in="" look="" p61="" qpcr="" the="" why="" you="">12. Please provide the formula for calculating the Simpson Diversity Index in the Methods section.
13. Figure 2: I would suggest showing Figure S3B instead of Figure 2C in the main figures, as the diversity index is based on both measurements, the number of clusters found and the proportions.
14. Figure 3: Since expression of the non EPCR-binding A-type (“unknown A” binding phenotype) was assessed in qPCR (DBL1.5/6/8), I would suggest including the predicted CIDRb/g/d domains in panel A as well, especially since the binding phenotype has also been associated with severe disease.
15. The overviews hidden in the supplement (Figure S3C, S5A & D) are easy to understand and should, in my opinion, be included in the main figures – especially as there are no obvious differences between the samples.
16. Recently, ruf6 expression was shown to be transcribed from PolIII and regulated by Maf1, and an increase in ruf6 and var expression was associated with increased plasma magnesium levels in symptomatic wet season samples (PMID: 38921824). Do you have any data from your cohort to support this study?
17. Page 12: Ref29 is not the correct reference for the Luminex assay
18. To improve the flow of the manuscript, I would suggest moving the section on the assessment of immunity to the first chapter on the description of the cohort, as it fits with the age and parasitemia curves and then the scRNA results are not so detached.
19. Also, is there an assessment of immunity in this cohort of those who were able to overcome the infection compared to those who remained positive throughout the dry season or were negative at the beginning of the dry season?
20. The entire section on scRNA may be difficult to understand for non-PfEMP1 experts. The mapping of the sc reads against varDB, in which the genomic sequences of the var genes of the isolates studied are not deposited, was performed because no reference genomes are available. Why did the authors not generate a reference, either by sequencing gDNA or by de novo assembly of var transcripts from RNAseq reads? At the very least, I would recommend providing schematics for each cluster with the putative domain composition, which would also show that different regions of a domain correspond to different domains in the database.
21. Figure 6B&C: What is the difference between dots that are filled and others that contain a plus? I would suggest drawing vertical lines between the clusters.
22. Please comment if you have seen var-null or multiple var-expressing cells as described in the preprint https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.03.08.584127. Have you found any other expression differences apart from the var genes?
23. The authors provide the scRNAseq data only on request, as indicated in the legends of Tables S2 and 3. The data should be included in the manuscript supplement or deposited in publicly accessible databases.
24. We already know from CHMI infections and another cohort study using the DBLa tag approach that naïve (and also more severe cases) and less immune African individuals (“non-controllers”) express a higher number of var genes, which is restricted in individuals with higher immunity (“controllers”), this might be worth discussing (PMID: 31295334; PMID: 27070311; PMID: 33908865; PMID: 34340541; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.12.27.23300577)</ct30).>
Reviewer #2: I have no major criticisms for the authors. The present a large set of data, and while alternative methods of analysis and presentation are possible, I will leave that to the authors’ discretion.
Minor, suggestions:
1. In all the Figures, the authors occasionally use yellow or light green text (or symbols) that are virtually impossible to read on a white background. They should adjust all the colors to ensure easy legibility.
2. The legend to Figure 1 is missing a description of panel E. The current legend includes descriptions of panels F and G but labels them E and F.
3. In the first sentence on page 4 the authors use the abbreviation MAL but don’t define it until later in the paragraph.
4. On page 7, the authors annotate their DBL-tag sequences to DBLα types 0, 1 and 2. Please provide the readers with a brief description of what these types are and why this is interesting.
Reviewer #3: • The reference numbering starts at [2]
• Page 4, first line: The abbreviation MAL is used for the first time, but not defined. Later in the manuscript, MAL is defined several times or sometimes the abbreviation is not used at all but the full term. MAL should be defined one time, when the it is used for the first time, but then MAL should be used consequently throughout the text.
• Page 4, center part: "The individuals’ age correlated negatively to parasitaemia (Spearman’s cor -0.52, p= 8.99e-7) (S Fig. 1A)" These values cannot be derived from the graph. There is a correlation coefficient of -0.39 in the graph.
• Page 13, center part: "iRBC surface recognition , and..." There is an extra space.
• Page 13, last line of the text: The authors talk about a negative correlation, so it should be -0.71 instead of 0.71. (It is also incorrect in the graph.)
• Page 14, center part: Reference to Fig. 6a - it should be 6A.
• Page 19, line 4: Fig.4 - a space is missing here.
• Materials and Methods section: µ is italicized in some places and not in others.
• Page 20, end of the first paragraph: One study exclusion criterion is a temperature of greater than or equal to 37.5 degrees? Does this make sense when the authors further write the following: Clinical malaria cases were defined as Plasmodium infection with parasitaemia >2500 parasites/µl blood and an axillary temperature >37.5°C?
• Page 20, last paragraph: P. falciparum is not italicized.
• Page 25, second paragraph: "Recombinant Pf3D7 AMA1." Incomplete sentence?
• Page 26, center part: flash-frozen instead of "flash-freezed."
• Figure 1: The legend lacks a description of E; the panel labeled as E should be F, and what is labeled as F should be G. In the last two sentences of the legend, the statistical tests assigned to the panels are also incorrect.
• Figure 2: The legend is missing an L in the last sentence at "individual."
• Figure S4: The legend states, "Red boxes indicate samples where all haplotypes present at the end of the dry season are also detected at the season’s start." This cannot be seen. Does this only apply to A? Then what do the boxes mean in B?
• Figure S6: I believe the two panels of E do not appear in the text and also lack a legend. Does the legend for C and D match? The legend does not fit the figure.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. If there are other versions of figure files still present in your submission file inventory at resubmission, please replace them with the PACE-processed versions.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that authors of applicable studies deposit laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013210.r003Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
17 Apr 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: reSub c&K Response to Reviewers.pdf
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013210.r004Decision Letter 1
PhillipsMargaret ASection EditorDzikowskiRonAcademic Editor© 2025 Phillips, Dzikowski2025Phillips, Dzikowskihttps://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Submission Version1
12 May 2025

Dear Dr. Portugal,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Plasmodium falciparum expresses fewer var genes at lower levels during asymptomatic dry season infections than clinical malaria cases' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Ron Dzikowski
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Margaret Phillips
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064
***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: My comments have been adequately addressed.
Reviewer #2: This manuscript describes a valuable and interesting dataset that details var gene expression at different points in the transmission season and in individuals that had different levels of anti-malaria immunity. The authors provide convincing evidence that as individuals acquire greater anti-PfEMP1 immunity, var expression levels fall, the number of var genes that are detectably expressed decreases, and symptoms similarly decrease. The analysis is extensive and thorough and provides insights into the dynamics of lengthy P. falciparum infections and the acquisition of immunity.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: n/a
Reviewer #2: None.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: Point 2: Analyzing the DBLa tag data using the new upsAI tool with increased accuracy and increased number of predicted DBLa tags (>99%) improved the significance of this data point. However, it also shows the difficulty in distinguishing between upsB and upsC types, as these values differed the most between the two prediction tools. Unfortunately, as the upsAI tool is not yet published, it is difficult to assess whether reliable predictions of ups types can be made from relatively short DBLa tags or whether longer sequences are required. For correct interpretation of the data, I think any remaining limitations/difficulties in distinguishing between upsB and upsC with cUPS and upsAI should be mentioned somewhere in the manuscript.
Line 272: var should be in italics
Line 254: Instead of “encoded var domains” -> “var-encoded domains” or “encoded PfEMP1 domains”
Reviewer #2: The authors have suitably addressed my previous comments. I have no additional suggestions.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes:  Gabriele Pradel
10.1371/journal.ppat.1013210.r005Acceptance letter
PhillipsMargaret ASection EditorDzikowskiRonAcademic Editor© 2025 Phillips, Dzikowski2025Phillips, Dzikowskihttps://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.Dear Dr. Portugal,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Plasmodium falciparum expresses fewer var genes at lower levels during asymptomatic dry season infections than clinical malaria cases," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0003-2946-9497
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064