pmcACS Infect DisACS Infect Dis822acssd101654580idACS Infectious Diseases2373-8227pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC10862538PMC10862538.110862538108625383827199110.1021/acsinfecdis.3c005641ArticleEnhanced Antimalarial
and Antisequestration Activity
of Methoxybenzenesulfonate-Modified Biopolymers and Nanoparticles
for Tackling Severe Malaria
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4868-9364NajerAdrian KimJunyoung https://orcid.org/0009-0000-3883-9635SaundersCatherine CheJunyi BaumJake https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7335-266XStevensMolly M. †Department
of Materials, Department of Bioengineering, and Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, U.K.‡Department
of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, U.K.§Department
of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, Department of Engineering Science,
and Kavli Institute for Nanoscience Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QU, U.K.*Email: adrian.najer@kcl.ac.uk.*Email: jake.baum@unsw.edu.au.*Email: molly.stevens@dpag.ox.ac.uk.2501202409022024102455754732745201020230801202407012024130220241402202414022024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2024The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
Severe malaria is
a life-threatening condition that is associated
with a high mortality. Severe Plasmodium falciparum infections are mediated primarily by high parasitemia and binding
of infected red blood cells (iRBCs) to the blood vessel endothelial
layer, a process known as sequestration. Here, we show that including
the 5-amino-2-methoxybenzenesulfonate (AMBS) chemical modification
in soluble biopolymers (polyglutamic acid and heparin) and poly(acrylic
acid)-exposing nanoparticles serves as a universal tool to introduce
a potent parasite invasion inhibitory function in these materials.
Importantly, the modification did not add or eliminated (for heparin)
undesired anticoagulation activity. The materials protected RBCs from
invasion by various parasite strains, employing both major entry pathways.
Two further P. falciparum strains, which either expose
ligands for chondroitin sulfate A (CSA) or intercellular adhesion
molecule 1 (ICAM-1) on iRBCs, were tested in antisequestration assays
due to their relevance in placental and cerebral malaria, respectively.
Antisequestration activity was found to be more efficacious with nanoparticles vs gold-standard soluble biopolymers (CSA and heparin) against
both strains, when tested on receptor-coated dishes. The nanoparticles
also efficiently inhibited and reversed the sequestration of iRBCs
on endothelial cells. First, the materials described herein have the
potential to reduce the parasite burden by acting at the key multiplication
stage of reinvasion. Second, the antisequestration ability could help
remove iRBCs from the blood vessel endothelium, which could otherwise
cause vessel obstruction, which in turn can lead to multiple organ
failure in severe malaria infections. This approach represents a further
step toward creation of adjunctive therapies for this devastating
condition to reduce morbidity and mortality.

Plasmodiumsevere malariasequestrationbiomaterialnanoparticleinhibitionWellcome Trust10.13039/100010269100993/Z/13/ZLee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University10.13039/501100011738NAChina Scholarship Council10.13039/501100004543NANational Research Foundation of Korea10.13039/5011000037252022R1A6A3A03069072Rosetrees Trust10.13039/501100000833NAImperial College London10.13039/501100000761NARoyal Academy of Engineering10.13039/501100000287CiET202194Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council10.13039/501100000266EP/S023259/1Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council10.13039/501100000266EP/R00529X/1Wellcome Trust10.13039/100010269209121_Z_17_Zpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9id3c00564document-id-new-14id3c00564ccc-priceMalaria is a mosquito-transmitted
parasitic infection that caused 249 million infections and 608,000
deaths in 2022. Severe forms of the disease,
responsible for these deaths, are associated with hyperparasitemia
in the blood (∼2.5–20% depending on the epidemiological
context) and “sticky” late-stage infected red blood
cells (iRBCs) obscuring microvasculature blood flow, eventually causing
serious multiple organ failure. Even with access to state-of-the-art
hospitals, the mortality associated with severe malaria is still about
10–20%, and survivors of cerebral malaria can be neurologically
disabled for life. − The multiplication rate per life cycle (ca. 2 days)
was found to be around 16-fold for Plasmodium falciparum in humans, representing a key intervention
point. Another hallmark of severe P. falciparum infection in humans is the phenomenon called sequestration, i.e., binding of iRBCs to specific receptors on the blood
vessel endothelium. Hence, interfering
with both invasion and sequestration might be a suitable strategy
to avoid potentially fatal multiplication and blood flow obstruction
in severe malaria cases.
Parasites achieve sequestration through
mutually exclusive expression
of 1 out of 60 var genes encoding P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1). This protein is translocated to the iRBC surface
to mediate specific interactions with endothelial receptors including
heparan sulfate, , chondroitin sulfate A (CSA), and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), among others. The
CSA interaction can cause placental malaria, while the ICAM-1 interaction
is associated with cerebral malaria; both represent severe health
risks for the unborn child and mother and cerebral malaria patient,
respectively. Adjunctive therapeutic measures that can potently reverse
these interactions have been sought for a long time and are urgently
required to reduce mortality. This is particularly the case because
iRBCs continue to sequester in the blood microvessels, even after
killing the intracellular parasites with standard antimalarials. 
Heparin has a long-standing history in
evaluation for severe malaria
treatment because heparan sulfate on endothelial cells serves as a
receptor for PfEMP1, which is part of the knoblike
protrusions on the iRBC surface. Binding of heparin with PfEMP1 is mediated through lysine-rich, cationic regions of PfEMP1, called the Duffy-binding-like domain 1 (DBL-1), , and single-molecule force spectroscopy determined a binding force
of about 28–46 pN. However, heparin
use was banned for severe malaria application after initial trials
in the 1970s due to serious side effects, such as internal bleedings
caused by its inherent anticoagulation activity. , This has led to a breadth of research aimed at reducing the anticoagulation
properties of heparin or heparin-like molecules, while keeping the
invasion inhibitory and antisequestration functions to treat infections. − One formulation (sevuparin) has progressed up to in vivo trials in humans but revealed only a transient desequestration effect
and some activity against merozoite invasion, clearly requiring further
optimization to be a valuable adjunctive treatment option for severe
malaria. Unfortunately, heparin-based
structures, even when modified, still suffer from low specificity,
low potency, and often short circulation times. 
Other strategies with higher target specificity that
are being
evaluated preclinically against sequestration in severe malaria include
antibodies, , aptamers, and small molecule inhibitors. , However, specificity in the context of antisequestration application
could mean that it might be necessary to develop and test several
different inhibitors due to the 60 PfEMP1 variants.
It might also require detecting the dominant PfEMP1
expressed in iRBCs of a patient, and then apply an inhibitor specific
to that PfEMP1 variant, which could cause the parasites
to switch to another PfEMP1, subsequently avoiding
the inhibitor. Hence, finding more broadly applicable therapies that
act against various PfEMP1 variants, while providing
both sequestration inhibition and reversal action, would be of benefit. 
Nanotechnology has recently become more
prominent in various applications
against infectious diseases, including for diagnostic, therapeutic,
and preventive interventions. Indeed,
nanoparticles are also an upcoming tool for improving efficacy of
existing antimalarials through targeted delivery , and as invasion inhibitors. , − In the search for a simple nanoparticle system for the latter application,
we have recently shown potent Plasmodium invasion
inhibition with synthetic polymer–lipid hybrid nanoparticles
(EC50 at 0.38 ± 0.16 nM particle concentration) that
functioned by direct merozoite binding after egress in vitro and in a mouse malaria model. We further
demonstrated circulation time increase by incorporating poly(ethylene
glycol)-modified (PEGylated) lipids, but antisequestration activity
has not yet been evaluated for this system. In the specific case of
severe malaria mitigation, only a few nanoparticle-based strategies
have yet been studied and with a focus on drug delivery rather than
antisequestration. , Recently, nanoparticles were
coated with brain microvascular endothelial cell (BMEC) membranes
to allow binding to iRBCs and target brain microvasculature, combined
with controlled release of drugs for treating cerebral malaria. However, no direct evidence of antisequestration
activity against P. falciparum was
demonstrated as of yet for these nanoparticles. Further, finding more
easily translatable solutions, without the use of complex biological
components such as native cell membranes, might be beneficial.
Here, we chemically modified soluble biopolymers (polyglutamic
acid (PGA) and heparin) with the same chemical unit (5-amino-2-methoxybenzenesulfonic
acid, AMBS) used in our previous nanoparticle study. This modification transformed PGA into an antimalarial
polymer with a high potency. Furthermore, modifying the free carboxylic
acids within heparin also increased antimalarial activity, while the
undesired anticoagulation activity was nearly completely abolished.
Both biopolymers showed no cytotoxicity when tested at relevant concentrations
with a macrophage-like cell line. Besides evaluating parasite growth
inhibition potential of these soluble biopolymers and our previously
developed nanoparticles, we sought to
test antisequestration ability, which would be of great benefit as
an adjunctive therapy for severe malaria treatment. Both PGA-AMBS
and nanoparticles were found to be potent inhibitors of iRBC sequestration,
with the nanoparticles exhibiting even higher activity than gold-standard
soluble CSA. We demonstrated this activity with the parasite lines
CS2, modeling the severe pathology of placental malaria, and ItG,
which binds ICAM-1 and is associated with deadly cerebral malaria.
We finally confirmed the activity of our nanoparticles in prevention
and reversal of ItG iRBCs binding to ICAM-1 overexpressing human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), after tumor necrosis factor α
(TNF-α) stimulation. Overall, our modified biopolymers and nanoparticles
serve as a basis for the development of a severe malaria adjunctive
treatment, which would be highly desirable to bring down the high
mortality associated with this critical medical condition.

## Results
and Discussion

## Synthesis and Characterization of Methoxybenzenesulfonated
Materials
Various soluble polymers, including different versions
of heparin
and many other polysaccharides, have a long history of evaluation
as antimalarial agents. − However, their typically low potency and unwanted
side effects, such as anticoagulation activity, have hampered their
further development. Here, we evaluated modification of soluble biopolymers,
including a polypeptide and heparin, with a sulfonated molecule 5-amino-2-methoxybenzenesulfonic
acid (AMBS) that we have previously identified to produce potent nanoparticle-based
inhibitors. Free carboxylic acids within
PGA and heparin were modified similarly to the previous nanoparticle
modification through N-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)-N-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC-HCl)-mediated carboxylic
acid activation and in situ amine coupling ( ). These two modified biopolymers (PGA-AMBS and Hep-AMBS)
were used as soluble biopolymers and not in a nanoparticle formulation.
 The purified biopolymers revealed the characteristic ultraviolet–visible
(UV–vis) absorbance peak of AMBS that could be used to determine
the degree of modification, which yielded 53 and 58% for glutamic
acid units in PGA and of disaccharide units in heparin (on average
about 1 COOH per disaccharide), respectively (Figure S1). 1H NMR revealed higher degrees of modification
of 92 and 91% for PGA-AMBS and heparin-AMBS (assuming 1 available
COOH per disaccharide), respectively, as expected, as for UV–vis
characterization, no loss during purification was assumed (Figures S2 and S3). The hydrodynamic sizes revealed
that the biopolymers remained as soluble polymers after the modification
rather than assembling into nanoparticles (Hep-AMBS 4.8 ± 0.4
nm and PGA-AMBS 6.7 ± 1.6 nm; dynamic light scattering (DLS),
number distribution, mean ± s.d., technical triplicates). Instead
of modifying soluble biopolymers, we have previously shown that the
AMBS modification can be performed on the self-assembled block copolymer
poly(d,l-lactide)-block-poly(acrylic acid)
(PDLLA-b-PAA, 9 kDa-b-9 kDa), hereafter
called PDLLA-AMBS. When coassembling
this modified copolymer (PDLLA-AMBS) with lipids, polymer–lipid
nanoparticles (PLNs) are formed. The
reader is referred to our previous paper containing additional extensive
analysis with respect to particle characterization (transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), cryo-TEM, small-angle neutron scattering (SANS),
and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS)) and biological evaluation
of this system in vitro and in vivo. Here, we provide additional PLN characterization
data that are relevant to the systems used herein to treat severe
malaria ( ).
 We prepared PLNs by coinjection of an ethanolic
solution of 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(POPC), cholesterol, and PDLLA-AMBS, followed by size-exclusion chromatography
(SEC) purification. We have now sought to determine the saturation
point for the copolymer integrated in our PLNs by preparing particles
with 4, 8, and 15 mol % of the copolymer with respect to the vesicle-forming
POPC component, denoted as low, mid, and high, respectively. DLS measurements
revealed monodisperse hydrodynamic diameters of about 150 nm for all
of the samples after purification. Stability in PBS ± 10% (v/v)
fetal bovine serum (FBS) measured by DLS (Figure S1) and FCS ( c) using PLN-Atto647 revealed no aggregation of PLNs and hence
good stability in physiologically relevant conditions. ζ-potential
measurements suggested that the copolymer was coassembling with the
lipids, as the lipid-only control exhibited neutral charge, while
the PLNs revealed negative ζ-potentials, irrespective of the
amount of copolymer used ( d and S1).
We next
employed single-particle automated Raman trapping analysis
(SPARTA), previously used to establish
single-particle variation in synthetic nanoparticles, , to evaluate changes and distributions of polymer amount per particle
incorporated in PLNs. The average Raman spectra across all of the
single-particle traps ( e) show the characteristic PDLLA-AMBS signals (1032 and 1613
cm–1) together with the lipid signal (1439 cm–1), confirming coassembly of the polymer and lipid
on a single-particle level. Further, studying the polymer peak at
1613 cm–1 shows saturation of copolymer-loading
at the medium feed ratio ( f, where each dot represents one trapped and measured
particle). The addition of even more copolymer (high feed ratio) did
not increase the average amount of the copolymer present in PLNs and
instead caused a larger variation in loading per particle. We decided
to employ medium and high loading for subsequent experiments to use
PLNs with high copolymer presentation, maximizing the numbers of binding
sites, hence, allowing for multivalent interactions between PLNs and
cells.

## Biological Evaluation of Methoxybenzenesulfonated Materials
After synthesis and characterization of the AMBS-modified biopolymers
and nanoparticles, we then tested their biological activity including
anticoagulation activity, cytocompatibility, and invasion inhibitory
potential. The anticoagulation activity of many sulfated and/or sulfonated
biomaterials is a concern if the intended application is different
from anticoagulation therapy. However, anticoagulation potency is
often much lower than that for heparin. Polystyrenesulfonate (PSS)
that is chemically related to our AMBS-modified biomaterials did not
show anticoagulation activity previously; hence, we only expected little or no activity for our materials.
Indeed, the AMBS modification only conferred negligible anticoagulation
property to PGA and PLNs, as measured by anti-Xa tests. Only <0.5%
of anti-Xa activity was observed for all of the AMBS-modified materials
when compared to unmodified heparin by weight ( b and S4). This
is in agreement with our previous study that found low anticoagulation
property for polymer micelles based on the aminomethanesulfonic acid
(AMSA)-modified copolymer (MAMSA) and AMBS-modified copolymer (MAMBS). In the case of heparin, the addition of AMBS
to the carboxylic acids of the major disaccharide unit nearly completely
abolished the well-known anticoagulation activity of heparin ( b). This was not
unexpected since the carboxylic acid that is present in the native
pentasaccharide sequence is known to be responsible for the anticoagulation
activity of heparin; however, this functional group was transformed
with AMBS by the modification. Modifying the carboxylic acid functional
groups within heparin was previously shown to remove heparin’s
interaction potential with antithrombin III, which is required for
the characteristic anticoagulation property. 
 The cytocompatibility of new therapeutics
is another important
characteristic. We confirmed that our modified biomaterials were cytocompatible
when tested with the RAW 264.7 macrophage-like cell line at relevant
concentrations ( c). In conclusion, all of our AMBS-modified biomaterials did not
show significant anticoagulation potential nor were they cytotoxic.
From a safety perspective, these findings confirm the suitability
of our biomaterials for applications aside from anticoagulation therapy,
such as the herein described antimalarial applications. We had also
confirmed previously that PLNs (with 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[methoxy(poly(ethylene
glycol))-5000], DSPE-PEG) were biocompatible in vivo by histological analysis after intravenous PLN injection in mice. 
Next, our biomaterials were evaluated
in terms of P. falciparum invasion
inhibition using various strains
of the parasite known to utilize both main invasion pathways (W2mef,
sialic acid-dependent pathway; 3D7 and D10, sialic acid-independent
pathway). These assays involved incubating late-stage iRBCs with fresh
human RBCs either with or without the inhibitor overnight and then
counting the number of new-formed ring-stage iRBCs the following day
using flow cytometry. Dose–response curves revealed the transformation
of PGA into an antimalarial polymer by introducing the AMBS modification
(PGA-AMBS, d,e), while the unmodified PGA did not exert an inhibitory potential.
Using another small amino-sulfonate molecule (AMSA) for PGA modification
(PGA-AMSA) created much less potent inhibitors than the AMBS modification.
PGA and PGA-AMSA were not evaluated further because they did not reveal
any invasion inhibitory activity ( d). Interestingly, PGA-AMBS was even more
potent than the gold-standard heparin ( ). This can be explained by the slightly
longer polymer chain of PGA vs heparin combined with
our previous data that larger structures tended to become better inhibitors. , , 
 Introducing AMBS into heparin, which removed the anticoagulation
property ( b),
further increased the growth inhibition potential of heparin, also
against P. knowlesi, where unmodified
heparin was much less effective than in the P. falciparum experiments ( d–f and S4). The higher activity
of both unmodified and modified heparin against W2mef compared to
3D7 can be explained by their usage of more charged units for invasion
(sialic acid-dependent invasion). Heparin was also previously confirmed
to act at the merozoite invasion stage rather than influencing intraerythrocytic
development of parasites. , Hence, inhibitors using
charge-based interactions are more efficacious against the W2mef strain
as found previously. Obtaining more potent
antimalarial activity of heparin while simultaneously removing the
anticoagulation property is a key finding of this study and has the
potential to bring heparin, when modified, back into the discussion
for severe malaria treatment. Other heparin-related examples that
have previously been tested extensively in vitro and in vivo include sevuparin, which also had lower anticoagulation
potential than heparin and good invasion inhibition potential (EC50 at 5.2 μg/mL, 650 nM). Hence, our constructs PGA-AMBS and heparin-AMBS performed up to
5 to 10 times better than sevuparin on weight and molar bases, respectively.
Considering relatively high plasma concentrations, with mean Cmax between 56.7 and 149 μg/mL, that were
achieved in the human trial with sevuparin, the decrease of the EC50 values by our modification could
have significant implications. Modifying sevuparin with AMBS might
be another interesting avenue to consider.
We also performed
additional tests for PLNs ( f) and could demonstrate that PLNs without
DSPE-PEG (EC50 at 0.73 ± 0.03 μg/mL of active
AMBS polymer) had similar potency to our previously published PEGylated
PLNs (EC50 at 0.80 ± 0.07 μg/mL of active AMBS
polymer), otherwise made from the same components. Invasion inhibition activity of MAMSA/MAMBS micelles against
various P. falciparum strains was also
reported in that previous paper (EC50 values are reprinted
in for comparison).
With respect to severe malaria, reducing iRBC numbers by acting at
the key multiplication stage of reinvasion (the multiplication rate,
corresponding to RBC reinfection is ca. 16 for P. falciparum in humans) could represent an interesting
adjunctive therapeutic measure. Our nonanticoagulant, cytocompatible,
and potent invasion inhibitory methoxybenzenesulfonated biopolymers
and nanoparticles are promising candidates for such an application.
Additional activity of our materials relevant to severe malaria was
explored next.

## Antisequestration Activity of Methoxybenzenesulfonated
Materials
against CSA-Binder
Reducing iRBC sequestration is thought
to be a second key strategy to help mitigate severe malaria conditions,
including placental malaria, in the future. A potential application
in the context of pregnancy-associated malaria requires disturbing
the iRBC–CSA interaction. Hence, we first evaluated whether
fluorescently labeled PLNs can interact with the surface of CS2 iRBCs,
which is a parasite strain expressing VAR2CSA, the PfEMP1 variant responsible for CSA binding. Indeed, when studying the
interaction of PLN with a mixture of RBCs and CS2 iRBCs, we could
clearly observe accumulation of PLNs on the iRBC membranes ( and S5). The chemical nature of the hydrophilic block
of PDLLA-AMBS contains many sulfonate groups and was designed to mimic
heparin-like molecules. CSA is chemically
related to heparin; hence, this is a likely explanation for the binding.
Hep-AMBS and PGA-AMBS could not be labeled sufficiently through chemically
conjugating a fluorophore to allow fluorescence imaging. This is likely
due to quenching of the fluorophore by the high density of aromatic
AMBS groups in close proximity.
 The observed interaction of PLNs with the CS2 iRBC
surface was
next hypothesized to function similarly to soluble CSA in inhibiting
subsequent interaction with CSA receptors. To test this, we performed antisequestration experiments with decorin-coated
48-well plates ( ). Decorin is a CSA-containing glycoprotein that has previously been
used to coat surfaces for studying CS2 iRBC sequestration and inhibition. After incubation of knob-enriched CS2 iRBCs
together with the above-developed AMBS-modified biomaterials and relevant
controls for 1 h, the plates were washed, fixed, and stained, and
the area of the wells coated with iRBCs was measured and compared
to that of the PBS control.
 When first evaluating the inhibitors at a fixed
concentration of
20 μg/mL, we found interesting behaviors in our biomaterials
( b). Unmodified
CSA was used as a gold-standard positive control and provided the
expected antisequestration activity, in agreement with the literature. Interestingly, incorporating the AMBS modification
in CSA, obtained via the same modification procedure
as for PGA-AMBS and Hep-AMBS, reduced the antisequestration potential
of CSA, suggesting that the specific interaction of CSA with CS2 iRBCs
is dependent on the carboxylic acid residues in CSA. Conversely, AMBS-modified
PGA revealed good antisequestration activity, while unmodified PGA
was inactive, mirroring the growth inhibition data ( d,e). Heparin and heparin-AMBS
both showed low activity, contrasting with the growth inhibition data
in this case ( d–f). The inability of heparin to inhibit iRBC sequestration
of a CSA-binder is in agreement with the literature. All of the nanoparticles, including PLNs with and without
PEG and the polymer micelles from our previous study based on the
AMSA-modified copolymer (MAMSA) and AMBS-modified copolymer (MAMBS), were all highly active in inhibiting CS2 iRBC
binding to decorin receptors ( c). These interesting differences point toward a possibility
to tailor inhibitors for CS2 iRBC antisequestration, as even small
changes in the structures had a large effect on the antisequestration
property.
The most potent inhibitors from above, specifically
CSA, PGA-AMBS,
MAMSA, MAMBS, PLN, and PLN–PEG, were then subjected to full
dose–response evaluation with the same protocol using decorin-coated
well plates and CS2 iRBC cultures ( d–f and S6). When comparing the EC50 values of our methoxybenzenesulfonated
biomaterials to CSA, we found a significant improvement when using
PLNs with and without PEGylation. Interestingly, for PLNs, the antisequestration
activity (EC50 corresponding to 0.45 ± 0.10 nM particles)
is of similar potency as growth inhibition ( f and ). The improved activity in terms of antisequestration
activity of nanoparticles vs soluble polymers, including
gold-standard CSA or PGA-AMBS, could be due to multivalent interactions
and creation of a larger gap between iRBCs and decorin. This study
on CS2 iRBCs revealed the potential of methoxybenzenesulfonated materials,
especially PLNs, to be evaluated further toward an adjunctive therapy
for placental malaria. The best-performing structure (PLN) was taken
forward to test against another parasite strain using a different PfEMP1 variant, causing another severe malaria condition.

## Antisequestration Activity of Nanoparticles against ICAM-1-Binding
iRBCs
Cerebral malaria represents a devastating, severe malaria
form associated with high mortality. Parasites expressing PfEMP1 that are capable of ICAM-1 and endothelial protein
C receptor (EPCR) binding on the endothelium are the key candidates
responsible for most cases of cerebral malaria. , In addition, ICAM-1 is overexpressed in the inflamed endothelium,
which is another hallmark of severe malaria. Inhibiting and reversing
these PfEMP1-endothelium interactions to liberate
sequestered iRBCs from the brain vasculature could have a significant
impact as an adjunctive treatment for patients with cerebral malaria.
After the encouraging results of potent CS2 iRBC sequestration inhibition
by PLNs ( ),
we continued to test their activity against another parasite line.
ItG iRBCs express ITvar16, a PfEMP1 variant with
high affinity for ICAM-1. , 
Therefore, we
first performed an experiment analogous to the above CS2 iRBC-decorin
setup but now using recombinant ICAM-1 immobilized on 48-well plates
and switching to the parasite line ItG. The activity of PLNs and PEG–PLNs
against ItG iRBC sequestration was confirmed in this setup (Figure S7). To better mimic the in vivo situation, including the inflammatory environment, we moved on to
evaluate antisequestration activity on endothelial cells. We cultured
HUVECs and added 1 ng/mL TNF-α 16–18 h prior to the experiment
to simulate inflammation. This represents a common sequestration model,
and these culture conditions were previously found to induce overexpression
of ICAM-1 on HUVECs and promote ItG iRBC sequestration. , − When testing inhibition of ItG iRBCs binding to ICAM-1-expressing
HUVECs, we again found potent activity of our PLNs, while the heparin
control only demonstrated a modest effect ( ).
 The EC50 of 2.1 ± 0.3 μg/mL
for the PLNs
corresponding to 0.89 ± 0.14 nM particles ( d and ) was in a range similar to that of the experiments
with CS2 inhibition on decorin ( ) and ICAM-1 receptor-coated dishes (Figure S7). Importantly, first allowing ItG iRBCs to adhere
to HUVECs for 1 h and adding PLNs only during the washing steps (contact
time of only about 5 min) efficiently reversed the interaction ( c). Liberating previously
bound iRBCs from the endothelium is thought to be the most important
property of an antisequestration adjunctive therapy.
 In comparison to our data, sevuparin required
≥100 μg/mL
to inhibit sequestration on human dermal microvascular endothelial
cells (HDMECs); hence, it was much less
effective than our PLNs ( d and ). Our PLNs also reveal various advantages over soluble CSA,
as our nanoparticles were highly potent against sequestration of CSA-
and ICAM-1-binding iRBCs, in addition to the merozoite invasion inhibition
potential described above ( ). In contrast, CSA efficiently inhibits CSA-mediated
iRBC sequestration, but it is inactive against iRBC cytoadherence
to ICAM-1 expressing cells ( , FCR3csa vs PA-ICAM-1), , and CSA does not inhibit merozoite invasion. The herein confirmed limited activity of heparin against
ItG sequestration is also in agreement with the literature, as only
60% inhibition was achieved at a high concentration of 400 μg/mL
heparin when tested with the same system as described here (ItG parasites
on TNF-α treated HUVECs). In another
study, heparin (ca. 500 μg/mL) did not reverse or inhibit ItG
binding to ICAM-1 expressing cells. On
the other hand, small molecules identified by a screen against ICAM-1-
and CSA-binders, yielded ca. 80% inhibition of iRBC binding to receptor-coated
dishes but only at high concentrations (EC50 at low to
mid μM range) for both receptors. Despite a more recent small molecule screen identifying more potent
inhibitors of ICAM-1 binding of iRBCs (EC50 at ca. 350
nM), reversal of the interaction, which is more clinically relevant,
was not possible with these compounds. 
Hence, our finding that PLNs inhibited and reversed binding
of
an ICAM-1-binding parasite strain (ItG) at relatively low concentrations
(EC50 at 2.1 ± 0.3 μg/mL, corresponding to 230
± 33 nM active polymer, and 0.89 ± 0.14 nM particles), when
tested in a relevant setting with endothelial cells, represents an
important step toward creation of a universal sequestration inhibitor.
Again, the higher activity of nanoparticles compared to soluble polymers
for antisequestration might be attributed to multivalent interactions
with iRBCs and the introduction of more spacing between iRBCs and
endothelial cells. This is in agreement with a previous literature
which shows that higher-molecular-weight soluble polymers show higher
activity compared to their lower-molecular-weight counterparts (dextran
sulfate 8 kDa vs 500 kDa) against sequestration. Therefore, the use of nanoscale constructs to
mitigate severe malaria infection is a worthwhile avenue of research
toward advancing strategies that reduce the high morbidity and mortality
associated with this life-threatening condition.

## Conclusions
We have presented here the chemical modification
of soluble biopolymers,
including PGA and heparin, and nanoparticles with AMBS to improve
the antimalarial and antisequestration activity of these materials.
Reduction of parasite numbers and removal of sequestered infected
cells from blood vessel walls are considered to be two important strategies
in the development of an adjunctive therapy for severe malaria. The
straightforward AMBS modification performed herein, only using a cheap
commercial molecule and well-known EDC-coupling, turned all of the
described structures more inhibitory in terms of RBC invasion inhibition,
while ensuring negligible anticoagulation activity. When testing against
another feature of severe malaria, i.e., the binding
of iRBCs to endothelial receptors, it was established that the AMBS-modified
nanoparticles provided potent activity in inhibiting and reversing
this sequestration process. Importantly, the nanoparticles were functional
against two different parasite strains, a CSA-binder and an ICAM-1-binder,
which are associated with placental malaria and cerebral malaria,
respectively. Targeting different PfEMP1 variants
with the same construct is beneficial as it might allow broad-spectrum
applicability against various strains using the same inhibitor. Future
work is necessary to test activity under physiological flow to confirm
suitability in a more realistic scenario. Our previous finding that incorporation of PEGylated lipids in this
nanoparticle formulation extended blood circulation time, together with the antisequestration activity
found herein also for this nanoparticle version (PLN–PEG),
provides supportive arguments for the development of a nanoscale inhibitor.
Further, a nanoparticle-based strategy allows straightforward combination
with controlled release of additional drugs to adjust the overall
treatment response. Hence, the findings
reported herein represent an important step toward optimizing biopolymers
and nanoparticles toward a potentially transformative severe malaria
adjunctive therapy.

## Materials and Methods

## Nanoparticle Synthesis
Our previously developed protocol
was employed to modify the copolymer and formulate nanoparticles. In brief, 10 mg/mL of the copolymer PDLLA-b-PAA (Poly(d,l-lactide-block-acrylic
acid), 9 kDa–9 kDa, Sigma-Aldrich, 802190) in MES buffer (0.5
M MES (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.25 M NaCl (VWR), pH 6.0) were vigorously
stirred for 30 min and subsequently ultrasonicated (bath) for 45 min.
Per 10 mg of copolymer, 21.4 mg of AMBS (5-amino-2-methoxybenzenesulfonic
acid, 1.5 equiv with respect to AA repeating units, ChemCruz, SC-233225),
or 18.4 mg aminomethanesulfonic acid (AMSA, 2.5 equiv, Sigma-Aldrich,
127442) was added and dissolved. Next, aliquots of 0.5 eq of EDC-HCl
(N-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)-N-ethylcarbodiimide
hydrochloride, 6.6 mg, Sigma-Aldrich, E7750) were added every 0.5–1
h, a total of 8 times, while stirring vigorously at room temperature
and sonicating the solution for 1 min before each addition. To recover
the micelles (MAMSA and MAMBS), 1 mL of modified sample was passed
through a PD MidiTrap column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated in phosphate
buffer (0.1 M phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.05 M NaCl (VWR), pH 7.4)
and then a 30 cm Sepharose 6B column (Sigma-Aldrich, 6B100) equilibrated
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Sigma-Aldrich, D8537). To recover
the copolymer for subsequent PLN assembly, 5 mL of modified sample
was purified and desalted with 5 PD MidiTrap columns (GE Healthcare)
equilibrated in phosphate buffer (0.1 M phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich),
0.05 M NaCl (VWR), pH 7.4), and 3 PD 10s (GE Healthcare) equilibrated
in water. After concentrating the sample to about 3 mL using Amicon
ultracentrifuge devices (100 kDa, Sigma-Aldrich), it was run through
a cation-exchange column (AG-50W-X8, H+ form, Bio-Rad, 1435451, ca.
3–4 mL packed bead volume, washed with water). The obtained
aqueous sample (PDLLA-AMBS) was sterile-filtered (0.22 μm syringe
filter) and freeze-dried, giving a white fluffy powder.
PLNs
(PLN-Mid) were assembled by mixing 5.4 mg of 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(POPC, Avanti, 850457P-200 mg), 2.7 mg of cholesterol (Sigma-Aldrich,
C8667–5G), and 11.4 mg of PDLLA-AMBS. For PLN-Low and PLN-High,
the amount of both the vesicle-forming POPC and cholesterol was doubled
or halved, respectively, while keeping 11.4 mg of PDLLA-AMBS constant.
To formulate PEGylated nanoparticles (PLN–PEG), 17.2 mg of
1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[methoxy(poly(ethylene glycol))-5000] (DSPE-PEG5k, Laysan
Bio, MPEG-DSPE-5000–1g) was included in the above PLN-Mid mixture.
To fluorescently label the PLNs, DSPE-Atto647 (0.1 mg, AttoTech, AD647N-161)
was included in the PLN-Mid mixture. The components were dissolved
in 100 μL of ethanol each, combined, and briefly heated to obtain
a clear solution. This mixture was subsequently injected rapidly into
0.6 mL of vigorously stirred phosphate buffer (0.1 M phosphate, 0.05
M NaCl) and pH adjusted to ca. 7.2 to 7.4 with drops of 2 M NaOH.
A N2 stream was then used to evaporate the ethanol, and
the sample was next run through a 30 cm column loaded with Sepharose
2B-CL (Sigma-Aldrich, CL2B300) equilibrated in PBS. The samples were
subsequently sterile-filtered (0.22 μm syringe filters) and
concentrated with Amicon ultracentrifuge devices (100 kDa, Sigma-Aldrich),
if required. The concentration (μg/mL) of the sulfonated polymer
in the final samples and the conversion to nM particle concentrations
was obtained through a combination of Farndale microassays and fluorescence
correlation spectroscopy (FCS) as described in detail in our previous
paper. 

## Biopolymer Modification
The above method for PDLLA-b-PAA modification
was also employed for polyglutamic acid
(PGA, Sigma-Aldrich, P4761, 20.5 kDa), heparin (Sigma-Aldrich, H3393,
18 kDa), and chondroitin sulfate A (CSA, Sigma-Aldrich, C9819) modification.
10 mg/mL PGA, 20 mg/mL heparin, or 20 mg/mL CSA was prepared in MES
buffer. 21.4 mg of AMBS or 19.4 mg of AMSA was added and dissolved
per mL of sample. Eight aliquots of 6.6 mg of EDC-HCl were added over
a period of 6–8 h, while sonicating the solution for 1 min
before addition of a new aliquot. The samples were purified by sequential
SEC using first PD MidiTrap column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated in
phosphate buffer (0.1 M phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.05 M NaCl (VWR),
pH 7.4) and second PD 10 (GE Healthcare) equilibrated in PBS. The
samples were passed through 0.22 μm syringe filters for sterilization.
The degree of modification was determined using UV–vis spectroscopy
(SpectraMax M5, Molecular Devices) using the characteristic AMBS peak
and assuming no loss of PGA or heparin during purification. The degree
of modification was confirmed by 1H NMR in D2O using a JEOL 400 MHz spectrometer, assuming 1 available COOH per
heparin disaccharide unit.

## Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) and ζ-Potential
Measurements
DLS measurements (n = 3) were
performed on a Malvern
Zetasizer Nano-ZS. 70 μL of nanoparticle sample in PBS was typically
used in single use microcuvettes. For ζ-potential measurements,
950 μL of 0.3 M sucrose was mixed with 50 μL of purified
nanoparticle sample in PBS and run on the same machine (n = 3).

## Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy (FCS)
FCS was
performed on a commercial LSM 880 (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany), and
data analysis was conducted with PyCorrfit program 1.1.6. A dilution series of Alexa647 in PBS was used
to calibrate the confocal volume. All measurements were performed
at 37 °C, correcting the diffusion coefficient for the higher
temperature: Alexa647 in PBS (D = 4.42 × 10–6 cm2/s at 37 °C, D = 3.3 × 10–6 cm2/s at 25 °C). A HeNe laser (633 nm excitation), a 40×
C-Apochromat water immersion objective (NA 1.2), and appropriate filter
sets were selected. Measurements were performed 200 μm above
the ibidi eight-well glass plate (80827, ibidi, Germany) using 5 μL
of sample droplets. For each sample, 25 × 5 s intensity traces
were recorded and autocorrelated. The following one component fit
(G1comp (τ)) was employed, with
τD being the diffusion time, τtrip is the triplet time (fixed between 1 and 10 μs) of triplet
fraction T, N is the effective number
of diffusing particles in the confocal volume, and SP is the structural
parameter (fixed to 5). Hydrodynamic
diameters (Dh) were calculated from diffusion
coefficients (D) and employed the Einstein–Stokes
equation.

## Single-Particle Automated Raman Trapping Analysis (SPARTA)
Nanoparticles were characterized with SPARTA, which uses the combination
of Raman spectroscopy and optical trapping to measure single-particle
chemical information at the population level. Measurements were performed on the SPARTA 2.0 setup, as previously
described. Briefly, a 785 nm laser (200
mW, Cheetah, Sacher Laser Technik, Germany) was directed through a
custom confocal microscope fitted with a 63x/1.2 NA water immersion
lens (W Plan-Aprochromat, Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) to form the
optical trap and simultaneously excite Raman scattering from the trapped
particle. This Raman signal was directed onto a spectrograph (HoloSpec-F/1.8-NIR,
Andor, U.K.) coupled with a thermoelectrically cooled (−60
°C) back-illuminated CCD camera (iDus 416ALDC- DD, Andor, U.K.).
200 μL amount of nanoparticle suspension was pipetted onto a
thickness #0 glass coverslip affixed to a standard microscope slide,
and the droplet was interfaced with the objective. The sample was
measured with an exposure time of 10 s per particle and a laser disabling
time of 1 s between particles. DPBS was measured with the same measurement
parameters for background subtraction. The Raman spectra were preprocessed
using custom Matlab scripts for cosmic spike removal, spectral response
correction (785 nm reference standard National Institute of Standards
and Technology), background subtraction, baseline correction, smoothing,
and normalization.

## Anticoagulation Assays
Antifactor
Xa tests (Iduron,
Anti-Xa Heparin XAE-200) were performed following manufacturer’s
instructions but scaling down all of the volumes. 25 μg of Factor
Xa (EXA-25) and 5 IU antithrombin (PAT-5) were mixed with 10 mL of
Tris buffer (0.05 M Trizma Base, 0.175 M NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) PEG6000,
0.0075 M EDTA, pH 8.4), while 5 mg of Xa substrate (SXE-5.0) was dissolved
in 10 mL of ddH2O. Commercial heparin (Sigma H3393, 189
USP/mg) was prepared in PBS and serially diluted to act as calibration
series. Protein low-bind 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes were placed in a Thermomixer
set to static at 37 °C. Calibration and experimental samples
(10 μL) were first combined with 40 μL of Tris buffer
and equilibrated at 37 °C for 2 min. This was followed by sequential
addition of 50 μL of antithrombin, 50 μL of Factor Xa,
50 μL of Xa substrate, and in the end 50 μL of 20% (v/v)
acetic acid while incubating the tubes for 2 min at 37 °C after
each addition. The negative control consisted of PBS only, while for
the blank, all of the reagents were combined the wrong way around,
starting with the acetic acid solution. Spike controls of samples
mixed with known heparin amounts were included to test for potential
nonspecific assay inhibition by the samples. Finally, a total volume
of 300 μL per sample was transferred into a transparent flat
bottom 96-well plate. A plate reader (SpectraMax M5, Molecular Devices)
was used to measure absorbance from 350 to 500 nm, while the absorbance
at 405 nm was employed for the calculations. Due to development of
some turbidity in some samples, an exponential decay function was
fitted to the scattering contribution within the curves and subtracted
from the data to correct the baseline. Each sample was tested in duplicate
per experimental repeat.

## RAW Cell Viability Tests
Cytocompatibility
was studied
according to the protocol in BS ISO 19007:2018. DMEM medium (high glucose) containing fetal bovine serum
(FBS, Gibco, 10% (v/v)) and P/S (1% (v/v), Sigma-Aldrich) was prepared
to culture RAW 264.7 cells. For the experiment, 15,000 RAW 264.7 cells/well
were seeded in 96-well plates according to the suggested plate setup
BS ISO 19007:2018. After incubating the plates at 37 °C for 24
h, the spent medium was replaced with 180 μL of new medium and
20 μL of sample solution in PBS or PBS only (100% viability
control). After another incubation for 24 h at 37 °C, the supernatants
were again removed and replaced with 120 μL of a mixture of
MTS (317 μg/mL, Abcam, ab223881) and PMS (7.3 μg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich,
P9625) in phenol-red-free RPMI medium. Absorbance at 490 nm was measured
using a plate reader (SpectraMax M5, Molecular Devices) after incubation
of the plates for 1–2 h at 37 °C in the dark.

## Malaria Parasite
Culture and Growth Inhibition Assays
P. falciparum strains 3D7, D10, W2mef,
and CS2 were cultured in human O+ RBCs as described elsewhere using RPMI-HEPES (Sigma-Aldrich, R5886) medium
supplemented with 5 g/L Albumax II (Gibco), 0.292 g/L l-glutamine, 0.05 g/L hypoxanthine, and 0.025
g/L gentamicin (called malaria culture medium, MCM, while incomplete
medium, ICM, refers to MCM without Albumax II). Synchronization was
performed with 5% (w/v) sorbitol. The
ItG parasite line was cultured in the same medium but replacing Albumax
with 10% (v/v) human serum. P. knowlesi strain A1-H.1 was cultured in human O+ RBCs as described
elsewhere and using RPMI-HEPES medium supplemented with 2 g/L dextrose,
0.292 g/L l-glutamine, 2.3 g/L sodium bicarbonate, 0.025
g/L gentamicin, 0.05 g/L hypoxanthine, 5 g/L Albumax II (Gibco), and
10% (v/v) equine serum (Life Technologies). Parasite stock cultures were kept static at 37 °C with a gas
mixture of 90% N2, 5% O2, and 5% CO2.
Shaking culture growth inhibition assays were conducted as
described elsewhere. In brief, 135 μL
of parasite mix at 5% hematocrit and 1–2% parasitemia (synchronized
trophozoite/schizont stage P. falciparum) in the above-described culture media were combined with 15 μL
of test sample or PBS (100% growth control) in flat bottom 48-well
plates. Stacked plates were surrounded with wet tissue paper in a
gastight plastic box. After gassing the box with the mixture described
above, the box was incubated at a tilt angle of about 15° under
shaking at 185 rpm inside a cell culture incubator. The next day (typically
18–24 h later), 10 μL of each well was pipetted into
U-bottom 96-well plate containing 200 μL of PBS. The plates
were centrifuged, the supernatants were discarded, staining solution
was added (200 μL 1/5000 dilution of SYBR Green (Invitrogen,
S7563) in PBS), and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. Then,
the plates were washed 3 times with 200 μL of PBS and parasitemia
determined on a flow cytometer (plate reader, BD LSRFortessa II).
EC50-curves were analyzed using QtiPlot.

## Malaria
Antisequestration Trials on Receptor-Coated Dishes
For experiments
with receptor-coated dishes, 48-well plates were
coated with either 100 μL of 2 μg/mL decorin (CSA-containing
glycoprotein, Sigma-Aldrich, D8428) or 10 μg/mL ICAM-1 (Sino
Biological, 10346-H08H) in PBS for at least overnight in a humidified
chamber in the fridge. , The plates were washed twice
with PBS and blocked with MCM for 1 h at room temperature and washed
3 times with PBS. CS2 and ItG parasite cultures were gelatin-floated
to purify late-stage parasites with knobs on the surface from early
stage parasites, knobless parasites, and uninfected RBCs according
to a literature procedure. Purified late-stage
parasites were washed 3 times with MCM (carbonate-free, pH 6.8 for
CS2) or ICM (ItG). Mixtures of CS2 in
MCM (carbonate-free, pH 6.8) at 6 Mio. iRBCs/mL and ItG in an ICM
at 8 Mio. iRBCs/mL were prepared. , , 135 μL of these mixtures were added to each
well of the 48-well plate and followed by 15 μL of PBS (100%
sequestration control) or 15 μL of test sample in PBS. The plates
were incubated under static conditions at 37 °C for 1 h. Then,
the supernatants were pipetted away by tilting the plates to one side
and using multichannel pipettes. 200 μL of MCM (carbonate-free,
pH 6.8)/ICM was subsequently added from the opposite side to where
the supernatants were pipetted off. The plates were not shaken but
tilted to the other side again to pipette away the supernatants from
the same side as before. This step was repeated at least 5 times (the
last two were always with ICM (carbonate-free, pH 6.8)/ICM for CS2
or ItG, respectively). The plates were then emptied, air-dried, MeOH-fixed,
and Giemsa-stained for further analysis.

## Malaria Antisequestration
Trials on HUVECs
HUVECs were
cultured in EGM-2 BulletKit medium (CC-3162, Lonza) without heparin.
Cells were seeded into six-well plates by adding 1 mL of 2 ×
106 cells/mL to each well. The plates were incubated overnight
and washed with culture medium to remove floating cells. HUVECs were
cultured for one more day to form the endothelial layer. To create
an inflammatory environment, 1 ng/mL TNF-α was added and incubated
for 16–18 h prior to the sequestration experiment to overexpress
ICAM-1 as done previously in ItG sequestration trials. The HUVECs were next washed with ICM. ItG parasites
were gelatin-floated to collect iRBCs with knobs. Next, a cell mixture of 6–8 Mio. ItG iRBCs/mL (at
50–75% parasitemia) was prepared in ICM as previously done
when testing other inhibitors. , 0.95 mL portion of
this mix was added per well together with 50 μL of PBS or 50
μL of test samples at various concentrations in PBS. The plates
were incubated under static conditions at 37 °C for 1 h. Then,
the plates were rotated horizontally by hand to lift off any unbound
cells, the 1 mL mixture was taken up into a pipette from the right,
holding the plate on a tilt angle, and readded into each well from
the left, the plate swirled around again, and this was repeated 5
times in total. Then, the mixture was removed, and the wells were
washed 5 times with ICM only, using the procedure of add, swirl, take
away as described above. To test for reversal of iRBC binding, the
nanoparticle solution was only added for all of the washing steps
after the 1 h incubation time. The wells were then fixed with 4% (v/v)
PFA and 0.4% (v/v) GA in PBS for 20 min and PBS-washed for further
analysis.

## Microscopy and Analysis
Fluorescence
images (including
z-stacks) were recorded on a Nikon Ti Microscope with a 100x oil immersion
objective. EpiDEMIC plugin in Icy (50 iterations) was used to deconvolve
the z-stacks. Images were subsequently
processed in Fiji. Brightfield imaging of Giemsa-stained iRBCs within
48-well plates and fixed iRBCs on HUVECs in 6-well plates was conducted
on an EVOS microscope using a 10×/20× objective. Images
were always taken just left of the center of the wells. Fiji was used
to turn the images into a binary mask to measure the area covered
by iRBCs, and all of the data was compared to the PBS control (set
to 100% sequestration). For 6-well plate experiments, 3 random points
just left to the center of the well were imaged per well and averaged.
All of the data was again compared to the PBS control (set to 100%
sequestration).

## Statistical Analysis
All of the
figure captions explain
the sample sizes, employed statistical tests, and post hoc analysis.
Each caption also clarifies data normalization and representation.
Growth inhibition and antisequestration EC50-curves were
analyzed using QtiPlot (https://www.qtiplot.com). All other data was analyzed and plotted using GraphPad Prism 9.0.0.

## Supporting Information Available
The
Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsinfecdis.3c00564.Material characterization
(UV–vis spectroscopy, 1H NMR); stability analysis
(DLS, ζ-potential, UV–vis
spectroscopy); anti-Xa assays (UV–vis spectroscopy); and parasite
inhibition data and images (Figures S1–S8) (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
id3c00564_si_001.pdf

## Author Present Address
∥ School
of Cancer & Pharmaceutical Sciences, Institute of Pharmaceutical
Science, King’s College London, SE1 9NH London, U.K

## Author Present Address
⊥ School of Biomedical Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
NSW 2052, Australia

## Author Contributions
A.N. designed
and led the study, performed chemical synthesis, particle formation
and characterization, anticoagulation assays, invasion inhibition
assays, and antisequestration experiments, and wrote the paper. J.K.
assisted antisequestration experiments. C.S. conducted SPARTA measurements
and analysis. J.C. performed cytocompatibility assays. J.B. and M.M.S.
cosupervised the project. All authors have read and commented on the
manuscript.
The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): M.M.S. has
filed a patent application (1810010.7) and has a registered trademark
(US Reg. No. 6088213) covering the name SPARTA and the techniques
described in the manuscript by Penders et al. (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-06397-6).
M.M.S. is a founder of SPARTA Biodiscovery Ltd. C.S. is a current
employee at SPARTA Biodiscovery Ltd.

## Acknowledgments
The authors
kindly acknowledge Dr Akemi Nogiwa Valdez for
editing of the manuscript and data management support. Prof. Alister
Craig and Dr Janet Storm at LSTM are thanked for kindly providing
the ItG parasite line. A.N. acknowledges support from a Sir Henry
Wellcome Postdoctoral Fellowship (209121_Z_17_Z) from the Wellcome
Trust. J.K. acknowledges the support of the National Research Foundation
(NRF) grant (2022R1A6A3A03069072) funded by the Korean Government.
C.S. acknowledges funding from EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training
in the Advanced Characterisation of Materials (EP/S023259/1). J.C.
acknowledges support from the China Scholarship Council. J.B. was
supported by an Investigator Award from Wellcome (100993/Z/13/Z).
A.N. and M.M.S. acknowledge support from the EPSRC IRC Agile Early
Warning Sensing Systems for Infectious Diseases and Antimicrobial
Resistance (EP/R00529X/1) and the Imperial College
and LKC School of Medicine Collaborative Fund. M.M.S. acknowledges
support from the Royal Academy of Engineering Chair in Emerging Technologies
award (CiET2021\94) and from the Rosetrees Trust. The authors thank
the Light Microscopy Facilities at the Francis Crick Institute (London,
UK) for access to FCS. This research was funded in part by the Wellcome
Trust (209121_Z_17_Z to A.N. and 100993/Z/13/Z to J.B.). For the purpose
of open access, the author has applied a CC-BY public copyright license
to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.
Raw data is available upon request from rdm-enquiries@imperial.ac.uk.