pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospathplosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC10939253PMC10939253.110939253109392533843723910.1371/journal.ppat.1011879PPATHOGENS-D-23-013481Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyImmune PhysiologyAntigensBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune System ProteinsAntigensMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune System ProteinsAntigensBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsImmune System ProteinsAntigensBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyImmune PhysiologyAntibodiesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune System ProteinsAntibodiesMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune System ProteinsAntibodiesBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsImmune System ProteinsAntibodiesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsParasitic DiseasesMalariaMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsTropical DiseasesMalariaBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentResearch and Analysis MethodsImmunologic TechniquesImmunoassaysEnzyme-Linked ImmunoassaysMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesInfectious Disease ControlVaccinesBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaProtozoansParasitic ProtozoansMalarial ParasitesStructure-guided design of VAR2CSA-based immunogens and a cocktail strategy for a placental malaria vaccine
VAR2CSA structure-based vaccine designMaRuiConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationValidationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing SalinasNichole D.InvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing Orr-GonzalezSachyInvestigationWriting – review & editing RichardsonBrandiInvestigationWriting – review & editing OuahesTarikInvestigationWriting – review & editing ToranoHollyInvestigationWriting – review & editing JenkinsBethany J.InvestigationWriting – review & editing DickeyThayne H.MethodologyWriting – review & editing NealJillianInvestigationWriting – review & editing DuanJunhuiInvestigationWriting – review & editing MorrisonRobert D.InvestigationWriting – review & editing GittisApostolos G.Investigation DoritchamouJustin Y. A.InvestigationWriting – review & editing ZaidiIrfanProject administrationWriting – review & editing LambertLynn E.Project administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing DuffyPatrick E.Project administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2689-1337ToliaNiraj H.ConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Host-Pathogen Interactions and Structural Vaccinology Section, Laboratory of Malaria Immunology and Vaccinology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America2
Vaccine Development Unit, Laboratory of Malaria Immunology and Vaccinology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America3
Pathogenesis and Immunity Section, Laboratory of Malaria Immunology and Vaccinology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America4
Structural Biology Section, Research Technologies Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of AmericaSmithJoeEditor . Plasmids can be provided by N.H.T. pending scientific review and a completed material transfer agreement. Requests should be submitted to Richard Shimp (rshimp@niaid.nih.gov).

## Data Availability
All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or . Plasmids can be provided by N.H.T. pending scientific review and a completed material transfer agreement. Requests should be submitted to Richard Shimp (rshimp@niaid.nih.gov).

## Introduction
Malaria during pregnancy is a major global health problem. The accumulation of Plasmodium falciparum parasites in the placenta of pregnant women causes severe outcomes for both the mothers and their offspring, resulting in high rates of maternal anemia, low birth weight, stillbirth, and pregnancy loss [ – ]. Up to 200,000 infant deaths and 50,000 maternal deaths annually are attributed to malaria infection in pregnancy globally [ – ]. A body of evidence has shown that women naturally acquire resistance to placental malaria over successive pregnancies, indicating that a vaccine that replicates this immunity should protect against placental malaria [ , ].
VAR2CSA is a ~310 kDa Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) family member protein. VAR2CSA is the leading vaccine candidate for placental malaria because it is expressed on the surface of infected red blood cells (iRBCs) and directly mediates the sequestration of iRBCs by binding to the placental receptor chondroitin sulfate A (CSA) [ , ]. Recently, the structures of VAR2CSA alone [ – ] and in complex with CSA [ , ] have been solved. The ectodomain of VAR2CSA consists of an N-terminal sequence (NTS), six or seven Duffy-binding-like (DBL) domains and three interdomain regions (IDs) [ – ]. Plasmodium parasites utilize a variety of DBL domain-containing proteins [ , ] to bind to host receptors [ , ]. The structural and mechanistic basis [ ] for some of these interactions in erythrocyte invasion [ – ], cytoadherence [ , ] and placental sequestration [ – ] have been defined. Insights from antibody neutralization of parasite proteins [ – ] have enabled vaccine design for some antigens [ – ]. Antigens have the propensity to elicit both neutralizing human antibodies that protect against disease and interfering human antibodies that interfere with the function of neutralizing antibodies through an immune evasion mechanism called antigenic diversion [ ]. Structure-guided design of VAR2CSA-based immunogens leveraging the available structural, mechanistic, and immune evasion mechanisms may improve placental malaria vaccines.
The overall architecture of VAR2CSA resembles the number 7, with a core structure comprising the segment from the NTS domain to ID3 and an arm structure composed of DBL5 and 6 [ ] ( ). A 12-residue sugar segment of the placental receptor CSA binds within a channel formed by the NTS, DBL1, DBL2 and DBL4 domains [ , ] ( ). A potential second CSA binding site is located between DBL2 and ID2a [ ] ( ). The cryo-EM structure indicates that the CSA binding sites are surrounded by highly polymorphic residues, and this variation hampers the development of a strain-transcending vaccine [ ]. PRIMVAC and PAMVAC are two placental malaria vaccine candidates that are in clinical trials that comprise part of the CSA binding channel [ – ]. The CSA binding sites do not include the immunodominant DBL3, DBL5 and DBL6 domains, and human antibodies preferentially target these domains [ , , ].
 Here, we used structure-based design to develop a VAR2CSA immunogen termed HPISVpmv1 that retains the conserved functional elements of VAR2CSA and eliminates the immunodominant polymorphic segments. Serology studies indicated that HPISVpmv1 elicited antibody titers equal to or greater than the full-length VAR2CSA ectodomain control after a two-vaccination regimen in rats. These antibodies showed potent inhibition of infected erythrocyte binding to CSA. These studies were performed using an adjuvant suitable for translation to clinical studies and form a strong foundation for the further development of these candidates as vaccines. Strain-transcending protection for placental malaria is hindered by the high sequence variation in VAR2CSA among parasite strains and isolates. We leveraged the reduced size and enhanced yield of HPISVpmv1 to expedite the production of five variants for a cocktail immunization strategy that provided broad protection against multiple strains.

## Results

## Structure-based design and production of VAR2CSA immunogens
We recently established the structural basis and binding mechanism for VAR2CSA engagement of CSA through three cryoEM structures of VAR2CSA alone and in complex with CSA [ ]. Seven structure-based designs of VAR2CSA were developed based on these data (Figs and ). The major and minor CSA binding channels of VAR2CSA are formed predominantly by the NTS, DBL1, DBL2 and DBL4 domains, and three immunogens (Major and minor 1, Major and minor 2 and Core) were developed that contain these critical domains (Figs and ). ID1 is located near the major CSA binding channel and is not observed in any of the cryoEM structures, likely due to inherent structural flexibility [ ], and three additional immunogens where the ID1 domain was removed (ΔID1) were developed (Figs and ). Last, a construct that comprises DBL5 and DBL6 known as the arm was designed [ ]. The arm is not involved in CSA binding [ , ] and serves as an excellent control for further study. This led to seven designs and the full-length ectodomain comparator.
All designs were expressed and purified from Expi293 cells with high purity and homogeneity as established by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) and SDS PAGE analysis ( ). The yield of the immunogens varied from 1.3 mg/L to 260 mg/L ( ). The ΔID1 versions have consistently lower yields than the versions that include ID1, which indicates that ID1 might play a role in structural stability ( ). This is consistent with the finding that ID1 interacts with DBL2 and DBL4 [ ] and might play a role in stabilizing the CSA binding channel. We analyzed the circular dichroism (CD) spectra of the immunogens, and the results indicate that all the immunogens have formed structures similar to the full-length VAR2CSA ( ).

## The designs are immunogenic and key designs elicit responses comparable to the full-length protein
Preclinical animal studies in rats are an established system to evaluate placental malaria vaccine candidates [ – ]. Rats were immunized with the designed immunogens and Complete Freund’s Adjuvant (CFA)/Incomplete Freund’s Adjuvant (IFA) three times to initially evaluate immunogenicity ( ). All designs elicited high antibody titers by ELISA after three vaccinations ( ). We evaluated the functional antibody response using the binding inhibition assay (BIA) with P. falciparum NF54 infected erythrocytes and pooled purified IgGs at 1 mg/ml and 4 mg/ml. Major and minor 1, Major and minor 2, and Core elicit inhibitory activity (>70%) comparable to the full-length protein at both 1 mg/ml and 4 mg/ml IgG concentrations, while the arm did not (<30% inhibitory activity) ( ). In contrast, the ΔID1 versions of these designs showed less than 50% inhibitory activity at 1 mg/ml, although their inhibitory activity increased to greater than 50% at 4 mg/ml ( ). The reduced activity of the ΔID1 versions suggests that elimination of ID1 destabilizes the antigens and is consistent with the reduced expression and yield of the ΔID1 designs. These data indicate that Major and minor 1, Major and minor 2, and Core designs are promising candidate antigens. Of these three designs, Major and minor 1 is the most promising design, as it had the highest expression yields, approximately six-fold greater than the full-length protein, and elicited strong inhibitory activity (Figs and ). We further optimized the construct’s C-terminus based on the different definition of the boundaries of ID3 [ – ] to evaluate whether the C-terminal residues affected expression ( ). The shorter C-terminal construct resulted in the highest expression levels, and the final optimized design was renamed HPISVpmv1 for simplicity.
 CFA/IFA is a readily available research adjuvant that we employed for initial evaluation. However, it is imperative to evaluate the immune response when formulated in an adjuvant that can readily be translated to use in humans. The adjuvant AddaS03 is a research-grade adjuvant equivalent of AS03 that is suitable for use in humans [ – ]. The optimized HPISVpmv1 was subsequently moved forward for vaccination formulated in AddaS ( ). Serology studies indicated that HPISVpmv1 elicited a strong antibody response when formulated in AddaS03 compared to the PBS control ( ). The antibody titers elicited by HPISVpmv1 showed no significant difference when compared to the antibody titers elicited by the full-length protein after three vaccinations ( ). Furthermore, vaccination with HPISVpmv1/AddaS03 resulted in strong functional binding inhibitory activity that was indistinguishable from that of the full-length protein ( ). Finally, no differences in antibody titers between HPISVpmv1 formulated in either CFA-IFA or AddaS03 were observed ( ), indicating that AddaS03 is suitable for further development and that the results derived here will likely be applicable to the vaccination of humans with HPISVpmv1 formulated in AS03.
 

## Two vaccinations of HPISVpmv1 are sufficient to elicit inhibitory response
We examined whether two vaccinations would be sufficient to generate a peak functional immune response by comparing the antibody titers and binding inhibitory activity with antibodies purified from individual animals ( ). A two-vaccination regimen induced antibody titers that showed no difference from the three-vaccination regimen ( ). BIA results also indicate that the two-vaccination regimen is sufficient to elicit potent inhibitory activity ( ). Finally, we titrated the pooled purified antibodies after two vaccinations in the binding inhibition assay, which demonstrated potent functional activity as low as 0.05 mg/ml of purified antibodies consistent with the maximal inhibition afforded by the full-length protein ( ). These data indicate that a two-vaccination regimen may be suitable for further vaccine development.

## A cocktail vaccination strategy expands the breadth of protection
VAR2CSA vaccines typically have not achieved a strain-transcending immune response due to the highly polymorphic nature of VAR2CSA [ ]. As with other VAR2CSA vaccines, the HPISVpmv1 NF54 design showed strong functional activity against P. falciparum NF54 infected cells but lacked activity against P. falciparum CS2 (containing a FCR3 VAR2CSA sequence) or WF12 (containing a 7G8 VAR2CSA sequence) infected cells [ ] (Figs , ). Similarly, full-length VAR2CSA, Core, Major and minor 2 induced homologous inhibitory activity but did not demonstrate strain-transcending activity (Figs , ). These data indicate that the functional antibody response is largely strain specific.
Cocktail vaccination strategies that include several representative epitopes/immunogens have been shown to increase the breadth of protection for HIV in primates [ ], influenza in mice [ , ], pneumococcal and COVID-19 in humans [ , ]. The HPISVpmv1 design has an increased yield, ease of production, ease of adaptation to diverse isolates and induces functional activity equivalent to the full-length protein. We therefore examined whether a cocktail approach could increase the breadth of protection using the structure-based design. We examined whether a mixture or sequential immunization with HPISVpmv1 from the NF54 and FCR3 strains with a two-vaccination regimen formulated in AddaS03 increased the breadth of protection ( ).
 Both the mixture and sequential strategies induced strong immune responses ( ). Strikingly, both strategies also induced strong functional inhibitory activity against NF54 and CS2 parasite strains ( ). The CS2 parasites have a VAR2CSA sequence identical to that found in FCR3. However, neither approach was able to increase the breadth of protection to the parasite strain WF12, which has a VAR2CSA sequence identical to that found in 7G8 ( ). These data suggest that a cocktail vaccination strategy based on the highly expressible and adaptable HPISVpmv1 design may adequately expand the protection breadth.
HPISVpmv1 from three additional strains, M. Camp, M200101 and 7G8 were further designed to expand the scope of study to five variants. High expression yields for all these variants were observed, demonstrating the successful application of the HPISVpmv1 design to multiple variants of VAR2CSA with diverse sequences ( and ). The five variants were evaluated in a mixture cocktail strategy to observe changes in breadth. All combinations were evaluated in a two-vaccination regimen formulated in AddaS03 with a total combined dose of 10 μg divided equally among all variants used ( ). Therefore, the dose of each individual variant was lower in the groups containing a larger number of variants. We tested combinations of three strains (NF54, FCR3, M. Camp), four strains (NF54, FCR3, M. Camp, M200101) and five strains (NF54, FCR3, M. Camp, M200101, 7G8). This experimental design allowed evaluation of binding inhibitory activity against NF54 and CS2 (VAR2CSA FCR3) parasites as readouts for the response to antigens included during vaccination and binding inhibitory activity against WF12 (VAR2CSA 7G8 sequence) parasites as the readout for breadth outside the set of antigens immunized. All strategies induced strong immune responses ( ) and retained potent inhibitory activity against NF54 and FCR3 ( ) despite lowering the dose for these two variants in the combination strategies. Intriguingly, only the rats immunized with HPISVpmv1 7G8 in the five-combination group or the 7G8 alone group showed potent inhibitory activity against WF12 (VAR2CSA 7G8 sequence) ( ). Taken together, these data indicate that strain-specific responses appear dominant and that a cocktail vaccination strategy using the adaptable HPISVpmv1 can expand the protection breadth.
 

## Discussion
Women can become susceptible to malaria infection during pregnancy despite any residual immunity from past P. falciparum infections. Pregnant women may further act as a reservoir for parasites, complicating malaria eradication efforts. An effective vaccine to prevent placental malaria is urgently needed, as parasites continue to acquire medication resistance, and new drugs carry the risk of teratogenesis [ , ]. Despite the critical role of VAR2CSA in placental malaria, the full-length protein is not ideal for industrial production under GMP conditions due to its size and complexity [ , ]. It is of great interest to develop an effective immunogen suitable for production that can elicit potent functional activity.
Women living in malaria-endemic areas develop immunity to placental malaria after successive pregnancies [ , – ] yet the mechanisms of protection are not fully elucidated. Preclinical animal studies using diverse VAR2CSA fragments have identified potential inhibitory epitopes in VAR2CSA, and inhibitory antibodies have been raised to all DBL domains [ ]. It is likely that antibodies binding to the CSA-binding site will be a potent mechanism to block the CSA-binding ability of VAR2CSA, thus preventing the placental accumulation of the parasite. In addition, antibodies may facilitate other effector functions that contribute to protection, including antibody-facilitated opsonic phagocytosis of infected red cells [ , ]. The recently solved cryo-EM structures of the VAR2CSA-CSA complex revealed the specific binding mechanisms between VAR2CSA and CSA [ , ]. We hypothesized that a VAR2CSA vaccine design that primarily focuses on the CSA binding sites within VAR2CSA will elicit potent inhibitory activity. Several immunogens were designed based on this hypothesis and shown to be as immunogenic and effective as the full-length protein in preclinical animal studies formulated with either CFA/IFA or AddaS03 in a two-vaccination regimen.
HPISVpmv1 has multiple advantages over current vaccine candidates and the full-length protein for placental malaria vaccine design. First, HPISVpmv1 is highly stable and expresses at six times the yield of the full-length protein. Second, HPISVpmv1 contains the complete CSA-binding site and inhibitory epitopes on DBL4, which are absent in PRIMVAC and PAMVAC. Previous studies have identified inhibitory epitopes on DBL4, highlighting the importance of including this domain in any effective VAR2CSA vaccine. This domain, and the complete CSA binding site are included in HPISVpmv1 but are not present in other leading vaccine candidates. Third, we have shown that HPISVpmv1 is highly adaptable, producing high protein yields for all five variants tested here. This has major benefits from a manufacturing standpoint where protein yields, stability and adaptability to new variants are key advantages. Higher expression levels can increase yields during manufacturing of protein-based vaccines, thereby reducing costs. Expression level is also a key factor for mRNA vaccines, where the protein antigen must be expressed from a coding mRNA. The higher the expression level, the better the immunogenicity of mRNA vaccines. The expression level becomes further important once multiple variants are introduced in a single mRNA vaccine, as the total mRNA dose must be kept constant and distributed across multiple variant mRNAs. Higher expression levels can compensate for the loss of mRNA dose per variant. Fourth, HPISVpmv1 has the advantage of a larger mass than existing vaccines, and the antigen mass can enhance immunogenicity. This is especially pertinent in the context of cocktail immunizations, as the total vaccine dose is distributed among multiple variants. We have also demonstrated that HPISVpmv1 is highly immunogenic even at low doses required for immunization with multiple variants.
The structural studies indicated that the arm comprised of DBL5 and DBL6 does not play a role in CSA binding. Consistent with this finding, immunization with the arm alone generated high antibody titers comparable to the full-length ectodomain of VAR2CSA and HPISVpmv1 but with no functional binding inhibition activity. These results suggest that DBL5 and DBL6 may divert the immune response away from the core functional elements of VAR2CSA. However, epitopes in the arm correlated with functional activity have been reported [ , , , ] and the mechanism of protection for these epitopes remains to be further investigated.
Although ID1 is not seen in the full-length VAR2CSA structures [ – ], a recent study suggests that it may contact DBL2 and DBL4, contributing to the stabilization of the CSA binding channel [ ]. In addition, although recombinant ID1 alone does not induce a sufficient protective antibody response, it appears indispensable for the induction of adhesion-inhibitory antibodies by either NTS-DBL1 or DBL2 [ ]. Deletion of ID1 described here reduced the stability of multiple distinct designs and their ability to elicit an inhibitory response. This is further evidence that advocates for the inclusion of ID1 as a component of VAR2CSA immunogens.
A key tenet for a placental malaria vaccine is to develop immunity to diverse parasite isolates given the high variation in VAR2CSA. The data presented here indicate that immunization with the full-length ectodomain of VAR2CSA results in inhibition that is limited to the strain immunized, referred to as homologous protection. This is consistent with previous findings that full-length VAR2CSA can induce broadly reactive antibodies to various strains with no strain transcendent inhibition [ ]. A similar strain-specific response is also found for PRIMVAC and PAMVAC [ , ]. These data suggest that a single strain of VAR2CSA may not be sufficient to confer the breadth of protection desired against multiple parasite isolates. This is consistent with previous studies demonstrating that VAR2CSA-purified IgG from multigravida women showed broad inhibitory activity [ ]. However, the cross-inhibitory reactivity purified from one strain appears limited to a certain number of other strains [ ]. Interestingly, although immunization of a certain strain alone (NF54, FCR3 or 7G8) induces antibodies that cross-react with the other strain, these cross-reactive antibodies are not able to mediate inhibitory activity.
The cocktail strategy presented in this study offers a potential approach for a broadly protective placental malaria vaccine and similar practices have been employed for the development of influenza, pneumococcal, and COVID vaccines [ – ]. We demonstrate that increasing the number of variants used enhanced the breadth of protection to additional parasite strains. Notably, these results were achieved with a fixed total dose divided equally among the tested variants. Therefore, in the five-combination group, each HPISVpmv1 variant immunogen induced potent inhibitory activity at a low 2 μg dose in rats. These data suggest that it is possible to further expand the number of variants and lower the dose without having a detrimental effect on the inhibitory activity. The mixture strategy was also designed to evaluate whether a response can be generated to parasite strains not included during immunization. Interestingly, the results showed that rats only generated inhibitory activity to the strains that were included during vaccination, and breadth outside the strains used was not generated.
Together, these results suggest that a successful placental malaria vaccine may require a cocktail strategy that includes a limited number of circulating strains in endemic areas with consideration of the clades that form the VAR2CSA variation [ ]. Future bioinformatic and field surveys will help determine the number of strains to include in this strategy, and clinical trials will be required to determine the efficacy of these combinations. Moreover, strain-specific inhibitory epitope mapping may facilitate additional engineering to refocus the antibody response to shared inhibitory epitopes. The cocktail vaccines could be formed by multiple protein HPISVpmv1 variants formulated in a suitable adjuvant. mRNA vaccine technology has recently become an excellent platform for a number of diseases, and cocktail mRNA vaccines are readily developed and have shown excellent efficacy and breadth. The design of an adaptable, stable, high-expressing VAR2CSA antigen that enables a cocktail strategy to increase the breadth of protection will enable the development of next-generation placental malaria vaccines.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
Animal studies were performed in an American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care-accredited facility under the guidelines and approval of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the National Institutes of Health.

## Structure-based design of VAR2CSA immunogens
The rational designs of the novel VAR2CSA immunogens are depicted in . In brief, the full-length VAR2CSA protein was first separated into two parts: the Core and the Arm. By maintaining the CSA binding sites, the Core is further simplified by subtracting DBL3 to make Major and minor 2 and then subtracting ID2 to make the Major and minor 1. For Core, Major and minor 2 and Major and minor 1, versions lacking ID1 (ΔID1) were created. Removal of domains was stabilized by a flexible GS linker reconnecting the remaining segments. The length and sequence of the flexible linker were determined by evaluating the distance between connecting residues in the structure and designing GS-linker sequences that could accommodate those distances. The designed DNA sequences were codon-optimized and synthesized by GeneScript. The designed sequences are listed in .

## Expression and purification of immunogens in Expi293 cells
The designed immunogens together with the wild-type VAR2CSA NF54 proteins were expressed in Expi293 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) cells according to the manufacturer’s protocols. In brief, the cells were grown to 5.0 × 106 for three to four passages after thawing. The day before transfection, 500 ml of culture was seeded at a density of 2.5–3.0 × 106 cells ml−1 in a 2-liter flask. On the day of transfection, cells were diluted back to 2.5–3 × 106 before transfection. The plasmid DNA was diluted with 25 ml of Opti-MEM I medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a final concentration of 1 μg ml−1.
Then, 1.4 ml of ExpiFectamine 293 Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was diluted with 25 ml Opti-MEM I medium, gently mixed and incubated at room temperature for 5 min. The diluted ExpiFectamine 293 Reagent was then added to the diluted plasmid DNA, mixed by swirling, and incubated at room temperature for 20 min. The mixture was added to the cells slowly while swirling the flask. The flask was returned to the incubator at 37°C and in 8% CO2. After 20 h of incubation, ExpiFectamine 293 Transfection Enhancer 1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and ExpiFectamine 293 Transfection Enhancer 2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added to the transfection flask.
The cultures were centrifuged at 5,000 revolutions per min for 15 min 5 d post-transfection. The supernatant was collected and loaded onto Ni Sepharose Excel columns (GE Healthcare), which were manually packed in a glass gravity column. The column was washed twice with 10 column volumes of wash buffer (25 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazine-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 25 mM imidazole) and eluted with 5 column volumes of elution buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole). The elutes were concentrated with a 100-kDa cutoff centrifugal filter unit (Millipore Sigma) to 1 ml and further purified by size-exclusion chromatography (Superose 6 Increase 10/300, GE Healthcare) in PBS buffer. The peak fractions were collected and verified by sodium dodecylsulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis before animal study. The protein yield was measured with three technical replicates from three biological replicates.

## Circular Dichroism
CD spectra were collected on a JASCO J-815 spectropolarimeter at 25 degrees C in a 1 mm path length quartz cuvette between 200 and 250 nm with the buffer background subtracted. Each CD spectrum is the average of five scans at 50 nm/min with a 1 nm bandwidth and a time constant of 0.5 seconds. The analysis and plotting of the spectra were performed with CAPITO [ ] that utilizes the Protein Circular Dichroism Data Bank (PCDDB) [ ].

## Rat immunizations

## Formulation for vaccination
CFA/IFA: A dose of 10 μg of antigen in a volume of 50 μL of the immunogens mentioned in in DPBS was added to 50 μL of Complete Freund’s Adjuvant (CFA) (Sigma Aldrich) on day 0 or Incomplete Freund’s Adjuvant (IFA) (Sigma Aldrich) on days 21 and 42 and incubated with vortexing for 15 min at room temperature. The control immunization was 50 μL DPBS added to 50 μL of CFA on day 0 or IFA on days 21 and 42 and incubated with vortexing for 15 min at room temperature. All formulations were kept at room temperature between formulation and injection into rats.
AddaS03: For single antigen formulations, a dose of 10 μg in a volume of 50 μL of immunogens in DPBS was added to 50 μL of AddaS03 (Invivogen) and mixed by pipetting up and down 10 times. For multi-antigen mixed formulations, a total dose of 10 μg antigen composed of equal amounts of the antigens in a total volume of 50 μL in DPBS was added to 50 μL of AddaS03 and mixed by pipetting up and down 10 times. For 2 antigens, the dose was 5 μg each. For 3 antigens, the dose was 3.3 μg each. For 4 antigens, the dose was 2.5 μg each. For 5, antigens the dose was 2 μg each. The control immunization was 50 μL DPBS added to 50 μL of AddaS03 and mixed by pipetting up and down 10 times. All formulations were kept at room temperature between formulation and injection into rats.

## Immunization
Female CD rats approximately 7 weeks in age were obtained from Charles River Laboratories. On either day 0, 21, and 42 for 3 vaccination studies or day 0 and 21 for 2 vaccination studies, rats were immunized subcutaneously in one site in the inguinal region with a volume of 100 μL containing a dose of 10 μg of total antigen in either CFA/IFA or AddaS03 formulated as described above. For the sequential cocktail immunization assay, rats were first immunized with HPISVpmv1 NF54 formulated as described above on day 0 and then immunized with HPISVpmv1 FCR3 formulated as described above on day 21. For the mixture cocktail immunizations, rats were immunized with a total antigen dose of 10 μg of mixed antigen formulated as described above on days 0 and 21.

## Sample collection
Rats were bled for sera on days 14 and 35/36 for the two-vaccination protocol and on days 14, 35, and 63 for the three-vaccination protocol.

## Generation of a standard curve for ELISA antibody unit measurement
Pooled serum from rats immunized with full-length VAR2CSA or HPISVpmv1 was used as a standard curve on each plate to calculate the antibody titers of individual animals in all groups. One antibody unit (AU) was defined as the dilution of the standard serum required to achieve an Abs450 value of 1. Each plate included triplicate 2-fold serial dilutions of the standard serum from 20 to 0.01 AU. Serum from each animal was diluted such that the Abs450 fell in the informative portion of the standard curve between 0.1 and 2.0. The Abs450 values for the standard curve were fit to a 4-parameter logistic curve, which was used to convert Abs450 values to AU for each individual animal. AU values for each individual animal were measured in triplicate on separate plates, and the average is reported.

## Antibody titer measurements
Nunc MaxiSorp plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were coated with 100 μl 0.02 mg/mL purified full-length VAR2CSA or HPISVpmv1 diluted in 50 mM Na-carbonate pH 9.5. Plates were coated overnight at 4°C and then washed three times with PBST. Plates were blocked for 1 hour at room temperature with 2% BSA in PBST and then washed three times with PBST. A 100 μl series of diluted serum (1:10,000; 1:100,000; 1:1,000,000) was added to each well. The primary antibody was incubated for 1 hour at room temperature, the plates were washed three times with PBST, and 200 μl of 1:5000 peroxidase-conjugated anti-rat IgG was added (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc. Cat. # 109-035-098). Plates were incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature and washed three times with PBST. Finally, 70 μl tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) (MilliporeSigma) was added and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature before quenching with 70 μl 2 M H2SO4. Absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a Biotek Synergy H1 plate reader.

## Rat antibody purification
Rat serum was diluted 1:2 with Pierce Protein G IgG Binding Buffer and then incubated with protein G resin (Gold Biotechnology) for 1 h at room temperature. After washing the resin with Pierce Protein G IgG Binding Buffer, the rat IgG was eluted with Pierce IgG Elution Buffer (0.15 ml of Tris pH 9.0 buffer per ml of purified IgG was added to neutralize the eluted fractions). The purified IgG was then buffer exchanged with PBS.

## Parasite culture and purification
Laboratory-adapted parasite lines were synchronized to reach the trophozoite/schizont stages with a parasitemia >1%, and parasites were enriched using a gelatin gradient. Parasitemia was determined by Giemsa staining. Pelleted blood was resuspended in RPMI 1640 to 50% hematocrit. Then, two volumes of 1% gelatin RPMI solution were added and incubated for 30 min in a 37°C water bath. The upper layer was transferred to a new tube, and the parasites were pelleted and washed three times with RPMI 1640 medium. The parasites were then used for a binding inhibition assay (BIA). A strain of Plasmodium falciparum parasite culture was genotyped by sequencing fragments of the DBL4 domain of the var2csa and clag2 genes. Briefly, using the NF54 parasite sequence, primers were designed to amplify the DBL4 domain (Fw: 5’-AGATATTATTAAAGGCAACGATTTAGTGC and Rv: 5’-ATTTGTCCATTCTTCCAACCATCT) and CLAG2 (Fw: 5’- TTAAGTCTTTTGTGTGAATACCAAGCA and Rv: 5’-ATAGGTGCATCAGATTTCCAATTAAAG). The expected amplicon sizes were 355 bp and 248 bp for DBL4 and CLAG2, respectively. For each parasite culture, DNA was extracted using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s recommendation. PCR of DBL4 and CALG2 was performed using Q5 Hot Start High-Fidelity 2X Master Mix (New England Biolabs) following the manufacturer’s suggested protocol and an annealing temperature of 64°C. PCR products were cleaned and concentrated using a Monarch PCR & DNA Cleanup Kit (New England Biolabs) visualized on an ethidium bromide gel to confirm band size and singularity and sent to PooChon Scientific for Sanger sequencing. The resulting sequences were then aligned to the reference parasite for sequence identity assessment.

## Binding inhibition assay (BIA)
The CSA binding inhibition assay was evaluated in a static binding inhibition assay using immobilized CSA as previously described [ ]. In brief, CSA (Sigma) at 10 μg/ml in PBS was coated as 15 μl spots on a 100 x 15 mm Petri dish (Falcon 351029) by overnight incubation at 4°C. The spots were blocked with 3% BSA in 1x PBS at 37°C for 30 min. Before the binding assay, enriched mature trophozoite/schizont stages of infected erythrocytes (IEs) from different P. falciparum strains were diluted to 20% parasite density at 0.5% hematocrit, blocked with 3% BSA in complete RPMI medium and then incubated with total rat IgG for 30 min at 37°C. IE suspended in IgG solution were then allowed to bind duplicated receptor spots for 30 min at 37°C. Unbound IE were washed away, and bound IE were fixed, stained and quantified by microscopy. The percentage of inhibition was calculated relative to the wells containing IE without IgG. The negative percentage was set to 0.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Domain structures of the designed immunogens.
Each immunogen is illustrated as a schematic representation and the sequences of the linker was shown. This figure was generated with the help of Biorender (https://www.biorender.com/) and PRISM 9.
(TIFF)
S2 Fig

## Purification of the designed immunogens.
(A) The size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) profile overlay of the designed immunogens after purification are shown. The yield of each immunogen is illustrated within parenthesis behind the names. The SEC profile of each immunogen was shown below. The results shown here are one representative purification with all purifications performed at least three times with consistent results. (B) SDS-PAGE analysis of the designed immunogens.
(TIFF)
S3 Fig

## Circular dichroism (CD) analysis of the designed immunogens.
(A) CD spectra of the immunogens. (B) Upper panel shows the CD spectra for the different immunogens as color-coded in the inset. The lower panel shows the MRE (Mean-residue-ellipticity) values at lambda = 222 nm versus lambda = 200 nm that indicate the folding state of each immunogen as color-coded in the inset. PCDDB—Protein Circular Dichroism Data Bank.
(TIFF)
S4 Fig

## Optimization of the HPISVpmv1 construct.
(A) Domain structure of the HPISVpmv1 domain structure. (B) SDS-PAGE analysis result of HPISVpmv1 and HPISVpmv1_ext from NF54 and FCR3 strains. ‘ext’ is short for extension. (C) The yield of each immunogen is determined using eight biological replicates. The p values of the one-way ANOVA test are shown. This figure was generated with the help of Biorender (https://www.biorender.com/).
(TIFF)
S5 Fig

## Neither full length VAR2CSA nor designs show strain transcending activity.
(A) The BIA assay results against WF12 parasite strain containing 7G8 VAR2CSA using purified pooled IgG at 1mg/ml from the serum after three vaccinations. (B) The BIA assay results against CS2 parasite strain containing FCR3 VAR2CSA using purified pooled IgG at 4mg/ml from the serum after three vaccinations. The dashed line indicates the 50% inhibition level used as a cutoff for inhibitory or non-inhibitory activity, the data shown are derived from two independent experiments and each point is the mean of two technical replicates.
(TIFF)
S6 Fig

## The cocktail strategies show limited strain transcending activity.
The BIA assay results against WF12 parasite strain containing 7G8 VAR2CSA using purified pooled IgG at 1mg/ml from the serum after two vaccinations. The dashed line indicates the 50% inhibition level used as a cutoff for inhibitory or non-inhibitory activity, the data shown are derived from two independent experiments and each point is the mean of two technical replicates.
(TIFF)
S7 Fig

## Purification of HPISVpmv1 from diverse strains.
The Size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) profile (A) and SDS PAGE gel (B) of HPISVpmv1 from 7G8, M.Camp and M200101 are shown.
(TIFF)
S1 Table

## Sequence identity among 5 HPISVpmv1 strains.
The sequence identity (%) between each of the two HPISVpmv1 strains are shown in the table.
(DOCX)
S2 Table

## Protein sequences of the designed immunogens.
(DOCX)

We thank Tom Wellems for the WF12 parasite line. We thank Palak Patel and Dashuang Shi for experimental assistance and J. Patrick Gorres and David Garboczi for assistance in editing the manuscript. This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH) to N.H.T. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011879.r001Decision Letter 0
SmithJoeAcademic EditorCollins IIIJames JSection Editor© 2024 Smith, Collins III2024Smith, Collins IIIhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
7 Sep 2023

Dear Dr. Tolia,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Structure-based design of VAR2CSA and a cocktail strategy for a placental malaria vaccine" for consideration at PLOS Pathogens. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. In light of the reviews (below this email), we would like to invite the resubmission of a significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments.
1. As suggested by Reviewer 1, more description is needed of the design process and the validation of the immunogens. More information should be provided on how linker lengths were chosen and any other in silico considerations that went into the truncation designs. Additionally, data should be provided that the immunogens folded correctly (secondary structure and protein binding to CSA).
2. The head-to-head serological comparison of full-length VAR2CSA and HPISVpmv1 in figure 3F needs to be titrated below 0.1 mg/ml.
3. The discussion gives the impression that a cocktail vaccine is a practical approach to achieve strain-transcendence coverage. However, the cocktails did not broaden reactivity beyond the included immunogens. Given that extreme VAR2CSA polymorphism is raised as a major challenge to vaccine development, the authors should acknowledge that the present data suggests these immunogens elicit highly strain-specific inhibitory antibodies and they have not estimated the parasite population diversity of these strain-specific inhibitory epitopes. Therefore, it is difficult to gauge how easy or difficult it will be to design a broad coverage VAR2CSA cocktail. It may be necessary for additional engineering to refocus the antibody response on more shared inhibitory epitopes.
We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Joe Smith
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
James Collins III
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************
1. As suggested by Reviewer 1, more description is needed of the design process and the validation of the immunogens. More information should be provided on how linker lengths were chosen and any other in silico considerations that went into the truncation designs. Additionally, data should be provided that the immunogens folded correctly (secondary structure and protein binding to CSA).
2. The head-to-head serological comparison of full-length VAR2CSA and HPISVpmv1 in figure 3F needs to be titrated below 0.1 mg/ml.
3. The discussion gives the impression that a cocktail vaccine is a practical approach to achieve strain-transcendence coverage. However, the cocktails did not broaden reactivity beyond the included immunogens. The authors should acknowledge that they have no way of estimating the parasite population diversity of these strain-specific inhibitory epitopes and therefore it is difficult to gauge how to design a broad coverage VAR2CSA vaccine. It may be necessary for additional engineering to refocus the antibody response on more shared inhibitory epitopes.
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: The manuscript by Ma et al uses the recent structures of the important pregnancy-associated malaria vaccine candidate VAR2CSA to guide the design of new version of this protein which are more effective as vaccine immunogens. The structures provide detailed insight into the architecture of this complex protein and the location of the ligand binding site, making it timely to take such an approach. Indeed, a complex antigen such as VAR2CSA would benefit from this as it is difficult to make, making a more readily produced antigen desirable.
The approach used is a simple one of just truncating regions of the protein, sometimes replacing domains with linkers. Therefore, while this is “structure-guided”, it does not use the most recent techniques. There is also little data presented to show that these truncations are properly folded, with the authors relying solely on mobility on size exclusion columns and a gel.
The authors next test these immunogens by rat immunisation and assessing ELISA signal and the ability of raised sera to block pRBCs from binding to CSA. The main success from the design approach was to generate an immunogen which is produced at higher yield. However, none of the immunogens generated a more effective inhibitory response than full-length VAR2CSA and most (perhaps all?) were less effective. This is interesting as these truncated immunogens were still very large, containing most of the native protein. Why was the quality of the generated antibodies (i.e. the inhibitory activity as a factor of total IgG) not better if only epitopes for non-inhibitory antibodies had been removed?
Finally, the authors show that their immunogen is very variant specific, but also show that immunisation with a ‘cocktail’ of different VAR2CSA variants can lead to a better cross-inhibitory response. This is nice data, although it is not clear that it is related to the ‘structure-based’ design part as the authors do not show whether this only happens with their design or would also occur with full-length VAR2CSA.
In summary, this is a worthwhile study, but there are issues with validation of the designed immunogens and sadly, it appears as though the immunogens generated are not an improvement in terms of immunogenicity, while one does express substantially better. The cocktail approach, which would probably work with full-length VAR2CSA is interesting. There is still work to do to make the best immunogen, as these designs are only a bit shorter than full length are do seem to give slighted lower inhibitory effects.
Reviewer #2: This review is regarding the paper Structure-based design of VAR2CSA and a cocktail strategy for a placental malaria vaccine by Ma and colleagues.
This paper describes the design of various potential vaccine candidates (mainly subunit vaccines) based on knowledge of the VAR2CSA antigens' biological functions and structure . These candidate vaccine antigens were then expressed and used to vaccinate rats. Antibody levels and function were measured. Due to issues in the past of a lack of heterologous immunity being elicited the authors also investigated the possibility of blended or sequential vaccination with antigens from different variants. Antibodies generated using vaccines from multiple variants recognized multiple parasite strains suggesting that a blended vaccine is a plausible approach.
A vaccine against placental malaria would help reduce disease. Hurdles to a vaccine include the large size of the antigen which can make its expression in-vitro difficult as well as a lack of immunity generated to heterologous strains in past sub unit vaccines.
This paper provides potential solutions to both of these queries by showing that subunit vaccines made of antigens from multiple strains can elicit functional antibodies in rats.
This has not been previously shown experimentally and is a significant step forward in the field.
This paper is well written and the methods used are appropriate.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: The main concern is the lack of description of the approach used for design and lack of validation of the designed proteins. There is almost no description of the design process. Was it just truncation? When linkers were used, how were they designed? What surfaces on the proteins were exposed on truncation of neighbouring domains and were they fixed or resurfaced?
Also the only demonstration of protein quality is a gel and a SEC trace. Many of the peaks on the SEC trace are very small, making it impossible to see their shape and so at the very least a SEC trace with equivalent loading is essential. In my view, the authors should also present CD traces to show correct secondary structure, SEC-MALLS or the equivalent and demonstration that the proteins bound to CSA with the same affinity as the original. The major reason for concern is that the deltaID1 behaves poorly, while not containing any of the CSA binding residues. Perhaps this has not been designed properly to allow it to fold?
Secondly, sometimes the manuscript does not present a sufficient range of concentrations of sera to determine whether the designed immunogen is as good as the original. For example, Figure 3F only shows concentrations which give very high inhibition and it looks as though the design is slightly worse at the lowest concentration presented than VAR2CSA. Without repeats, stats and measurements at a range of lower concentrations, it is not possible to make a firm conclusion here. An IgG titration is required.
Indeed, stats are required throughout as they are missing for most of the data.
Reviewer #2: no major issues noted
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: Through-out the manuscript, the authors use value judgements, with words like “much higher” (line 27), “highly” (line 103), “strong” (line 110), “potent” (line 139) etc etc. In my view, scientific reports should just state the facts in a quantitative way, without using such value judgements.
I also think that the title is wrong. VAR2CSA is not designed. VAR2CSA-based immunogens?
Line 37-38 – seems truncated?
Line 59 ‘the design of VAR2CSA’ seems strange phrasing as VAR2CSA is a natural protein. ‘Re-design’, ‘Design based on the structure of VAR2CSA’?
Figure 2 – please show individual data throughout, rather than just means. Shows states throughout.
Figure 3 – please show individual data throughout, rather than just means. Shows states throughout. For F, please titrate down further to IgG concentrations lower than 0.1 mg/ml.
Figure 4 – please show individual data throughout, rather than just means. Shows states throughout.
Figure 5 – please show individual data throughout, rather than just means. Shows states throughout.
Figure S2 – how was loading decided on this set of SEC traces? Some of the curves really can’t be seen at this y axis scale. Show on different scales or repeat with equal loading? What column? How many repeats?
Figure S3 – I would move this into a main figure as this is the major advantage of the new immunogen.
Figure S5 + 6 – please show individual data throughout, rather than just means. Shows states throughout.
Reviewer #2: Some minor editorial comments
Line 63- refer to figure 1B
Final paragraph in the Introduction- please be clear that this study is in Rats
Lines 106- expand abbreviation of the adjuvant CFA/IFA
lines 114-116, consider rephrasing this sentence as it is unclear and incorrect as currently written
paragraph starting 140- I needed to reread this multiple times to understand, please rephrase to it is clearer
line 221- specify which vaccines you are referring to
line 271- specify this is in rats
Figure 5- it is really hard to determine what the vaccine was and the antigen was being used in the assays. Please rearrange figure and rewrite figure legend
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Elizabeth Aitken

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here on PLOS Biology: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011879.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
26 Oct 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewer Response v6 RM PLOS.docx
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011879.r003Decision Letter 1
SmithJoeAcademic EditorCollins IIIJames JSection Editor© 2024 Smith, Collins III2024Smith, Collins IIIhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
6 Nov 2023

Dear Dr. Tolia,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Structure-guided design of VAR2CSA-based immunogens and a cocktail strategy for a placental malaria vaccine" for consideration at PLOS Pathogens. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important topic. Based on the reviews, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, providing that you modify the manuscript according to the review recommendations.
AE's comment: Please address the reviewer's comments to be more circumspect in some of your conclusions related to the new secondary structure analysis. As noted by the reviewer, similar secondary structure does not indicate folded structure.  I am not requiring additional experimentation. However, it is important to state other possible reasons for some of the immunogenic outcomes with the truncated proteins. 
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 30 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to all review comments, and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript.
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Joe Smith
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
James Collins III
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************
AE's comment: Please address the reviewer's comments to be more circumspect in some of your conclusions related to the new secondary structure analysis. As noted by the reviewer, similar secondary structure does not indicate folded structure.  I am not requiring additional experimentation. However, it is important to state other possible reasons for some of the immunogenic outcomes with the truncated proteins. 
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: The manuscript by Ma et al is improved in this round and some of my suggestions have been accepted and acted on. In particular, the sequences of the immunogens are included, the design process is clear, data points and statistics are included on the graphs, value judgements have been replaced with numbers and the authors have made some CD measurements to indicate secondary structure of their immunogens. These changes all make this a publishable piece of work.
It does still have limitations. Using only CD to show that a protein is correctly folded doesn't quite work as this only shows secondary structure context. which is why I also suggested a functional assay, such as CSA binding. This might be why there are still some inconsistencies in the data. For example, lines 120-122 says that the immunogens are all correctly folded due to CD and then 136-138 says that some are not immunogenic due to being destabilised. These seem contradictory to me. Perhaps the CD is giving a misleading outcome as these immunogens have the correct secondary structure but an altered tertiary structure? Or perhaps it is a more interesting reason - such as because ID1 is required for generation of a neutralising response? We can't know from the data.
Despite this, I recommend publication. The removal of half of var2csa, making something which expresses 6-fold better and still has the same efficacy is a worthwhile step forward and should be published, even if the data doesn't really tell us why it is as good. I therefore recommend publication.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: none
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: I think that the authors should be more circumspect in some of their conclusions. For example, making clear that CD alone only tells that there is secondary structure and giving more possible reasons for outcomes, such as the reason why ID1 removal leads to loss of activity. They state destabilisation but then only show data which indicates that it is folded. Perhaps thermal melt CD, which is easily done, and if they don't want to do this, just to at least state that there are other possible reasons for their observations.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Figure Files:
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
Data Requirements:
Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.
Reproducibility:
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
References:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011879.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
28 Nov 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewer Response v6 RM PLOS.docx
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011879.r005Decision Letter 2
SmithJoeAcademic EditorCollins IIIJames JSection Editor© 2024 Smith, Collins III2024Smith, Collins IIIhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
29 Nov 2023

Dear Dr. Tolia,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Structure-guided design of VAR2CSA-based immunogens and a cocktail strategy for a placental malaria vaccine' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Joe Smith
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
James Collins III
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
10.1371/journal.ppat.1011879.r006Acceptance letter
SmithJoeAcademic EditorCollins IIIJames JSection Editor© 2024 Smith, Collins III2024Smith, Collins IIIhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
27 Feb 2024

Dear Dr. Tolia,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Structure-guided design of VAR2CSA-based immunogens and a cocktail strategy for a placental malaria vaccine," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens. 
Best regards,
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064