pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospathplosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC11542837PMC11542837.111542837115428373946684210.1371/journal.ppat.1012661PPATHOGENS-D-24-017821Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsImmune CellsAntibody-Producing CellsB CellsBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsAntibody-Producing CellsB CellsMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsAntibody-Producing CellsB CellsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsBlood CellsWhite Blood CellsB CellsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsB CellsBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsB CellsMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsB CellsBiology and life sciencesCell biologyCellular typesAnimal cellsImmune cellsAntibody-producing cellsB cellsMemory B cellsBiology and life sciencesImmunologyImmune cellsAntibody-producing cellsB cellsMemory B cellsMedicine and health sciencesImmunologyImmune cellsAntibody-producing cellsB cellsMemory B cellsBiology and life sciencesCell biologyCellular typesAnimal cellsBlood cellsWhite blood cellsB cellsMemory B cellsBiology and life sciencesCell biologyCellular typesAnimal cellsImmune cellsWhite blood cellsB cellsMemory B cellsBiology and life sciencesImmunologyImmune cellsWhite blood cellsB cellsMemory B cellsMedicine and health sciencesImmunologyImmune cellsWhite blood cellsB cellsMemory B cellsBiology and Life SciencesParasitologyParasite GroupsApicomplexaPlasmodiumBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyImmune PhysiologyAntigensAntigenic VariationBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune System ProteinsAntigensAntigenic VariationMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune System ProteinsAntigensAntigenic VariationBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsImmune System ProteinsAntigensAntigenic VariationMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsParasitic DiseasesBiology and Life SciencesParasitologyParasite GroupsApicomplexaMerozoitesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune ResponseMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune ResponseBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsBlood CellsRed Blood CellsDifferences in phenotype between long-lived memory B cells against Plasmodium falciparum merozoite antigens and variant surface antigens
Long-lived memory B cell responses against Plasmodium falciparumhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2234-4758ReyesRaphael A.ConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing TurnerLouiseResourcesWriting – review & editing SsewanyanaIsaacResourcesWriting – review & editing JagannathanPrasannaResourcesWriting – review & editing FeeneyMargaret E.Resources LavstsenThomasResourcesWriting – review & editing GreenhouseBryanResourcesWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3843-6657BolSebastiaanFormal analysisInvestigationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4003-3053BunnikEvelien M.ConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationProject administrationSupervisionVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Molecular Genetics, Long School of Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America2
Centre for translational Medicine & Parasitology, Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, and Department of Infectious Diseases, Righospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark3
Infectious Disease Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda4
Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America5
Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America6
Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America7
Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of AmericaButlerNoah S.Editor files.

## Data Availability
The authors confirm that all data underlying the findings are fully available without restriction. All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
Malaria continues to be an enormous public health problem in sub-Saharan Africa [ ]. This potentially fatal disease is caused by parasites of the Plasmodium genus, of which P. falciparum is responsible for most malaria cases and deaths [ ]. The development of an effective vaccine against P. falciparum plays an important role in the fight to eradicate malaria. However, a major hurdle to overcome in malaria vaccine development is the quick waning of vaccine-elicited immune responses. Most malaria vaccines and vaccine candidates elicit antibodies that inhibit parasite invasion or development, as well as memory B cells that will be activated upon the next P. falciparum antigen encounter. To improve the durability of malaria vaccine-induced immune responses, it is important to define the characteristics of long-lived anti-parasite immunity (here defined as persisting for at least one year in the absence of exposure), for example by studying long-lived B cell memory induced by P. falciparum infection. The goal of this study was to compare long-lived memory B cell responses to different parasite antigens acquired as the result of natural infection in individuals living in a malaria-endemic region.
In the human host, P. falciparum develops through several life cycle stages, of which the asexual replication cycle within erythrocytes is responsible for pathogenesis. During this replication cycle, a single P. falciparum merozoite infects an erythrocyte and over the course of 48 hours, divides into 16–32 daughter cells. These newly formed merozoites then burst out of the infected erythrocyte, each ready to invade a new erythrocyte. People living in malaria-endemic regions are repeatedly infected by Plasmodium parasites and, as a result of these repetitive exposures, develop immunoglobulin (Ig) M and IgG responses against asexual blood-stage parasites that protect against disease [ – ]. The main antigenic targets of these antibody responses can be divided into two categories. The first class is expressed by merozoites and is involved in erythrocyte invasion, such as merozoite surface protein 1 (MSP1) and apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1). The second class of antigens comprises several families of variant surface antigens that are expressed by P. falciparum on the surface of the infected erythrocyte. The most studied of these are members of the P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) family that mediate binding to endothelial receptors on the host microvasculature.
Merozoite-specific memory B cells have been detected in the circulation up to 16 years after infection in the absence of antigen exposure [ – ]. Similarly, memory B cells against the PfEMP1 variant VAR2CSA involved in pregnancy-associated malaria can be found in the circulation for many years [ ]. However, the phenotype of these long-lived P. falciparum-specific memory B cells has not been studied in great detail. Antigen-experienced B cells in the circulation can be divided into two main populations: conventional memory B cells (IgD-CD27+) and double negative (DN) B cells (IgD-CD27-), both known to harbor P. falciparum merozoite antigen-specific B cells [ , ]. Recent studies have identified subsets of conventional memory B cells that are associated with durable humoral immune responses after influenza and tetanus vaccination, and SARS-CoV-2 infection [ – ]. In particular, the surface protein FcRL5, often expressed in conjunction with the integrin CD11c and the transcription factor T-bet, marks a subset of long-lived class-switched memory B cells that are epigenetically and metabolically poised to differentiate into antibody-secreting cells during recall responses [ ]. The same three markers are expressed by a subset of DN B cells called DN2 or atypical B cells that are typically expanded in P. falciparum-exposed individuals [ , ]. Atypical B cells also have the capacity to differentiate into antibody-secreting cells and may thus contribute to protection against malaria [ , ]. However, it is unknown whether P. falciparum-specific atypical B cells have the same durability as P. falciparum-specific memory B cells and if there are differences in the phenotype and longevity of B cells specific for merozoite antigens or variant surface antigens.
In malaria-endemic regions, repetitive P. falciparum infections result in boosting of the immune response during every infection. These repeated infections complicate the study of the durability of anti-parasite immune responses, because every antigen exposure results in the activation and differentiation of long-lived memory B cells into antibody-secreting cells, as well as the formation of new memory B cells. To overcome this problem, we used samples that were collected before and after local reduction of P. falciparum transmission. Analyzing antigen-specific B cells from these two time points allowed us to evaluate which P. falciparum-specific B cell subsets remained present in the absence of new infections and could thus be considered long-lived. Using high parameter spectral flow cytometry, we analyzed the phenotype of memory and atypical B cells that recognize P. falciparum merozoite antigens or variant surface antigens. Additionally, we performed an unsupervised clustering analysis of antigen-specific B cells to identify characteristics of the long-lived B cell response that are unique to each class of antigens.

## Results

## Activated B cell subsets decreased in abundance in the absence of Plasmodium falciparum exposure
To study P. falciparum-specific B cell responses that were maintained in the absence of new infections, we used peripheral blood mononuclear cells from ten P. falciparum-exposed Ugandan adults collected during a period of high P. falciparum transmission and after effective mosquito control by means of indoor residual spraying (IRS) had reduced parasite prevalence by 80% [ ]. Individuals had not tested positive for P. falciparum infection for a median of 1.7 years (range, 1.1–2.5 years) before collection of blood at the second time point ( and ). B cells were isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells and stained with a comprehensive panel of B cell markers ( ). This panel included antigen tetramers that allowed for the detection of B cells with specificity to two classes of P. falciparum antigens: (i) merozoite proteins involved in erythrocyte invasion (merozoite surface protein 1 [MSP1] and apical membrane antigen 1 [AMA1]), and (ii) the cysteine-rich interdomain region α1 (CIDRα1) domain of the variant surface antigen P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) that is expressed on the surface of the infected erythrocyte. These antigens were selected because we have previously used these proteins to isolate monoclonal antibodies with confirmed antigen specificities [ , ].
 To assess the composition of the B cell compartment irrespective of antigen-specificity, we first determined the relative abundance of major B cell populations during high P. falciparum transmission and after a reduction in parasite exposure. Following published guidelines for the identification of B cell populations [ ], total CD19+CD20+ B cells were first gated on CD24 and CD38 to identify transitional B cells (CD24+CD38+) and plasmablasts (CD24-CD38+). The remaining cells were then divided into naïve B cells (IgD+CD27-), unswitched memory B cells (IgD+CD27+), switched memory B cells (IgD-CD27+), and double negative B cells (IgD-CD27-) ( ). Based on the expression of CD11c, naïve B cells were further divided into resting (CD11c-) and activated (CD11c+). For unswitched and switched memory B cell populations, we used CD21 to divide cells into resting (CD21+) and activated (CD21-). Using CD11c and CD21, double negative (DN) B cells were separated into sub-populations DN1, DN2, DN3, and DN4 ( ). DN2 (or atypical; CD11c+CD21-) B cells have been studied extensively in P. falciparum-exposed individuals [ , , – ], whereas the other three sub-populations of DN B cells have not previously been characterized in the context of malaria. DN1 B cells (CD11c-CD21+) and DN4 (CD11c+CD21+) B cells are thought to be closely related to resting switched memory B cells, while DN3 B cells (CD11c-CD21-) may be precursors of atypical B cells [ , ].
Following IRS, we observed a consistent decrease in the percentage of activated cells: naïve B cells from a median of 5.1% to 2.4% (~55% reduction), unswitched memory B cells from 3.4% to 1.3% (~60% reduction), switched memory B cells from 12.3% to 7.6% (~40% reduction) and plasmablasts from 0.2% to 0.1% (~50% reduction) ( and ). In contrast, the percentage of DN1 cells increased significantly post-IRS, from 2.2% to 3.6% (~40% increase) ( ). These results are in line with a decrease in immune activation due to an interruption of exposure to P. falciparum infections. A similar pattern was observed when we analyzed antigen-specific B cells: the relative abundance of activated, but not resting, MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific naïve B cells, unswitched memory B cells, and switched memory B cells declined between the two time points (~70, 40, and 75% reduction, respectively for MSP1/AMA1-specific B cells and ~85, 75, and 75% reduction, respectively for CIDRα1-specific B cells) ( ). Additionally, although the total percentage of atypical B cells did not change, the percentage of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific atypical B cells decreased (~60% and 65% reduction, respectively). The percentages of antigen-specific DN1, DN3, and DN4 B cells, as well as plasmablasts were small, with only CIDRα1-specific plasmablasts decreasing over time (Figs and ). When looking at the abundance of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells among total B cells, we observed that both populations decreased in size by about 50%, although these differences were not statistically significant ( ).
 Collectively, these results suggest that the percentage of P. falciparum-specific activated B cells declines in the absence of P. falciparum infection but that long-lived P. falciparum-specific B cells are detectable in the circulation after more than a year without parasite exposure. In addition, we did not observe a difference in the percentage of B cells with specificity for merozoite antigens or variant surface antigens that were lost.

## Long-lived MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells differed in phenotype
To further explore similarities and differences in the long-lived memory B cell responses to merozoite antigens and variant surface antigens, we analyzed the phenotype of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells. To do this in an unbiased way and without limiting the analysis to pre-defined B cell subsets, we first grouped all non-naïve antigen-specific B cells from all ten individuals at both time points. Unsupervised clustering was then performed based on expression of all markers, except for Ig isotypes to prevent these from dominating the clustering (Figs and and ). This analysis identified six clusters, which were classified based on the expression of markers associated with previously characterized B cell populations, as follows: plasmablasts (CD27+CD38+), activated memory B cells (CD21-CD27+), two atypical B cell subsets (CD21-CD27-CD11c+), and two memory B cell subsets (CD21+CD27+) ( ). The two atypical B cell subsets were distinguished by differences in the expression of FcRL5 and T-bet, while the two memory B cell subsets mainly differed in the expression of CD11c and CD95.
 Overlay of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells onto the composite UMAP of all antigen-specific B cells showed differences in their distribution over the six clusters, especially at the post-IRS time point ( ). We therefore determined the percentage of antigen-specific cells that belonged to each of the six subsets of B cells ( and ). This allowed us to quantify the changes in composition of the MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells by calculating the percentage overlap between the samples collected before and after IRS. The overlap in composition of CIDRα1-specific B cells between the two time points (60%) was slightly lower than that of MSP1/AMA1-specific B cells (71%), suggesting that the population of CIDRα1-specific B cells may have undergone more changes during the period with reduced P. falciparum transmission. When comparing the two groups of antigen-specific B cells at each time point, we observed that the populations of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells were more similar during high parasite transmission (74%) than in the absence of parasite exposure (54%). Thus, the populations of circulating long-lived B cells with specificity for merozoite antigens or variant surface antigens seem to diverge in their composition in the absence of antigen re-exposure.
To better understand these differences in phenotype between long-lived B cells with different antigen-specificities, we looked more closely at the distribution of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells over the six subsets. During a time of high parasite exposure, both MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells were found among all six subsets. With the exception of plasmablasts that were a small population among both antigen groups, antigen-specific B cells were distributed fairly evenly over the various sub-populations ( ). In line with the reduction in immune activation, the percentage of short-lived plasmablasts (cluster 1) and activated memory B cells (cluster 2) was lower post-IRS (20–70% of the pre-IRS level) ( ). The same was true for the FcRL5+T-bet+ subset of atypical B cells (cluster 3), which decreased in proportion by ~65% for both merozoite and variant surface antigens. However, we observed differences in the relative abundance of subsets 4, 5, and 6 between the two antigen groups. While the fraction of FcRL5-T-bet- atypical B cells (cluster 4) increased among MSP1/AMA1-specific B cells (from 25% pre-IRS to 37% post-IRS), it remained unchanged among CIDRα1-specific B cells (~10%). Additionally, the fraction of CD95+CD11c+ memory B cells (cluster 5) remained stable among MSP1/AMA1-specific B cells (25–30%) but decreased among CIDRα1-specific B cells (from 24% pre-IRS to 16% post-IRS). Together, subsets 4 and 5 made up the majority (65%) of MSP1/AMA1-specific B cells post-IRS, but only 25% of CIDRα1-specific B cells at this time point. In contrast, 65% of all CIDRα1-specific B cells detected post-IRS were CD95-CD11c- memory B cells (cluster 6), an almost three-fold increase in comparison to its proportion among CIDRα1-specific B cells present during high P. falciparum exposure (25%). Collectively, these results suggest that circulating long-lived anti-Plasmodium B cells with different antigen specificities may have different phenotypes.

## Long-lived MSP1/AMA1-specific memory B cells expressed CD95 and CD11c
The difference in proportions of CD95+CD11c+ (cluster 5) and CD95-CD11c- (cluster 6) long-lived memory B cells between merozoite antigen-specific and variant surface antigen-specific memory B cells was interesting given that, in general, the majority of class-switched memory B cells (CD19+IgD-CD27+) do not express these markers [ , , ]. To study this observation in more detail, we determined the percentages of CD95+ cells and CD11c+ cells among antigen-specific switched memory B cells and the total population of switched memory B cells (gated manually as shown in ). Irrespective of the level of parasite exposure, the large majority (80–95%) of MSP1/AMA1-specific switched memory B cells expressed CD95, compared to only 40–50% of all switched memory B cells ( ). A similar pattern was seen for CD11c with 70–80% of MSP1/AMA1-specific switched memory B cells expressing CD11c, compared to only 35–40% in the total population of switched memory B cells ( ). During high parasite exposure, the percentages of CD95+ / CD11c+ MSP1/AMA1-specific switched memory B cells did not differ from those among CIDRα1-specific switched memory B cells (median, 60–70%), although it should be mentioned that the percentages of CD95+ / CD11c+ CIDRα1-specific switched memory B cells were also not significantly different from those of the total population of switched memory B cells ( ). Post-IRS, the percentages of CD95+ / CD11c+ CIDRα1-specific switched memory B cells decreased to 25–30% and were significantly different from those among MSP1/AMA1-specific switched memory B cells.
 CD11c is often co-expressed with FcRL5 and T-bet. Collectively, these markers have been associated with long-lived class-switched memory B cells that participate in robust recall responses [ , ]. To determine whether MSP1/AMA1-specific memory B cells not only express higher levels of CD11c than CIDRα1-specific switched memory B cells, but also higher levels of these other two markers, we compared the percentages of FcRL5+ cells and T-bet+ cells among antigen-specific switched memory B cells and the total population of switched memory B cells. The percentage of T-bet+ cells among MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific switched memory B cells was similar during high parasite exposure (median, 30–40%) and post-IRS (median, 5–20%), and was not increased as compared to the total population of switched memory B cells ( ). The percentage of cells expressing FcRL5 was low and did not differ between MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific switched memory B cells ( ). Thus, CD95 and CD11c, but not other markers of durable immunity, seem to be differentially expressed between MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific long-lived memory B cells present post-IRS.

## CD86+CD11chi atypical B cells were enriched for CIDRα1-specific cells
As shown in , we observed that the large majority (90%) of long-lived MSP1/AMA1-specific atypical B cells (clusters 3 and 4, post-IRS) did not express FcRL5 and T-bet, whereas CIDRα1-specific atypical B cells were divided almost equally between the FcRL5+T-bet+ (cluster 3) and FcRL5-T-bet- (cluster 4) populations. We recently described three subsets of atypical B cells with different functional profiles [ ], that we will here refer to as atBC1 (CD86+CD11chi), atBC2 (CD86-CD11chi), and atBC3 (CD86-CD11cint). Of these, atBC1 and atBC2 expressed high levels of FcRL5 and T-bet, whereas atBC3 expressed low levels of T-bet and did not express FcRL5. We determined the proportion of these three previously described subsets of atypical B cells among the MSP1/AMA1-specific atypical B cells and the CIDRα1-specific atypical B cells. After gating on IgD- atypical B cells (CD21-CD27-CD11c+IgD-), unsupervised clustering was performed, followed by separating the cells into the three atypical B cell subsets based on expression of CD11c and CD86 (Figs and ). Overall, the fraction of atBC1 among all atypical B cells was smallest (25%) and decreased in the absence of P. falciparum-exposure (6%) ( ). The fraction of atBC2 increased from 27% to 40%, while the relative size of subset atBC3 remained stable at ~50%. However, it is important to note that atypical B cells of all subsets were still detected in the circulation post-IRS, indicating that these cells are long-lived in the absence of infection.
 Next, we determined the proportion of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific cells among the three atypical B cell subsets, as well as among resting and activated memory B cells. Antigen-specific B cells were found among all atypical and memory B cell populations, but their distributions within each population differed. Resting memory B cells, activated memory B cells, and atBC2 harbored equal proportions of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific cells ( ), suggesting that there is no enrichment for antigen-specificity among these B cell populations. AtBC3 contained about 60% MSP1/AMA1-specific cells and 40% CIDRα1-specific cells, although this difference did not reach statistical significance when analyzed for individual donors ( ). In stark contrast, the majority of antigen-specific atBC1 (~80% after normalizing for the total abundance of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific cells) was specific for CIDRα1 at the pre-IRS time point (Figs and ). The relative abundance of CIDRα1-specific cells within atBC1 was even higher post-IRS, although it should be noted that very few antigen-specific B cells were detected at this time point (10 cells in total). Collectively, these results suggest that atypical B cells are part of the long-lived B cell response to Plasmodium antigens and point to differences in the atypical B cell response to different classes of antigens.

## Discussion
Our current understanding of the longevity of naturally acquired immunity against P. falciparum is mostly based on studies that measured the presence of anti-parasite antibodies in serum. Previous research on memory B cell responses in P. falciparum-exposed individuals has mainly focused on changes in the major B cell populations shortly after acute infection or on studying B cell memory in non-immune individuals [ , , ]. In recent years, novel subsets of memory and atypical B cells have been discovered, each of which may play a different role in the immune response to infection [ – , ]. To identify components of the naturally acquired B cell response that contribute to long-lived memory against P. falciparum infection, we studied samples collected from individuals living in a malaria endemic region before and after a reduction in P. falciparum exposure due to highly effective vector control. Using spectral flow cytometry, we determined the phenotype of B cells with specificity to P. falciparum merozoite antigens (MSP1/AMA1) and variant surface antigens (the CIDRα1 domain of PfEMP1). While both groups of antigen-specific B cells showed similar dynamics over time (i.e., a reduction in the percentage of activated B cells), we observed several differences in the composition of circulating long-lived MSP1/AMA1-specific B cells and CIDRα1-specific B cells.
First, we found that the majority of MSP1/AMA1-specific switched memory B cells expressed CD95 and CD11c. CD95 is a death receptor that can induce apoptosis of the cell when it gets bound by its ligand. CD95 is upregulated in germinal center B cells and activated B cells as a mechanism to regulate the humoral immune response and limit inflammation [ ]. Seemingly contradictory, it can also play a role in cell survival and proliferation [ ]. Until now, it was unclear whether CD95+ B cells were recent germinal center emigrants that would disappear shortly after the resolution of infection, or whether they were part of a durable memory B cell response. Our observation that approximately 80% of MSP1/AMA1-specific switched memory B cells expressed CD95 after almost two years without P. falciparum exposure suggests that these cells are long-lived in the circulation. Glass et al. showed that CD95+ memory B cells were phenotypically more closely related to plasma cells than other memory B cell subsets, suggesting that these cells readily differentiate into antibody-secreting cells upon antigen encounter [ ]. Indeed, CD95+ memory B cells strongly responded to BCR crosslinking, resulting in the phosphorylation of proteins that are part of the BCR signaling cascade [ ]. CD11c expression has also been shown to be upregulated by BCR stimulation, and, similar to CD95+ memory B cells, CD11c+ B cells are more prone to differentiate into antibody-secreting cells than CD11c- B cells [ ]. Together, this suggests that MSP1/AMA1-specific switched memory B cells are enriched for an effector memory population that will rapidly differentiate into antibody-secreting cells upon antigen encounter. Interestingly, long-lived MSP1/AMA1-specific switched memory B cells did not express FcRL5 or T-bet, markers that are often co-expressed with CD11c and have been associated with durable B cell immunity and rapid recall responses following vaccination [ , ]. The lack of FcRL5 and T-bet expression in CD11c+ memory B cells observed here may point to differences in the immune response to vaccination and infection.
The second major difference between MSP1/AMA1-specific B cells and CIDRα1-specific B cells was that the large majority of atypical B cells subset 1 were CIDRα1-specific. We previously reported that this subset of atypical B cells had the most “atypical” phenotype, with highest expression of CD19, CD11c, FcRL5, and T-bet, and upregulated many genes that are involved in antigen presentation and interaction with T cells [ ]. This subset of atypical B cells is most likely to home to the spleen where they function as a memory B cell subset, possibly to rapidly respond to systemic infections [ , ]. Their presence in the circulation may be the result of spillover from the spleen, either due to limited space to harbor all newly formed atypical B cells or to distortion of the spleen architecture during P. falciparum infections [ ]. In the circulation, the proportion of this atypical B cell subset decreased after a period without P. falciparum infection. However, it is possible that these cells are longer-lived in the spleen and are more abundant than can be assessed using PBMCs.
What may underlie the differences in phenotype between MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific memory B cells? One possible explanation may be a difference in the type of cell that initially captures the antigen for presentation to CD4+ T cells. MSP1 and AMA1 are both shed from the merozoite surface during invasion and are thus present in the circulation in soluble form [ ]. Dendritic cells are highly efficient at taking up and presenting soluble antigen [ ]. In contrast, PfEMP1 is expressed on the surface of infected erythrocytes, which can be considered ‘particles’. Dendritic cells have been shown to be dispensable for mounting an immune response to particulate antigens [ ]. Instead, B cells are the primary antigen-presenting cells that take up particulate antigens, including Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes [ – ]. Gao et al. recently showed that atypical B cells were better at presenting antigen and activating CD4+ T cells than other B cell subsets [ ]. In line with these observations, we show that atypical B cell subset 1 (that seems primed for antigen presentation) was enriched for particle-associated CIDRα1-specific B cells over B cells with specificity for soluble antigens MSP1 and AMA1, suggesting that capturing infected erythrocytes and presenting parasite antigens to T cells may be an important function of this atypical B cell subset. We have previously determined that this subset of atypical B cells can also be stimulated to differentiate into antibody-secreting cells in vitro [ ], indicating that it may have dual roles in the immune response to P. falciparum.
The difference between soluble and membrane-bound antigens may also have a direct effect on how these antigens are perceived by B cells. Atypical B cells have been shown to be restricted to recognition of membrane-bound antigens [ ]. The interaction of a B cell with membrane-associated antigen allows the formation of an immunological synapse. Inhibitory receptors expressed by atypical B cells are excluded from this synapse, resulting in B cell receptor signaling and differentiation towards antibody-secreting cells [ ]. This could explain why atypical B cell subset 1 that expresses the highest levels of the inhibitory receptor FcRL5 is enriched for recognition of the CIDRα1 domain of membrane-bound protein PfEMP1. It should however be noted that soluble antigen can also be presented effectively in membrane-context by conventional dendritic cells, follicular dendritic cells, and subcapsular macrophages in secondary lymphoid organs, especially when it is part of an immune complex (reviewed in [ ]). This would provide a route for atypical B cells to also respond to soluble merozoite antigens, such as MSP1 and AMA1.
Another explanation for the observed differences in phenotype of antigen-specific B cells is that certain B cell receptor properties predispose B cells to a certain fate. Prior studies have shown that while atypical B cells harbor reactivity against P. falciparum antigens [ , ], they are also enriched for autoreactivity [ ]. Specifically, atypical B cells produce antibodies against the membrane lipid phosphatidylserine, which can induce the destruction of uninfected erythrocytes and contribute to anemia [ ]. It has been hypothesized that atypical B cells are derived from anergic cells with low levels of autoreactivity [ ]. During P. falciparum infection, these cells could be activated and acquire mutations in the B cell receptor that increase their affinity to P. falciparum antigens and at the same time decrease their autoreactivity [ ]. In line with this theory, we have previously observed differences in antibody heavy chain V-gene usage between memory and atypical B cells [ ]. Specifically, we showed that VH3-48 was overrepresented among IgG+ atypical B cells. Interestingly, we have recently isolated two broadly inhibitory antibodies against CIDRα1 that both used VH3-48 [ ]. These observations suggest that intrinsic autoreactivity of their B cell receptor may equip atypical B cells with the potential to recognize P. falciparum variant surface antigens.
Finally, it cannot be ruled out that P. falciparum-exposed individuals have different life-time levels and frequencies of exposure to these two groups of antigens that may result in differences in phenotypes of long-lived B cells. With every asexual replication cycle of blood-stage P. falciparum, MSP1 and AMA1 are expressed to mediate erythrocyte invasion. B cell responses against these two antigens are thus expected to get boosted with every P. falciparum infection. On the other hand, not all PfEMP1 variants contain a CIDRα1 domain [ ]. Although the parasite population within an infected individual may collectively express multiple PfEMP1 variants, it is possible that not every infection leads to exposure of the immune system to CIDRα1. However, we observed a similar reduction of activated MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific cells from the pre-IRS to the post-IRS time point among all major B cell populations: naïve, unswitched memory, switched memory, and atypical B cells. In addition, the unsupervised clustering analysis of antigen-specific B cells identified a population of CIDRα1-specific plasmablasts that were short-lived in the circulation. Together, these observations suggest that the individuals in this study had recently been exposed to CIDRα1 and that a lack of CIDRα1 exposure in itself cannot explain the differences in long-lived memory B cell responses between CIDRα1 and merozoite antigens.
To determine how these different long-lived B cell subsets contribute to protection against P. falciparum infection, it would be important to analyze the connection between the cellular repertoire and plasma antibody responses. For P. falciparum antigens, a moderate correlation between memory B cell abundance and IgG titers has been observed for some merozoite antigens, but not for others [ , ]. This is in line with studies for other pathogens, that showed a correlation between the percentage of memory B cells and IgG titers for antigens from several viruses and bacteria [ – ], while other studies have reported the absence of such a correlation [ – ]. The lack of a correlation between the magnitude of the memory B cell and the antibody response fits with the prevailing model that memory B cells and plasma cells are two independently controlled arms of the humoral immune system [ , ]. To determine the contribution of different memory B cell subsets to the recall response against P. falciparum, it would be interesting to analyze antibody responses upon re-infection. However, none of the individuals included in this study experienced a recorded P. falciparum infection post-IRS, preventing us from performing such an analysis.
This study has several limitations. First, the study population is relatively small and homogeneous (ten women between 25 and 65 years of age). Performing a similar analysis in a larger cohort of individuals of different age groups, including children and men, will strengthen our observations. Second, we assessed B cell responses almost 1.5–2 years after the last known P. falciparum infection, which is a relatively short time without antigen exposure. Long-lived memory B cells have been detected decades after infection or vaccination [ – , ]. It would be interesting to survey the ten individuals included in this study again at a later time point. Third, our analyses are restricted to B cell phenotype and did not include functional assessment of the various B cell populations identified here. Finally, we detected relatively few antigen-specific B cells, especially for CIDRα1 in the absence of P. falciparum exposure, which in some cases prevented us from analyzing responses for each person separately. In these instances, we aggregated antigen-specific B cells from ten individuals and analyzed them in bulk. Using antigen probes of additional CIDRα1 variants and non-3D7 P. falciparum MSP1/AMA1 variants could facilitate the detection of larger numbers of antigen-specific B cells. All in all, it will be important to perform additional studies of the phenotype and functionality of long-lived B cells with specificity for P. falciparum antigens to reproduce and extend our findings.
In conclusion, we analyzed long-lived B cell responses against merozoite antigens and variant surface antigens in individuals living in a malaria-endemic region at a time when P. falciparum transmission was high, and after at least a year (median of 1.7 years) without parasite exposure. The loss of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells in the circulation was similar, but the phenotype of long-lived MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells appeared to differ. The majority of long-lived MSP1/AMA1-specific were CD95+CD11c+ memory B cells and FcRL5-T-bet- atypical B cells, whereas the majority of long-lived CIDRα1-specific B cells were CD95-CD11c- memory B cells. Our results do not necessarily point to a qualitative difference in the memory B cell response to these antigens but may be reflective of differences in how these different antigens are recognized or processed by the immune system, and how the immune response will unfold during a new P. falciparum infection.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
All ten individuals included in this study were residents of the Nagongera sub-county in Tororo District, Uganda. This region was historically characterized by extremely high P. falciparum transmission intensity, with an estimated annual entomological inoculation rate of 125 infectious bites per person per year [ ]. Since 2015, multiple rounds of indoor residual spraying (IRS) have dramatically reduced malaria incidence compared with pre-IRS levels [ ]. Individuals were selected for inclusion into this study based on age and P. falciparum exposure. All individuals included in this study were enrolled in The Program for Resistance, Immunology, Surveillance, and Modeling of Malaria (PRISM) cohort [ ] and have provided written consent for the use of their samples for research. All infections (P. falciparum and other causes) in the three months prior to sample collection are indicated in . Additional information about PRISM participants, including medical history, is available through ClinEpiDB (clinepidb.org). The PRISM cohort study was approved by the Makerere University School of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee (SOMREC), London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine IRB, the University of California, San Francisco Human Research Protection Program, and the Stanford University School of Medicine IRB. The use of cohort samples for this study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio.
Samples from P. falciparum-naïve US donors (n = 7) were received de-identified from the University of Texas Health San Antonio COVID-19 Repository and were obtained from individuals who had not been SARS-CoV-2-infected for at least 20 weeks prior to sample collection. This repository was reviewed and approved by the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio Institutional Review Board. All study participants provided written informed consent prior to specimen collection for the repository to include use of left-over clinical specimens for research. The COVID-19 Repository utilizes an honest broker system to maintain participant confidentiality and release de-identified data or specimens to recipient investigators.

## B cell isolation
Cryopreserved PBMCs were thawed and immediately mixed with pre-warmed (37°C) thawing medium (IMDM/GlutaMAX supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (USA origin) and 0.01% Universal Nuclease (Thermo, #88700)) to wash away the DMSO. After centrifugation (250 × g, 5 min at RT), the cell pellet was resuspended in warm thawing medium and viable cells were counted. Next, cells were centrifuged (250 × g, 5 min at RT), resuspended in isolation buffer (PBS with 2% FBS and 1 mM (f/c) EDTA) at 50 million live cells/mL, and filtered through a 35 μm sterile filter cap (Corning, # 352235) to break apart any aggregated PBMCs. B cells were isolated by negative selection using the EasySep Human B Cell Isolation Kit (StemCell, #17954) or the MojoSort Human Pan B Cell Isolation Kit (BioLegend, # 480082) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Staining for spectral flow analysis
C-terminally biotinylated full-length P. falciparum 3D7 MSP1 and AMA1 were produced in Expi293F cells (Thermo, # A14635) as described previously [ ]. C-terminally StrepTagII labeled HB3VAR03 CIDRα1.4, ITVAR22 CIDRα1.7, and IT4VAR20 CIDRα1.1 were produced in baculovirus-infected insect cells as described previously [ ]. Antigen tetramers were synthesized by incubating protein with fluorophore-conjugated streptavidin overnight at 4°C at a molar ratio of 6:1 with rotation. MSP1 and AMA1 tetramers were made with APC-conjugated streptavidin (Cytek, # 20-4317-U100) and BUV563-conjugated streptavidin (BD, # 612935), while CIDRα1 tetramers were generated with PE-labeled streptavidin (Cytek, # 50-4317-U100) and BUV661-conjugated streptavidin (BD, # 612979). B cells isolated by negative selection were washed with PBS, centrifuged (250 × g, 5 min), resuspended in 1 ml of PBS containing 1 μl live/dead stain (Zombie UV Fixable Viability kit (Biolegend, # 423107)) and incubated on ice for 30 min. Cells were subsequently washed with cold PBS containing 1% BSA (250 × g, 5 min, 4°C), resuspended with a cocktail of 25 μM of each merozoite tetramer (MSP1/AMA1) diluted in PBS containing 1% BSA to a volume of 100 μl, and incubated at 4°C for 30 min. The cells were then washed twice with cold PBS containing 1% BSA (250 × g, 5 min, 4°C) and incubated with a cocktail of 25 μM of each CIDRα1 tetramer (CIDRα1.1/ CIDRα1.4/CIDRα1.7) diluted in PBS containing 1% BSA to a volume of 100 μl, and incubated at 4°C for 30 min. Next, the cells were washed twice with cold PBS containing 1% BSA (250 × g, 5 min, 4°C) and incubated at 4°C for 30 min with a B cell surface marker antibody cocktail ( ) with 10 μl Brilliant Stain Buffer Plus (BD, # 566385) diluted in PBS containing 1% BSA to a volume of 100 μl. The cells were then washed with cold PBS containing 1% BSA (250 × g, 5 min, 4°C), resuspended in 1 ml of Transcription Factor Fix/Perm Concentrate (Cytek, part of # TNB-0607-KIT), diluted with 3 parts Transcription Factor Fix/Perm Diluent (Cytek), and incubated at 4°C for 1 hour. After the incubation, the cells were washed twice with 3 ml of 1× Flow Cytometry Perm Buffer (Cytek) (300 × g, 8 min, 4°C) and resuspended in 1× Flow Cytometry Perm Buffer with an anti-human T-bet antibody. After an incubation at 4°C for 30 min, the cells were washed twice with 3 ml cold 1× Flow Cytometry Perm Buffer (300 × g, 8 min, 4°C) and once with 3 ml cold PBS containing 1% BSA, resuspended in cold PBS containing 1% BSA to 20–30 million cells/ml and filtered into a FACS tube through a 35 μm sterile filter cap. Cells were analyzed by flow cytometry immediately following intracellular staining.

## Spectral flow cytometry analysis
B cells were analyzed on a Cytek Aurora spectral flow cytometer equipped with five lasers. SpectroFlo QC Beads (Cytek, # N7-97355) were run prior to each experiment for routine performance tracking. Daily quality control and Levey-Jennings tracking reports were used to ensure optimal performance of the machine and to confirm that settings between different runs were comparable. Pooled B cells from two malaria-naïve US donors were used for the unstained control, technical replicates, and to perform compensation for the live/dead stain. UltraComp eBeads Plus Compensation Beads (Thermo, #01-3333-41) were used to perform compensation for all other fluorophores. Between experiments performed on different days, the technical replicates showed near perfect correlation between the expression of cell surface and intracellular markers (Spearman r = 0.98). To minimize experimental variation, paired samples were analyzed within the same experiment.
The cytometry analysis software OMIQ (Dotmatics) was used for all data analysis. B cell subsets and antigen specific B cells were manually gated in OMIQ ( ). Since both MSP1 and AMA1 tetramers were generated in the same two fluorochrome format (APC and BUV563), MSP1/AMA-specific B cells were collectively defined as cells staining positive for both tetramer formats. For CIDRα1, we used the domain variants IT4VAR20 CIDRα1.1, HB3VAR03 CIDRα1.4, and IT4VAR22 CIDRα1.7 that are highly diverse in sequence. Because tetramers for each CIDRα1 variant were generated using PE and BUV661 fluorochromes, B cells binding either one of the two variants were indistinguishable. Therefore, all CIDRα1.1, CIDRα1.4, and CIDRα1.7-reactive B cells were collectively referred to as CIDRα1-specific B cells. Antigen-specific B cells were defined as cells staining positive for both tetramer formats in a single antigen group. To exclude any non-specific binders, B cells with reactivity to both MSP1/AMA1 and CIDRα1 probes were removed. Thus, the gating strategy for antigen-specific B cells is summarized as follows: single / live / CD19+ / CD20+ / IgD- / non-strep / (MSP1/AMA1+ or CIDRα1+).
Data integration and dimension reduction analysis were performed using Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP). UMAPs of antigen-specific B cells were created using the expression of CD19, CD20, CD21, CD24, CD27, CD38, CD83, CD86, CD95, CXCR3, CXCR5, CD11c, FcRL5, and T-bet as features with default parameters (neighbors = 15, minimum distance = 0.8, metric = Euclidean, random seed = 2478) and included all 20 Ugandan donor samples used in this study for initial projection. FlowSOM [ ] was used to identify six cell subsets based on the expression of CD19, CD20, CD21, CD24, CD27, CD38, CD83, CD86, CD95, CXCR3, CXCR5, CD11c, FcRL5, and T-bet (metric = Elucidean, random seed = 1150). For the analysis of atypical B cells, atypical B cells were pre-gated on single / live / CD19+ / CD20+ / CD21- / CD27- / CD11c+ / IgD- cells, followed by the generation of a UMAP (neighbors = 15, minimum distance = 0.8, metric = Euclidean, random seed = 2742) based on the expression of markers associated with atypical B cells (CD19, CD20, CD24, CD38, CD86, CD95, CXCR3, CXCR5, CD11c, FcRL5, and T-bet). To define the three atypical B cell subsets, FlowSOM [ ] was used to identify three clusters based on CD11c and CD86 expression using default parameters (metric = Euclidean, random seed = 7333). For the projection of antigen-specific B cells onto the UMAP, gates were manually set to identify populations of interest using two-dimensional displays, which were then overlaid onto the UMAP projection. Mean fluorescence intensities of cell surface and intracellular markers in select B cell subsets were calculated using the heatmap function in OMIQ. For the analysis of expression of individual markers (CD95, CD11c, T-bet, and FcRL5) in switched memory B cells, samples with fewer than 10 cells were excluded from analysis.

## Percent overlap in B cell populations
To determine the similarity in distribution of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells over six B cell subsets, we calculated the percentage overlap between pair-wise combinations of samples. For each subset, we determined which of the two samples had the smallest fraction of that subset. For example, if subset A took up 25% of sample x and 17% of sample y, we used the value of 17%. We then calculated the sum of these six smallest fractions to obtain the overlap in composition between the two samples. All distributions and calculations of percent overlap are included in .

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses of flow cytometry data were performed in GraphPad Prism 10 with details of statistical tests provided in the relevant figure legends. P values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Gating strategy.
A) The gating scheme used to identify resting and activated B cell populations, as well as subpopulations of double negative cells. The table lists all abbreviations of B cell populations and their definitions. B) The gating strategy used to identify antigen-specific B cells. Left: cells that bound to both CIDRα1 and MSP1/AMA1 tetramers (denoted as “strep”) were considered non-specific binders. Only “non-strep” cells were used to gate on antigen-specific B cells. Middle: background of antigen-specific B cells in a P. falciparum-naïve US donor. Right: detection of antigen-specific B cells in a P. falciparum-exposed Ugandan donor. C) The gating strategy used to identify CD95+, CD11c+, T-bet+, and FcRL5+ B cells.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## The percentage of DN3 B cells, DN4 B cells, and plasmablasts among circulating B cells.
The percentages are shown for total B cells (left), MSP1/AMA1-specific B cells (middle), and CIDRα1-specific B cells (right). Differences between groups were evaluated using a Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## Projection of the surface and intracellular markers used to generate the composite UMAP of antigen-specific B cells onto this UMAP.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## CD11c and CD86 expression projected onto the UMAP of all atypical B cells as well as each of the three subsets individually.
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## The normalized percentage of MSP1/AMA1-specific and CIDRα1-specific B cells among different B cell subsets.
Values were calculated for individual donors. For the three atypical B cell subsets, donors were only included if the total size of the subset allowed for the detection of at least one MSP1/AMA1-specific B cell and one CIDRα1-specific B cell. For example, if the total percentage of MSP1/AMA1-specific B cells is 1.5%, a B cell population needs to contain at least 1 / 1.5 × 100 = 67 cells to be included in this analysis. Because atypical B cell subsets in samples obtained post-IRS were too small to perform this analysis, only pre-IRS data is shown. swM, switched memory B cell; atBCi, atypical B cell subset i. n.s., not significant.
(TIF)
S1 Table

## Information about individuals included in the study.
(XLSX)
S2 Table

## Flow cytometry panel.
(XLSX)
S3 Table

## All data underlying the results.
(XLSX)

Plasmids encoding 3D7 MSP1-bio, AMA1-bio, and BirA, were a kind gift from Dr. Gavin Wright (Wellcome Sanger Institute). Data were generated in the Flow Cytometry Shared Resource at UT Health San Antonio, which is supported by a grant from the National Cancer Institute (P30 CA054174) to the Mays Cancer Center, a grant from the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT) (RP210126), a grant from the National Institutes of Health (S10 OD030432), and support from the Office of the Vice President for Research at UT Health San Antonio.
 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012661.r001Author response to previous submission
Submission Version0
22 Aug 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: 147694_1_rebuttal_3117957_s3ft3y.docx
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012661.r002Decision Letter 0
PhillipsMargaret ASection EditorButlerNoah S.Guest Editor© 2024 Phillips, Butler2024Phillips, Butlerhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
25 Sep 2024

Dear Dr. Bunnik,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Differences in phenotype between long-lived memory B cells against Plasmodium falciparum merozoite antigens and variant surface antigens" for consideration at PLOS Pathogens. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important topic. Based on the reviews, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, providing that you modify the manuscript according to the review recommendations.
All three reviewers comment on the value of the characterization of parasite antigen-specific memory B cell populations in individuals during periods of high and low P. falciparum transmission. A key strength of the work includes the tetramer-based antigen specific approaches and rigorous interrogation of the phenotype of AMA-, MSP-, and PfEMP1-specific subsets. However, reviewer 1 and 3 ask that clarifications be provided, as well as inclusion of data that quantifies the absolute numbers of memory B cells. Please also address the data display in Figure 2 and conciser discussion of the limitations of focusing only on IgG and not including analyses of IgM.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 30 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to all review comments, and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript.
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Noah S. Butler
Guest Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Margaret Phillips
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: The manuscript by Reyes RA, et al., provides a phenotypic description of Plasmodium falciparum-specific (MSP1/AMA1 and CIDRAa1) B cells in Ugandan adults during a period of high transmission and a subsequent period of low transmission, with about 1.7 years between the two time points. This study design allowed for a numeric and phenotypic assessment of long-lived antigen-specific B cells. The authors have provided a well-written assessment of their observations, with most conclusions supported by the data. These data provide further insight into the presence and potential contribution of atypical B cells towards anti-Plasmodium immunity, the maintenance and phenotype of Plasmodium-specific B cells in the absence of continuous antigen exposure, and the impact of Plasmodium antigen distribution between merozoite and surface of infected red blood cells on the phenotype of antigen-specific B cells. Collectively, these data will be a valuable resource to the malaria immunology community.
Reviewer #2: As our tools expand, our ability to identify heterogenous populations of cell types increases. In the case of malaria, there is a high interest in determining if atypical MBCs generated as early as the first exposure to the parasite in humans can play a protective role in recall responses against the parasite. Here, the authors wanted to address how circulating memory B cell (MBC) populations against two different classes of antigens (merozoite proteins involved in invasion and variant surface antigen) resemble or differ from one another after a period of high Plasmodium transmission and after the absence of infection for a median of ~1.7 yrs. The novelty here involves the utilization of B cell tetramers specific for MSP1/AMA-1 and the CIDRa1 domain of PFEMP-1. Spectral flow cytometry was used for phenotyping the MBC populations in the blood of ten Ugandan patients who were involved in a P. falciparum transmission reduction program. Importantly, the authors found that the MBCs generated against the different antigens differed after IRS, with the CIDRa1-specific MBCs primarily resembling atypical MBCs. In contrast, the phenotype of the MSP-1/AMA-1–specific MBCs resembled that of cells primed for activation or atypical MBCs. Overall, the authors conclude that different parasite-derived antigens drive the production of different phenotypes of B cells. This is a finding that will be of interest to others in the field.
While this study provides new insight into the ability of different classes of parasite antigens to give rise to MBCs of varying phenotypes, the study was constrained by several limitations, including being able to address whether these different MBC phenotypes result in functional differences upon recall remained unanswered. Also, the authors did not compare the degree of somatic hypermutations accumulated in the BCR of the different antigen-specific MBC populations, as differences may exist. However, the ability to address the latter question could be due to the limited availability of cells from the patients. Nevertheless, the absence of these data detracts from the findings' overall significance, which is largely a phenotypic characterization of MBC populations, as acknowledged by the authors.
Reviewer #3: This manuscript by Evelien Bunnick and colleagues utilizes a longitudinal study to examine the longevity of memory B cells to both merozoite (MSP1 / AMA1) and the CIDR�1 domain of PfEMP-1 in the absence of continued transmission. The strengths of the work are the thorough analysis of the B cell population in human samples using tetramers and comprehensive flow cytometry, not an easy task given that it is difficult to detect antigen-reactive B cell subsets as they are generally much smaller populations, and the discovery of different subsets of memory B cells for merozoite epitopes vs the infected RBC membrane epitope.
The major weakness of the work in my opinion is that there are only 10 patient samples tested raising a potential issue regarding the replicability of the data. Having said that I would be supportive of publishing the data in this study as it adds something to the literature, in my opinion more than previous reviewers have stated.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: Lines 276-288 – It is not clear the data support the broad conclusion that CD95 and CD11c are differentially expressed between MSP1/AMA1- and CIDRa1-specific long-lived memory B cells as the percentage of these antigen-specific B cells are not different at the pre-IRS time point. That said, these markers are different between these antigen-specific B cells at the post-IRS timepoint. If the conclusion of this data set is that post-IRS represents “long-lived memory B cells” then the claim is supported. If so, then the authors should make it clear that they are referring specifically to the expression of CD95 and CD11c on the post-IRS time point, which they believe represents long-lived memory B cells.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: There are a couple of data presentation issues I think should be addressed that would help the reader. I would consider the most important omission is the number of cells. All conclusions are based on % of total B cells. However, to be prudent I would like to see the absolute number calculated from the number of circulating PBMCs / B cells. If the incidence of malaria transmission indeed has been reduced in the area are the number of PBMCs in each matched patient sample different at the 2 time points? The answer to this question may well be that it is not but I think it would be important to include this information in some way, perhaps in the supplemental information. Accounting for differences in numbers relative to % is important for interpretation purposes.
Similarly I would like to see a slightly different representation of the % data to help with visual interpretation. The axis in Figure 2 are all different. Whilst the authors have likely chosen to represent the data in this way to make differences between the two sampling time points clearer, it is harder for the reader to compare the changes visually between the different B cell populations as they may be represented in the bloodstream.
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: Several concerns were raised during the initial review of the manuscript; in the resubmission, the authors largely addressed these concerns by adjusting figures and tables, tempering their conclusions, and adding to their discussion.
Reviewer #3: in line 63 I would also mention IgM – IgM has an underappreciated role in protection and there are papers (Pepper /Crompton / Pierce amongst others) on IgM that should be briefly discussed (I understand why isotypes are not a major feature of the analysis in this study but nonetheless humoral immunity to malaria is not all about IgG). IgM memory cells also exist.
In line 68 – PfEMP-1 is certainly the most studied but I am not entirely sure it is necessarily the most important. For clarity maybe it might be wise to mention it is not the only variant family in falciparum.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Figure Files:
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
Data Requirements:
Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.
Reproducibility:
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
References:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012661.r003Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
27 Sep 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewer Comments.docx
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012661.r004Decision Letter 1
PhillipsMargaret ASection EditorButlerNoah S.Guest Editor© 2024 Phillips, Butler2024Phillips, Butlerhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
12 Oct 2024

Dear Dr. Bunnik,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Differences in phenotype between long-lived memory B cells against Plasmodium falciparum merozoite antigens and variant surface antigens' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Noah S. Butler
Guest Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Margaret Phillips
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012661.r005Acceptance letter
PhillipsMargaret ASection EditorButlerNoah S.Guest Editor© 2024 Phillips, Butler2024Phillips, Butlerhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
22 Oct 2024

Dear Dr. Bunnik,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Differences in phenotype between long-lived memory B cells against Plasmodium falciparum merozoite antigens and variant surface antigens," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens. 
Best regards,
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064