3954cellrepsmedCell Reports MedicineCell Rep MedElsevierPMC1152498111524981115249813916386410.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101692CTC-derived pancreatic cancer models serve as research tools and are suitable for precision medicine approaches
TangJiajia ZhengQuan WangQi ZhaoYaru AnanthanarayananPreeta ReinaChiara ŠabanovićBerina JiangKe YangMing-Hsin MenyClara Csilla WangHuimin AgerbaekMette Ø ClausenThomas Mandel GustavssonTobias WenChenlei BorghiFelice MellanoAlfredo FenocchioElisabetta GregorcVanesa SapinoAnna TheanderThor G FuDa AicherAlexandra SalantiAli ShenBaiyong HeeschenChristopher 1Center for Single-Cell Omics, School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China2State Key Laboratory of Systems Medicine for Cancer, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China3Pancreatic Cancer Heterogeneity, Candiolo Cancer Institute FPO-IRCCS, 10060 Candiolo, Turin, Italy4Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei 114, Taiwan52nd Institute for Pathology and Experimental Oncology Research, Semmelweis University, 1085 Budapest, Hungary6Centre for Translational Medicine and Parasitology (CMP) at Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark7VarCT Diagnostics, Ole Maaloes vej 3, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark8VAR2Pharmaceuticals, Ole Maaloes vej 3, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark9Research Institute of Pancreatic Disease, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China10Pancreatic Disease Centre, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China11Shanghai Institute of Digestive Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China12Department of Surgical Oncology, Cancer Institute FPO-IRCCS, 10060 Candiolo, Turin, Italy13Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute FPO-IRCCS, 10060 Candiolo, Turin, Italy14Department of Pathology, Cancer Institute FPO-IRCCS, 10060 Candiolo, Turin, Italy15Precision Immunotherapy, Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, China Medical University, Taichung 404328, Taiwan16Immunology Research and Development Center, China Medical University, Taichung 404328, Taiwan∗Corresponding author shenby@shsmu.edu.cn
∗∗Corresponding author christopher.heeschen@icloud.com
17These authors contributed equally
18Lead contact
1982024591016921016921112024© 2024 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) poses significant clinical challenges, often presenting as unresectable with limited biopsy options. Here, we show that circulating tumor cells (CTCs) offer a promising alternative, serving as a “liquid biopsy” that enables the generation of in vitro 3D models and highly aggressive in vivo models for functional and molecular studies in advanced PDAC. Within the retrieved CTC pool (median 65 CTCs/5 mL), we identify a subset (median content 8.9%) of CXCR4+ CTCs displaying heightened stemness and metabolic traits, reminiscent of circulating cancer stem cells. Through comprehensive analysis, we elucidate the importance of CTC-derived models for identifying potential targets and guiding treatment strategies. Screening of stemness-targeting compounds identified stearoyl-coenzyme A desaturase (SCD1) as a promising target for advanced PDAC. These results underscore the pivotal role of CTC-derived models in uncovering therapeutic avenues and ultimately advancing personalized care in PDAC.
Keywords: pancreatic cancer, liquid biopsy, circulating cancer stem cells, CXCR4, metabolism, compound screening

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•A CTC platform for retrieving CTCs from patients with pancreatic cancer was developed
•The obtained CTCs contain a rare subset of CXCR4+ metastatic cancer stem cells
•CTC-derived cultures from patients with advanced pancreatic cancer could be established
•Drug screening utilizing these models identified SCD1 as a potential target

Tang et al. introduce a malaria protein VAR2-based platform for retrieving circulating tumor cells from patients with pancreatic cancer. The obtained high numbers of circulating tumor cells facilitated the creation of in vitro and in vivo models suitable for drug screening and identified stearoyl-coenzyme A desaturase (SCD1) as a potential therapeutic target.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Feb 7; Revised 2024 May 12; Accepted 2024 Jul 25; Collection date 2024 Sep 17.

## Introduction
Pancreatic cancer, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) as its most common form, is an extremely deadly disease characterized by extensive metastasis. , , Current treatments for PDAC provide hardly any long-term survival benefits, , , and by 2030, PDAC may even become the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths. Addressing this pressing challenge necessitates the development of viable, patient-derived, and clinically applicable models to explore the intricate facets of advanced PDAC biology, metastasis, and resistance to prevailing chemotherapy regimens.
To date, the majority of patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) and in vitro models for PDAC have primarily originated from resected tumors, with extremely rare instances derived from biopsies of metastatic lesions. Consequently, these models predominantly capture the fundamental biological characteristics of localized disease, as reflected in the limited metastatic potential of orthotopically implanted PDX models. However, given that the majority of patients with PDAC are diagnosed at advanced stages, frequently succumbing to metastatic spread, there arises an imperative demand for the large-scale development of models representing advanced PDAC. It has been demonstrated that such advanced PDAC models, even when stemming from established cell lines, yield circulating tumor cells (CTCs). The study of such cells is pivotal for potentially enhancing the clinical outcomes of patients with cancer and has already proven valuable as a source of viable biological material in patients with small-cell lung cancer and melanoma. 
However, the development of CTC-derived models specific to PDAC has been challenging due to the low CTC counts with limited viability in these patients. In this study, we utilize an innovative VAR2-based platform designed for the retrieval of CTCs from all patients with PDAC, irrespective of the disease stage. The Plasmodium falciparum-derived VAR2 protein binds to oncofetal chondroitin sulfate (ofCS) glycosaminoglycans that are strongly expressed on many carcinoma cells, including PDAC cells. , We show that pancreatic CTCs harbor a distinctive subset of circulating cancer stem cells (CSCs) endowed with the potential to initiate both tumor growth and metastasis. Therefore, CTCs serve as a non-invasive source of tumor material, akin to a “liquid biopsy.” This is especially pertinent for patients with PDAC, where acquiring biopsy material is an infrequent challenge, and serial biopsies post-treatment are essentially unfeasible.
Our CTC-derived models from patients with advanced PDAC are functionally distinct from traditional PDX-derived ones by encompassing a wide range of cancer cells, particularly CXCR4+ circulating CSCs (circCSCs) with high self-renewal and tumorigenic abilities, capable of inducing tumors in immunodeficient mice from a single cell. To demonstrate the translational relevance of these models, we performed a drug screen with compounds targeting stemness and, among others, identified and validated stearoyl-coenzyme A desaturase (SCD1) as a promising, so far unidentified, target for advanced PDAC. These findings demonstrate that CTC-derived PDAC models are critical for advancing our comprehension of PDAC by enabling the isolation and expansion of aggressive cancer (stem) cells from advanced PDAC for biological research and precision medicine. These models should aid in the development of more effective treatments for this lethal disease and enable tracking of treatment response and the optimization of treatment selection.

## Results

## Enhanced capture rate of CTCs from patients with local and advanced PDAC
To identify the most efficient method for retrieving CTC from human peripheral blood ( A), we evaluated magnetic beads coated with various antibodies using whole blood samples spiked with low numbers of primary and highly heterogeneous PDAC cells. Specifically, 100 primary PDAC cells (SiC024) expressing GFP were introduced into 5 mL of whole blood obtained from healthy donors. After processing the samples with antibody-coated beads, captured cells were transferred to glass slides, additionally stained for CD45, and DAPI, and scanned on the Operetta confocal microscopy platform (PerkinElmer). GFP+ cells were classified as cancer cells ( A).
 First, we employed beads coated with EpCAM antibodies, targeting epithelial cells, but observed very low retrieval rates for these heterogeneous PDAC cells of only ∼60% ( A). Next, we added antibodies targeting the “don’t eat me” signal CD47, previously shown to be consistently expressed on PDAC cells. Alternatively, antibodies targeting the fibroblast activation protein (FAP), highly expressed in mesenchymal PDAC cells, were added to the EpCAM-coated beads. While the inclusion of a single additional antibody did not markedly increase the capture rate, combining both CD47 and FAP antibodies with EpCAM antibodies significantly enhanced the retrieval rate ( A).
Next, we evaluated if the capture efficiency of our antibodies was maintained for cancer cells undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a critical process in the metastatic progression of primary carcinomas. EMT regularly downregulates surface markers like EpCAM, rendering them more difficult to capture. For this purpose, we utilized SiC024 primary cultures treated with macrophage-conditioned media (MCM), inducing a myofibroblast-like morphology. EMT induction was confirmed by demonstrating the consistent upregulation of EMT-associated genes (SLUG, VIM, and ZEB1) in MCM-treated cells compared to untreated cells ( B). Induction of EMT resulted in markedly decreased capture by EpCAM antibodies alone, but the combined application of EpCAM, CD47, and FAP antibodies maintained a robust capture rate of over 80% ( A).
Next, we conducted a head-to-head comparison of our triple antigen retrieval method against (1) beads coated with universal cancer-binding protein VAR2, known for successfully retrieving CTCs from various tumor types through binding ofCS and (2) RosetteSep, which has previously been used to successfully isolate CTCs from patients with PDAC. Interestingly, the triple antigen retrieval method resulted in a markedly higher capture rate compared to RosetteSep ( B). VAR2-coated beads were equally effective in retrieving cancer cells compared to triple antigen-based retrieval, with both methods exceeding 90% retrieval rate ( B).
As previous studies have indicated that the standard EpCAM-based approach (e.g., CellSearch, Veridex) rarely retrieves more than five CTCs/5 mL of blood from samples of patients with PDAC, we next performed a direct comparison using five clinical samples of patients with PDAC. We utilized beads coated with EpCAM only, the triple antibody cocktail, or VAR2 protein. As predicted, EpCAM-coated beads retrieved only a very small number of CTCs/5 mL of whole blood, while VAR2-based retrieval increased the CTC capture by ∼10-fold ( C). The triple antibody cocktail was nearly as effective. However, VAR2-based CTC enrichment resulted in a markedly lower level of contamination with remaining peripheral blood mononuclear cells ( D). Based on these comprehensive data, we decided to proceed with the VAR2-based platform for our subsequent CTC studies.
For clinical evaluation, we collected a comprehensive set of blood samples from control individuals with no apparent malignant disease (healthy donors and patients with chronic pancreatitis), patients with intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs), and patients with diagnosed PDAC at different stages of disease (local PDAC, locally advanced, and advanced PDAC) ( E). The baseline characteristics of the enrolled individuals are provided in C–S1F. Intriguingly, while no false-positive CTCs were found in the blood of the control populations, we did detect CTCs in various patients with IPMNs. Among patients with IPMN who underwent timely resections and subsequent pathological assessment, those with histologically confirmed high-grade IPMNs all had increased CTC numbers at baseline. In contrast, patients with histologically confirmed low-grade IPMNs did not have any detectable CTCs ( E and F). Additionally, two patients with IPMNs who were not yet considered for surgery still had detectable CTCs. One of them progressed to PDAC in the following 19 months.
Equally striking, CTCs could be retrieved from the blood of all patients with PDAC at various stages, except for one patient with local disease, and at very high frequency with an overall median of 65 CTCs/5 mL, irrespective of the stage of the disease ( E). Representative images are also provided in G. Dichotomizing all patients with PDAC based on the median number of detected CTCs (65 CTCs/5 mL) exhibited significantly reduced overall survival for patients with high CTC numbers versus patients with low CTC numbers ( F). To date, there are still no satisfactory biomarkers for PDAC in clinical practice. Although carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) is a commonly used tumor marker for PDAC diagnosis, our study confirms its major limitations that the majority of patients with local disease exhibited CA 19-9 levels below the upper limit of normal ( G). Intriguingly, our CTC platform detected CTCs in all PDAC patients with normal CA 19-9 levels, except for one. As no false-positive CTCs were detected in our control populations ( E), our data suggest that any detectable CTC using the aforementioned method should be considered pathological. Finally, we employed stepwise forward Cox proportional hazards survival regression (Cox regression) to assess the impact of various clinical variables and biomarkers on 1-year overall survival. The findings, displayed in H, indicate that “CTC numbers” and “stage of disease” are the only significant predictors of 1-year overall survival among the patients with PDAC included in our study.

## Retrieved CTCs give rise to long-term in vitro organoid cultures
To examine whether we could expand the retrieved CTCs as organoid-like cultures, we isolated CTCs using the VAR2-based method from 45 mL of whole blood. The first 5 mL of whole blood was utilized for CTC enumeration using the standard protocol ( A), while the remaining 40 mL of blood was applied to the in vitro CTC expansion protocol ( A). For the latter, instead of using SeraMag beads, we used detachable anti-biotin Dynabeads. The harvested CTCs can be removed from these by cleaving the DNA linker with DNase ( A). Keeping the magnetic beads attached to the CTCs interferes with their sustained in vitro viability.
 From a subset of 20 patients with PDAC who donated the required larger blood volume, we captured a median number of 520 CTCs, which equates to a median of 58 CTCs/5 mL and therefore is comparable to the entire study population (65 CTCs/5 mL). The released CTCs were resuspended in 10 μL of DPBS, placed onto a 96-well plate coated with 50 μL of Matrigel, covered with an additional 50 μL of Matrigel, and cultured in the MCM-enhanced organoid medium ( A and S2B). Given the fact that Wnt signaling also plays a crucial role in pancreatic tumor progression, self-renewal, proliferation, and differentiation, we also supplemented the medium with human recombinant Wnt3a, a Wnt/β-catenin signaling activator. Within ∼2–4 weeks after seeding the CTCs, we observed cancer cell colonies growing as organoid-like structures ( B). The success rate (9 out of 20) in establishing consistently growing organoid cultures closely correlated with the median number of CXCR4+ CTCs as a particularly aggressive subset of bulk CTCs, but not with the median number of bulk CTCs ( C).
After passaging ( B and S2C), CTC-derived organoid formation continued and showed no evidence of exhaustion. The organoids could also be cultured as adherent or anchorage-independent spheres ( B and D). Expression of stemness-, EMT-, and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)-related genes was markedly higher for CTC-derived cultures compared to conventional PDX-derived cultures ( E). We also performed single-cell RNA sequencing for several of the produced CTC- and PDX-derived models (GEO: GSE184871), which confirmed strong overexpression of various EMT-related genes in CTC-derived models ( F). Genetic profiling unveiled the presence of KRAS mutations for all CTC-derived cells ( G), as commonly reported for PDAC. Other detected genomic alterations were also within the expected spectrum of what has previously been reported for PDAC. 

## CTC-derived PDAC models are more invasive and show enhanced metastatic potential in vivo
To determine the functional features of a representative panel of CTC-derived cultures compared to classic PDX-derived cultures, we evaluated the cells’ invasive capacity by seeding them into Matrigel-coated cell culture inserts with fetal bovine serum as a chemoattractant in the lower chamber. Quantifying cells that traversed the Matrigel-covered membrane pores revealed a significantly greater invasive capacity of CTC-derived PDAC cells compared to PDX-derived cells ( A).
 To validate the higher metastatic potential of the CTC-derived cultures in vivo, CTC- and PDX-derived cultures were transduced with GFP-luciferase and intrasplenically administered to immunocompromised mice. Seven days post-administration, splenectomy was performed to avoid intrasplenic primary tumor growth. Therefore, only cells rapidly translocating from the spleen to the liver via the portal vein blood will be able to form liver metastases. The formation of liver metastases was monitored by an in vivo imaging system (IVIS) over 4 weeks. The results revealed that a significantly higher number of mice injected with CTC-derived cells developed liver metastases compared to those injected with PDX-derived cells ( B and ). We also found significantly more CTCs in the blood of mice injected with CTC-derived cells compared to those injected with PDX-derived cells. Ex vivo bioluminescence imaging of the explanted livers confirmed that mice injected with CTC-derived cells had a higher metastatic burden in the liver compared to those injected with PDX-derived cells. Finally, the explanted local PDAC tumors, as well as liver and lung metastases, accurately recapitulated human PDAC histology ( C).
To determine if the CTC-derived models faithfully replicate the biology of their respective PDAC donors, we studied the response to standard-of-care chemotherapy through functional assessments using sphere formation assays ( D). Anchorage-independent growth in spheres under serum-free conditions is widely accepted for determining the self-renewal capability of cancer cells and reflects in vivo tumorigenicity. , , Examining the inhibitory effects of the standard-of-care chemotherapeutic drugs gemcitabine (GEM) and nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane; ABX), or their combination, we observed a high level of chemoresistance for CTC-derived cultures. No model responded to GEM alone, and only one model showed a response >30% to ABX treatment ( D). In this experiment, we are simulating the revised RECIST criteria 1.1 in vitro, and based on these criteria, the observed response would be classified as a partial response. Finally, still only two of the six tested CTC-derived models showed a partial response to the combination chemotherapy, whereas response to ABX alone or in combination with GEM was recorded for most of the tested PDX-derived models. None of the models show complete response. Intriguingly, this observed in vitro resistance closely mirrored the patients’ response to their individually assigned treatment regimen ( E). The two patients who provided the corresponding models, which exhibited a partial response in vitro to treatment with GEM plus ABX, also demonstrated a partial response in the clinical setting according to the RECIST 1.1 criteria. These data support the notion that CTC-derived cultures could be applicable to precision medicine approaches.

## CTC-derived PDAC models are functionally heterogeneous
We previously demonstrated that PDAC CSCs exhibit a distinct metabolic profile characterized by mitochondrial OXPHOS. To reliably detect functional mitochondria, we compared several commonly used staining reagents in the absence or presence of carbonyl cyanide 4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhydrazone, a compound known to disrupt the mitochondrial membrane potential ( A). Notably, tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (TMRM) exhibited greater sensitivity than MitoTracker dyes for detecting changes in mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm). This heightened sensitivity is indicative of electron transport and OXPHOS activity, independent of mitochondrial mass ( A). Next, we isolated cells with high and low ΔΨm from SiC002 CTC-derived cultures and used the Seahorse assay to validate that cells with high ΔΨm indeed display enhanced OXPHOS activity ( A and B).
 To functionally enrich the primary cultures for CSCs, we conducted sphere culture experiments for both CTC- and PDX-derived models ( C). Notably, elevated TMRM staining was observed in CSC-enriched spheres derived from CTC models, but not from PDX models ( B). Consistently, CD133+ CSCs from CTC models exhibited higher levels of ΔΨm compared to their CD133– counterparts ( C and D). To gain further insights into the role of ΔΨm in regulating stemness, we isolated cells with high and low ΔΨm from CTC- and PDX-derived models. Remarkably, an upregulation of stemness-related genes was observed almost exclusively in cells with increased ΔΨm ( D and E). Moreover, we recorded a ΔΨm-dependent enhancement in sphere formation capacity, as evidenced by an increased number and size of the spheres ( E and 4F). To assess the functional relevance of ΔΨm in CSCs, we conducted in vivo tumorigenicity experiments. Notably, cells with low ΔΨm did not only form fewer tumors but also displayed smaller sizes compared to those derived from cells with high ΔΨm. Extreme limiting dilution analysis of the SiC002 and SiC007 CTC-derived models revealed a 19- and 11-fold increase in CSC frequency for cells with high ΔΨm compared to cells with low ΔΨm ( G). Collectively, these findings demonstrate that ΔΨm serves as a functional marker for stemness in CTC-derived cultures and underscores their functional heterogeneity as evidenced by their wide range of ΔΨm levels and in vivo tumorigenicity.

## CXCR4+ CTCs represent circCSCs
As we had previously reported that the CXCR4 receptor is critical for the metastatic activity of pancreatic CSCs, we next hypothesized that CXCR4 might also serve as a reliable biomarker for CTCs with enhanced stemness features. For this purpose, we first tested ΔΨm levels in CXCR4+ cells versus CXCR4– CTC-derived PDAC cells and found significantly higher ΔΨm levels in CXCR4+ cells as evidenced by flow cytometry ( H) and immunofluorescence ( I). Encouraged by these findings, we extended the immunostaining of freshly isolated CTCs by including CXCR4. Expectedly, the numeric range of CXCR4+ CTCs across the patient cohort was considerably narrower due to their relative scarcity compared to bulk CTCs (0–33 CXCR4+ CTCs/5 mL). Therefore, for further analysis, we opted to use “CXCR4+ CTC content” rather than absolute numbers, which allowed us to accurately dichotomize the patient cohort. The average content of CXCR4+ CTCs was remarkably similar in both early-stage PDAC and advanced stage PDAC ( A). Representative images are also provided in A. When the patient cohort was split based on the “median content of CXCR4+ CTCs” (8.9%), the difference in outcomes between patients classified as “CXCR4+ CTCs high” versus “CXCR4+CTCs low” was more pronounced than that observed with “bulk CTC numbers,” achieving a chi-square of 24.843 for “CXCR4+ CTC content” compared to 7.194 for bulk CTCs ( F and B). Additionally, using Cox proportional hazards survival regression, which included both “CTC numbers” and “CXCR4+ CTC content,” along with other clinical variables shown in C, the results suggest that “CXCR4+ CTC content” could be a more effective predictor of 1-year overall survival than “bulk CTC numbers.”
 To further validate these clinical findings, we next isolated and picked single DAPI+CD45–CK+CXCR4+ and DAPI+CD45–CK+CXCR4– CTCs from three individual patients with PDAC using the CellCelector system ( B). Single-cell droplet digital PCR analysis showed a consistent upregulation of pluripotency-associated genes, including KLF4, SOX2, OCT3/4, and NANOG in CXCR4+ CTCs compared to CXCR4– CTCs ( D). Consistently, flow cytometry revealed that the content of CXCR4+ PDAC cells is markedly higher in CTC-derived versus PDX-derived PDAC cells ( E), suggesting that CTC-derived PDAC cells may serve as a suitable model for validating and studying circCSCs. These data suggest that CXCR4+ CTCs represent circCSCs that are only sparsely found in conventional PDX-derived cultures, but highly enriched in CTC-derived cultures.
To validate this hypothesis, we conducted a series of functional analyses. First, CXCR4+ CTC-derived cells displayed a markedly increased invasive capacity compared to CXCR4– CTC-derived cells as assessed by a modified Boyden chamber invasion assay ( F). In contrast, no significant difference was observed for PDX-derived CXCR4+ versus CXCR4– cells. Thus, CXCR4+ CTC-derived cells appear to be more invasive, indicative of a circCSC phenotype. Given that enhanced in vivo tumorigenicity is a critical feature of circCSCs, we explored the capacity of CTC-derived CXCR4+ versus CXCR4– CTC-derived PDAC cells to form tumors in vivo following injection into immunocompromised mice. Notably, CXCR4+ cells formed significantly more tumors compared to CXCR4– cells ( G). Extreme limiting dilution analysis down to a single cell showed a 116- and 69-fold increase in CSC frequency for CXCR4+ versus CXCR4– CTC-derived PDAC cells. Remarkably, even single CXCR4+ CTC-derived PDAC cells were capable of inducing tumor formation ( G). These findings indicate that cells capable of initiating pancreatic cancer are highly enriched in the CXCR4+ cell population.

## CTC-derived PDAC models are amenable to drug screening
In our pursuit to demonstrate the utility of our CTC-derived PDAC models for personalized drug screening, we next conducted comprehensive drug tests using a stemness compound library ( A and S6C), evaluating their effects on cell viability. In our initial screening, we evaluated a library of over 80 compounds, considering their impact on viability and specifically selecting those causing a viability reduction of less than 50%, while ensuring minimal effects on normal human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells ( A and B). We identified various compounds with promising responses, including the ion channel blocker amiodarone hydrochloride, the AMPK inhibitor dorsomorphin dihydrochloride, the MEK inhibitor PD-0325901, the histone methyltransferase G9a (EHMT2) inhibitor BIX-01294, and the SCD1 inhibitor PluriSln 1. Therefore, these compounds were subjected to further detailed testing using sphere, organoid, and adherently growing cultures ( B and D). We examined the impact of these compounds across a range of concentrations, measuring the percentage of cell survival in five different CTC-derived PDAC models and three distinct PDX-derived models. Notably, the selected compounds, along with GEM, a standard-of-care treatment for PDAC, identified several CTC- and PDX-derived models with strong responses to these different treatment strategies ( B and D). The observed high variability across our CTC-derived models, akin to PDX-derived models, reflects the commonly observed intra-patient heterogeneity in treatment responses. These findings underscore the potential of these CTC-derived models, obtained by minimally invasive means, as valuable tools for testing diverse compounds tailored to individual patients, thereby advancing precision medicine.
 As the SCD1 inhibitor PluriSln 1 showed very strong response in some of the CTC-derived models ( B), we selected this pathway for further in vitro and in vivo validation, but using a different SCD1 inhibitor, specifically A939572, due to its improved suitability for in vivo administration. We tested its treatment effect in a distinct validation set of CTCs (SiC011, SiC012, and SiC013) and PDX-derived (SiC042 and SiC045) PDAC models as monotherapy or in combination with GEM. As expected, GEM alone had no effect on both CTC- and PDX-derived models in vitro ( C and 6D). However, the A939572 effectively reduced sphere formation in all tested CTC-derived models, while it showed no relevant responses in the tested PDX-derived models. Combinational treatment of A939572 with GEM further reduced the growth of spheres in two out of three models. In the third model, the effect of A939572 was already strong, so further reduction was limited. In line with these results, our in vivo data demonstrate that the combination of A939572 with GEM is very effective for the treatment of highly aggressive CTC-derived models as it resulted in impressive disease control in two out of three tested models ( E). Consistent with the aforementioned in vitro data, no relevant response was noted for A939572 alone or in combination with GEM in a representative PDX-derived model ( F).

## Discussion
We developed and explored the preclinical utility of a platform for the efficient isolation and expansion of CTCs from patients with PDAC. Notably, a median of 8.9% of the retrieved bulk CTCs exhibit cancer stem cell characteristics, such as enhanced tumorigenicity and invasiveness, and their presence correlates with disease stage and patient outcomes. The study successfully established CTC-derived organoid cultures, which are phenotypically distinct from common PDX cultures, showing high aggressiveness, strong metastatic potential, and resistance to standard-of-care chemotherapy. These cultures accurately reflect patient responses to treatments. Additionally, metabolic studies highlighted the heterogeneity in mitochondrial function among the isolated CTCs, with high mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) cells displaying enhanced stemness and in vivo tumorigenicity. Screening of compounds targeting MMP underscored the potential of these CTC-derived models in drug testing and personalized medicine for patients with PDAC.
Over the past decade, numerous technical platforms have been developed for the detection and isolation of CTCs, albeit reported CTC numbers in patients with PDAC exhibit considerable variation. , , , Notably, both our triple antibody-based and VAR2-based CTC platforms revealed substantially higher counts of captured CTCs (median 65 CTCs/5 mL) in a head-to-head comparison with CellSearch and RosetteSep, thus vastly exceeding CTC numbers reported in previous studies, typically hovering in the single-digit range. Our findings now show that the complementation of EpCAM antibodies with two distinct antibodies, namely CD47, a “don’t eat me” signal expressed on many cancer cells, and FAP, a mesenchymal marker strongly upregulated during EMT, significantly improves CTC retrieval rates. Expectedly, however, the triple antibody cocktail resulted in a 4.2-fold higher contamination with white blood cells (WBCs) compared to the VAR2-based approach. A diminished WBC contamination does not only improve subsequent CTC quantification but also leads to higher success rates in establishing cultures from the retrieved CTCs. Therefore, we focused on the VAR2-based CTC retrieval for our subsequent studies.
CTCs hold the potential to advance our ability to diagnose patients with cancer more accurately and earlier, predict their outcomes, monitor tumor evolution in real-time during treatment and progression, and facilitate precision medicine. In our study, CTCs were detected in nearly all patients with PDAC, including those with localized disease and no apparent lymph node or distant organ metastases (stage I). Therefore, not merely the detection of any CTC, but rather the proportion of CXCR4+ CTCs among all CTCs, emerged as a potent indicator of patients’ clinical outcomes. By dichotomizing our patients based on their median CTC level (65 CTCs/5 mL), we observed that patients with elevated CTC numbers exhibited significantly worse 1-year survival compared to those with lower CTC numbers. In a multivariate regression analysis, the number of detected CTCs was identified as powerful independent predictor of patient outcomes.
Interestingly, CTCs were also detected in some asymptomatic patients with IPMNs, which is in line with previous reports. , In cases where pancreatectomy was performed, malignant progression was confirmed in all patients with detectable CTCs, while no patients later diagnosed with benign IPMN exhibited detectable CTCs. Notably, a patient with IPMN with detectable CTCs who did not undergo prompt surgical resection later progressed to pancreatic cancer. Using the cancer-specific protein VAR2 for CTC retrieval ensures that our platform does not yield any false-positive results for patients without clinical evidence of pancreatic cancer (healthy donors and patients with pancreatitis). Therefore, any detectable CTC could be considered pathological, thereby markedly enhancing the platform’s sensitivity for the early detection of malignant transformations in the pancreas.
The in vitro expansion of CTCs as organoid cultures from patients with PDAC has been challenging due to their rarity and low viability. However, Rivera-Baez et al. successfully isolated and expanded CTCs from ten patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer using the Labyrinth microfluidic device. Furukawa et al. utilized a microfilter device to capture and cultivate CTCs from the blood of patients with pancreatic cancer that could establish CTC cultures. Arnoletti et al. discovered that turbulent blood flow aids in retaining PDAC-related CTCs and myeloid-derived immunosuppressor cells, forming clusters that improve CTC survival. Most recently, Wu et al. expanded CTCs from liquid biopsies of patients with pancreatic cancer using a RosetteSep CTC enrichment cocktail kit for short-term in vitro drug testing of existing treatment strategies in 2D cultures.
Notably, however, the putative CTCs retrieved in most of the aforementioned studies were only defined by immunofluorescence staining for cytokeratin and have not been molecularly validated through genomic analysis or functionally confirmed as bona fide cancer cells through comprehensive in vitro and in vivo functional studies. Even more importantly, the numbers of CTCs retrieved in these studies are notably low. Although these few cells were sufficient to establish (short-term) cultures, they are certainly too low to (1) comprehensively reflect intratumoral heterogeneity, (2) study functional phenotypes such as CSCs, and (3) enable efficient and predictive drug response testing through in vitro or in vivo expansion. In our study, we utilized 40 mL of blood for CTC expansion and harvested a median number of 520 CTCs, a number markedly higher than those reported previously. Therefore, our setup is ideal for initiating patient-derived organoid cultures, as the large number of utilized CTCs ensures more reproducible outgrowth of many clones, resulting in higher success rates and generating models that more faithfully represent the patients’ individual tumors. Indeed, testing standard-of-care chemotherapeutics on these models yielded very diverse results with a high level of resistance, closely mimicking the clinical responses recorded for the individual patients.
In addition, we utilized the CTC-derived PDAC models for a comprehensive screening with stemness-targeting compounds. The results revealed promising responses to various compounds, including the voltage-gated potassium (KCNH2) and voltage-gated calcium channel (CACNA2D2) inhibitor amiodarone hydrochloride, the AMP-activated protein kinase inhibitor dorsomorphin dihydrochloride, the MEK inhibitor PD-0325901, the histone methyltransferase inhibitor BIX-01294, and the SCD1 inhibitor A939572. As expected, these compounds, alongside the standard-of-care treatment GEM, exhibited variable treatment responses across the CTC-derived models, highlighting the inherent inter-patient heterogeneity faithfully captured by our models. Therefore, we were not able to identify a specific treatment that would be effective in the majority of PDAC cases, but future studies should expand the number of screened models to identify and further validate those regimens that could be beneficial for a larger fraction of patients with PDAC. This observed high variability in drug response aligns well with the commonly encountered challenges in assigning treatments for individual patients. Our findings underscore the potential of our minimally invasive CTC-derived models as robust tools for personalized drug screening, paving the way for advancements in precision medicine for patients with PDAC.
We have chosen to pursue further validation, both in vitro and in vivo, utilizing the SCD1 inhibitor A939572. Recent research underscores the significant impact of bioactive metabolites, particularly fatty acids (FAs), in regulating cellular plasticity and proliferation. As such, FAs play pivotal roles across a spectrum of biological processes, including energy metabolism, cellular signaling, gene expression regulation, phospholipid biosynthesis, and membrane fluidity. Dysregulation of FA metabolism has been implicated in cancer progression, metastasis, and resistance to therapy, but the existing literature concerning the role of SCD1 in PDAC remains limited, leaving unanswered questions regarding the relevance of FA metabolism in PDAC progression. Our findings now indicate that targeting SCD1 holds promise, particularly in advanced PDAC cases, with notable synergy observed when combined with GEM. Ongoing investigations in PDAC are underway to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms and identify the most suitable patient cohorts for such interventions.
CTCs are believed to represent indicators of residual disease and thus pose an increased risk for disease relapse. However, as the subsets of circCSCs are the main drivers of tumor progression and metastatic spread, it may be equally important to track and eliminate such rare circCSCs. , Recent studies have identified biomarkers for circCSCs. In breast cancer, a significant proportion of disseminated tumor cells in the bone marrow showed a CD44+CD24−/low phenotype, , , and ANTXR1 was associated with enhanced metastatic potential. In pancreatic cancer, our group showed that CD133+ CXCR4+ cancer cells represent invasive CSCs capable of contributing to metastasis. These results, while not yet prospectively identifying circCSCs, are supporting the existence and presence of such cells with tumor-initiating capabilities in the blood. Our findings now demonstrate that CTCs include a subset of highly tumorigenic PDAC cells expressing CXCR4, exhibiting increased mitochondrial membrane potential, heightened pluripotency gene expression, and metastatic capacity.
In comparison to traditional PDX-derived models that are primarily derived from resected PDAC tissue, our CTC-derived models can be obtained non-invasively from patients with advanced PDAC and contain large numbers of CXCR4+ circCSCs, which are notable for their high self-renewal capacity and in vivo tumorigenic potential, even capable of inducing tumors in immunodeficient mice at the single-cell level. This emphasizes the functional importance of CTC heterogeneity, highlights the need to collect large numbers of CTCs to faithfully reflect cancer heterogeneity, and should encourage us to further explore the molecular differences between CSCs in resectable PDAC versus advanced PDAC. We can now isolate and expand these aggressive CXCR4+ CSCs from the blood of any patient with PDAC, even on a longitudinal basis, which represents a crucial step for advancing biological research and eventually also precision medicine in PDAC. Our CTC-derived models, highly enriched in aggressive circCSCs, are instrumental in deepening our understanding of advanced PDAC and should help us in developing more effective treatments for this lethal disease.

## Limitations of the study
In our study, it was not possible to obtain paired CTC-derived models and PDX-derived models for direct comparison, as resectable tumors can primarily be obtained in patients with early-stage PDAC. Additionally, culturing CTCs from patients with resectable disease is more challenging, and the success rate is markedly lower compared to patients with advanced PDAC. Therefore, this study focused on developing CTC-derived cultures from patients with advanced PDAC, for which the PDX counterparts cannot be obtained.
Moreover, we conducted a drug screening with stemness-targeting compounds to demonstrate the utility of CTC-derived PDAC models for personalized drug screening. However, we did not perform drug screening on freshly isolated circulating CXCR4+ CTCs directly due to the reduced viability caused by the sorting procedure. CXCR4+ CTCs can only be maintained in culture for a short period before giving rise to differentiated progenies, making it challenging to obtain consistent and reliable results from such assays.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Christopher Heeschen (christopher.heeschen@icloud.com).

## Materials availability
For requests of biological materials, please refer to the . Note that we did not generate any reagents in this study.

## Data and code availability

•Data and materials produced and examined during this study are provided within the published article and its supplementary information files. Single-cell RNA-seq data have been deposited at GEO and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the key resources. For additional access, the can be approached to request the data and materials.
•This paper does not report any custom computer codes.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this work paper is available from the upon request.

## Experimental models and study participant details
Study participant details are provided in Supplementary info S1D-F.

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
The collection and propagation of patient and healthy control samples were performed, while adhering to ethical guidelines and informed consent procedures, at Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, China (ref. 2013-0905-70) and Candiolo Cancer Institute – FPO – IRCCS (Reference PROFILING 001-IRCC-00IIs-10), where appropriate informed consent was obtained from each patient before collecting samples.

## Cell identification and isolation

## Red blood cell lysis prior to bead-based CTC isolation
Blood was received in EDTA-tubes and divided into aliquots of 5 mL. In each aliquot, red blood cells were lysed using 45 mL Red Blood Cell (RBC) lysis buffer containing 0.155 M ammonium chloride, 0.01 M potassium hydrogen carbonate and 0.1 mM EDTA for 10 min. After centrifugation at 400 x g for 8 min, the cell pellet was gently washed in PBS once. The centrifugation step was repeated, and finally cells were resuspended in RPMI medium containing 1% BSA in addition to 1 mM CaCl2 and 5 mM MgCl2 and transferred to a low retention microcentrifuge tube.

## CTC isolation by VAR2-coated beads
The subunit DBL1-ID2a of VAR2CSA (VAR2) was recombinantly expressed in E. coli as previously described in Agerbaek et al.. VAR2 protein includes a SpyTag N-terminally, which enables covalent binding to a biotinylated SpyCatcher protein. For this purpose, the SpyTag-VAR2 and biotinylated SpyCatcher were incubated at a ratio of 0.8:1 at RT for 1 h to produce VAR2–SpyC protein. In the meantime, the Sera-Mag SpeedBeads Streptavidin-blocked magnetic particles were washed twice by protein-free blocking buffer. The VAR2–SpyC protein was added to the sample and incubated for 30 min with gentle rotation at 4°C. Then, the sample was washed and resuspended, beads were added, and incubated for 30 min with gentle rotation at 4°C. CTCs captured by the beads were retrieved by running the isolation protocol on the IsoFlux machine. Isolated cancer cells were hereafter retrieved in 200 μL binding buffer (BB: DPBS containing 2mM EDTA and 0.5% BSA) and transferred to slides for immunofluorescence and subsequent enumeration using the Operetta CLS High-Content Analysis System.

## CTC isolation by antibody-coated beads
CELLection Pan Mouse IgG Dynabeads were coated with EpCAM antibody alone, or in combination with CD47 and FAP antibodies. For this purpose, beads were incubated separately for 30 min with each of the following antibodies: 0.3 μg EpCAM, 0.02 μg CD47, and 0.06 μg FAP/μL beads suspension. Unbound antibodies were removed by carefully washing the beads in PBS containing 0.1% BSA three times, each time using a neodymium magnet (10× 12 mm) for pelleting the beads. Then the three differently labeled beads were mixed in a ratio of 3:1:1 and a 15 μL mixture was incubated with the prepared cells for 40 min with gentle rotation at 4°C. CTCs captured by the beads were retrieved by running the isolation protocol on the IsoFlux machine. Isolated cancer cells were hereafter retrieved in 200 μL binding buffer and transferred to slides for immunofluorescence and subsequent enumeration using the Operetta CLS High-Content Analysis System.

## In vitro culture

## CTC organoid culture
Prior to seeding CTCs, a concave matrix surface (bowl-shaped) was formed in a 96-well plate using 50 μL growth factor-reduced Matrigel. The Matrigel was allowed to solidify by placing the plates into a 37°C incubator for 60 min. Then, CTCs retrieved from 40 mL of whole EDTA blood using the VAR2-based isolation protocol (RBC lysis method) were pelleted using a neodymium cylindric magnet and resuspended in 10 μL of DPBS and placed onto the concave Matrigel surface and covered with another 50 μL of GF-reduced Matrigel. After 1 h of incubation to allow the Matrigel to solidify, 100 μL organoid medium was mixed 1:1 with macrophage-conditioned medium (MCM). DMEM/F12 organoid medium was supplemented with HEPES (10 mM), Glutamax (2 mM), 100 μg/mL Penicillin & 100 μg/mL Streptomycin, B27, Primocin (1 mg/mL), N-acetyl-L-cysteine (1 mM), human recombinant Wnt3a (20 ng/mL), PGE2 (1 μM), R-SPONDIN (500 ng/mL), Noggin (100 ng/mL), epidermal growth factor (EGF, 50 ng/mL), Gastrin (10 nM), fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2; 5 ng/mL), FGF10 (100 ng/mL), Nicotinamide (10 mM), and Y-27632 (10 μM). CTCs were cultured at 37°C and 5% CO2. On day 3, the medium was replenished with the same ingredients, excluding Y-27632. This process was reiterated every three days until the cells nearly occupied the entire well. For the sequential passaging of successfully established CTC organoids, cells were treated with cold cell recovery solution for 60 min on ice. Subsequently, the cells were further dissociated using TrypLE Express (1X) without phenol red for 15 min at 37°C. The dissociated cells were then collected, split, and reseeded in a 3D Matrigel culture with organoid medium. For immunophenotyping, organoids were fixed on 96-well and stained using the same protocol as employed for cancer cell immunofluorescence.

## Animal models
The study utilized 6-8-week-old female NSG mice (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ), which were maintained according to regulations for the use of animals in scientific research. The animal procedures at Shanghai Jiao Tong University received approval under project number A-2020-004, and those at the Candiolo Cancer Institute – FPO – IRCCS were approved by the Italian Ministry of Health under project number 942/2021-PR. The mice were housed in individually ventilated cages in specific-pathogen-free conditions, with a 12-h light cycle, at 21°C and 50% relative humidity, and had unrestricted access to food and water.

## Method details

## CTC enrichment by RosetteSep
For the RosetteSep method, the blood was directly incubated with the RosetteSep Human CD45 Depletion cocktail for 20 min to allow the crosslinking of the undesired white and red blood cells. Then, cells were carefully loaded onto Ficoll-Paque, centrifuged at 800 x g for 20 min with the brake off. The interface layer was collected and washed twice with DPBS. Cells were then transferred onto slides for immunofluorescence and subsequent enumeration using the Operetta CLS High-Content Analysis System.

## Spike-in cell preparations
Primary PDAC cells were harvested using TrypLE Express (1X) without phenol red, and resuspended in culture medium. Cell concentrations were assessed by manual counting the number of viable cells in a 1:1 mixture with Trypan Blue solution. The calculated cell suspensions were subsequently spiked into donor-derived whole EDTA blood to achieve the indicated numbers.

## Characterization of CTCs and organoids using four-color immunofluorescence staining
Enriched CTCs binding to beads were fixed in 4% PFA for 10 min and then transferred to microscopic glass slides using a round magnet of 12mm size. Deposited cells were circled with a water repellent Dako pen, blocked for 20 min in 100 μL binding buffer containing 10% Flebogamma, 10% normal donkey serum (NDS), prior to incubating with 1% Alexa Fluor 561-CD45 antibody (1:100), 1% Alexa Fluor 647-CXCR4 antibody (1:100), 1% Flebogamma, 1% NDS, and 1% Fc receptor blocking reagent blocking reagent for 30 min. Hereafter cells were washed three times and permeabilized using 0.2% Triton X-100 diluted in binding buffer, followed by staining with 1% FITC-Cytokeratin antibody in binding buffer. Samples were sealed using Mounting Medium with DAPI and imaged using the Operetta CLS High-Content Analysis System.

## Isolation of single cells
Single cells were isolated using a semi-automated micromanipulator, CellCelector (Sartorius). ALS CellCelector Software 3.0, (ALS) was used for analysis. Labeled cell solutions were transferred to a glass slide and cells were allowed to settle. Then, DAPI+CK+CD45– cells were detected at a 10× magnification. Subsequently, DAPI+CK+CD45–CXCR4– cells and DAPI+CK+CD45–CXCR4+ cells were selected by the software and additionally recorded at 10× magnification to verify the morphology of isolated cells. Selected cells were aspirated with a 30 μm glass capillary and transferred into PCR tubes containing 4 μL pre-chilled lysis Buffer (see below). Cells were stored at −80°C until further use.

## Detection of stemness genes by droplet digital PCR
Stemness gene detection via droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) was performed with a modified protocol based on the methodology outlined by Karlin-Neumann et al. Briefly, CTCs were picked and collected in PCR tubes containing 4 μL of pre-chilled lysis Buffer. The lysis buffer was prepared by combining 965 μL of suspension buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8, 0.1 mM EDTA), 10 μL of Triton X-100 (10%), and 25 μL of RNAse OUT (40 U/μL), then maintained on ice until use. The tubes were vortexed for 10 s and briefly centrifuged. The tubes were left on ice for 5 min for complete lysis. Subsequently, 6 μL of Reverse Transcription master mix, composed of 2 μL 5× iScript advanced reaction mix (iScriptTM Advanced cDNA Synthesis Kit for RT-qPCR), 0.5 μL iScript advanced reverse transcriptase, and 3.5 μL nuclease-free water, was added to each vial. After centrifugation and vortexing, the vials were loaded onto a thermal cycler and incubated under the following conditions: 42°C for 30 min, 85°C for 5 min, and 4°C (infinite). Droplet generation was performed using the QX200 Droplet Generator. Each ddPCR reaction included 17.6 μL ddPCR Master Mix and 4.4 μL cDNA obtained earlier, with 20 μL of each 22 μL sample transferred into the sample wells of a DG8 droplet generation cartridge. Droplet Generation Oil for Probes (70 μL/well) was added following the manufacturer’s instructions. The generated droplets were transferred to a 96-well PCR plate and loaded onto a thermal cycler. The thermal cycling protocol consisted of one cycle of 95°C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 94°C for 30 s and annealing temperature for 1 min, concluding with 98°C for 10 min before holding at 4°C using primers for KLF4, OCT3/4, SOX2, and NANOG.
After data acquisition, samples were analyzed in the QuantaSoft well editor, with the reported concentration in copies/μL of the final ddPCR reaction.

## RNA-seq library construction and analysis
Total RNA was retrieved from the respective samples using the guanidine thiocyanate method, adhering to established protocols. RNA Integrity Numbers ranged from 9.2 to 10.0 as determined by the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The Chromium Fixed RNA Kit, Human Transcriptome was then used. Next, the PolyA+ RNA fraction was extracted, randomly fragmented, converted to double-stranded cDNA, and finally subjected to a series of enzymatic treatments including end-repair, dA-tailing, and adapter ligation, according to Illumina’s ‘TruSeq RNA Sample Preparation v2 Protocol’ (Part # 15026494 Rev. C). The Chromium Next GEM Chip Q Single Cell Kit was utilized during this process. The adapter-ligated library was then completed with eight cycles of PCR using Illumina PE primers. The purified cDNA library was loaded onto an Illumina flow cell for cluster generation (TruSeq cluster generation kit v5) and sequenced on the Genome Analyzer IIx with SBS TruSeq v5 reagents, following the manufacturer’s protocols. Additionally, the Chromium Fixed RNA Feature Barcode Multiplexing Kit was used. The 40-nt single-end RNA-seq reads were aligned to the human genome (GRCh37/hg19) using TopHat-2.0.4 in conjunction with Bowtie 0.12.7 and Samtools 0.1.16, allowing for two mismatches and five multi-hits. Transcript assembly and abundance estimation were performed with Cufflinks 1.3.0, utilizing the Homo_sapiens.GRCh37.65 genome annotation dataset from Ensembl. Differential gene expression across conditions was analyzed using Cuffdiff. 

## Cancer hotspot panel analysis
To assess the pattern of somatic mutations in the CTC-derived cultures we studied the hotspot regions of 50 genes with known associations to cancer, as identified in the Catalog of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) database, using the 50-gene Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 (Life Technologies). The panel includes the following genes: ABL1, AKT1, ALK, APC, ATM, BRAF, CDH1, CDKN2A, CSF1R, CTNNB1, EGFR, ERBB2, ERBB4, EZH2, FBXW7, FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, FLT3, GNA11, GNAS, GNAQ, HNF1A, HRAS, IDH1, JAK2, JAK3, IDH2, KDR/VEGFR2, KIT, KRAS, MET, MLH1, MPL, NOTCH1, NPM1, NRAS, PDGFRA, PIK3CA, PTEN, PTPN11, RB1, RET, SMAD4, SMARCB1, SMO, SRC, STK11, TP53 and VHL. For the multiplex PCR amplification, 20 ng of DNA samples were utilized. The emulsion PCR process was carried out with the OneTouch2 systems. The quality of the resulting library was assessed using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). Sequencing procedures were conducted on the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM). The analysis of the data, which included aligning to the hg19 human reference genome and calling variants, was performed using the Torrent Suite, versions 5.2.1 (Life Technologies). The variants that were filtered through this process were then annotated utilizing SnpEff software version 4.9 and Ion Reporter software version 5.1. For visual verification of alignments, the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV version 2.6.3, Broad Institute) was employed.

## Flow cytometry
PDAC cells were harvested using TrypLE Express (1X) without phenol red, centrifuged at 300 x g for 5 min followed by washing with PBS. Cells were then blocked in 1 mL of 5% BSA at 4°C for 10 min. After incubation, cells were centrifuged at 300 x g for 5 min. For staining the cells were incubated for 30 min on ice with the following antibodies/reagents: CXCR4-APC, CD133-APC, and Image-iT TMRM (mitochondrial membrane potential indicator; 1 nM). Then, cells were centrifuged and resuspended in 300 μL Sorting Buffer (PBS; 3% FBS; 3 mM EDTA; 2 μg/mL DAPI) before analysis with LSR Fortessa (BD Bioscience). All samples were analyzed with unstained and isotype controls, and compensation was performed with positive controls. Data were analyzed with FlowJo 10.4 software.

## Cell sorting
PDAC cells were harvested with TrypLE Express (1X) without phenol red and pelleted at 300 x g for 5 min. After washing by PBS, cells were blocked with 5% BSA at 4°C for 10 min. Cells were then centrifuged at 300 x g for 5 min again. Cells were resuspended in 200 μL Sorting Buffer (PBS; 3% FBS; 3 mM EDTA) and incubated for 30 min on ice with the following antibodies/reagents: CXCR4-APC and Image-iT TMRM. After immunostaining, cells were centrifuged at 300 x g for 5 min and resuspended in 300 μL Sorting Buffer (PBS; 3% FBS; 3 mM EDTA; 2 μg/mL DAPI) before sorting using the FACS ARIA Fusion Cell Sorter (BD Bioscience). Sorted cells were directly injected into 15 mL Falcon tubes containing 2 mL FBS, and immediately used for the respective experiments.

## Immunohistochemistry staining
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) organoids and tumor tissues were serially sectioned (3 μm thick), dewaxed in xylene, and immersed in 100% ethanol for 5 min. Endogenous peroxidase was then blocked using 100% methanol and 3% hydrogen peroxide for 10 min following rehydration with graded alcohols. Antigen retrieval was carried in preheated 0.1 M Citrate Buffer (2.84 g Tri-sodium Citrate in 1 L distilled water, pH 6) for 10 min in the microwave. Sections were blocked using horse serum (1:75) for 15 min. After blocking, the sections were stained with a CK19 antibody (1:2,000) overnight at 4°C. Staining was developed using DAB solution and sections were counterstained with hematoxylin for 2 min.

## Sphere formation assays
PDAC spheres were generated by culturing primary PDAC cells (1,000 cells/mL in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 2% B-27 (50X), Penicillin-Streptomycin, Amphotericin B, and bFGF) in anchorage-independent suspension conditions for seven days. For serial passaging to further enhance CSC enrichment, 1st generation PDAC spheres were harvested, dissociated into single cells by trypsinization, and then re-cultured for an additional seven days. The area and the number of formed spheres was assessed by scanning the entire surface of the well using the Operetta CLS High-Content Analysis System (PerkinElmer).

## Invasion assay
Invasion assays were performed using modified Boyden chambers filled with growth factor-reduced Matrigel. Human PDAC cells were added to the Matrigel-coated inserts with 200 μL of serum-free RPMI medium, and 500 μL of RPMI medium with 20% FBS was added to the lower chamber. Cells were incubated at 37°C, and after the indicated time invaded cells were fixed in 4% PFA and stained with crystal violet.

## Screening for stemness-targeting compounds
Screening for stemness-targeting compounds. Cells were harvested, counted and resuspended in sphere culture medium with 4% MethoCult H4100 at a density of 1,000 cells/50 μL/well. Cell suspensions were seeded into 384-well ultralow-adhesion microplates. Finally, the compound library was loaded at 0.1 μL/well. After incubation for 4 days, 10 μL of CellTiter-Glo was added to each well and the chemiluminescence was assessed by BioTek Synergy Neo2 multimode reader (Agilent). The stemness compound library is provided as A and in more detail described in . List of the compounds used in the stemness library, related to and .

## Metabolic analysis
Single-cell suspensions from adherent cultures were plated into XF96 Cell Culture Microplates pre-coated with Cell-Tak at a density of 20,000 cells/well. To determine the oxygen consumption rate (OCR), cells were incubated for 1 h in base assay medium (supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 10 mM glucose, and 1 mM pyruvate) prior to analysis using the XF Cell Mito Stress Kit. Experiments were run on the XF96 analyzer, and raw data were normalized to protein content.

## In vitro treatments studies
For chemosensitivity testing, cells in sphere culture were treated with either 50 ng/mL Gemcitabine, 5 μM Abraxane, or their combination for seven days. For validation of the drug screening results, cells in the indicated culture conditions were treated for three days with one of the following drugs: the ion channel blocker amiodarone hydrochloride, the AMPK inhibitor dorsomorphin dihydrochloride amiodarone hydrochloride, the MEK inhibitor PD-0325901, the histone methyltransferase G9a (EHMT2) inhibitor BIX-01294, the Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD1) inhibitors PluriSln 1/A939572, or gemcitabine. Cell viability analyses were done using the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay.

## In vivo treatment studies
PDAC cells (1×105 in 50 μL Matrigel) were implanted subcutaneously into 6-8-week-old BALB/c nude mice (Charles River) as described previously. , , Once PDAC tumors had reached ∼150 mm3, mice were randomly assigned to treatments as outlined in E. Mice were housed according to the institutional guidelines, and the procedures were approved by local animal ethics committees, i.e., SJTU approval n° A-2020-004 and Italian Ministry of Health approval n° 942/2021-PR.

## In vivo tumorigenesis
To establish in vivo models from CTC-derived organoids, 104 CTC-derived PDAC cells were mixed with equal numbers of monocyte-derived M2 macrophages, resuspended in 50 μL of Matrigel and subcutaneously injected into both flanks of 8-10-week-old female NU-Foxn1nu nude mice. The tumor size was monitored weekly until tumors reach ∼1,000 mm3. For limiting dilution assays, CTC-derived PDAC cells (103,102, 101 and 1) were resuspended in Matrigel. The tumor size was monitored weekly over the course of 12 weeks. Mice were housed according to the institutional guidelines, and all procedures were approved by local animal ethics committees, i.e., SJTU approval n° A-2020-004 and Italian Ministry of Health approval n° 942/2021-PR.

## In vivo metastasis assay
Firefly luciferase expressing PDAC cells were established by transducing cells with the pLVX-Luc2-P2A-AcGFP1-puro Lentivector system. Cells were sorted for GFP expression with a FACS BD Aria II instrument and subsequently expanded in vitro. Then, 105 PDAC-Luc+ cells were injected into the spleen of 6-8-week-old female NSG mice. In brief, after sedation and analgesia administration, a skin incision was made in the left flank of the mouse. Subsequently, the spleen was mobilized, and PDAC cells were injected using an insulin syringe. After closing the peritoneum and abdominal muscle layer with 6/0 sutures, the skin was closed with surgical stables. Splenectomy was performed one week after cell injection. The IVIS-200 system was used for weekly in vivo luciferase imaging. Mice were anesthetized and injected intraperitoneally with 150 mg/kg body weight of luciferin. Sequential images were obtained after luciferin injection every 30 s (maximum light emission, ∼20 min after luciferin injection). Luciferase activity is expressed in photons per second per square centimeter per steradian (p/s/cm2/sr) and was analyzed using the Living Image software. Mice were housed according to the institutional guidelines, and all procedures were approved by local animal ethics committees, i.e., SJTU approval n° A-2020-004 and Italian Ministry of Health approval n° 942/2021-PR).

## Quantification and statistical analysis
The results are presented as means ± standard deviation (SD), unless otherwise indicated. Statistical comparisons and differences were primarily assessed using non-parametric tests, with the Mann-Whitney U test employed as the standard for pairwise comparisons. In instances where parametric tests, such as t-test or ANOVA, were used, data normality was confirmed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Shapiro-Wilk tests. Significance was considered at p-values of ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, and ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9.0 or SPSS version 27.

## Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the patients and healthy volunteers that donated their blood for this research project. We thank the coworkers of the High-Throughput Screening Core of the National Research Center for Translational Medicine (Shanghai, China) for their expertise and help with the compound screens.
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (82130074 and 82250710179 to C.H.), the Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (2021-01-07-00-02-E00090 to C.H.), the Shanghai Pujiang Program (21PJ1408900 to J.T.), the ERC Advanced Investigator Grant (grant number Pa-CSC 233460 to C.H.), the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) under grant agreement no. 602783 (grant ID CAM-PaC to C.H.), the Fondazione del Piemonte per l’Oncologia – IRCCS (grant number PTCRC-Intra-2021 to C.H.), the Fondazione AIRC per la ricerca sul cancro (IG 2023 ID 28933 to C.H.), the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (grant number MOST 111-2314-B-039-056 to A.A.), the Eurostars (grant number 114741 AS to M.Ø.A.), and the National Nordic Foundation (NNF21OC0068192 and NNF22OC0076055 to T.G.).

## Author contributions
Conception and design, C.H.; development of methodology, J.T., Q.W., Y.Z., P.A., M.-H.Y., M.Ø.A., T.M.C., A.A., A. Salanti, and C.H.; acquisition of data and analysis, J.T., Q.Z., Q.W., Y.Z., P.A., C.R., B. Šabanović, M.-H.Y., K.J., and H.W.; provision of critical reagents, M.Ø.A., T.M.C., T.G., and A. Salanti; provision of patient samples, C.W., F.B., A.M., E.F., V.G., A. Sapino, D.F., and B. Shen; analysis and interpretation of data (statistical analysis, computational analysis), M.-H.Y., A.A., and C.H.; intellectual contributions to study design and review of data, T.M.C., T.G.T., A. Salanti, A.A., and C.H.; writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript, J.T., C.C.M., A.A., and C.H.

## Declaration of interests
M.Ø.A., T.M.C., T.G.T., and A. Salanti are shareholders in VAR2Pharma ApS holding a patent on utilizing rVAR2 for diagnosing cancer and were not involved in the data analysis.

Published: August 19, 2024

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101692.

## Contributor Information
Baiyong Shen, Email: shenby@shsmu.edu.cn.
Christopher Heeschen, Email: christopher.heeschen@icloud.com.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6

## Table S1. List of the compounds

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6

## Table S1. List of the compounds

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data Availability Statement

•Data and materials produced and examined during this study are provided within the published article and its supplementary information files. Single-cell RNA-seq data have been deposited at GEO and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the key resources. For additional access, the can be approached to request the data and materials.
•This paper does not report any custom computer codes.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this work paper is available from the upon request.