822acssdJournal of Chemical Theory and ComputationJ Chem Theory ComputPMC1298072012980720129807204173014710.1021/acs.jctc.5c01743Coarse-Grained
Martini 3 Model of Chondroitin Sulfate
A
GreiciusPaulius GräterFrauke GrünewaldFabian Aponte-SantamaríaCamilo 
†
Max
Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, Mainz
55128, Germany

‡
Max
Planck School Matter to Life, Heidelberg
69120, Germany

§
Heidelberg
Institute for Theoretical Studies (HITS), Schloss-Wolfsbrunnenweg 35, Heidelberg
69118, Germany
*
Email: apontec@mpip-mainz.mpg.de.
232202622526222622–26341332026© 2026 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0

## Abstract
Chondroitin sulfate A (CSA) is a negatively charged linear
glycosaminoglycan
that plays a vital role in many biological processes. Research on
CSA has been challenging due to its size, chemical heterogeneity,
and multitude of binding partners. To address these issues, we developed
a model of CSA for coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations based
on the Martini 3 force field. We demonstrate that this model is capable
of reproducing atomistic properties of the repeating CSA disaccharide
unit, including its molecular volume, bonded interactions, and structural
polymer properties of CSA chains of different lengths. In particular,
for biologically relevant long chains and despite using an explicit
solvent, the computational cost is significantly reduced, relative
to the cost equivalent atomistic simulations would require. The compatibility
of the model with the Martini Go̅ protein model was tested by
retrieving the force–response relationship of the CSA–malaria
adhesin VAR2CSA complex. Importantly, we explored the influence of
electrostatics on CSA aggregation. We show that the default Martini
3 parameters lead to overaggregation. We provide at least three different
strategies to alleviate this issue, making use of a bigger bead for
sodium cations, reflecting their hydration shell, partial ionic charges
as a mean-field resource to take into account electronic polarizability,
and, optionally, particle mesh Ewald summation as a more robust treatment
of long-range electrostatics. Our model enables predictive modeling
of CSA and potentially other chondroitin sulfates with the Martini
3 force field. In addition, this model provides insights for the further
development of coarse-grained models of highly charged systems.

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Oct 16; Accepted 2026 Feb 13; Revised 2026 Feb 9; Collection date 2026 Mar 10.

## Introduction
Chondroitin sulfate (CS) is a linear glycosaminoglycan
composed
of alternating N-acetyl galactosamine (GAL) and glucuronic
acid (GLA) units connected via β1,3 and β1,4 linkages,
respectively ( A). Sulfates can be variably added at various hydroxyls of the disaccharide,
creating a highly negatively charged sugar. The polysaccharide is
synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi, where it is also
attached to cell surface or secreted proteins via serine residues. CS is a key extracellular matrix component in
various tissues including skin, bone, cartilage, vasculature, cornea, and the central
nervous system. Chains isolated from in
vivo sources display high heterogeneity both in their molecular weight
(50–150 kDa) and frequency of sulfated residues. Such structural diversity reflects the fact that
CS serves a broad range of biological functions.
 The polyanionic nature and variable sulfation status
of chondroitin
sulfate chains enable them to form interactions with various cations or proteins.
,
 Heavily sulfated
CS chains create high osmotic pressure, essential for load bearing
in articulate cartilage, sustaining bone
toughness, and hydration of cornea. Free carboxylate and sulfate groups chelate
metal ions, especially divalent cations such as calcium. The ability of CS to sequester metal ions enhances
its radical scavenging activity making
it an effective antioxidant. Similarly,
chelation of extracellular Ca2+ affects the transmembrane
potential, enabling modulation of voltage-gated ion channel activity. The sulfation pattern on CS chains also dictates
interactions with specific growth factors, morphogens, cytokines,
or chemokines, thereby regulating various signaling pathways.
,,
 In the nervous system, CS plays
a role in axon growth and guidance, but depending on CS sulfation,
it can either promote or inhibit these processes.
,
 Overall,
although chondroitin sulfate has been implicated in many biological
phenomena, it remains challenging to delineate the specific roles
and properties of different CS chain types.
Chondroitin sulfate
A (CSA), characterized by sulfate at carbon
4 of GAL residues ( B), is one of the most common CS types in animal tissues. It is the major type of CS in the human brain or at sites of spinal cord injury. CSA reduces with age in cartilage and has been associated with bone formation by
facilitating collagen mineralization. The sugar is also involved in diseases: as a ligand for placental
malaria pathogen
,
 and as a marker of cancer cells. In addition, CSA has received attention as a
dietary supplement for osteoarthritis and as a component of hydrogels or drug delivery systems. However, research on this sugar is complicated
by the heterogeneous nature of the samples,
,
 sometimes
even leading to contradictory results. For this reason, an approach capable of studying well-defined, homogeneous
CSA chains is needed to gain accurate insights into the sugar’s
properties and interactions.
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations
have tremendously advanced
our understanding of glycosaminoglycans, providing key aspects related
to their structure, (thermo)­dynamics, energetics, and interactions
(for comprehensive reviews, see Nagarajan et al. and Perez et al.). The technique
has the advantage of providing the spatial and temporal evolution
of glycan systems at varying levels of resolution and with explicitly
defined chain chemical composition. In the context of CS, MD has been
applied to probe conformations of CS fragments with different sulfation
motifs
,
 and the conformational impact of cation
or hydroxyl radical binding.
−

 MD and molecular docking have
also been employed to examine CS in complex with the chemokines CXCL8, CXCL14, the malarial
protein VAR2CSA,
−

 and cysteine cathepsins.
,
 However, all of these studies employed CS chains of up to 20 monomer
units of length due to the significant computational demands of all-atom
MD simulations. In contrast, the chondroitin sulfate length in biological
systems commonly exceeds 100 monomers.
One way to enable simulations
of longer CS chains is by using coarse-grained
(CG) MD simulations. In coarse-grained approximations, groups of atoms
are represented as a single particle (pseudoatom), which reduces the
number of entities within the system, thus speeding up its dynamics
by reducing the total degrees of freedom. CG MD simulations of infinitely
diluted chondroitin sulfate, represented by its backbone, have been
shown to successfully reproduce experimental measurements including
radius of gyration, osmotic pressure, and hydrodynamic radius. A CG model that also accounts for functional groups was
introduced, but significant computational
speedup was achieved only in implicit solvent. More recently, a CG
model for the most common glycosaminoglycans, including fully sulfated
CSs, has been developed in the Martini force field (version 2.2.). Nevertheless, a model for the most common CS
form, i.e., CSA, with single sulfation at the fourth carbon of GAL,
within the framework of generalized coarse-grained force fields for
large-scale multicomponent simulations, is still needed.
Martini
3 is a widely used force field for coarse-grained simulations
of biomolecules, with new and improved features over its predecessor
Martini 2.2. Models for many carbohydrates
have been implemented in the force field,
−

 but chondroitin
sulfate has not yet been defined. In this study, we introduce a Martini
3 model for the CSA repeating unit which accurately reproduces the
behavior of atomistic CHARMM36m simulations
and examine the impact of simulation parameters on CSA aggregation.
Then, we proceed to simulate CSA in complex with the CSA-binding protein
VAR2CSA. Lastly, to illustrate the computational gains of the coarse-grained
model, we perform equilibrium simulations of a 123-monomer-long CSA
chain.

## Methods

## All-Atom Chondroitin Sulfate A Structure
A linear 21-subunit
chondroitin sulfate A all-atom structure and associated GROMACS itp
files were generated using the CHARMM-GUI Glycan Modeler.
d-Glucuronic acid (GLA) subunits were
connected to N-acetyl-d-galactosamine (GAL)
via β 1,4 linkages. Then, GAL was connected to GLA via β
1,3 linkages. The structure was extended in such an alternating fashion
until it contained 21 subunits, with 11 GLA and 10 acetyl GAL sugars
in total. All N-acetyl-d-galactosamines
were modified by attaching an O-linked sulfate to the fourth carbon.

## All-Atom MD Simulations of CSA
For comparison, all-atom
MD simulations of either a single 21mer CSA chain or four of them
were carried out. The CHARMM36m glycan parameters were used for such
simulations. Simulations were carried
out in cubic boxes with periodic boundary conditions. For the single-chain
simulation, the box size was (9.77 nm)3, and for the multichain
simulations it was (17.36 nm)3. In the latter case, the
chains were initially positioned such that at least 1 nm of distance
was between them. In both the single-chain and four-chain simulations,
the box was solvated with CHARMM-TIP3P water molecules
,
 and neutralized with an excess of sodium ions. In addition, NaCl
salt up to a final concentration of 0.15 M was added to the systems.
The solvated systems consisted of approximately 90,000 atoms (single
chain) and 500,000 atoms (four chains). Steric clashes were removed
by energy minimization using the steepest descent algorithm. Thermalization
followed under NVT conditions for 125 ps of MD at a temperature of
303.15 K. The solvent was subsequently equilibrated around the glycans
by performing 250 ps of MD in the NPT ensemble, maintaining the temperature
at 303.15 K and the pressure at 1 bar. During minimization, thermalization,
and solvent equilibration steps, positional restraints of 400 kJ/mol/nm2 on backbone heavy atoms of the glycan rings, 40 kJ/mol/nm2 on the side-chain heavy atoms, and 4 kJ/mol/nm2 dihedral restraints were imposed. Equilibrium dynamics were then
simulated, releasing the positional and dihedral restraints, for five
replicates of 1 μs each (5 μs cumulative) for each system.

## Coarse-Grained Simulations of CSA
Coarse-grained simulations
of CSA were carried out for a single 21mer, for a system containing
four 21mer chains, and for a single 123mer. The coarse-grained models
for the single and four 21mers were generated by center-of-geometry
mapping of the NPT-equilibrated all-atom structure using the Fast-Forward
(ff_map) tool, retaining the same simulation
box dimensions, CSA chain and ion number, as well as their positions.
The 123mer chain was built by extending the CG 21mer with PyMOL and solvated in a (51.72 nm)3 box
with 0.15 M neutralizing salt, resulting in a total of about 1 million
particles. The Martini3 coarse-grained
force field was used. To avoid CSA chain aggregation, NaCl ions were
represented as Q5 beads with ±0.75 charge, unless otherwise noted.
The bead type Q5 accounts for the hydration shell around the ions.
Furthermore, charge rescaling of ± 0.75 corresponds to the proposed
correction to take into account the electronic polarization of water (see the section for a detailed explanation). Martini 3 water (representing
four atomistic water molecules in one bead) was used to solvate the
system. Files containing the initial interaction parameters (itp)
suitable for GROMACS were generated with Polyply (gen_params). For simulations with noninteger salt ion charges,
additional ions were added until the system was fully neutralized.
Energy minimization was carried out to remove steric clashes for 2000
steps using the steepest descent algorithm, followed by equilibration
in the NPT ensemble, for 75 ns. Finally, five production runs of 1
μs were performed for simulations with 21mers and 10 runs of
3 μs for the 123mer.

## Simulations of VAR2CSA in Complex with CSA
Equilibrium
coarse-grained MD simulations of the core domain of VAR2CSA (NF54
strain) in complex with a fully sulfated CSA 21mer were carried out.
The conformations of the complex were retrieved from previous all-atom
equilibrium MD simulations (at a time
point 150 ns of each of the 10 replicas). The CSA chain was coarse-grained
following the same process outlined above. The Martini 3 model of
VAR2CSA was built using Martinize2 choosing default parameters, including secondary structures predicted by
DSSP and native contacts. In addition, to preserve the tertiary structure
of the protein, a Go̅ model, establishing a network of pairwise
Lennard-Jones interactions of strength ϵLJ = 8.414
kJ/mol, was applied.
,
 Go̅ interactions were truncated
at a distance lower than 0.3 nm or greater than 1.1 nm and were excluded
from the internally disordered region spanning residues from 376 to
551. To remove steric clashes, the complex was energy-minimized using
the steepest descent for 100 steps. The energy-minimized complex was
placed in a dodecahedral box, with periodic boundary walls at a distance
of at least 1 nm from the complex, and solvated with Martini 3 water.
The system was neutralized at an ionic strength of 0.15 M NaCl, with
both Na and Cl represented as Q5 beads of ±0.75 e charge. The
noninteger excess charge was controlled by adding a single TP1 bead
with a charge of −0.25 e, which is not expected to introduce
any significant interactions in the system. Energy minimization and
three 750 ps rounds of NPT equilibration preceded the production runs.
During the first round, position restraints (with elastic constant
of 1000 kJ/mol/nm2) were applied to all protein and glycan
beads. During the second round, only protein beads were restrained.
Finally, the third round was performed without any restraints. Production
runs of 300 ns were subsequently performed independently for 10 replicates.
The final conformation after 300 ns of equilibration was used as
the starting configuration for force-probe MD simulations. Virtual
harmonic springs (1000 kJ/mol/nm2 force constant) were
attached to the C-terminal methionine 1953 of VAR2CSA and the first
monomer of the CSA 21mer chain and moved with a constant velocity
of 0.1 m/s in opposite directions. N = 10 force-probe
MD simulations were carried out, each lasting 120 ns.

## MD Simulation Parameters and Algorithms
All-atom MD
simulations were performed using the GROMACS MD package (version 2025.2). Newton’s equations of motion were numerically
integrated at time steps of 2 fs (1 fs during thermalization) using
the leapfrog algorithm. The temperature (pressure) was kept constant
by coupling the simulated system to the Nose–Hoover thermostat
(Parrinello–Rahman barostat), with coupling constants of 1
ps (5 ps) every 500 (2500) integration steps. Short-range nonbonded
van der Waals interactions were modeled by a Lennard-Jones potential
truncated at a distance of 1.2 nm. Electrostatic interactions were
treated using the particle mesh Ewald (PME) algorithm.
,
 Neighbors were considered via the Verlet buffer scheme with a tolerance of 0.005 kJ mol–1ps–1. LINCS was used
to constraint bonds involving heavy atoms of the sugars, while SETTLE was employed to constraint both bonds and angular
vibrations of water molecules.
Coarse-grained Martini 3 MD simulations
were carried out using the same parameters and algorithms as for the
all-atom simulations, except for the following differences. The integration
time step was 15 fs. Temperature–pressure coupling was achieved
with Berendsen thermostat and barostat during minimization or equilibration and with the v-rescale (Parrinello–Rahman) during production. The temperature coupling constants
were 1, 2, and 1 ps during minimization, equilibration, and production,
respectively. Meanwhile, the pressure coupling constant was 12 ps
during all steps. Instead of a tolerance in the interactions with
the Verlet buffer neighbor scheme, a fixed neighbor list cutoff of
1.35 nm was used. Electrostatic interactions
were treated either with the reaction-field scheme (dielectric constant: 15; cutoff radius: 1.1 nm) or with
PME for the simulations of 21mers, and exclusively with PME for the
simulations of the 123mer or a CSA 21mer in complex with VAR2CSA.

## Analysis
The solvent-accessible surface area (SASA)
was determined using the double cubic lattice method as implemented
in the GROMACS gmx sasa tool, using a probe sphere of size 0.191 nm. Atomic van der Walls
radii were retrieved from, and for the
Martini 3 beads the following sizes were used: 0.264 nm for regular,
0.23 nm for small, and 0.191 nm for tiny beads.

Center-of-geometry mapping of the all-atom trajectory
to Martini 3 beads and quantification of bonded term distributions
were carried out by using Fast-Forward. The bonded term distributions were compared by means of the Jensen–Shannon
divergence score, available in the SciPy library. The optimal bin width for each bonded term comparison was
selected using the Freedman–Diaconis rule.

The GROMACS gmx polystat function
was used to
compute both the end-to-end distance and the radius of gyration of
the CSA chains. gmx distance was employed for computing
pairwise residue distances, defined as the distance between virtual
sites located at the center of each sugar ring. It should be noted
that such a criterion is the most appropriate as it depends only on
the positions of the sugar rings and is not influenced by the orientation
of functional groups. gmx distance was also used
to quantify protein–CSA contacts by considering two beads “in
contact” if their minimum distance was less than 0.45 nm. The
radial distribution function of sodium was calculated using gmx rdf, with either the carboxylic acid or sulfate group
bead acting as the reference particle and the sodium bead acting as
the selection. Root-mean-square fluctuations (RMSFs) of the protein
residues or CSA monomers were determined with gmx rmsf. Unless otherwise stated, persistence
length was defined as the exponential decay half-life of the GLA virtual
site autocorrelation function C(x), quantified with MDAnalysis.analysis.polymer.PersistenceLength.
MDAnalysis.analysis.rms.rmsd

,
 was used to calculate the VAR2CSA root-mean-square
deviation.
The Flory scaling exponent ν was determined
by fitting the
function ⟨d

ij
⟩
= b|i – j|ν to the curve ⟨d

ij
⟩ versus |i – j|, where ⟨d

ij
⟩ is the average distance between residues i and j, and b is the proportionality
constant.

For VAR2CSA simulations,
analysis was computed for each replicate
from 150 to 200 ns time points in all-atom trajectory and from 100
to 300 ns for coarse-grained to account for equilibration. Analysis
of the CSA 123mer trajectory was done from 500 to 3000 ns for the
same reason.
Molecular structures were visualized and rendered
with VMD.

The CG force-field parameters,
MD simulation parameters, and initial
configurations generated in this study are deposited at https://github.com/PaulGreic/Csa_Martini3 and submitted to the Polyply library.

## Results

## Parametrization of the Repeating Unit
CSA is a linear
polysaccharide composed of repeating d-glucuronic acid (GLA)
and N-acetyl-d-galactosamine 4-sulfate (GAL)
units ( A,B).
We built a Martini 3 coarse-grained model of this repeating unit,
validating it against all-atom simulations using the CHARMM36m force
field. Five × 1 μs replicas of CSA 21mer all-atom simulations
were sufficient to ensure a converged reference data set (Figure S14). Most of the model was based on existing
atom-to-bead definitions from other carbohydrate and small-molecule
models ( C).
,
 The sulfate group, which is of key importance for CSA, has not yet
been parametrized in Martini 3. We mapped it following general force-field
guidelines: four heavy atoms, including a period three-element sulfur,
were represented as a regular-size bead of diameter 0.264 nm with
a Q4n label to account for the −1 charge delocalized among
the oxygens. In addition, in order to
capture the ring-stacking interactions, as recommended for Martini3
carbohydrates, a virtual interaction
site was added to the center of each six-membered glycan ring. The
resulting model mapped 53 atoms into 11 coarse-grained particles.
As in other Martini 3 carbohydrate models, to capture the rigid nature
of the glycan rings, beads representing them were connected via distance
constraints rather than harmonic bonds. Furthermore, the distance between such beads was increased by 10%
compared to the atomistic reference to more accurately represent the
molecular volume (Figure S1). This resulted
in a distribution of solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) for our
Martini 3 model that compared extremely well to that distribution
for the atomistic reference ( A), a result that was visually corroborated by the
Connolly surfaces ( B).Thus, the coarse-grained model adopted here accurately
captures the shape of the CSA repeating unit.
 All other bonded interactions within the disaccharide
repeating
unit were adjusted to match their corresponding distributions in all-atom
simulations. It should be noted that in order to make the comparison
possible, all-atom trajectories were forward-mapped based on the center-of-geometry
of atom groups corresponding to each Martini bead. The resulting distributions
are shown in Figures S2–S4. The
agreement between Martini and reference (all-atom) distributions of
each bonded term was quantified using the Jensen–Shannon divergence
(JSD), which gives a score of 0 for identical distributions and a
score of 1 for nonoverlapping distributions ( C). The median JSD value was 0.13, indicating
that most of the terms were well reproduced by the coarse-grained
model ( C,D).
The worst JSD value (0.27) was observed for an angle with an asymmetrical
reference distribution, which is a difficult case to reproduce at
this level of resolution ( E). Similarly, dihedral angles that span across a single
glycosidic bond contained minor peaks in the reference distributions
that were not captured during Martini 3 simulations (Figure S4). Analysis of the all-atom trajectories revealed
that these peaks resulted from nonexosyn conformations of the glycosidic
bond (Figure S11), indicating that the
coarse-grained CSA model is unable to capture anti-ϕ or anti-ψ
conformers. It should be noted that the coarse-grained simulations
were run using modified parameters to avoid CSA aggregation (see below);
nevertheless, similar results were also achieved with default Martini
3 parameters (Figure S5A).

## Evaluation of Polymer Properties
After establishing
a Martini 3 model for the CSA repeating unit, we evaluated whether
it is capable of reproducing the atomistic polymer properties of a
CSA 21mer under equilibrium conditions ( A). The size of polymers is commonly quantified
with the end-to-end distance (ETE) or the radius of gyration (R
g). For a Gaussian chain, the ratio ⟨ETE2⟩/⟨R
g
2⟩ ≈ 6. In the reference all-atom simulations, the ratio was 10.4,
indicating that this glycan chain adopts a highly extended conformation.
Reassuringly, a similar level of elongation was observed in our coarse-grained
Martini 3 model, where the ratio was estimated to be around 10.0 ( B). Furthermore,
the characteristic ratio, i.e. ⟨ETE2⟩ /(Nb
v
2) (with N = 21, the polymerization degree, and b
v = 0.52 nm, the bond length), was found to
be 10.8, which is consistent with the estimate from a previous implicit-solvent
CG model of CSA (see the value of ∼10 for comparable N in in Bathe et al.).
 Polymers are also highly influenced by the surrounding
solvent.
To confirm that the balance between polymer–polymer and polymer–solvent
interactions was maintained in our Martini 3 CSA system, we quantified
the Flory scaling exponent, ν, from the distance d

ij
 between saccharides i and j along the CSA chain ( C). Our coarse-grained model reproduced almost
perfectly the distances observed in the all-atom case. More specifically,
the CSA scaling exponent obtained from distances was very close in
the two descriptions, i.e., 0.65 for the all-atom and 0.66 for the
coarse-grained model. From polymer theory, under equal contributions
of polymer self-interactions and polymer–solvent interactions,
ν = 0.5, while ν > 0.5 indicates dominance of protein–solvent
interactions, rendering a highly solvated and ‘’swollen”
chain. Our results indicate the latter
to be the case for the studied (21 monomer long) CSA chain.
Lastly, we inspected the pairwise distances between CSA chain units
by also comparing the distributions using Jensen–Shannon divergence
( D). We found
that when |i – j| >3,
the
JSD score did not exceed 0.25, indicating that at larger length scales
there is high concordance between CG and AA models. However, comparison
of closer saccharide pairs revealed that the distributions between
GLA and its neighbors had a larger divergence. In particular, comparison
of two neighboring GLA residues (GLA–GAL–GLA) resulted
in the worst JSD score of 0.48, caused by the CG distance being overestimated
by 0.03 nm on average ( E, bottom panel). In contrast, the JSD score for neighboring
GAL residues was 0.22, indicating good overlap between coarse-grained
and all-atom distributions ( D,E, top panel). Because the error in pairwise distances
did not propagate along the chain (Figure S6) and did not affect chain stiffness (Figure S10), we deemed it acceptable given the resolution of Martini
3 models.
In summary, our CG Martini model reproduces well the
conformational
properties and the balance between glycan–glycan and glycan–solvent
interactions of a short CSA chain. It should be noted that comparable
behavior was also observed when CG simulations were performed with
the original Martini 3 parameters (Figure S5B–D), but as in the case of the disaccharide, we showed here the results
for the optimized parameters that did not lead to chain aggregation,
as explained in the following section.

## CSA Interchain Interactions
It is not only single chains
in isolation but also multiple coexisting chains that are the topic
of interest in CSA research. Accordingly, a key requirement for our
coarse-grained model was to ensure that chains remained well solvated
and dispersed. In order to check this, we carried out simulations
of a mixture containing four 21mer chains (corresponding to a molar
concentration of 1.27 mM) and monitored their aggregation tendency.
The level of aggregation was quantified as the ratio between the SASA
of all chains together, S
tot, and the
sum of the SASA of each chain, ∑
a = 1
4
S

a
. This ratio equals one if
the chains are not in contact (no aggregation) and tends to zero if
the chains get in contact and thus aggregate. Due to the strong electrostatic
repulsion between the negatively charged sulfate and carboxylic acid
groups, at an all-atom resolution, on the microsecond time scale,
the chains repelled each other not showing any sign of aggregation
(see data for CHARMM36m in A,B). On the contrary, coarse-grained simulations using
the default Martini 3 parameters revealed a strong aggregation tendency
(see Martini 3, Reaction-field, q(ions) = ±1.0, tiny (TQ5) case in B). Calculation of radial distribution functions
demonstrated that, in this case, the sodium density around negatively
charged CSA groups was found to be much higher than in the all-atom
system (Figure S6A). We also noted that
these cations can get sandwiched among negatively charged CSA beads,
thereby bridging the distance between CSA chains (Figure S6B). Thus, we explored whether such observed interchain
association could be prevented by reducing the strength of the interaction
between sodium and the anionic CSA moieties.
 Three aspects of relevance to the interaction of
glycans with ions
were considered. First, overestimation of Coulomb interactions is
a common issue among nonpolarizable force fields. One strategy to address this problem is by rescaling charges. The proposed rescaling factor is proportional
to the electronic polarization contribution of water screening, which would result in a reduction of monovalent
salt charges from ±1.0 to ±0.75. We tested such a correction
in our system by applying it to sodium and chloride ions. To only
minimally disturb the Martini 3 force field, other charges in the
system were not rescaled. In particular, because a charge of −1.0
e and SQ5n beads have been used to represent carboxylic acid moieties
in various other Martini models, we opted not to rescale this charge
either. Second, the Coulomb potential in Martini 3 is usually handled
using the reaction-field scheme. Although
less computationally intensive, this method can lead to artifacts,
including truncation and discontinuities of the potential function
and a mean-field approximation of long-range electrostatics. Thus, we tested particle mesh Ewald (PME), which
is an alternative. PME alleviates these issues at the expense of a
higher computational cost. PME is the standard in all-atom simulations,
although it has also been used in Martini coarse-grained simulations,
e.g., of an ionic liquid. Lastly, a hydration
shell forms around ions suspended in water. In older versions of Martini,
this was implicitly accounted for by representing ions with bead sizes
larger than their ionic radius. However,
this practice was abandoned in Martini 3, resorting to the use of
the smallest bead, TQ5. The choice of bead radius would not only influence
the size of the ion particle but also affect its Lenard-Jones potential
parameters. For this reason, we explored the effect of using a larger
bead for monovalent ions (i.e., Q5). Consequently, we conducted equilibrium
simulations of the 21mer CSA chain mixture with all possible combinations
of these three conditions to test how they influenced interchain association.
As mentioned, the default Martini 3 simulation setup (i.e., RF
treatment, tiny TQ5 beads of q ± 1.0 e for sodium
and chloride) showed the largest decrease in the exposed area ratio,
implying the largest level of aggregation ( B, top left). Changing each of the three
above-mentioned aspects individually reduced aggregation, however,
not fully ( B). For RF versus PME, compare the left-column and right-column purple
curves; for bead size, compare the tiny bead (purple) and the regular
bead (green) curves; and for charge scaling, compare q = ±1.0 e (purple) with q = ±0.75 e (blue).
The situation improved when two conditions were adjusted at the same
time. In two simulation setups (either RF with regular bead size (Q5)
and rescaled charge or PME with regular bead size (Q5) and full q = ±1.0 e charge), the exposure ratio fluctuated around
one, indicating the formation of brief and unstable small aggregates
( B). Interestingly,
using PME and rescaling the ionic charges, while still describing
sodium with a tiny bead, did not show significant improvement. Finally,
aggregation was fully avoided, as observed in all-atom simulations,
when all three conditions, i.e., PME, (Q5) regular-size beads, and
rescaled ionic charge of q = ±0.75 e, were in
place ( B).
To test how these changes might alter single-chain polymer properties,
we also conducted equilibrium simulations of a single CSA 21mer chain
and evaluated the end-to-end distance and radius of gyration for each
case (Figure S12). In the case corresponding
to PME treatment with tiny TQ5 beads of q ±
1.0 e for sodium and chloride, the polymer displayed collapsed conformations
that were not seen in other CG simulations nor in the all-atom reference
ones. Apart from this case, the polymer conformation was similar in
all other considered schemes, most importantly in the three nonaggregating
ones. We also evaluated the RDFs in these simulations, demonstrating
that the proposed changes indeed reduced the cation distribution around
anionic groups, although still not to the level of the all-atom reference
(Figure S13).
In summary, we identify
at least three distinct possible treatments
of glycan-ion electrostatic interactions that give satisfactory aggregation
levels of CSA at coarse-grained resolution ( C). To illustrate the applicability of our
coarse-grained model in two relevant contexts, in the following we
consider the conditions that led to full abolishment of aggregation,
i.e., after using PME and regular-size beads for sodium or chloride
ions with rescaled charges.

## CSA in Complex with VAR2CSA
After establishing a coarse-grained
model for CSA under nonaggregating simulation conditions, we sought
to confirm that such a setup can accurately capture the dynamics of
a protein in complex with the glycan. To test this, we chose the malaria
adhesin VAR2CSA, which is known to bind CSA chains in their fully
sulfated form.
,,
 The interaction of VAR2CSA with CSA is essential for the attachment
of malaria-infected erythrocytes to the placenta proteoglycan matrix,
leading to pregnancy-associated malaria. Hence, disruption of this interaction is a promising therapeutic
approach for the design of antimalarial vaccines. This complex has previously been investigated with all-atom
simulations.
,
 Thus, we here attempted to reproduce
the (all-atom) equilibrium dynamics of this complex using our Martini
3 model for CSA. The coarse-grained model of VAR2CSA was generated
following standard Martini 3 procedures by applying Go̅-type
additional interactions (see ). The initial conformation of the complex at both
levels of resolution is illustrated in A. The dynamics of the complex were then
simulated in n = 10 independent replicas of 300 ns
each.
 As expected, by imposing Go̅ distance restraints,
the protein
largely retained its structural fold (Figure S7). Local dynamics were subsequently compared using per-residue backbone
root-mean-square fluctuations (RMSFs) ( B). There was good agreement in residue flexibility,
with only deviations arising from highly mobile regions. When monitoring
the local flexibility of the (bound) CSA chain via RMSF, we also observed
good agreement between all-atom and coarse-grained simulations ( C). Saccharides 3
to 19 were directly in contact with VAR2CSA and thus displayed reduced
flexibility, compared to chain ends, which were not in contact and
were hence more mobile. The high agreement of RMSF values demonstrates
that the equilibrium dynamics of CSA in complex with a protein can
be accurately reproduced by our glycan model in conjunction with a
conventional protein model used for Martini.
Previous atomistic
simulations have also demonstrated that applying
elongational tension to VAR2CSA causes an opening of the core region, a process of relevance for the shear-enhanced
adherence mechanism of malaria-infected erythrocytes mediated by this
protein. We thus checked whether our
CG model was also capable to capture the force response of this complex.
By performing constant-velocity force-probe MD simulations, applying
the same elongational tension on the C-terminal methionine and the
21st sugar residue of the CSA chain, we were able to achieve the same
type of opening behavior ( D). The distance between the two subdomain regions
suddenly increased upon surpassing a certain force threshold (F
rupture) value, and the opening always preceded
glycan dissociation ( E). We quantified the rupture force by identifying the time
point when the VAR2CSA interdomain distance was ≥5 nm and then
identifying the maximal pulling force within a 10 ns window around
this time point. F
rupture in CG simulations
was greater than in all-atom simulations, likely because the default
Go̅ restraints were acting on the opened interface, creating
additional resistance not present in the atomistic protein model ( F). However, the
difference was not substantial, and in agreement with all-atom simulations,
the force required to open the VAR2CSA core region was lower than
the force needed for CSA dissociation; thus, opening always preceded
dissociation ( E,F). Thus, not only under equilibrium but also under nonequilibrium
tension conditions, our coarse-grained model of CSA (together with
a Go̅-type protein description) properly captures the specific
properties of the VAR2CSA–CSA complex.

## Simulations of a CSA 123mer
So far, we have focused
our analysis on 21mer CSA chains to allow comparison with all-atom
simulations and demonstrated that our coarse-grained model accurately
reproduces the dynamics of atomistic CHARMM36m simulations. However,
in vivo CSA chains are often longer than 100 saccharidesa
scale which is no longer feasible to simulate at an all-atom resolution.
Therefore, we proceeded to simulate a CSA 123mer by using our CG Martini
3 model for 10 independent replicates of 3 μs each ( A and Movie S1). Surprisingly,
although the energy surface of the coarse-grained resolution was smoother,
these simulations revealed slow equilibrium dynamics, as reflected
by slow, gradual fluctuations of the end-to-end distance (Figure S9). Thus, not only does the Martini 3
model of CSA enable simulations of more biologically relevant size
scales but it also allowed us to capture conformational states that
would take much longer to sample atomistically.
The simulations of the 123mer allowed us to quantify
the polymer
properties of a fully sulfated CSA chain in explicit solvent. Consistent
with the CSA 21mer, we find that the ratio ⟨ETE2⟩/⟨R
g
2⟩ > 6 pointed to an extended conformation
( B). In addition,
the mean end-to-end distance of this chain was 30 nm, which is close
to the experimentally measured value for a chain of a similar molecular
weight of 27.3 nm, while previous estimates
with an implicit-solvent CG model predicted
values of the order of 32.4 nm. The scaling exponent is similar to
our estimate for a CSA 21mer, confirming the dominance of the polymer–solvent
interactions ( C). In addition, the characteristic ratio, i.e., ⟨ETE2⟩ /(Nb
v
2) (with N = 123, the
polymerization degree, and b
v = 0.52 nm,
the bond length), was found to be 27, which falls in the same range
of a previous estimate from an implicit-solvent CG model (between
∼30–35 for a comparable N in in Bathe et al.). Previous studies using implicit-solvent CG
simulations and dynamic light scattering experiments reported hydrodynamic
radii, R
h, values of around 5.5 nm, for
CS chains of comparable polymerization degree, while explicit-solvent CG simulations (using Martini 2.2)
reported values of ∼4.8 ± 0.3 nm for a 100-monomer fully
solvated chain. Assuming a linear monodisperse
chain, R
g = 1.5 R
h,
,
 our estimate of the radius of gyration, R
g = 10.8 ± 1.6 nm (mean ± s.d., B), turns into an R
h = 7.2 ± 1.1 nm. Although larger, our
estimate is not too far from such previous estimates, especially taking
into account the differences in the samples (i.e., size and sulfation
distribution), environmental conditions, and the approximate nature
of the R
g to R
h conversion.
Lastly, we estimated the persistence length (l
p) of 10.3 ± 3.2 nm (average ± s.d.)
according
to the exponential decay half-life of the autocorrelation function C(x) ( D). The large variation among replicates
is attributed to the slow dynamics of the chain. Therefore, we also
quantified l

p
 using an
alternative method, assuming the CSA chain to be an idealized worm-like
chain (WLC). For a WLC with contour length (L) greater
than l
p, the following relationship holds:
⟨ETE2⟩ ≈ 2l
p
L. Using ETE at t = 0 as the contour length of the 123mer chain (50.1–51.9
nm), l
p was 9.6 ± 2.1 nm. Encouragingly,
both estimates are not far from previous computational persistence
length estimates, which saturated at 11.2–12.0 nm for several
hundreds, i.e., N = 256, chains and from a small angle neutron scattering estimate of 12.7
nm (for a 0.01 w/w concentration).

## Discussion
Chondroitin sulfate A (CSA) is a linear
glycosaminoglycan that
is attached to cell surface or secreted proteins. It regulates humoral signaling pathways, ensures hydration and toughness of various tissues,
−

 acts as an antioxidant, and is implicated
in many other vital roles. Research into CSA has been difficult due
to its large size, heterogeneous chemical composition, and multitude
of binding partners. Here, we developed a model of CSA for coarse-grained
simulations based on the Martini 3 force field to address these challenges.
Previous high-resolution simulations of CSA have been limited to
short fragments.
−
,
 In our CG model, the
53 atoms constituting the disaccharide repeating unit are represented
by 11 Martini particles. Despite this reduction in the level of detail,
our model still retained an accurate representation of the repeating
unit’s molecular volume and its internal bonded interactions
( ). Subsequently,
the parameters of the repeating unit could be used to build longer
CSA chains. For medium-sized chains, of a couple tens of monomers,
our results compare extremely well with atomistic simulations (performed
using the CHARMM36m force field) in terms
of description of polymeric properties, such as the chain extension
and intermonomer interactions ( ). The minimal CSA segment that binds to the malarial
adhesin VAR2CSA has such a degree of polymerization, and we thus show that our CG model is capable of capturing
the key structural details of CSA fragments of that length.
Beyond short fragments, the modularity of the model allowed investigation
of the behavior of much longer CSA chains. The degree of polymerization
of this glycan in nature is of the order of several tens or even hundreds
of monomers. For a chain in that range
(exactly 123 monomers), we predict structural properties that are
encouragingly close to experimental estimates
,,
 and to previous estimates from implicit-solvent
,
 and explicit-solvent CG models ( ). It should be noted
that differences in the exact size and sulfation distribution, as
well as in buffer conditions, make this comparison not straightforward.
In particular, we predict such a chain to adopt extended conformations
beyond what it would be expected for a Gaussian chain ( B), also reflected by the markedly long persistence length of the
order of 10 nm (20 monomers) ( D). This is likely due to strong self-repelling electrostatic
forces, promoting solvent–glycan interactions over glycan–glycan
interactions ( C). It should be noted that such an estimate could not have been
obtained from the simulations of short fragments of size comparable
to the persistence length.
When solvated by explicit Martini
water beads and ions, the 123mer
CSA chain system consisted of almost 1 million CG beads. One microsecond
molecular dynamics analysis of such a system on a 2 GPU and 72 CPU
node required 7 days of computing. If treated atomistically, such
simulation would have implied roughly 11 million atoms. Although Martini
CG and all-atom time-scales are not directly comparable, microsecond-long simulations of such a system
would be extremely time- and resource-consuming, requiring approximately
500 days of computing using a single 128-CPU node. We thus provide evidence of how our model enables access
to spatial and temporal scales that are currently extremely difficult
with atomistic simulations.
Despite accurately capturing single-chain
properties, simulations
of multiple chains, using the recommended Martini 3 interaction and
simulation parameters, resulted in aggregation ( ). We attribute this tendency to the strong
electrostatic interaction between the negatively charged sugar groups
and sodium ions, which promotes interchain association of the CSA
chains bridged by sodium ions (Figure S6). Similar ion-induced polymeric assembly has been observed in implicit-solvent
simulations of disordered mucin glycoproteins. To address this issue, we systematically varied three key
electrostatic properties of the system that attenuated the strong
interactions with sodium and quantified their impact on the aggregation
of CSA ( B).
By using the reaction-field scheme, we demonstrated that aggregation
could be prevented by introducing two changes simultaneously: increasing
the size of ion beads, reflecting their hydration shell (as it was
originally implemented in previous Martini version), and rescaling charge of salt ions, according to previously
proposed continuum correction to take into account electrostatic screening
of water. Charge scaling is actually
preferable to directly changing the screening constant, as it does
not affect all other Coulombic interactions of the system. It should
be noted that charge scaling and calibrated Lennard-Jones parameters
of ions have also been recently reported to properly describe ionic
radial distribution functions in implicit-solvent CG simulations. By using PME, which is a more robust way to
consider long-range electrostatic interactions, the extent of aggregation
was overall reduced but not fully abolished, requiring a larger (hydrated)
ion bead too. Furthermore, if the three conditions were in place,
i.e., PME and bigger salt ion beads with rescaled charges, the CG
model did not show aggregation, similarly to the atomistic reference.
Accordingly, we provide at least three schemes of varying level of
modifications (in reference to default Martini 3 force field) to attenuate
glycan–cation interactions and thereby prevent CSA aggregation
( C). It should
be noted that aggregation has been reported in previous simulations
with Martini (version 2.2).
,,
 Rather than rescaling Lennard-Jones parameters, as previously proposed
for polysaccharides,
,
 we here propose tuning electrostatic
interactions as an approach to mitigate it.
Treatment of electrostatics
of highly charged systems is a challenging
task both in all-atom and coarse-grained
MD simulations. Because CSA is a highly sulfated and thus highly negatively
charged biopolymer, studying its aggregation becomes an excellent
test to assess electrostatics in MD simulations. Already at the all-atom
level, electrostatics that govern CSA interaction with ions have been
found difficult to reproduce and to be highly sensitive to force-field
parameters. At the coarse-grained level,
ions have been shown to impact the polymeric assembly of a mucin disordered
glycoprotein in implicit-solvent CG simulations. We here demonstrate the impact that long-range electrostatics
(reaction-field vs PME), ion solvation (small vs big CG ion beads),
and electric screening (fractional ionic charges) have on clustering
of CSA. From this we recommend that, whenever possible, Martini 3
simulations of CSA should use PME, with ±0.75 Q5 beads for monovalent
salt ions. This setup, however, has two drawbacks: PME is more computationally
demanding than the reaction-field. In addition, simulations of ion
binding molecules may not be possible with implicitly hydrated ion
beads. In such cases, we suggest considering the other two nonaggregating
conditions as an alternative. Finally, our data also demonstrate that
regular Martini 3 parameters are already adequate for simulations
of short CSA single chains in highly diluted conditions, where aggregation
does not pose issues. In addition, these changes may be considered
for other Martini 3 systems, where artifactual aggregation is observed.
Although the presented study focuses on CSA, we believe that it provides
some practical clues for future studies, aiming at solving the issues
existing with electrostatics in Martini, e.g., with cations, not only
for the simulation of glycans but more generally for studying highly
charged systems.
We based our model on the Martini 3 force field
as it enables simulations
of large and complex multicomponent systems in coarse-grained resolution.
This allowed us to simulate multiple ( ) and also large ( ) CSA chains in explicit solvent. We thereby
complement existing Martini models of Glycosaminoglycans, available for the 2.2 version, by providing
here a model of CSA, the most common CS form, compatible with the
Martini 3 version. Considering the solvent explicitly may constitute
an advantage over existing implicit-solvent models of CSA,
−

 when evaluating solvent properties such as viscosity or friction.
This will be of relevance to study processes such as lubrication,
load bearing of joints, or shear-mediated cellular adherence. In addition,
our model can be used in conjunction with models of other biomolecules,
such as proteins. We demonstrate this by simulating the VAR2CSA–CSA
complex ( ).
This constitutes another advantage of our model, as biologically relevant
questions related to interactions of CSA with other biomolecules can
now be addressed within the Martini 3 framework. In the particular
case of VAR2CSA–CSA, it will be highly interesting to assess
how electrostatics, e.g., via changes in the ionic strength, could
impact the balance between protein–glycan and protein–protein
interactions, potentially influencing the force-mediated multivalent
binding kinetics of this complex.
,

In conclusion,
we have developed here a Martini 3 coarse-grained
model of chondroitin sulfate A that allows its MD simulations at reduced
computational cost without compromising simulation accuracy. This
opens the door for exciting research to study CSA and potentially
other chondroitin sulfates.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Klaus Tschira Foundation
(to all authors). This research was conducted within the Max Planck
School Matter to Life supported by the German Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF) in collaboration with the Max Planck
Society. Computations were performed on the HPC system at the Max
Planck Computing and Data Facility.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jctc.5c01743.
Distance comparison; comparison of bond length distributions;
comparison of angle distributions; comparison of dihedral angle distributions;
performance of CG CSA simulation; comparison of pairwise distance
distributions; comparison of radial distribution functions; C
α root mean square deviation; time traces
of end-to-end distance fluctuations; decay of autocorrelation C(x) functions; analysis of glycosidic
bond conformers; comparison of polymer size descriptors; and convergence
of measurements (PDF)
Trajectory of CSA 123mer under equilibrium conditions
(MP4)

Open access funded
by Max Planck Society.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials