pmcMol TherMol Ther902moltherMolecular Therapy1525-00161525-0024American Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC12703165PMC12703165.112703165127031654093151610.1016/j.ymthe.2025.09.004S1525-0016(25)00732-41Original ArticleElesclomol-copper combination synergistically targets mitochondrial metabolism in cancer stem cells to overcome chemoresistance in PDAC
YuQian JiangKe MaSiyu ZhengQuan TondiSerena ReinaChiara ŠabanovićBerina WenChenlei ShenBaiyong AicherAlexandra SongHaiyunsonghaiyun@shsmu.edu.cn MaYinxingyinxingma@sjtu.edu.cn HeeschenChristopherchristopher.heeschen@icloud.com 1Center for Single-Cell Omics, School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China2State Key Laboratory of Systems Medicine for Cancer, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China3Pancreatic Cancer Heterogeneity, Candiolo Cancer Institute - FPO - IRCCS, Candiolo, Turin, Italy4Research Institute of Pancreatic Disease, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China5Pancreatic Disease Centre, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China6Shanghai Institute of Digestive Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China7Precision Immunotherapy, Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan∗Corresponding author: Haiyun Song, Center for Single-Cell Omics, School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. songhaiyun@shsmu.edu.cn∗∗Corresponding author: Yinxing Ma, Center for Single-Cell Omics, School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. yinxingma@sjtu.edu.cn∗∗∗Corresponding author: Christopher Heeschen, Center for Single-Cell Omics, School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. christopher.heeschen@icloud.com8These authors contributed equally
0312202510920253312502459616061774122024492025100920250802202608022026© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive cancer with a poor prognosis, partly due to cancer stem cells (CSCs) that drive progression and treatment resistance. We explored the therapeutic potential of inducing cuproptosis, a copper-dependent, regulated cell death, in CSC-enriched PDAC models. Using human and murine PDAC models, we evaluated elesclomol, a copper transport enhancer. Elesclomol alone had minimal effects; combined with copper chloride (CuCl2), it significantly and irreversibly reduced CSC phenotypes without affecting non-transformed cells. Mechanistically, only the combination raised intracellular copper ions 2- to 4-fold, decreased iron-sulfur cluster proteins, and caused lipoylated dihydrolipoamide S-acetyltransferase (DLAT) accumulation in mitochondria, triggering cuproptosis, particularly in CSCs. It also selectively inhibited copper-dependent antioxidant SOD1 in PDAC cells, impairing oxidative stress defense and sensitizing them to copper-induced death. To enhance clinical relevance, CuCl2 was replaced with hollow mesoporous copper sulfide nanoparticles that release copper ions. Either combined with or loaded with elesclomol, these nanoparticles similarly increased copper levels and inhibited PDAC spheroid formation. In vivo, in aggressive immunocompetent murine PDAC models, this nanoparticle-based treatment significantly improved gemcitabine response. These findings identify nanoparticle-mediated cuproptosis induction, combined with standard chemotherapy, as an innovative CSC-targeting strategy to improve PDAC outcomes, offering new hope for patients with PDAC.

## Graphical abstract
 
Heeschen and colleagues demonstrate that elesclomol-copper synergy preferentially and effectively kills pancreatic cancer stem cells by selectively raising intracellular copper concentrations and triggering mitochondrial dysfunction. CuS nanoparticles loaded with elesclomol further enhance copper delivery and treatment efficacy. This multimodal therapeutic strategy improves chemosensitivity and tumor control in pancreatic cancer.

## Keywords
cancer stem cellspancreatic cancercopperelesclomolnanoparticlescuproptosismitochondriachemoresistancepmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Pancreatic cancer, particularly pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), the most common subtype, is notorious for its grim prognosis, insidious onset, and rapid metastatic progression. Its incidence is steadily rising and is projected to become the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths world wide. , Due to elusive early symptoms and swift progression, more than 80% of patients miss the opportunity for surgical resection at the time of diagnosis. Even among those eligible for surgery, over 80% experience disease recurrence. , 
A critical factor contributing to the poor outcomes in patients with PDAC is the presence of a highly aggressive subset of cancer stem cells (CSCs), which significantly impact tumor progression, metastasis, and resistance to chemotherapy. , , Therefore, effectively targeting CSCs should be an integral part of any new treatment development. Notably, pancreatic CSCs heavily depend on mitochondrial metabolism, and recent studies have unveiled an intricate link between copper-induced cell death and mitochondrial metabolism. Copper ions play a vital role in the electron transport chain, aiding in efficient ATP production, and are essential for the function of cytochrome c oxidase—the terminal enzyme in the respiratory chain. However, excessive intracellular accumulation of copper ions triggers a unique form of cell death called “cuproptosis”. Targeting copper homeostasis can thus lead to cellular damage, making copper-induced cell death a potential new strategy for pancreatic cancer treatment.
To date, limited information exists regarding the role of cuproptosis in PDAC and its potential application in new treatment strategies. Therefore, dissecting the interplay between cuproptosis and drug resistance in PDAC bears potential clinical significance. The sole addition of Elesclomol (ES; STA-4783), a small molecule escorting copper to the mitochondria, has been unsuccessful in clinical trials (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00888615, NCT00084214, NCT00087997, NCT00088088, and NCT00522834) , but may gain a second chance when combined with copper-based therapies to further enhance intracellular copper concentrations in cancer cells. Certain clinical results suggest that the effectiveness of elesclomol depends on metabolic factors, especially mitochondrial activity. Cancer cells with a strong dependence on mitochondrial metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation—such as pancreatic CSCs , , —might be particularly sensitive to elesclomol-copper-induced cell death. Therefore, this study aims to harness the principles of cuproptosis to enhance treatment responses for patients with PDAC, which may ultimately improve their currently poor prognosis.

## Results

## Pancreatic cancer cells are susceptible to treatment with elesclomol and copper chloride
To investigate the impact of elesclomol and copper chloride (CuCl2) (ES-Cu) on pancreatic cancer cells, we utilized two primary human PDAC cultures (SIC002 and SIC007) derived from in vitro expansion of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from patients with advanced pancreatic cancer and primary murine CHX1990 PDAC cells derived from KPC (KrasG12D;Trp53R172H; Pdx1-Cre) mice fully backcrossed to C57BL/6 mice. We maintained the PDAC cells as spheroid cultures using anchorage-independent conditions to preserve their heterogeneous nature. 
On day 3 after seeding in spheroid culture, the cells were subjected to treatment, and cytotoxicity was assessed on day 7 using CellTiter-Glo ( A and A). Elesclomol alone exhibited limited effects on cell viability, with approximately 95% of cells remaining viable at concentrations up to 800 nM on day 7. However, when elesclomol was combined with CuCl2, cell viability decreased as the concentration of elesclomol increased. Specifically, elesclomol concentrations of 40, 80, and 100 nM reduced cell viability to approximately 50%, 40%, and 10%, respectively. Higher concentrations (400–800 nM) resulted in PDAC cell viability dropping to less than 10%. Therefore, in subsequent studies, we utilized elesclomol concentrations ranging from 20 to 100 nM.
Next, we assessed the functional impact of the ES-Cu combination on our 3D PDAC models. While elesclomol or 1 μM CuCl2 alone had minimal effects on spheroid cultures, their combination significantly inhibited the formation of 3D spheroids, showing a marked reduction in both size and area compared to the control group ( B and 1C). Furthermore, increasing the concentration of elesclomol escalated the inhibitory effect on 3D spheroid formation in both human and murine PDAC cells ( B–1E and B). Flow cytometry revealed a consistent and strong induction of apoptosis in PDAC cells, as evidenced by Annexin V staining ( F, 1G, and C). 

## Elesclomol-copper preferentially targets pancreatic CSCs
We hypothesized that the combination of ES-Cu might be particularly effective in targeting CSC functionality in PDAC. To test this, we treated PDAC cells with ES-Cu after 2 days of spheroid culture and measured the proportion of CD133+ CSCs on day 7 ( A and 2B). Treatment with elesclomol or CuCl2 alone led, to a certain extent, to a decrease in CD133+ CSCs compared to the control group. In contrast, the combination treatment significantly reduced the percentage of CD133+ CSCs by approximately 80%. 
We also assessed apoptosis in both CD133+ CSCs and differentiated CD133− PDAC cells. Our results showed a substantial increase in Annexin V staining—a marker of apoptosis—in the CD133+ CSC population following ES-Cu treatment, whereas the differentiated CD133− cancer cells exhibited a much smaller increase ( C and A). Similar results were obtained using CXCR4+ cells as another CSC biomarker ( B and S2C). Additionally, expression levels of stemness-related genes such as SOX2, CXCR4, MYC, KLF4, and OCT3/4, determined by qPCR, were significantly reduced after ES-Cu treatment ( D and D). These findings were confirmed at the protein level for SOX2 using western blot (WB) analysis ( E and E).
To further investigate our CSC-targeting hypothesis, we subjected adherent PDAC cells to a 3 day pretreatment regimen with increasing concentrations of elesclomol alone or in combination with 1 μM CuCl2. Subsequently, equal numbers of cells were seeded into ultra-low attachment (ULA) plates to assess changes in sphere-forming capacity or maintained under adherent conditions to observe changes in cell expansion ( F and F). After 3 days of pretreatment, neither elesclomol nor 1 μM CuCl2 alone caused significant changes compared to the control group. However, the combined ES-Cu treatment decreased cell viability dose dependently by 70%–90% ( G and G).
Under sphere-forming conditions, we observed a reduction in both the number and size of spheroids as the concentration of elesclomol increased ( H, 2I, and H). Specifically, treatment with elesclomol alone or 1 μM CuCl2 alone resulted in a slight increase in sphere size compared to the control group. In contrast, combining 20 nM elesclomol with 1 μM CuCl2 significantly suppressed both the number and size of spheres. At higher elesclomol concentrations, the inhibitory effect was even more pronounced, with only sporadic small spheroids observed ( H, 2I, and H).
These findings clearly validate that ES-Cu leads to a substantial reduction in CSC numbers and a loss of spheroid-forming capacity. Notably, there was no evidence of stemness phenotype restoration after discontinuing the treatment, suggesting a permanent elimination of CSCs. Although ES-Cu did not directly eliminate CD133− differentiated cancer cells ( C and A–S2C), ES-Cu pretreatment dose-dependently inhibited PDAC cell expansion under adherent conditions ( I and S2J). Together, these data indicate that ES-Cu efficiently eliminates pancreatic CSCs.

## Elesclomol-copper eliminates pancreatic CSCs through induction of cuproptosis
To investigate the link between ES-Cu-induced cell death and cuproptosis, primary PDAC cells cultured under spheroid conditions were treated on day 3 after seeding. Assessment of intracellular copper ion concentrations on day 7 revealed a significant 2- to 5-fold increase in cells treated with ES-Cu compared to the control group. Notably, cells treated with elesclomol or CuCl2 alone showed no significant change in intracellular copper ion concentrations ( A and A). 
Notably, in non-transformed cells—namely, human mature cardiomyocytes (AC16), fibroblasts (NIH-3T3), pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (HPDE), bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS-2B), and microglial cells (HMC3)—the ES-Cu combination treatment did not affect cell viability at elesclomol concentrations up to 100 nM ( B–S3F, left). Consistently, ES-Cu did not alter the intracellular copper ion concentration in these non-transformed cells ( B–S3F, right), suggesting that PDAC cells may have lost their ability to maintain copper ion concentrations at physiological levels during transformation.
Mechanistically, Western blot analysis showed that ES-Cu treatment resulted in a marked downregulation of Fe-S cluster proteins —established markers of cuproptosis—including ferredoxin 1 (FDX1), lipoic acid synthase (LIAS), aconitase 2 (ACO2), and succinate dehydogenase complex iron sulfur subunit B (SDHB), whereas elesclomol alone did not alter the levels of these proteins ( B and G).
In response to increased intracellular copper ion concentrations, cells commonly upregulate the copper efflux transporters ATP7A and ATP7B to maintain copper homeostasis and evade cuproptosis. Notably, qPCR data showed that PDAC cells significantly downregulated ATP7A in response to ES-Cu treatment ( C and H), whereas in non-transformed cells, ATP7A levels remained unchanged or even increased ( I and S3J). In contrast, ATP7B expression remained unchanged across all conditions, suggesting that the selective downregulation of ATP7A plays a dominant role in copper homeostasis under ES-Cu treatment.
When intracellular copper ion content surpasses homeostatic levels, copper ions bind to lipoylated proteins of the TCA (tricarboxylic acid) cycle, triggering protein oligomerization and consequent depletion of iron-sulfur cluster proteins. Immunofluorescence indicated that ES-Cu treatment resulted in the accumulation of lipoylated dihydrolipoamide S-acetyltransferase (DLAT) in mitochondria ( D and K).
Glutathione (GSH), a key component of the cellular antioxidant system responsible for clearing excess reactive oxygen species (ROS) and detoxifying exogenous substances, was markedly decreased by ES-Cu treatment ( E and L). This depletion increased oxidative stress, leading to intracellular ROS accumulation ( F and M). In response, PDAC cells upregulated antioxidant defense genes, including activation of transcription factor NRF2 and induction of GCLC, the catalytic subumit of glutamate-cysteine ligase that governs the rate-limiting step in GSH biosynthesis ( G, 3H, N, and S3O). Given that superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) is a copper/zinc-dependent antioxidant enzyme and aconitase is a redox-sensitive iron-sulfur cluster enzyme critical for the TCA cycle, we next assessed their enzymatic activity. ES-Cu significantly reduced both SOD1 and aconitase activity in PDAC cells ( I, 3J, P, and S3Q), while activity in non-malignant HPDE cells remained mostly unaffected ( R–S3Y). These findings are corroborated by our observations that ES-Cu does not impair mitochondrial function, redox balance, and metabolic enzyme function in non-malignant cells ( R–S3Y). Together, these data demonstrate that ES-Cu triggers cuproptosis preferentially in PDAC cells while sparing non-transformed cells.

## Cuproptosis sensitizes pancreatic CSCs to chemotherapy
Induction of cuproptosis may enhance the sensitivity of pancreatic CSCs to chemotherapy. To investigate this hypothesis, we combined ES-Cu with the first-line chemotherapy drug gemcitabine (GEM). We first assessed the sensitivity of our PDAC models to GEM at concentrations of 2 and 5 nM, both alone and in combination with ES-Cu. As shown in A and 4B, 2 nM GEM alone did not affect the viability of our two PDAC models. For lower ES concentrations (10–20 nM), the combination of ES-Cu and GEM resulted in a moderate increase in toxicity, while at ES concentrations of 40 nM and above, the combination led to a marked reduction in viability. Treatment with 5 nM GEM alone caused strong overall toxicity, mostly affecting differentiated PDAC cells, but could be further enhanced and expanded to CSCs by the addition of 40 nM ES-Cu ( A and 4B). We next used the highest single agent (HSA) model of the Combenefit tool to assess the synergistic effect of the two treatments. In SIC002 PDAC cells, the strongest synergy (HSA = 22) was observed for the combination of 40 nM ES-Cu and 5 nM GEM ( A). Expectedly, due to intertumoral heterogeneity, results varied between the different PDAC models tested, and for SIC007 PDAC cells, the strongest synergy (HSA = 24) was recorded for the combination of 40 nM ES-Cu and 2 nM GEM ( B). 
Next, we explored the combined toxicity of ES-Cu with albumin-bound paclitaxel (nab-paclitaxel, Abraxane [Abx]). As depicted in C and S4D, combining 35 ng/mL nab-paclitaxel with ES-Cu resulted in a 10%–30% increase in toxicity. The toxicity observed with 55 ng/mL nab-paclitaxel was higher and doubled when combined with ES-Cu. In spheroid formation experiments ( C and 4D), GEM alone had little impact at concentrations up to 10 nM. However, the combination of 10 nM GEM with ES-Cu significantly inhibited spheroid formation, almost entirely preventing the formation of medium to large spheres. SIC007 spheroids were more sensitive to GEM alone, and the combination of 2 nM GEM with ES-Cu achieved even greater toxicity ( E and 4F). The combination of Abx with ES-Cu also demonstrated strong inhibitory effects on spheroid formation ( E–S4H). Consistent results were obtained for murine primary CHX1990 PDAC cells ( G and 4H). Collectively, these findings demonstrate that the induction of cuproptosis in pancreatic CSCs enhances their sensitivity to standard-of-care chemotherapy.
To further investigate the mechanisms by which ES-Cu enhances sensitivity to chemotherapeutics such as GEM, we analyzed the expression of key drug transporters involved in GEM efflux and uptake. Our qPCR data revealed that ES-Cu downregulates ABCG2 (BCRP), an ATP-binding cassette efflux transporter responsible for GEM export, and decreases the GEM-induced upregulation of additional efflux transporters, including ABCB1, ABCC1, and ABCC5 ( I). On the other hand, apart from the concentrative nucleoside transporter (CNT) influx transporter SLC28A1, which was significantly upregulated ( J), other influx transporters from the CNT and equilibrative nucleoside transporter (ENT) families were not notably affected by ES-Cu treatment. Since ABC transporters are also involved in paclitaxel resistance, we further analyzed their regulation following treatment with paclitaxel alone or in combination with ES-Cu. Interestingly, the combination treatment suppressed paclitaxel-induced upregulation of ABCC5 and ABCC10 ( K), , suggesting that ES-Cu may also enhance paclitaxel efficacy by limiting efflux-mediated resistance. These findings indicate that ES-Cu sensitizes PDAC cells to chemotherapy by a dual mechanism: reducing stemness, as evidenced by reduced sphere formation, and modulating drug transporter expression to promote intracellular drug retention.

## Elesclomol-copper sulfide nanoparticles for targeting pancreatic CSCs
Conceptually, copper nanoparticles offer several therapeutic advantages over CuCl2, such as enhanced cellular uptake, improved stability, and the potential for tumor-specific targeting to reduce systemic toxicity. Therefore, we engineered hollow mesoporous copper sulfide (CuS) nanoparticles capable of gradual copper ion release within the cells ( A–S5F). These particles serve a dual purpose by substituting CuCl2 as a copper source and delivering incorporated drugs. We hypothesized that loading CuS nanoparticles with elesclomol would result in strong anti-cancer effects.
While 5–20 μg/mL of unloaded CuS nanoparticles showed only modest toxicity on pancreatic CSCs, increasing the dose to 40–75 μg/mL resulted in approximately 50% toxicity ( A and G). Combining CuS nanoparticles with 20 nM elesclomol shifted the dose-response curve to the left. Neither 5–10 μg/mL CuS nanoparticles nor 20 nM elesclomol alone altered intracellular copper ion concentrations compared to the control. However, their combination significantly enhanced intracellular copper ion concentrations to levels comparable to those achieved with 1 μM CuCl2 ( B and H). Notably, CuS nanoparticles can enter cells independently of elesclomol. However, once inside the cells, their degradation releases copper ions, and elesclomol enhances the transport of these ions into the mitochondria. This process is likely the primary reason for the elevated intracellular copper ion levels observed in cells treated with the combination of CuS nanoparticles and elesclomol. 
We then aimed to reproduce our results obtained with CuCl2 ( ) using CuS nanoparticles. Spheroid cultures were treated on day 3 after seeding with CuS nanoparticles, with or without elesclomol, which substantially inhibited sphere formation ( C and 5D). Similarly impressive results were obtained when PDAC cells were pretreated and subsequently transferred to untreated spheroid culture conditions ( E and 5F). Next, we loaded elesclomol into our hollow mesoporous CuS nanoparticles (CuS-ES) and found that these demonstrated similar toxicity to CuS nanoparticles plus exogenous elesclomol ( G). Consistent data were obtained for murine primary CHX1990 PDAC cells ( H and I). Notably, CuS-ES nanoparticles combined with GEM further enhanced the inhibitory effect on sphere formation.
Together, these findings demonstrate the strong potential of CuS-ES nanoparticles for eliminating pancreatic CSCs.

## In vivo treatment effects in advanced murine PDAC models
We next tested the in vivo activity of the Cu-ES combination using our fully immunocompetent and highly aggressive murine CHX1990 PDAC model ( A and A). Once tumors were established, as evidenced by IVIS imaging ( B), copper was administered orally as copper(II) gluconate, the copper salt of D-gluconic acid, while elesclomol was administered via intraperitoneal injection. By day 29, tumor progression was significantly reduced compared to the vehicle control group ( C). Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated that copper(II) gluconate + elesclomol significantly extends overall survival compared to control (0.9% NaCl) or elesclomol alone ( D). Consistent results were obtained using CuS-ES nanoparticles ( A). Compared to the control, elesclomol alone showed no inhibitory effect on PDAC progression, whereas both CuS nanoparticles combined with exogenous elesclomol and elesclomol-loaded CuS-ES nanoparticles exhibited a strong tumor-inhibitory effect ( B). Notably, copper ion concentrations in tumor tissues at the end of the treatment were 2- to 4-fold higher compared to control or elesclomol alone ( C). WB analysis revealed a marked and exclusive reduction in the expression of Fe-S cluster proteins in tumors treated with CuS-ES nanoparticles ( D). 
Finally, the additional administration of GEM resulted in an even stronger treatment response, with reduced disease progression during the first half of the treatment interval and stable disease during the second half ( E and S6F). Interestingly, copper ion concentrations in tumors treated with CuS-ES nanoparticles combined with GEM were markedly higher compared to tumors treated with CuS-ES nanoparticles alone ( G). WB analysis revealed that CuS-ES nanoparticles markedly downregulated key cuproptosis-related proteins, including FDX1, LIAS, and SDHB, while ACO-2 levels remained unchanged. Notably, the combined treatment with CuS-ES nanoparticles and GEM led to even stronger suppression of these proteins, supporting a synergistic effect on promoting cuproptosis ( H and S6I). Intriguingly, histological analysis of control tumors showed the expected low numbers of cytotoxic antitumor CD8+ T cells, whereas tumors treated with CuS-ES nanoparticles exhibited a strong enrichment of CD8+ T cells ( E and J). Mechanistically, in vitro data suggest that the enhanced influx of CD8+ T cells might be related to the CuS-ES-induced upregulation of the chemokines Cxcl9 and Cxcl10 ( F), which could facilitate the recruitment of immune cells, particularly cytotoxic T cells. 

## Discussion
The present study demonstrates that the combination of elesclomol and copper (ES-Cu) effectively induces cuproptosis in primary PDAC cells, preferentially targeting CSCs while sparing non-transformed cells. This strategy not only reduces CSC populations and spheroid-forming capacity but also enhances the sensitivity of PDAC cells to standard chemotherapies like GEM and nab-paclitaxel. Additionally, the use of copper sulfide nanoparticles loaded with elesclomol offers a promising approach for targeted delivery, improving cellular uptake and potentially reducing systemic toxicity. The in vivo efficacy observed in orthotopic murine PDAC models further supports the potential clinical applicability of this treatment modality.

## Selective targeting of pancreatic CSCs by ES-Cu
One of the critical findings of this study is the preferential targeting of pancreatic CSCs by ES-Cu. CSCs are known to contribute significantly to tumor progression, metastasis, and chemoresistance in PDAC. , , Our results show that ES-Cu treatment significantly reduces the proportion of CD133+ and CXCR4+ CSCs while inhibiting spheroid formation, a functional hallmark of CSCs. This effect was not observed for elesclomol or copper alone, suggesting a synergistic interaction that exploits specific vulnerabilities of CSCs.
The selective targeting of CSCs can be attributed to their reliance on mitochondrial metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation. , , CSCs exhibit high mitochondrial activity to meet their energy demands and support stemness-related functions. By inducing cuproptosis ES-Cu effectively disrupts the metabolic machinery of CSCs. This mechanism contrasts with conventional therapies that often fail to eliminate CSCs, leading to tumor recurrence and metastasis. , , 

## Mechanism of cuproptosis induction
ES-Cu treatment, but not elesclomol or copper alone, increases intracellular copper levels, leading to the accumulation of copper ions in mitochondria. Excess copper binds directly to lipoylated components of the TCA cycle enzymes, causing protein aggregation and the depletion of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster proteins. , WB analysis confirmed the downregulation of Fe-S cluster proteins such as FDX1, LIAS, ACO2, and SDHB, which are established markers of cuproptosis. , Interestingly, while ACO2 protein levels were reduced in vitro following ES-Cu treatment ( B), this effect was not observed in vivo in explanted tumors ( H and S6I). This discrepancy may be due to the complex tumor microenvironment in vivo, which can limit copper accumulation or activate compensatory mechanisms that preserve mitochondrial proteins such as ACO2. Additionally, ES-Cu treatment results in the accumulation of lipoylated DLAT in mitochondria and a marked decrease in GSH levels. The reduction in GSH compromises the antioxidant defense of PDAC cells, leading to increased ROS and oxidative stress. These events collectively contribute to mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death. In addition, ES-Cu treatment selectively inhibited the copper-dependent antioxidant enzyme SOD1 in PDAC cells, which may further increase oxidative stress specifically in tumor cells and enhance their susceptibility to cuproptosis without affecting normal tissue.
Importantly, non-transformed cells maintain their intracellular copper homeostasis and are not affected by ES-Cu treatment. This selectivity may be due to the upregulation of copper efflux transporters like ATP7A in normal cells, which is downregulated in PDAC cells upon ES-Cu treatment. The inability of cancer cells to regulate copper levels renders them susceptible to cuproptosis, highlighting a metabolic vulnerability that can be therapeutically exploited.

## Enhancement of chemotherapy sensitivity
Co-treatment with ES-Cu and standard-of-care PDAC chemotherapies, such as GEM and nab-paclitaxel, markedly increased cytotoxicity compared to GEM alone and significantly inhibited spheroid formation. This indicates that inducing cuproptosis via ES-Cu enhances CSC chemosensitivity and potentially overcomes both intrinsic and acquired resistance. The synergistic effect likely operates through two key mechanisms: (1) ES-Cu–mediated disruption of mitochondrial function, which is essential for maintaining stemness and may also lower the threshold for chemotherapy-induced cell death, reducing the threshold for chemotherapy-induced cell death, and (2) downregulation of multiple ABC transporters involved in GEM efflux, coupled with increased expression of certain influx transporters, collectively driving higher intracellular GEM levels. Consequently, incorporating ES-Cu into standard chemotherapeutic treatment regimens could lead to improved tumor control and better patient outcomes.

## In vivo efficacy in orthotopic murine PDAC models
Our in vivo studies using fully immunocompetent and highly aggressive murine orthotopic PDAC models demonstrated the efficacy of the ES-Cu combination, resulting in increased copper accumulation in tumor tissues and subsequent tumor growth reduction. The downregulation of Fe-S cluster proteins in tumor samples is consistent with the notion that cuproptosis is the mechanism of action in vivo. The addition of GEM enhanced the therapeutic effect, resulting in stable disease during the treatment period. These findings support the potential clinical applicability of ES-Cu and CuS-ES nanoparticles, offering a promising avenue for PDAC treatment.

## Advantages of CuS nanoparticles
The use of copper nanoparticles offers several therapeutic advantages over copper salts like CuCl2. Copper nanoparticles facilitate enhanced cellular uptake and provide a controlled release of copper ions within the acidic microenvironment of tumor cells. We have designed and synthesized highly versatile hollow mesoporous copper sulfide CuS nanoparticles and loaded them with elesclomol. These CuS nanoparticles achieved at least similar efficacy compared to the combination of CuS nanoparticles plus exogenous elesclomol. This dual-delivery system ensures that both copper and elesclomol reach cancer cells simultaneously, maximizing cuproptosis induction. Our data suggest that our CuS-ES nanoparticles could address pharmacokinetic challenges associated with the administration of free drugs and improve therapeutic outcomes. In future studies, these nanoparticles could be further advanced for tumor-specific targeting, e.g., using the VAR2CSA protein, potentially reducing systemic toxicity and side effects.

## Specificity and safety profile
A significant advantage of the ES-Cu treatment is its selectivity for cancer cells over non-transformed cells. Our data show that non-transformed cells such as cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts, and epithelial cells are unaffected by ES-Cu treatment in terms of viability, intracellular copper accumulation, ROS levels, and antioxidant capacity. This suggests a favorable therapeutic window and reduced risk of systemic toxicity. The selectivity may be due to the ability of normal cells to regulate copper homeostasis more effectively, possibly through the upregulation of copper efflux transporters ATP7A and maintenance of antioxidant defenses. In contrast, PDAC cells exhibit altered copper metabolism and reduced capacity to mitigate oxidative stress, rendering them highly vulnerable to cuproptosis.

## Comparison with previous clinical trials involving elesclomol
Elesclomol (codenamed STA-4783) has previously been evaluated in clinical trials as a monotherapy or in combination with chemotherapy in various cancers, including melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00888615, NCT00084214, NCT00087997, NCT00522834, and NCT00522834) , but has not yet been tested in PDAC. Notably, these trials did not demonstrate significant clinical benefits, leading to the discontinuation of further development. Our study provides a rationale for revisiting elesclomol by combining it with copper to more efficiently induce cuproptosis. The addition of copper overcomes limitations observed in prior studies, where insufficient intracellular copper may have hindered the efficacy of elesclomol. By specifically targeting the mitochondrial metabolism of CSCs, this combination could revitalize the clinical potential of elesclomol.

## Impact on PDAC treatment paradigm
PDAC remains one of the most lethal cancers, with limited effective treatment options. , , The current study and previous work , , support a paradigm shift toward targeting metabolic vulnerabilities and regulated cell death pathways in cancer treatment strategies. Furthermore, by selectively inducing cuproptosis in pancreatic cancer (stem) cells, ES-Cu addresses the challenges of chemoresistance and tumor recurrence. In addition to its direct effects on CSCs, our data further reveal that modulation of relevant drug transporter provides an additional mechanism by which ES-Cu sensitizes PDAC cells to chemotherapy and may contribute to overcoming resistance to GEM. This approach aligns with the emerging concept of precision medicine, where treatments are tailored to exploit specific characteristics of cancer cells. The potential to improve patient outcomes by integrating ES-Cu into existing treatment regimens represents a significant advancement in PDAC therapy.

## Mechanistic differences between cuproptosis and ferroptosis
While both cuproptosis and ferroptosis involve metal-induced cell death, they operate through distinct mechanisms. , , , Ferroptosis is characterized by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation and oxidative damage to cellular membranes, heavily reliant on disruptions in antioxidant defenses and lipid metabolism. In contrast, cuproptosis results from copper-induced proteotoxic stress in mitochondria, specifically targeting cells with high mitochondrial activity and reliance on lipoylated TCA cycle proteins. Targeting cuproptosis is particularly relevant for PDAC and its CSCs, given their reliance on mitochondrial metabolism. , , By exploiting this metabolic vulnerability, ES-Cu offers a novel therapeutic approach distinct from strategies aiming to induce ferroptosis. Future studies could explore combining agents that induce different forms of regulated cell death, such as mitophagy inhibition, to enhance therapeutic efficacy. 

## Limitations and future directions
Despite the promising results, several limitations warrant consideration. The long-term consequences of inducing cuproptosis in vivo remain to be fully understood. There is also the potential for cancer cells to develop resistance to cuproptosis induction over time. Further studies are needed to investigate these aspects and refine dosing strategies. Clinical translation of this therapy will require addressing challenges related to drug delivery, pharmacokinetics, and safety in humans. Phase 1 clinical trials to assess safety and efficacy represent a logical next step. Additionally, identifying biomarkers predictive of responsiveness to cuproptosis-based therapies could enhance patient selection and treatment outcomes.

## Conclusions
This study demonstrates that inducing cuproptosis through the combination of elesclomol and copper selectively targets pancreatic CSCs and enhances the efficacy of standard chemotherapy in PDAC. The use of CuS nanoparticles loaded with elesclomol offers a promising strategy for targeted delivery and improved therapeutic outcomes. By exploiting the metabolic vulnerabilities of CSCs and disrupting mitochondrial function, this approach provides a novel avenue for overcoming chemoresistance and improving PDAC outcomes.

## Materials and methods

## Reagents
The following reagents were used: Elesclomol (MedChemExpress HY-12040); CuCl2 (Sigma-Aldrich, 451665); copper(II) D-gluconate (Millipore Sigma, 344419); GEM (MedChemExpress, HY-17026); GEM HCl (Selleck Chemicals, S1149); nab-paclitaxel (Abx) (Selleck Chemicals, E1068); dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-358801); Roswell Park Memorial Institute Medium (RPMI) medium 1640 basic (Gibco, C11875500bt/C11875500cp); Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) high glucose (Yeasen, 41401ES76); DMEM/F-12 (BasalMedia, L320KJ); fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco, 10270106); B-27 (Thermo Scientific, 17504044); Dulbecco’s balanced salt solution (DPBS; Servicebio, G4200-500ML); Trypsin 0.25% EDTA (Thermo Scientific, 25200056); recombinant human FGF-basic (PeproTech, 100-18C-100μg); DLAT (4A4-B6-C10) mouse monoclonal antibody (mAb) (Cell Signaling Technology, 12362S); LIAS polyclonal antibody (Proteintech, 11577-1-AP); β-actin mouse mAb (Cell Signaling Technology, 3700S); SOX2 (D6D9) XP rabbit mAb (Cell Signaling Technology, 3579S); aconitase 2 antibody (Abcam, ab129069); SDHB antibody (Abcam, ab178423); ADX/FDX1 antibody (Abcam, ab108257); Alexa Fluor 647 goat anti-mouse (Abcam, ab150119); CD184 (CXCR4)-APC (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-120-708); CD133/2 antibodies (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-112-196); DAPI staining solution (absin, abs47047616); Fcr blocking reagent human (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-059-901); poly-D-lysine (Thermo Scientific, A3890401); Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS) with calcium, magnesium, and no phenol red (Servicebio, G4204-500ML); MitoTracker Orange CMTMRos (Thermo Scientific, M7510); 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) (Servicebio, G1101-500ML); Triton X-100 (Thermo Scientific, A16046); 5% bicinchoninic acid (BSA; Beyotime, ST023-200g); protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, 11873580001); BCA method (Beyotime, P0010); 5× trans-blot turbo (TBT) transfer buffer 1L (Bio-Rad, 10026938); radio-immunoprecipitation assay (RIPA; Thermo Scientific, 89900); skimmed milk powder (Beyotime, P0216-300g); 4× LDS buffer (Genscript, M00676-10); ExpressPlus PAGE gel, 10 × 8, 4%–20%, 10 wells (Genscript, M00656); Tris-MOPS-SDS running buffer (Genscript, M00138); transfer buffer (Genscript, M00139); primary antibody dilution buffer for WB (Epizyme, PS114); secondary antibody dilution buffer for WB (Epizyme, PS115); protein free rapid blocking buffer (1×) (Epizyme, PS108); PVDF (Immobilon-P, ZSEQ00010); WB stripping buffer (Epizyme, PS107); goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin (Ig)G (H+L) secondary antibody (Thermo Scientific, 31430); goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) secondary antibody (Thermo Scientific, 31460); dual-color pre-stained protein marker (Epizyme, WJ102L); Matrigel (ABW, 082704); the Annexin V-FITC/PI Apoptosis Detection Kit (Vazyme, A211-02); the Cell Copper (Cu) Colorimetric Assay Kit (Elabscience, E-BC-K775-M); the Copper (Cu2+) Colorimetric Assay Kit (Elabscience, E-BC-K300-M); the GSH and GSSG Assay Kit (Beyotime, S0053); the ROS Fluorometric Assay Kit (Elabscience, E-BC-K138-F); the SteadyPure Quick RNA Extraction Kit (Agbio, AG21023); the Primescript RT Reagent Kit with gDNA Eraser (Takara Bio, RR047A); SuperReal PreMix Plus SYBR Green (Tiangen, FP205); CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (Promega, G7570); Western ECL Substrate (Bio-Rad, 1605061); and the Aconitase Assay Kit (Abcam, ab109712).

## Culture of primary PDAC cells
SIC002 and SIC007 from PDAC patient samples were collected following patients' informed consent and propagated at Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (ref. 2013-0905-70). Cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C, 5% CO2, and constant humidity. Primary murine CHX1990 PDAC cells derived from KPC mice were cultured in DMEM/F12 media supplemented with 5% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C, 5% CO2, and constant humidity.

## 3D sphere cultures
Cells were seeded at 2,000 cells/well in 24-well ULA plates containing 1 mL of sphere culture medium, which is composed of 500 mL DMEM/F12, 2% B-27 supplement, 2 mM L-glutamine, 1% penicillin-streptomycin, 1 µg/mL amphotericin B (Fungizone), and 20 ng/mL bFGF. Cells were subjected to the indicated treatments on day 3. Formed spheres were imaged using Operetta (PerkinElmer) on day 7 and analyzed using ImageJ.

## Culture of primary cells
Human mature cardiomyocytes (AC16), pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (HPDE), bronchial epithelial cells (BEAS-2B), microglial cells (HMC3), and primary murine fibroblasts (NIH-3T3) were cultured in DMEM media supplemented with 10% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C, 5% CO2, and constant humidity.

## Cell viability assay
The cells were digested with TrypLE Express, and a cell suspension of single cells was obtained using a 20 μm filter. 1,000 cells/well PDAC cells were seeded in 384-well ULA plates containing 50 μL of sphere medium. After 48 h of incubation, compounds were treated alone or in combination with first-line therapies. After 5 days of culture, viability was measured using CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay following the manufacturer’s instructions, and luminescence was recorded using BioTek Synergy Neo2 (Agilent).

## Flow cytometry to detect cell apoptosis
Cell apoptosis was detected using Annexin V-FITC/PI kit. After trypsin digestion and resuspension in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), 100,000 cells were taken from each group. Annexin V-FITC (5 μL) and DAPI (5 μL) were sequentially added. After incubation in the dark for 15 min, the cells were collected and analyzed using the Attune NxT Flow Cytometer (Invitrogen) and analyzed using FlowJo v.10 software.

## Flow cytometry to detect stemness markers CD133 and CXCR4
Primary human PDAC cells or murine KPC cells were dissociated using TrypLE and subsequently incubated with an Fc receptor-blocking reagent. Cells were then stained with CD184 (CXCR4)-APC or CD133/2-APC antibodies or with isotype-matched REA control (S)-APC antibodies, following the manufacturer’s instructions. Dead cells were excluded using DAPI. The samples were then processed on the Attune NxT Flow Cytometer (Invitrogen) and analyzed using FlowJo v.10 software.

## Western blot analysis
Cells or tumor tissue were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer containing 1× protease inhibitor cocktail. The resulting protein was resolved on 4%–20% SurePAGE Bis-Tris protein gels and subsequently transferred to PVDF membranes. The membranes were blocked using a protein-free rapid blocking buffer for 10 min at room temperature, followed by overnight incubation with primary antibodies at 4°C. Following this step, the membranes were incubated with secondary antibodies at room temperature for 1 h, after which the blots were developed with Clarity western ECL substrate. Band quantification was performed using ImageJ. After initial detection of β-actin, membranes were stripped to allow reprobing with additional primary antibodies. Briefly, blots were incubated in 10–20 mL of stripping buffer (fast stripping buffer, PS107S, EpiZyme) for 20 min at room temperature with gentle agitation. Membranes were then thoroughly washed in TBST and blocked again in 5% non-fat milk in TBST for 1 h at room temperature before incubation with the subsequent primary antibody. Secondary antibodies were applied again under the same conditions before detection. This procedure ensures consistent loading controls and allows direct comparison across related experiments.

## Immunofluorescence
Cells were stained with MitoTracker probes in a 37°C staining solution for 45 min and then fixed with 4% PFA and permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100. After blocking with 5% BSA for 1 h, they were incubated with DLAT primary antibody (50 μL) at 4°C overnight. Post-primary incubation, cells were washed three times with PBS and incubated with Alexa Fluor 647 secondary antibody (1:500) for 1 h in the dark. Following secondary incubation, cells were washed again, and the silicone gasket was removed. Slides were air dried, mounted with DAPI-containing medium, covered with 24 × 24 mm coverslips, and sealed with nail polish. Images were acquired using a fluorescent microscope (Operetta, PerkinElmer).

## Intracellular copper concentration
The spheres were cultured at 15,000 cells/mL per well in 6-well ULA plates, each containing 2 mL of sphere medium. On day 3, the cells were subjected to the specified treatments. After a further 4 days, the cellular copper (Cu) content was assessed using the Cell Copper (Cu) Colorimetric Assay Kit (Elabscience, E-BC-K775-M) following the manufacturer’s protocol. To each sample containing 2 × 106 cells, 0.2 mL of reagent IV lysate was added. The samples were then thoroughly mixed and incubated on ice for 10 min to ensure complete cell lysis. The lysed samples were centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C to separate the supernatant from the cellular debris. The supernatant was carefully extracted for further analysis, with a portion reserved for protein concentration determination. 100 μL of the supernatant were transferred into each measurement well. 50 μL of chromogen working solution was added to each well, covered with a membrane, and incubated at 37°C for 5 min. Finally, the optical density (OD) at 580 nm was measured for each well using BioTek Synergy Neo2 (Agilent).
For the tumor tissue, we used double-distilled water as the homogenization medium to thoroughly homogenize the tissue samples. After homogenization, we used a centrifuge to separate the supernatant from the tissue debris and used the supernatant as the sample for measuring copper ion concentration. The copper (Cu) content was assessed using the Copper (Cu2+) Colorimetric Assay Kit (Elabscience, E-BC-K300-M) following the manufacturer’s protocol.

## Real-time qPCR analysis
Total RNA was isolated using the SteadyPure Quick RNA Extraction Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA synthesis was performed using the Primescript RT Reagent Kit with gDNA Eraser. qPCR analysis was conducted using SuperReal PreMix Plus (SYBR Green #FP205, Tiangen) and analyzed with the QuantStudio 6 Pro System (Thermo Scientific). Relative mRNA expression was calculated using the ΔΔCt method. Primer sequences are provided in . 

## Aconitase activity
The spheres were cultured at 15,000 cells/mL/well in 6-well plates (ULA) containing 2 mL of sphere medium. The cells were treated as indicated on day 3, and 4 days later, the aconitase activity was determined using the Aconitase Assay Kit (Colorimetric) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## SOD1 activity
The spheres were cultured at 15,000 cells/mL/well in 6-well plates (ULA) containing 2 mL of sphere medium. The cells were treated as indicated on day 3, and 4 days later, the SOD1 activity was determined using a Human SOD1 ELISA Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Intracellular GSH level
The spheres were cultured at 15,000 cells/mL/well in 6-well plates (ULA) containing 2 mL of sphere medium. The cells were treated as indicated on day 3, and 4 days later, the intracellular GSH level was determined using the GSH and GSSG Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Intracellular ROS level
The spheres were cultured at 15,000 cells/mL/well in 6-well ULA plates containing 2 mL of sphere medium. Treatment was started on day 3, and 4 days later, intracellular ROS levels were determined using the ROS Fluorometric Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After trypsin digestion and resuspension in PBS, 100,000 cells were taken from each group. 1× H2DCFDA was added, and after 30 min of incubation, cells were collected, processed on the Attune NxT Flow Cytometer (Invitrogen), and analyzed using FlowJo v.10 software.

## In vivo murine PDAC model
Murine PDAC cells (5,000 or 10,000) in 20 μL Matrigel derived from KPC mice were orthotopically injected into the pancreas or subcutaneously into the flanks of 6- to 8-week-old C57BL/6 mice, as described previously. , , All animal procedures adhered to the 3R principles and institutional animal care regulations (Shanghai Jiao Tong University project approval A-2020-004).

## Preparation of CuS nanoparticles and CuS-ES nanoparticles
For nanoparticle synthesis, 2.4 g polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP K30, molecular weight [MW] = 40,000, Aladdin), 1 mL CuSO4 (0.5 M, Sigma) and 250 mL NaOH (pH 9.0, Aladdin) were sequentially added to 250 mL ultrapure water. The mixture was added dropwise with 64 μL hydrazine hydrate (25 wt %, Sigma), stirred for 5 min, added with 2.8 mL (NH4)2S aqueous solution (20 wt %, Aladdin), and stirred in an oil bath at 60°C for 2 h. The resulting precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 18,000 × g for 10 min and washed three times with ultrapure water. To prepare elesclomol-loaded CuS nanoparticles, the CuS nanoparticles (1 mg) were mixed with 50 μL elesclomol (40 mg/mL) in 910 μL of ultrapure water. Subsequently, 40 μL Kolliphor EL (Sigma-Aldrich) was added dropwise, and the mixture was stirred at room temperature overnight at 500 rpm. CuS-ES nanoparticles were collected by centrifugation and washed three times with ultrapure water. To calculate the drug loading levels, the CuS-ES nanoparticles were incubated with 1 mL SDS (6 wt %), sonicated for 10 min, constantly shaken for another 30 min, and centrifuged to collect the supernatant. The washing procedure was performed three times, and the supernatants were pooled to measure the elesclomol concentration by analyzing its characteristic absorption peak at 280 nm.

## Copper(II) gluconate + ES treatment
Murine CHX1990 cells (5,000 cells in 20 μL Matrigel) were orthotopically injected into the pancreas of 6-week-old C57BL/6 mice. On day 14, the mice were randomly divided into two groups according to the IVIS imaging. The mice were intraperitoneally administered ES (10 mg/kg body weight) and intragastric administration with copper(II) gluconate (50 μg/mouse) every third day, for ten injections in total. IVIS imaging of the tumors was recorded every 7 days. After completion of the treatments, tumor tissues were collected for subsequent analyses.

## CuS-ES nanoparticle treatment
A CHX1990 tumor model was established by subcutaneously injecting murine CHX1990 cells (10,000 cells in 20 μL Matrigel) into the right flank of mice on day 0. On day 42, when the tumor volume had reached ≈120 mm3, mice were randomly assigned to four groups: 0.9% NaCl, ES, CuS nanoparticles plus ES, and CuS nanoparticles loaded with elesclomol (CuS-ES nanoparticles) (n = 7 each). Mice received 10 intratumoral injections of ES, CuS nanoparticles, or CuS-ES nanoparticles (5 mg/kg body weight). The volume of the tumors was recorded every 7 days. After completion of the treatments, tumor tissues were collected for subsequent analyses.

## CuS-ES nanoparticle + GEM combined treatment
A CHX1990 tumor model was established by subcutaneously injecting murine CHX1990 cells (10,000 cells in 20 μL Matrigel) into the right flank of mice on day 0. On day 49, when the tumor volume reached ≈120 mm3, the mice were randomly divided into six groups: 0.9% NaCl, GEM, ES, CuS nanoparticles, CuS-ES nanoparticles, and CuS-ES nanoparticles + GEM (n = 7). The mice were intraperitoneally administered GEM (70 mg/kg body weight) once per week for 3 weeks and received intratumoral injections of ES, CuS nanoparticles, and CuS-ES nanoparticles (5 mg/kg body weight) for a total of 10 injections. The volume of the tumors was recorded every 7 days. After completion of the treatments, tumor tissues were collected for subsequent analyses.

## Statistical analyses
Data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) unless otherwise specified. Statistical comparisons were performed using parametric tests, such as ANOVA, following confirmation of normality with the Shapiro-Wilk test. Survival differences were assessed using the log rank test. Significance was defined as ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, and ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 10.0 software or SPSS v.26.

## Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Bioinformatics Core of the Center for Single-Cell Omics (CSCOmics), Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, for providing bioinformatic support and high-performance computing services. This work was supported by the 10.13039/501100001809National Science Foundation of China (NSFC; 82130074 and 82250710179 to C.H.); the 10.13039/501100003395Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (2021-01-07-00-02-E00090 to C.H.); the Shanghai Pujiang Program (grant no. 21PJ1408800 to Y.M.); the ERC Advanced Investigator Grant (grant no. Pa-CSC 233460 to C.H.); the European Community's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) under grant agreement no. 602783 (grant ID CAM-PaC to C.H.); FPRC 5 per mille Ministero della Salute 2017 PTCRC-Intra 2020 (to C.H.); FPRC 5 per mille Ministero della Salute 2018 ADVANCE (to C.H.); FPRC 5 per mille Ministero della Salute 2022 CARESS (to C.H.); the Italian Ministry of Health, Ricerca Corrente 2025 (to C.H.); the Fondazione AIRC per la ricerca sul cancro (IG 2023 ID 28933 to C.H.); and the Ministry of Science and Technology (NSTC), Taiwan (grant nos. 113-2314-B-039-073-MY3 and 114-2314-B-039-070-MY3 to A.A.).

## Author contributions
Q.Y. developed the study concept, established methodologies for data acquisition, analyzed and interpreted the data, performed the statistical analysis, and contributed to the writing and the revision of the manuscript. K.J. contributed to the in vivo study design, acquired and interpreted in vivo data, performed the statistical analysis, and contributed to the revision of the manuscript. S.M. developed and produced the elesclomol-loaded copper nanoparticles. Q.Z. helped with the design and execution of in
vivo studies. S.T. helped with the flow cytometry analysis. C.R. and B.S. developed the human and murine PDAC models, C.W. and B.S. collected patient samples. A.A. contributed to data analyses, interpretation, and manuscript editing. H.S. contributed to the conception and study design, development of the copper nanoparticles, and revising the manuscript. Y.M. contributed to the conception and study design, analyzed and interpreted the data, acquired funding, and revised the manuscript, and C.H. developed the conception and study design, analyzed and interpreted the data, acquired funding, and wrote the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2025.09.004.