379blackwellopenChemistry & BiodiversityChem BiodiversPMC1243542212435422124354224024486610.1002/cbdv.202402940Promising Prodiginins Biological Activities
LadettoMaría F GantnerMelisa E Rodenak‐KladniewBoris E RodriguezSantiago CuestasMaría L TaleviAlan CastroGuillermo R 
1
Laboratorio de Nanobiomateriales, CINDEFI‐Departamento de Química, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, CONICET‐UNLP (CCT La Plata), La Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina
2
Institute for Research in Microbiology and Medical Parasitology (IMPaM), University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina
3
Laboratorio de Investigación y Desarrollo de Bioactivos (LIDeB), Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata (UNLP), La Plata, Buenos Aires, Argentina
4
Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de La Plata (INIBIOLP), CONICET‐UNLP, CCT‐La Plata, Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, La Plata, Argentina
5
Nanomedicine Research Unit (Nanomed), Center for Natural and Human Sciences, Federal University of ABC (UFABC), Santo Andre, Sao Paulo, Brazil✉Corresponding author.
652025229e202402940e2024029401692025© 2025 The Author(s). Chemistry & Biodiversity published by Wiley‐VHCA AG.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## ABSTRACT
Prodiginins are a large family of at least 34 pyrrolic compounds, including the well‐studied red pigment prodigiosin. Prodiginins are produced by several microorganisms displaying broad biological activities, including antimicrobial, antiviral, antiparasitic, antiproliferative, and immunosuppressive activities. The present review aims to compile and analyze the main physicochemical and biological properties and mechanisms of action of prodiginins for microbial disease treatment, particularly SARS‐CoV‐2 disease and opportunistic infections related to COVID‐19. The interaction of prodigiosin, as a model molecule, with cellular membranes, potential drug delivery devices, and toxicological studies, and in silico studies using molecular dynamics showed that the prodigiosin motif, which interacts with lipids, opens a new door for the potential therapeutic use of prodiginins.
Keywords: antiviral, biocide activities, drug delivery models, in silico studies, nanodevices, prodiginins, prodigiosin

 

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Apr 10; Received 2024 Nov 12; Accepted 2025 Apr 17; Issue date 2025 Sep.

1.

## Introduction
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), until October 13, 2024, the number of confirmed accumulated coronavirus disease (COVID‐19) cases worldwide has increased to over 776 million, with more than 7 million cumulative deaths. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV2) has emerged as the 11th global pandemic, with the highest infectivity and lowest infection fatality rate [ ].
The inhalation of air‐contaminated droplets transmits COVID‐19. Most patients infected with SARS‐CoV2 exhibit mild or moderate symptoms that disappear after 6–10 days. However, almost 20% of the patients develop serious complications associated with high lethality, including atypical bilateral pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) [ ]. Apart from causing respiratory symptoms, SARS‐CoV‐2 can also significantly affect the cardiovascular [ ] and central nervous systems [ ].
In the early phase of infection, the virus penetrates lung tissue and multiplies quickly after interacting with angiotensin‐converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors in the respiratory epithelium of the upper respiratory tract with the help of transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) [ ]. In particular, ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are vastly expressed in the lungs, as well as in the heart, blood vessels, kidneys, and gastrointestinal smooth muscle [ ], which may explain the tropism of SARS‐CoV‐2 to various cell types and tissues [ , ].
At this early stage of infection, the viral load is low, and the immune system is activated to defend against this pathogen, restricting its replication and further dissemination. In the middle stage of the disease, tissue injury caused by the pathogen may lead to increased production of proinflammatory cytokines, macrophages, and granulocytes. Vasodilation and endothelial permeability facilitate this inflammatory process, resulting in a cytokine storm that characterizes the later stages of the disease. At this stage, a high viral load, hyperinflammation, and apoptosis of epithelial cells occur; the virus reaches the lung alveoli, producing diffuse alveolar damage with severe inflammatory exudation. Finally, ARDS develops, characterized by systemic organ dysfunction associated with the lymphocyte number reduction in the peripheral blood (i.e., lymphopenia) [ , ]. According to this, COVID‐19 patients always have immunosuppression with CD4+ T and CD8+ T cells decrease [ ], which leads to bacterial and fungal infections as common complications of SARS‐CoV‐2 pneumonia, especially in critically ill patients. This has led to an increased need for intensive care and mortality rates. Secondary infections were found in 50% of non‐surviving COVID‐19 patients [ ].
In addition, in severe COVID‐19 cases, massive endothelial dysfunction, extensive coagulopathy, and thrombosis caused by the complement system function could result in the development of systemic microangiopathy and thromboembolism. These complications are life‐threatening and can cause multiple organ dysfunctions, including myocarditis, heart failure, pulmonary edema, hypoxia, and kidney damage [ ].
In recent decades, the world's pressure on products from natural sources to replace artificial chemical compounds in consumable goods has increased considerably in all industrial fields. One area of intense research has focused on microbial pigment screening for use in foods, beverages, textiles, and medicine. Numerous microorganisms have a significant capacity to synthesize and produce pigments with different chemical features and many biological activities, which could be used to develop new products for several biotechnological applications [ , ].
Development and characterization of new molecules with therapeutic uses are essential in infectious disease treatments because the intensive use (and abuse) of antibiotics has led to the development of multidrug‐resistant (MDR) microorganisms. Therefore, WHO declared “antibiotic emergency” [ ]. However, the discovery of novel anti‐infectious agents has been, with some exceptions, outside the main scope of major pharmaceutical industries. This declining interest has been attributed to several causes [ , , ], such as relatively low return on investment (because of potentially shorter life cycles owing to drug resistance issues and comparatively shorter duration of treatment regimens than other therapeutic classes), regulatory requirements of large and complex clinical trials by regulatory agencies, a high attrition rates during development.
Current approaches to addressing novel anti‐infective agent discovery include chemical modification of marketed drugs and screening for new compounds from wild‐type microbial isolates and other natural sources, as natural products persist as major sources of novel compounds with antimicrobial and antiviral activity [ , ].
Microbial pigments possess potential beneficial biological activities such as photoprotective, antioxidant, antiparasitic, antiviral, antibacterial, and anticancer activities [ , ]. Antiviral compounds have influenced a diversity of viral functions, including inhibition of viral protein related to adherence and entry into host cells, viral genetic material integration into the host DNA, inhibition of viral genome transcription, protein viral synthesis, and viral release from the host cell. In general, many antiviral medications target the cell surface receptors and enzymes that facilitate the entry of viral particles into host cells and take command of the host cell machinery [ , ].
The origin of the word “prodigiosin” is accredited to the early isolation from the red microorganism mistakenly named Bacillus prodigiosus, which was reclassified and renamed Serratia marcescens [ ]. In the last 40 years, many “red microorganisms” have been isolated and characterized, some of which not only produce prodigiosin (PG) but also analog compounds. All these related compounds are grouped under the generic denomination of prodiginins (PGNs). They are a family of microbial red alkaloidal pigments produced as secondary metabolites that share a distinctive basic tripyrrol chemical structure. Some PGNs display many beneficial biological activities, such as antiproliferative, antiparasitic, antioxidant, antibacterial, and anti‐inflammatory. Diverse PGNs have been discovered in several microorganisms with ubiquitous niches worldwide. Members of different microbial genera such as Actinomadura, Alteromonas, Hahella, Janthinobacterium, Pseudoalteromonas, Pseudomonas, Serratia, Streptomyces, Vibrio, and Zooshikella can produce PGNs [ , ]. Whereas PGNs synthesized by microorganisms can be found in nature, they can also be obtained by chemical synthesis and/or mutagenesis of PG producer strains [ , , ].
PG is the most studied pigment among PGNs and has been the focus of recent reviews [ , ]. It possesses several biological properties, easily scalable obtention processes, and reduced toxicity to both ecosystems and human health [ ]. Several studies on its antimicrobial [ , , , ], anticancer [ , , , ], antiplasmodial [ ], and antioxidant activities [ , ] have been conducted. However, the main reports were centered on PG, other potentially beneficial biological activities such as antiviral activity are still scarcely studied in other PGNs.

2.

## Properties of PGNs
PGNs are a large family of compounds produced by many microorganisms of different genera and species and by chemical synthesis.
However, all PGNs share a basic tripyrrol linear structure called prodigidiosinide (i.e., pyrrolyldipyrrolylmethene) and differentiate by the presence of different linear or cyclic substituents. Some molecular structures and properties of molecules that belong to the PGN family are shown in Figure  and Table  .
 In general, the production of PGNs requires low‐cost media that may mainly contain byproducts and/or agro‐industrial wastes (i.e., corn bran, straw, stalks, etc.), brown sugar, oils (i.e., palm oil, soya oil), or agro‐industrial wastes (i.e., corn bran, straw, stalks, etc.) [ , ].
PG has the molecular formula C20H25N3O and is made up of three rings that create a pyrrolylpyrromethane skeleton with a methoxy group at C4. PG was isolated and characterized from many microbial strains belonging to g‐proteobacteria such as Serratia spp., Janthinobacterium lividum, Pseudomonas magneslorubra, Vibrio psychroerythrous, Pseudovibrio denitrificans, amongst others [ ]. Besides, S. marcescens strains are the main PG producers with a high titer ranging between 8 and 49 g/L depending on experimental conditions and strains [ , ]. However, different PG derivatives have been obtained in Serratia spp. Genetic modification and Streptomyces spp. by modifying culture conditions recently reviewed [ ]. Natural and chemical syntheses of different PG derivatives have been reported, leading to variable yields and mixtures [ , ]. Importantly, PG and noncyclic PG can appear in pH‐dependent isomer equilibrium (Figure  ). The interaction of the acyclic oxygen with protonated nitrogen can be observed at acid pH, meanwhile, N⋯H─N can be detected at alkaline pH [ ]. All PGNs share similar physicochemical properties, such as being insoluble in aqueous media (i.e., logp ≫ 1), and soluble in organic solvents such as alcohols, acetonitrile, chloroform, and ether. In addition, all PGNs are light sensitive [ ].
 PGNs can be broadly classified from their chemical structure into linear or cyclic (Figure  ).
In general, cyclic structures are associated with the pyrrole ring C (Figure  ); these are produced by some microbial strains (i.e., Streptomyces spp.) but also chemically synthesized as shown in Table  . In both cases, different strategies must be implemented to obtain pure compounds. In the case of PGN biosynthesis, some strains produce more than one type of PGN. For example, fermentation by Vibrio sp. strain KSJ45 leads to three different PGNs, with various concentrations, in batch fermentation: PG and cycloprodigiosin are expressed in low quantities whereas undecylprodigiosin is the major compound [ ]. Similarly, Saccharopolyspora spp. synthesizes metacycloprodigiosin and undecylprodigiosin, which showed high cytotoxic activities against five cancer cell lines [ ]. A more complex situation was observed in the case of Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 11594 is isolated from deep‐sea sediment, which produces several compounds with many biological activities. Among these are undecylprodigiosin and metacycloprodigiosin [ ]. Another example showing the complexity of the metabolic network of PGN synthesis is a strain isolated at 320 m depth in the Sea of Japan, named 1020R, closely related to Pseudoalteromonas rubra strains. Seven secondary metabolites with tripyrrol structure were detected in the 1020R strain but only four were identified, including PG. They all displayed many alkylated side‐chain rings from butyl to heptyl residues at C3 at a C‐pyrrole ring [ ].
In addition, to date, only S. marcescens has been able to produce PG in the large quantities required for industrial development. Most of the research has focused on Serratia spp. strains because of the high PG production (from 0.28 to 49.5 mg/mL), and the absence of other analogs and precursor molecules in significant quantities [ , ]. The high PGNs production in Hahella chejuensis, Streptomyces spp., and Achromobacter denitrificans were reported, in contrast, is generally lower than 1.7 mg/mL [ , – ]. It is worth mentioning that in many strains the production and composition of PGNs are highly dependent on culture conditions such as media composition and physiochemical parameters (i.e., temperature, pH, ionic strength, stirring, flow rate, etc.) [ ]. Moreover, the production and purification of PGNs is related to the microbial source, since PGNs in Gram‐negative bacteria are typically associated with the membrane, whereas in Gram‐positive microorganisms such as Streptomycetes spp. it can be found in the mycelium. Still, many efforts are being made to produce new PGNs from nature and/or to synthesize them using different strategies.
A recent exhaustive literature review reported 34 different PGNs produced in nature with very diverse chemical structures. The review also summarized the genetic mechanisms of biosynthesis of the main biological activities of reported PGNs related to antimicrobial, antimalarial, and anticancer activities [ ].
In a pioneering study, mutasynthesis‐based genetic engineering of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 produced 13 different PGNs [ ]. The study reported high cytotoxic activity of 1‐methyl‐2‐n‐propyl‐prodigiosin against the MCF‐7 breast cancer cell line, twice as potent as PG and Obatoclax (OBX) (i.e., an anticancer PGN that reached clinical trials). A similar approach was developed on S. marcescens, which allowed the biosynthesis of diverse PGN molecules not found in the native strain and expressed in Escherichia coli recombinant strains followed by a final step using a biocatalyst to produce ten different tripyrrol alkaloids with potential biological applications. The PGN derivatives were tested against the fungi Sclerotinia sclerotiorum and Phoma lingam, which are common plant pathogens and showed good antifungal activity. While tests using seven PGNs showed high activity against the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, only PG exhibited activity against the plant parasite Heterodera schachtii [ ].
Twenty‐six novel PGNs derived from nonylprodigiosin were chemically synthesized combining diverse strategies and several chemical reactions [ ]. Three of these new PGNs suppressed the proliferation of murine spleen cells, and acid vacuolization of baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells. The same group developed a similar approach starting with a precursor of butylcycloheptylprodigiosin (BCHPG) to obtain new PGNs. DNA‐cleavage of ϕX174 bacteriophages with BCHPG analogs in the Cu(II) presence revealed different nicking activities [ ].
However, chemical synthesis presents contamination risks by catalysts (i.e., mostly heavy metals with moderate to high toxicity). Furthermore, the presence of intermediary products and catalyst residues requires for therapeutic applications many purification steps, expensive equipment, highly trained personnel, and expertise, make it very time‐consuming. Furthermore, biological mutant strains that can synthesize nonnatural novel PGNs are generally unstable and consequently difficult to scale for industrial production.

3.

## Anticancer Activities of PGNs
Anticancer activity is among the most studied biological activities of PGNs (Table ). Although PGNs exhibited multiple anticancer mechanisms, underlying mode(s) of action have not been fully elucidated. The mechanisms described include the induction of apoptosis in several cancer cell lines through the interference of key signaling pathways, deleterious activities on mitochondrial function, and modulation of cell cycle regulators [ ]. Interestingly, the administration of PG to cancer cell lines interfere with key metabolic pathways involved in cell transformation and survival; apoptosis induction has also been observed at higher concentrations [ ].
 Studies carried out in the breast cancer cell line MCF‐7 showed that PG enhanced expression of cyclin‐dependent kinase inhibitor (i.e., p21 or CDKN1A), a tumor suppressor responsible for cell proliferation inhibition and acts as an apoptotic inductor, independent of the expression of the cancer p53 transcription factor. The underlying mechanisms of this effect involved the inhibition of oxidative mitochondrial phosphorylation and glucose uptake via PG interaction with glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1), causing cell starvation and death [ , ].
PG interference in cell metabolism is seemingly related to the transcriptional repression of the S‐phase kinase‐associated protein 2 (SKP2) gene detected in several human cancers with adverse prognoses. The underlying mechanisms involve the inhibition of protein kinase B required for the transcriptional activation of SKP2. Since the product of SPK2, the protein kinase 2, contributes to p27KIPI depletion, its inhibition and consequent stabilization of p27KIPI can lead to cell cycle arrest in the G1 phase, with antiproliferative results [ ]. PG has been shown to strongly inhibit Wnt/β‐catenin in breast cancer cell lines MDA‐MB‐231 and MDA‐MB‐468 plays a crucial role in cell differentiation, proliferation and migration, invasion, apoptosis, and tissue homeostasis. Its overexpression is associated with malformations, osteoporosis, and cancer [ ]. PG prevents phosphorylation of Dishevelled 2 (DVL2) and lipoprotein receptor–related protein 6 (LRP6) and activates glycogen synthase kinase‐3β (GSK3β) leading to the suppression of the Wnt gene, reducing cyclin D1 and driving the cells to apoptosis [ , ]. In further study, in human choriocarcinoma (JEG3) and prostate cancer (PC3) cell lines, protein members of the inhibitors of apoptosis (IAP) including the XIAP, survivin, cIAP‐1, and cIAP‐2 were downregulated by PG concomitantly with the activation of caspase‐3 and caspase‐9, and the proteolysis of poly(ADP‐ribose)‐polymerase [ , ].
In earlier studies, the dual inhibition of topoisomerases I and II by PG via DNA intercalation was observed in the cancer cell lines MCF‐7 (human breast adenocarcinoma) and Jurkat E6‐1 clone (acute human lymphocyte leukemia cells). Intercalation showed some preference for alternating base pairs but with no discrimination between AT or CG sequences; the effects of PG also involved the abolition of topoisomerase I and II activity and subsequent DNA cleavage [ ].
PG‐induced DNA damage has also been associated with the downregulation of RAD51 mRNA, whose protein is a recombinase in DNA repair by homologous recombination. The RAD51 mRNA downregulation mediated PG involves the phosphorylation of mitogen‐activated protein kinases (MAPK), and c‐Jun N‐terminal kinases (JNK). Importantly, RAD51 is overexpressed and linked to the resistance to DNA‐breaking drugs and radiation treatment observed in several human tumors, among them breast, colon, lung, and prostate cancers [ ]
In addition, PG produces changes in the intracellular pH by sequestering H+ and altering the co‐transport of the H+/Cl− symporter, disrupting the electron transport in mitochondria depleting the synthesis of ATP and creating an acidic cytoplasmatic environment that activates caspase as a proapoptotic event. The cytoplasm acidification by PG also triggers the protooncogene B‐cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl‐2) producing the Bcl‐2 protein family. BCL‐2 family proteins play a relevant dual role with two fractions prosurvival (MCL‐1, BCL‐2, and BCL‐XL) and proapoptotic (i.e., BID, BIM, and PUMA). PG binds to several Bcl‐2 prosurvival proteins such as MCL‐1, BCL‐2, and BCL‐XL inducing conformational changes in these proteins and interrupting their antiapoptotic roles. In addition, PG interacts with two proapoptotic fractions BH3 only proteins interact with the BAX and BAK death effectors that oligomerize creating pores in the mitochondria and releasing cytochrome C from the mitochondria with the consequent cell death [ , ].
Another interesting study reported the restoration of p53 transcription factor activity involved in tumor repression via p73 activation by PG in several colorectal cancer (CRC) stem cells (i.e., DLD1, HCT116, SW480, and SW620 cell lines). In addition, PG reduced the 5‐fluorouracil (5‐FU) drug resistance in a dose‐dependent concentration [ ].
The authors identified the mTOR target in a study using the cell lines SK‐MEL‐5 and SK‐MEL‐28 melanoma cancer to compare the PG and OBX cytotoxic effects [ ]. The mTOR is a serine–threonine kinase used as the target for rapamycin that operates through two different complexes, mTORC1, and mTORC2 working in the central metabolism involved in cell proliferation and growth, resistance to apoptosis, and energetic metabolism. PG and OBX depleted both mTOR complexes via AKT at S473 phosphorylation reduction with enhanced cell death [ ]. In recent work, using MDA‐MB‐231 metastatic breast cancer cell line combined with PG and PU‐H71 drug exhibited the mTOR reduction levels, reduction of mRNA of BCL2, as well as the induction of caspases, elevated levels of BAX which correlated with massive apoptosis [ ].
The PGNs produced by the microbial strain 1020R include, besides PG, 2‐methyl‐3‐heptyl‐prodiginine, 2‐methyl‐3‐hexyl‐prodiginine, and 2‐methyl‐3‐butyl‐prodiginine. Interestingly, the cytotoxicity of these PGNs in the U937 leukemia cell line is inversely proportional to the length of the alkyl substituent and associated with the induction of apoptosis mediated by caspase‐3 activation [ ].
The anticancer activity of cycloprodigiosin produced by Pseudoalteromonas denitrificans and Zooshikella rubidus S1‐1 was reported many years ago [ , ]. Studies in liver cancer cell lines and hepatocellular carcinoma xenografts developed in nude mice showed high apoptotic activity of cycloprodigiosin, which was attributed to the acidification of cytoplasm mediated by the H+/Cl− symporter activity. The cytotoxic activity of cycloprodigiosin was later confirmed in several breast, colon, and liver cancer cell lines [ ]. In addition, the authors found that this effect is associated with the stimulation of nitric oxide and the suppressive effect of NF‐κB gene expression. Interestingly, the inhibitory effects of cycloprodigiosin on the synthesis of NF‐κB conduce simultaneously to immunoregulatory and antitumoral activities [ ].
A chemical derivative of PG, OBX, and derivative OBX mesylate, also known as GX15‐070 and GX15‐070MS, was developed for cancer treatment to inhibit the family of Bcl‐2 proteins, involved in key roles of cellular apoptosis [ ].
Several Phase I and II clinical trials using OBX were conducted to treat solid tumors and hematological malignancies showing mixed results. Additional analysis indicated that OBX may be combined with other anticancer drugs to achieve increased efficacy against hematological malignancies [ , , ].
It has been reported that OBX may be used as a sensitizer that can be successfully combined with a variety of chemotherapeutic drugs. Examples include OBX combination therapy with proteasome inhibitors (e.g., bortezomib and carfilzomib) for small cell lung cancer, and antibodies (e.g., anti‐PD‐1 antibody for hepato‐cellular carcinoma) plus cisplatin [ , , ].

Streptomyces griseoviridis 2464‐S5 synthesize roseophilin, a tripyrrole molecule belonging to the PGNs family, and PG R2 (Figure  ). Interestingly, PG R2 showed high cytotoxicity to HeLa, a human cervical carcinoma cell line, and HT1080, a human fibrosarcoma cell line [ ].
 PGNs exhibit broad anticancer action against lung cancer cells, CRC, breast cancer, triple‐negative breast cancer, and urothelial carcinoma, among other cancer types. Furthermore, PGNs act as sensitizers increasing the effect of commercial anticancer drugs such as doxorubicin, cisplatin, 5‐FU, and paclitaxel (PTX) [ , , , ].
Based on the experimental results, PGNs are promising, and flexible therapeutic agents highlighted by their capacity to produce apoptosis and make cancer cells more responsive to current therapies.
In addition, the antimicrobial and antiparasitic activities of PDGs have been extensively reviewed recently and are outside the scope of the present review [ , ]. However, the high similarity of PDG chemical structures does not imply similar bioactivity profiles, which strongly suggests that PGNs require more in‐depth studies to search for novel biological applications.

4.

## SARS‐CoV‐2‐Associated Microbial Infections
Approximately 5%–30% of COVID‐19 patients become critically ill and require intensive care unit (ICU) admission [ ]. ICU patients, especially those undergoing mechanical ventilation or having a long hospital stay (even as long as 50 days), are at greater risk of developing bacterial or fungal infections during the middle and later stages of the disease. As mentioned above, severe COVID‐19 is associated with immune dysregulation, affecting T‐helper cell 2 (Th2) and Th1 responses, including cytokine release syndrome, which contributes to lung pathology and promotes pulmonary microbial proliferation and subsequent infection [ ]. Critically ill COVID‐19 patients have higher levels of pro‐inflammatory (IL‐1, IL‐2, IL‐6, and tumor necrosis alpha) and anti‐inflammatory (IL‐4 and IL‐10) cytokines, lower CD4 interferon‐gamma expression, and fewer CD4 and CD8 cells. This severe clinical situation increases the risk of invasive fungal infections (IFI) such as invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA), invasive candidiasis (IC), and Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) [ , , ].
Coronavirus‐associated pulmonary aspergillosis (CAPA), as influenza‐associated pulmonary aspergillosis (IAPA), has been a concern in COVID‐19 patients, occurring in 8.6% of patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome, mainly in those requiring admission to the ICU and mechanical ventilation [ ]. Similarly, candidemia has been described in 2.5%–6.9% of COVID‐19 patients in the ICU, mainly catheter‐related infections, and often with unfavorable outcomes [ , ]. In this regard, the wide use of antibiotics, corticosteroids, and central venous catheters, along with the damage exerted by SARS‐CoV‐2 among patients with ARDS, may allow commensal Candida spp. cells to invade internal organs [ ].
Microbial co‐infections are associated with increased morbidity and mortality rates among patients with respiratory viral infections, including COVID‐19 and influenza. Numerous studies have described an association between COVID‐19 and opportunistic microbial infections, many classified as nosocomial or hospital‐acquired infections [ ].
It was reported that the most frequent causative agents of ICU‐acquired bacterial bloodstream infections are coagulase‐negative staphylococci (24%), Enterococcus faecalis (18%), and Staphylococcus aureus (13%) [ ].
Another study of COVID‐19 patients admitted to the ICU reported that all patients had bacterial co‐infections. The predominant bacterial pathogens identified were Acinetobacter baumannii (90%) and S. aureus (10%). Antibiotic resistance was found in 17% of the A. baumannii isolates. Methicillin‐resistant S. aureus (MRSA) was detected in one isolate [ ], Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Burkholderia cepacia, E. coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Legionella pneumophila, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis were other important bacterial pathogens that were detected among COVID‐19 patients [ , , , , , ].
A matter of concern is the recent emergence of MDR fungal species, including azole‐resistant Aspergillus fumigatus species, Candida glabrata, and Candida auris, the increasing trend of fluconazole‐resistant Candida parapsilosis and Candida tropicalis, and inherently resistant Candida krusei, which notoriously affects the efficacy of antifungal treatment [ ]. On the other hand, MDR bacteria include M. tuberculosis, P. aeruginosa, A. baumannii, MRSA, and carbapenem‐resistant K. pneumoniae.
Therefore, new antibiotic and antifungal drug developments with novel mechanisms of action are needed for therapies for these difficult‐to‐treat bacterial and fungal pathogens, which are associated with high mortality rates in COVID‐19 patients.

5.

## Antibacterial and Antifungal Activities of PGNs
Several antimicrobial effects of PGNs have been described during the pre‐penicillin era [ ]. Some PGNs display broad‐spectrum antimicrobial activity, which depends on the PGN structure and the infectious microorganism [ ]. The PG minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) against Gram‐negative and Gram‐positive bacteria ranged from 10 to 100 µg/mL. Antimicrobial activity was determined in some PGNs; importantly, cyclic derivatives of PG exhibited higher antibacterial activity than their linear counterparts [ , ].
Relevant results showed that PG exerts antibacterial effects by inhibiting bacterial growth, virulence factor protease production, and biofilm formation [ , ]. Interference and/or inhibition of microbial biofilm formation is significant because is involved in many infective processes. More recently it has been associated with serious respiratory diseases, which have been observed in acute SARS‐CoV‐2 coinfections [ , ]. For instance, it was demonstrated that PG inhibits P. aeruginosa biofilm formation by producing reactive oxygen species (ROS) that damage biological molecules. In addition, the co‐administration of PG and the Cu(II) complex strongly cleaves RNA and DNA through hydrogen peroxide formation [ , ]. Similarly, high ROS levels were reported by the addition of 50 µg/mL PG to bacterial cultures of E. coli and Bacillus cereus, causing elevated DNA damage [ ]. In addition, a metabolic study conducted in E. coli cultures grown in the presence of PG revealed a decrease in the transcription process, de novo protein synthesis inhibition, and a reduction in carbon dioxide production associated with cell respiration [ ]. Similarly, 1.0 µg/mL of butyl‐meta‐cycloheptylprodiginine (i.e., streptorubin B), a cyclic derivative of PG, produced by wild‐type Streptomyces sp. strain MC11024, decreases biofilm formation to less than 30% of MRSA strain N315 [ ]. A recent report showed that PG is more selective toward Gram‐positive bacteria and inhibited the growth of MRSA, S. aureus, E. faecalis, and Gram‐negative E. coli [ ]. A minimum inhibitory concentration of 10 µg/µL PG was required to inhibit the growth of S. aureus, E. coli, and E. faecalis, whereas > 10 µg/µL was necessary to inhibit MRSA growth. Moreover, an elegant study showed that PG failed to inhibit the hemolytic activity of clinically associated bacteria but could reduce protease activity for MRSA, E. coli, and E. faecalis as well as decrease Salmonella typhimurium, and E. coli biofilm formation [ ].
The activity of PG against pathogenic fungi has also been previously described. For instance, in vitro susceptibility studies against C. albicans showed that PG exhibited fungistatic activity by inhibiting yeast growth [ ]. Other reports described that these pyrrol derivatives exert antifungal activity against Coccidioides immitis, Histoplasma capsulatum, Aspergillus niger, Aspergillus flavus, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Penicillium sp., Cryptococcus neoformans, Fusarium oxysporium, Blastomyces dermatitidis, and Sporothrix schenckii [ , ]. Most of these are fungal agents that can complicate COVID‐19.
In the era of shortage of a new effective antimicrobial arsenal and increased emergence of MDR bacteria and fungi, natural products such as PGNs may provide a basis for further developments that would selectively increase antimicrobial activity with selective toxicity to mammalian cells [ ].

6.

## Antiviral Activity of PGNs
There is growing interest in examining the antiviral potential of pigments, colorants, and dyes, including PGNs [ , , , ]. However, most of the reports related to PGNs are focused on PG, with rather scarce investigations of other family members (Table ). Previous studies demonstrated that PG interferes with signal transduction pathways crucial for viral infection [ , ].
 A pioneering in vitro study on silkworm BmN cells infected with Bombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus (BmNPV) was the first study challenged with PG as a potential antiviral drug against human DNA viruses [ ]. BmNPV is an enveloped double‐stranded DNA virus that infects mainly arthropods, primarily silkworms, with severe losses. The authors discovered that PG was highly toxic to BmN cells and that even at relatively high concentrations (i.e., 300 nM) it was non‐cytotoxic for uninfected cells. Indeed, occlusion bodies (OB), which stand in for the last and lytic stage of BmNPV, and budded virus (BV) generation were reduced by PG at relatively low concentrations starting at 10 nM. Considering the PG concentrations used (10–300 nM), time‐ and dose‐dependent tests suggested that PG had antiviral effects against BmNPV and a selective cytotoxicity for BmNPV‐infected cells. Inhibiting viral DNA replication and the gene transcription of early (ie‐1), late (vp39), and very late (p10) genes involved in DNA replication, capsid formation, and OB synthesis, respectively, are among the antiviral modes of action of PG in BmN cells. After subjecting cells to 100 nM PG for up to 72 h, gene expression of ie‐1, vp39, and p10 genes were repressed by 55‐ to 100‐fold, indicating that PG significantly inhibited viral gene transcription and thus decreased both BV and OB production. In a more recent study, the mechanism of virus entry into BmNPV cells was established as clathrin‐ and dynamin‐dependent endocytosis at low pH via Rab5 and Rab7 [ ].
PG was likewise effective at suppressing corneal HSV‐1 infection in mice and HSV‐2 in vitro. To treat BALB/c mice topically infected with the HSV‐1 strain, 50 µM PG, 50 µM trifluorothymidine (TFT), or DMSO (control) were applied every 2 days for 7 days. At levels comparable to TFT, PG effectively prevented the illness progression of HSV‐1 in mice. In addition, human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells were used to assess the prophylactic effect of PG against HSV infection. After PG treatment, HCE cells infected with HSV‐1 showed suppression of viral replication in a dose‐dependent manner, exhibiting an optimal therapeutic concentration of 2.5 µM. The authors concluded that PG targets host signaling pathways after the virus infects the cells since it induces prophylactic activity but does not prevent viral entry. More precisely, they demonstrate that the transcription factors NF‐κB and Akt (i.e., protein kinase B) signaling, which are involved in host cell survival and apoptosis suppression and are active during HSV infection, are inhibited by PG [ ].
An extensive antiviral screening employing 201 preselected molecules against Bunyamwera virus (BUNV), human Echovirus 6 virus (Echo6), Herpes simplex 1 virus (HSV‐1), several strains of Influenza A and B (IAV and IBV) viruses, Measles virus (MeV), Semliki Forest virus (SFV), Sindbis virus (SINV), Vaccinia virus (VACV), and Mock virus as control were tested in vitro using A549 (human adenocarcinoma alveolar basal epithelial cells), Madin‐Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells, retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells, and Vero (from kidney tissue of the African green monkey Chlorocebus sabaeus) cell lines [ ]. Only three molecules showed antiviral activities against many of the tested viruses. Among them were gemcitabine, saliphenylhalamide, and OBX. In addition, OBX displayed antiviral activity against BUNV, SINV, SFV, and Echo6 in Vero and A549 cell lines, but no activity was observed against HSV‐1 and VACV viruses in RPE cells and MEV in Vero cell lines. Interestingly, OBX displayed high antiviral activity against IAV H3N2 and IBV. The inferred antiviral mechanisms were virus‐cell entry inhibition, viral ribonucleoprotein accumulations, and the antiapoptotic Bcl‐2 protein family, particularly the Mcl‐1 protein. Consequently, OBX interferes with vRNA transcription and replication, viral protein synthesis, and the production of mature viral particles. A more recent study demonstrated OBX antiviral in vitro activity against alphaviruses like Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) and SFV and flaviviruses like Zika virus (ZV), West Nile virus (WNV), and yellow fever virus (YFV) in different cell lines. The study confirmed the suppression of viral fusion in cells through the neutralization of endosomal pH, which was hypothesized as the mechanism of action of OBX [ ].
In another recent piece of work, purified PG produced by the marine wildtype Serratia rubidea RAM‐Alex was used to study some biological activities (e.g., anticancer, antioxidant, and antimicrobial activities) plus antiviral activity in HepG2 infected cells with hepatitis C virus (HCV). The total absence of viral RNA of HCV determined by RT‐PCR in HepG2 infected cell cultures was observed in the presence of 309 µM PG after 8 days of treatment. Contrary to this, nonviral infected HepG2 cells grew normally [ ].
Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is a major public health issue in Asia Pacific regions. The virus, which is closely related to polioviruses, mostly affects children and can cause hand, foot, and mouth diseases with neurological and systemic complications. Specific receptors for EV71 are found in white blood cells, the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract, and dendritic cells. Being an RNA virus, studies in vitro revealed that PG, with an IC50 value of 0.51 µg/mL (1.58 µM), reduced virus titers by 0.17 log (32.39%) in 30 min and 0.19 log (35.43%) in 60 min. The findings suggest that PG has antiviral activity with a moderate inhibitory effect against EV71 [ ].
Moreover, a recent in vitro report showed that PG prevents Micropterus salmoides rhabdovirus (MSRV) infection. In this study, the viral strain MSRV‐FJ985 was isolated from MSRV‐infected M. salmoides and later inoculated on grass carp ovary (GCO) cells. The capacity to inhibit MSRV was tested by applying 130 µg/L PG methanolic extracted sediment (SED) from S. marcescens MS01 culture. The authors claimed that PG from the extract was the main virus‐inhibiting compound [ ].
It is particularly relevant in the current worldwide context to highlight some studies showing the potent antiviral activity of OBX against different SARS‐CoV‐2 variants. OBX evidenced good efficacy in vitro studies [ , ], and in vivo mouse disease models [ ], where intraperitoneal administration of OBX 3 mg/kg, once a day for 4 days significantly reduced virus load in lung tissue. Antiviral studies on SARS‐CoV‐2 with OBX demonstrated inhibition of replication in epithelial cell cultures. OBX displayed activity at the early stage of infection by blocking endocytosis, neutralizing the acidic environment in endosomes, and via the impairment of furin and cathepsin activities, with both enzymes involved in the viral fusion protein activation [ ].
Considering these preliminary results, OBX is emerging as a potential clinical drug for the treatment of COVID‐19. Despite the above‐mentioned promising results, more studies would be necessary first to confirm that PGNs have in vivo efficacy in animal models.

7.

## Interaction of PGNs With Membranes
The mechanisms of action that explain antimicrobial activity of PGNs are still unclear, and not well defined. Based on recent literature, the first effect of PG in contact with bacteria observed by electron microscopy was to generate holes in the bacterial outer membrane followed by the interference of biological mechanisms and breakdown of the cellular membrane. The PG biological activity was described in Gram‐positive models such as B. cereus, and S. aureus, as well as in Gram‐negative bacteria such as E. coli. The immediate consequence is the release of bacterial intracellular ions, proteins, sugars, and amino acids resulting in cell death. One of the key underlying mechanisms to PG biocide activity seems to be its role as a hydrophobic stressor of cellular membranes [ ]. Accordingly, cytotoxicity may be mainly attributed to the hydrophobic nature of PG (log P
octanol/water = 5.16), which favors the interaction with lipidic components of the plasma membrane. For instance, it has been reported in E. coli that, while the outer membrane became leaky after PG treatment, chromosomal DNA remained mostly unaffected [ ]. The postulated mechanistic model of action of PG is consistent with experimental results which show that PG displays high activity against Gram‐positive microorganisms but variable levels of activity against different strains of Gram‐negative bacteria. This activity can be correlated to the fact that the former has a single lipid bilayer cell membrane surrounded by a thicker peptidoglycan layer. The latter presents a lipopolysaccharide structure on the outer membrane, which is less permeable to lipophilic solutes, reducing PG diffusion to the cells and consequently PG penetration [ ]. Other mechanisms that have been historically proposed include cleavage of bacterial DNA, cell cycle inhibition, modulation of pH [ ], and induction of ROS [ , ].
According to molecular dynamic (MD) simulations, PG is embedded deeper within the membrane lipid bilayer compared to other natural pigments with biological activity and lipophilic nature, such as violacein, explaining its efficacy against some Gram‐negative strains [ ]. It could also be pointed out that resistance to PG by P. aeruginosa might be based on these above‐explained PG physicochemical characteristics since this bacterium produces rhamnolipids as microbial surfactants, which exhibit a good capacity to emulsify PG‐like hydrophobic compounds, therefore blocking their antibacterial activity [ ].
Given that PG's pK
a is 7.2 [ ], it is predominantly found in its protonated form at acidic or neutral pH. Its conformational array permits coordination with anions like Cl− by hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interactions, thus allowing its behavior as an H+/Cl− symporter across lipid vesicles [ , ]. Moreover, it is reported that it can also facilitate antiport anion exchange with lipophilic anions such as , Cl−, and [ ]. This ability could show how PGNs trigger apoptosis or DNA damage, by altering intracellular pH or forming complexes with transition metal ions [ ].
MD studies have also suggested that PG may aid the entry of certain molecules into the membrane, and even lead to the loss of proteins and/or their functions when is close to the membrane vicinity.
The affinity of PG for biological membranes and hydrophobic structures may also be of crucial interest when evaluating potential interactions with viruses. The fusion between viral and cell membranes is often highlighted as an effective strategy for cell infection, observed in the case of coronaviruses with lipid–protein envelopes. Enveloped viruses also manipulate host membranes to create viral replication organelles, which are relevant for viral multiplication and immune response evasion. As previously discussed, PG showed promissory results in both in vitro and in vivo studies against different enveloped viruses (BmNPV, HSV, MSRV), and in an in vitro assay against non‐enveloped viruses (EV71) [ , , , ].

8.

## PG Delivery Systems
The biological activities of PG are relatively well‐established, and extensive research has been conducted to boost its use in the biomedical field, by demonstrating its effectiveness against numerous microorganisms and disease models, exploring the possible mechanisms of action, and even improving the available treatment platforms by proposing novel systems with synergistic activities or innovative materials. However, PG is a highly hydrophobic compound, and the transport mechanisms from the producing bacteria to other cells have not yet been fully understood.
PG is principally attached to the inner membrane of the producing bacteria, but it is also found on intracellular granules and vesicles [ ]. An early work has proposed that PG‐containing vesicles are formed in the cytoplasm and secreted extracellularly by producing strains [ ]. Moreover, some S. marcescens strains present a cytoplasmic macrovesicle with components like those of extracellular vesicles, with proven key roles in the higher capacity of PG biosynthesis, storage, and secretion [ ]. Recently, it was confirmed that even though S. marcescens secretes PG using membrane vesicles (MVs), these PG‐charged MVs did not exhibit good activity against S. aureus in comparison to free PG, due to their inadequate cargo release derived from the high affinity of the compound for membranes. On the other hand, direct contact cell assays showed increased activity compared to both free and MVs‐charged PG, and the authors hypothesized that cell‐to‐cell contact is needed to achieve optimal activity, as well as in de novo synthesis of PG [ ].
The use of PG as medical treatment is limited because of its low solubility in physiologically relevant media, which makes its administration difficult and compromises its bioavailability and absorption. To overcome these problems, several encapsulation and drug delivery strategies are being developed aiming for higher availability and improving efficacy by modulating specific targeting and providing controlled release, thereby decreasing toxicity using lower doses [ , , ].
Diverse materials have been used for drug delivery, including synthetic systems based on polymers, lipids, metal particles, and biological systems such as bacterial ghosts (BGs).
One strategy used to overcome the low solubility issues of PG is the formation of nanomicelles, obtained by adding a surfactant agent during microbial fermentation under continuous agitation so that the secreted PG remains wrapped in the micelles. The Tween 80 as a nonionic surfactant has been used for cotton [ ] and silk [ ] PG‐dyeing processes to synthesize natural materials with good cytocompatibility and antimicrobial activities, as tested against E. coli and S. aureus.
In the context of drug delivery using polymeric materials, researchers have explored various ways to encapsulate PG within polymer‐based carriers to enhance stability, bioavailability, and delivery to specific targeted cells or tissues. Polymeric micro‐ and nanoparticles, micelles, and hydrogels have been investigated as potential carriers [ , ].
Chitosan‐based formulations were among the first assayed because of their biocompatibility, biodegradability, and low toxicity. SEM analysis revealed that 40–60 µm PG‐loaded chitosan microspheres could be obtained via the water‐in‐oil (w/o) emulsion technique using glutaraldehyde as a cross‐linker, with encapsulation efficiencies (EE, %) ranging from 66.7 ± 3% to 90 ± 4%. Drug release from these systems followed first‐order kinetics, and potential anticancer was assessed in viable breast cancer MDA‐MB‐231 cells, which showed a noticeable decrease in cell viability after 24 h of PG treatment, with normal cell proliferation in the control sample [ ].
A recent study optimized two new chitosan‐based formulations for PG delivery using the Taguchi method [ ]. A combination of 0.5% chitosan, 1% sodium alginate, and 5% CaCl2 was optimal to obtain 93.03 ± 0.30 µm microspheres, and 0.1% chitosan, 1.5% TPP, and 1.5% acetic acid to prepare 75.1 ± 1.4‐nm nanoparticles. Both micro‐ and nanoparticles release kinetic parameters after fitting to the Korsmeyer–Peppas model, showing encapsulation efficiencies (EE, %) and maximum release (MR, %) values of 89.27 ± 1.2% and 87.42 ± 1.90%, and 96.36 ± 1.70% and 91.58 ± 2.10%, respectively. The MTT assay was conducted to test the anticancer activity of free PG and its formulations in the A549 lung carcinoma cell line, and cytotoxicity in HEK‐293 cells. In vivo, toxicity studies were also carried out using Daphnia magna and zebrafish models. The IC50 values were 11.7 ± 1.2, 10.8 ± 1.4, and 9.4 ± 0.8 µg/mL for free PG, PG‐loaded microspheres, and nanoparticles, respectively. Toxicity studies, both in vitro and in animal models, indicated the nontoxic nature of PG and its formulations [ ].
Another biodegradable and biocompatible but synthetic polymer widely used in the biomedical field is poly(d,l‐lactide‐co‐glycolide) (PLGA). Researchers have developed PLGA‐based loaded microspheres with average particle sizes between 5 and 17 µm using the single‐emulsion solvent evaporation method and 0.5% polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) as an emulsifier and varying the homogenization speed. They encapsulated 200 µL of 7.5 mg/mL PG stock solutions and the anticancer drug PTX as a control, with EE (%) greater than 70% in all cases. In vitro drug release studies were run using 10 mg of loaded microspheres suspended in 10 mL of PBS (pH 7.4) with 0.1% (w/v) Tween 80 at 37°C and 8 rpm for 30 days. Non‐Fickian diffusion was suggested as the drug release mechanism for both PG and PTX. The results showed controlled PG release for up to 720 h, governed by a combination of diffusion and dissolution events in the early stage, and polymer degradation in the latter. In addition, the controlled release of PG from PLGA‐loaded microparticles demonstrated its ability to reduce the viability of MDA‐MB‐231 breast cancer cells under in vitro conditions, stopping the progression of cells during the mitotic stage and thereby inducing apoptosis. PG showed similar effects compared to the PTX model drug, validating its promising use. Nevertheless, additional toxicity and stability studies are needed, especially in vivo models, as well as formulation improvements to minimize initial bursts and avoid potential overdoses [ ].
An interesting alternative approach using natural polymers involves optimizing the obtention of PG‐loaded microparticles via the spray‐drier technique using κ‐carrageenan and maltodextrin as PG‐encapsulation agents [ ]. The particles appeared to be predominantly spherical, with a size distribution between 0.5 to 5 µm. Although improved PG solubility could be demonstrated using this strategy, neither drug release studies nor cytotoxicity assays were included [ ].
Another recent study using natural polymers applied poly(3‐hydroxybutyrate‐co‐3‐hydroxyvalerate, PHBV) to produce PG‐loaded films using the solvent casting methodology. PG incorporation improved the physical properties and functionality of the obtained biomaterials by acting as a nucleating agent, leading to more organized internal structures with a higher degree of crystallinity and higher melting and degradation temperatures. PHBV/PG films of 115.6–118.8 µm thickness exhibited in vitro anticancer potential in a PG‐concentration‐dependent manner, as proven by an MTT assay using HCT116 colon cancer cells [ ].
Many hybrid polymeric systems have been developed to optimize drug delivery while improving other characteristics (i.e., controlled drug release, injectability, cell adhesion, and targeting). Hybrid composite poly(d, l‐lactic‐co‐glycolic acid) (PLGA)/gelatin/poloxamer 407 electrospun nanofibers with PG exhibited improved sustained drug release profiles and enhanced cell adhesion. PG incorporation showed a smaller diameter when compared to the polymer fibers alone, with mean diameters of 1.35 ± 1.26 and 1.82 ± 0.65 µm, respectively. Ultimate tensile strength and Young's moduli tests proved that mechanical properties could be tuned by controlling the blending ratios of PLGA and the surfactant, achieving properties comparable to those of soft tissues. In vitro drug release studies in PBS (pH 7.4) at 37°C and 400 rpm revealed that PG release occurred in three stages: an initial burst, within the first hour with a non‐Fickian (zero‐order) diffusion mechanism, followed by a sustained release for up to 12 h, with quasi‐Fickian diffusion and an even slower quasi‐Fickian diffusion mechanism until the drug supply was exhausted at 72 h (cumulative release of 49.7 ± 0.1%). Furthermore, the presence of poloxamer 407 surfactants resulted in increased EE (%) and drug loading capacity (DLC), reaching values of 54% and 3.60 mg/mL, respectively, as well as causing a reduction in burst release. Finally, the in vitro effects of PG release from PLGA/Ge‐PG nanofibers (without surfactant) were tested in MCF‐7 and MDA‐MB‐231 cancer cell lines. A significant reduction in cell viability was observed compared to the nanofiber scaffolds without PG, which, unexpectedly, promoted cell spreading and proliferation [ ].
A recent study reported the synthesis of hybrid nanoparticles made of PGLA and red blood cell membrane (RCBm) containing OBX and their assay in vitro against non–small lung cancer cells and in vivo in a mice tumor model [ ]. The authors reported that the presence of RCBm in PGLA/OBX nanoparticles increased the stability of the 153 nm nanodevice with a diameter change of approximately 10% within a week. In addition, the cytotoxicity of hybrid nanoparticles containing OBX in human noncancer cells (i.e., BEAS‐2B and MRC5) was reduced compared to the administration of free OBX. Moreover, the apoptotic activity of hybrid nanoparticles containing OBX against A549 and H1975 cancer cell lines as well as the caspase 3/7 increased dramatically, reflecting the efficacy of the OBX formulation. In addition, hybrid nanoparticles containing OBX showed a hyperbolic kinetic release of the drug triggered at lower pH values, which is beneficial when the physiological pH decreases under certain pathologies. In vivo experiments in Balb/C mice injected with A549 tumor cells treated with hybrid cells containing OBX showed extended circulation in the blood and, importantly, major accumulation in tumors compared with the free OBX. These in vitro and in vivo studies seem to confirm the potential of OBX for cancer therapies.
Poly(N‐isopropyl acrylamide)‐based hydrogels have also been designed as thermosensitive smart materials, centered on the ability of these polymers to expel their liquid cargo at body temperature (≈37°C). P(NIPA)‐based homo‐polymers and P(NIPA)‐based co‐polymers with acrylamide (AM) and butyl methacrylate (BMA) were studied, as well as their swelling kinetics when exposed to 5 mL distilled water (DW) and 2.5 mg/mL drug solutions of PG, PTX, and bromophenol blue (BB) at temperatures between 28°C and 48°C for 30 h. Each formulation exhibited a different average swelling ratio (SRa) and a reversed temperature response to SRa, resulting in greater solution uptake by the hydrogels at lower temperatures. Elution of PG could be controlled at 37°C or above (41°C, 43°C, and 45°C), while the diffusion coefficients of PG released from the hydrogels were between 4.97 and 9.29 × 10−9 m2/s at 37°C. The most promising system for the controlled release of PG at physiological temperatures was the co‐polymer ratio of the P(NIPA) based hydrogel (95.5 mol%) [ ]. Subsequent analyses studied the drug release kinetics of P(NIPA)‐based homopolymer and P(NIPA)‐co‐AM (90:10 wt%) at 37°C, revealing a Fickian diffusion‐controlled release. The authors suggested that drug release behavior was related to the porosity of the hydrogel and that it could be controlled by cross‐linking and copolymerization with AM. Furthermore, the in vitro effect of PG release on percent cell survival in comparison to non‐treated cells showed that PG inhibited the proliferation of an MCF‐10A normal human cell line and an MDA‐MB‐231 cancer cell line, with no significant differences due to hydrogel composition [ ].
In addition, these thermosensitive PNIPA‐based co‐polymer gels with AM and BMA were studied for an implantable device development, seeking therapies with a synergistic effect, combining hyperthermia and controlled drug release. PNIPA‐based drug‐loaded hydrogels were prepared by soaking them in PG, PTX, and BB solutions and inserting them into poly‐di‐methyl‐siloxane (PDMS) capsules with well‐controlled microchannels for drug‐elution. The effects of PG and PTX release were tested over a range of temperatures (37°C–45°C) in which localized hyperthermia was applicable [ , ]. The dependence of drug release rates on time and diffusion rates was demonstrated to follow a non‐Fickian mechanism greatly influenced by temperature [ ]. A subsequent study analyzed the effects of localized release of PG and PTX on cell viability, via a clonogenic assay on a human MDA‐MB‐231 breast cancer cell line on a 72‐h drug release assay. The combined effect of drug release and hyperthermia was also investigated. The results showed that localized release of PG reduced the viability of cancer cells with increasing drug concentrations, and similar reductions were observed for the PTX model drug. The effective concentrations of PG and PTX for cell viability were about 30 µM. The combination of both chemotherapy and hyperthermia indicated synergistic effects on reducing cancer cell viability [ ]. Despite these encouraging results, there is a need for further in vitro and in vivo studies to characterize the safety and efficacy of these systems.
Dendrigraft poly‐l‐lysine (DGL) are a novel type of synthetic polymers composed of lysine units. They are gaining attention as versatile carriers for drugs and genetic materials because of their biodegradability and numerous external amino groups that enable drug encapsulation and plasmid DNA binding. Moreover, DGLs can be modified with targeting ligands and polyethylene glycol (PEG) to create vectors with targeting abilities and prolonged circulation. Following this strategy, DGL nanoparticles were modified with synthetic placental chondroitin sulfate (CSA)‐binding peptide (plCSA‐BP) derived from the malarial protein VAR2CSA for tumor‐targeting delivery of encapsulated PG as a chemotherapeutic agent. This research led to the development of PG‐loaded nanoparticles (DGL/CSA‐PNPs), which had an average size of 396.10 ± 13.27 nm and a negatively charged surface (zeta potential of −6.94 ± 0.65 mV). These NPs demonstrated a substantial loading capacity (41.36 ± 0.87%) and EE (%) of 89.39 ± 1.83%. In vitro release studies indicated a rapid initial PG release within 12 h, both at pHs 5.3 and 7.4, suggesting their potential as delivery carriers. Furthermore, when tested on choriocarcinoma JEG3 cells, DGL/CSA‐PNPs exhibited significantly greater anticancer activity than free PG, both in vitro and in vivo JEG3 tumor models. Notably, these nanoparticles displayed sustained slow‐release properties at pH 7.4, allowing for specific binding to JEG3 cells and enhanced anticancer effects compared to control treatments. The mechanism of action involves apoptosis induction in JEG3 cells through the caspase‐3 and P53 signaling pathways, primarily triggered via the mitochondria‐cytochrome C pathway [ ]. These findings suggest that this NPs system holds promise for targeted therapy and demonstrates a strong potential for antitumor activity.
Metallic and other inorganic nanoparticles are other nanoparticle types considered for PG administration. PG demonstrated having both reducing and capping properties for the synthesis of metal nanoparticles, in a study optimizing the synthesis of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) using AgNO3 solution and 4 µg/mL PG as a reducing agent in alkaline conditions. The successful synthesis of AgNPs was demonstrated using 1–10 mM AgNO3 and 4–500 µg/mL PG solutions, at reaction temperatures from 20°C to 70°C and pH values from 9 to 13. Spherical AgNPs were obtained for 1–4 mM AgNO3 at pH from 9 to 13, with variable sizes and polydispersity, depending on the reaction conditions (pH, temperature). The mean diameter ranged from 9 to 52 nm. Moreover, in vitro analyses against human liver cancer HepG2 were carried out, showing an IC50 of 29.85 µg/mL for AgNPs‐PG, considerably lower than the IC50 value of 44.83 µg/mL for free PG, thus demonstrating the system's high therapeutic potential. In addition, in silico MEK1 kinase inhibition by AgNPs‐PG was demonstrated [ ].
Furthermore, a recent study in rats tested AgNPs‐PG as neurotherapeutic agents against cadmium chloride (CdCl2)‐induced neurotoxicity. Rats have injected ip with 6.5 mg/kg Cd doses for 7 days, and the treated group was additionally administered 3 mg/kg AgNPs‐PG after 2 h of Cd exposure. Results exhibited AgNPs‐PG treatment had significant neuroprotective effects against Cd‐induced toxicity in rats by suppressing pro‐oxidative insults, enhancing antioxidative defense systems, reducing neuronal inflammation (TNF‐α, and IL‐6), modulating monoaminergic, amino‐acidergic, and cholinergic transmission in the brain tissue, and preventing neuronal apoptosis [ ].
Another study performed the green synthesis of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) using leaf extracts of Nauclea latifolia as a reducing agent, and 2.5 mM gold(III) chloride tri‐hydrate (HAuCl4) solution at pH 7. Once obtained, AuNPs were conjugated with the LHRH peptide, followed by PG addition by physisorption. The resulting AuNPs‐LHRH‐PG presented a combination of octagonal, heptagonal, hexagonal, and prismatic shapes with variable sizes with an average of 51–60 nm. Subsequently, the adhesion of the nanoparticles to MDA‐MB‐231 and normal breast cells was analyzed by atomic force microscopy (AFM), exhibiting a five times bigger force of adhesion to MDA‐MB‐231 cells for the conjugated AuNPs‐LHRH and AuNPs‐LHRH‐PG nanoparticles than AuNPs and normal cells. This greater adhesion of the LHRH‐conjugated AuNPs was related to the increased incidence of LHRH receptors that are overexpressed on the surfaces of breast cancer cells, showing the potential of this nanosystem for selective and specific targeting [ ].
In a recent study, selenium nanoparticles with PG (SeNPs‐PG) were synthesized by overnight stirring 10 mL of Na2SeO3 10 mM with 10 mL of 3.5 mg/mL PG. Obtained SeNPs‐PG presented 109.3 nm mean diameters and −13.9 mV mean zeta potential. The neuroprotective and anticonvulsant potential of SeNPs‐PG was tested in the pentylenetetrazole seizure model, in mice. Findings revealed these NPs delayed the onset of induced seizures and significantly decreased their duration, thus indicating SeNPs‐PG potential as a novel antiseizure agent [ ].
Magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles (MNPs) were also used for PG delivery systems development. MNPs grafted with carboxymethyl chitosan (CS) and β‐cyclodextrin (β‐CD) were synthesized using the co‐precipitation method by adding ammonium hydroxide to ferrous and ferric salts solutions, also containing either CS or β‐CD. The obtained MNPs, MNPs‐β‐CD, and MNPs‐CS presented a hydrodynamic mean diameter of 12.5, 121.1, and 38.1 nm, respectively, as measured by dynamic light scattering. PG drug loading was carried out using 50 mg of β‐CD‐MNPs or CS‐MNPs dispersed in 25 mL of PBS by repeated PG addition at 10 min‐time intervals until the final concentration of 10 µM, showing an EE (%) of 81% and 92%. In vitro PG release studies from PG‐loaded β‐CD‐MNPs and CS‐MNPs were made in PBS (pH 7.4), in the presence of alpha‐amylase and chitosanase, resulting in 58.24% and 44.61% release after 60 min of enzyme incubation, versus 3.59% and 6.95% PG release by spontaneous drug diffusion into the solution in the absence of enzymes [ ]. Later, MNPs‐PG cytotoxic activity was studied in human breast and liver cancer cell lines MCF‐7 and HepG2, and noncancerous mouse fibroblast cell line NIH/3T3. Intracellular uptake was also evaluated by fluorescence flow cytometry and confocal laser microscopy. Results showed that the polysaccharide coating might help to increase the biocompatibility of the MNPs and that both MNPs entered more efficiently in cancerous cells via the endosome/lysosome pathway than in low glucose‐receptor‐containing NIH/3T3 cells. CS‐MNPs‐PG gave an IC50 = 0.8544 µg/mL for MCF‐7 and IC50 = 1.05 µg/mL for HepG2, with no detectable toxicity up to the highest concentration examined (6 µg/mL) in NIH/3T3 cells, while β‐CD‐MNPs‐PG presented IC50 = 2.61 µg/mL, IC50 = 1.79 µg/mL, and IC50 = 3.31 µg/mL for MCF‐7, HepG2, and NIH/3T3 cell lines, respectively. Also, the higher cytotoxicity of MNPs‐PG against MCF‐7/GFP cells compared to that of the free PG even after 4 h of incubation, and the even lower of β‐CD‐MNPs‐PG, showed PG treatment to be more effective with CS‐MNPs than free drug and β‐CD‐MNPs. Overall, these results demonstrate that CS‐MNPs, and to a lesser extent β‐CD‐MNPs, target the ability of glucose overexpressing cancerous cells, and thereby it is potential for PG targeted delivery and release enhancing efficacy and reducing side effects [ ].
For a different application, but also using Fe3O4 nanoparticles and PG, an iron‐oxide‐decorated functionalized activated carbon composite conjugated with PG ([Ac]F@Fe3O4− PG) was developed for water treatment microbial systems [ ]. It was tested against antibiotic‐resistant E. coli and B. cereus, demonstrating bactericidal activity in a dose‐dependent manner, with complete bactericidal efficiency at 4 mg/mL for E. coli and 5 mg/mL for B. cereus. The authors suggested that the composite mechanism of action included cell membrane disruption due to surface charge neutralization and inducing intracellular ROS formation. In addition, [Ac]F@Fe3O4‐PG composite proved its recyclability and capacity to inhibit biofilm formation [ ].
Other inorganic formulations developed with proven antitumoral activity are PG‐loaded aluminosilicate halloysite‐based nanoparticles (HNTs). Based on halloysite nanotubular structure, surface, and capacity to load various molecules in the internal tubular cavity, these NPs were tested for PG loading and controlled drug release to the cell cytoplasm on anticancer therapies. In vitro analysis showed HNTs‐PG affected the viability of Caco‐2 cells (human epithelial colorectal adenocarcinoma) and HCT116 (human colon carcinoma), followed by alteration of cell morphology and F‐actin structure disorganization, whereas no significant changes were observed on nonmalignant MSC and HSF cells viability [ ].
In recent years, several innovative materials were also tested and proposed as suitable candidates for PG delivery. That is the case with metal–organic framework (MOF) nanocarriers [ , ]. Two types of biodegradable and pH‐sensitive MOFs type MIL‐100 were obtained by an electrochemical synthesis procedure, MIL‐100 (Fe) and MIL‐100 (Fe)/folic acid (FA), with FA conjugated to the MOF surface for site‐specific targeting drug delivery to FA‐positive breast tumors. PG loading was carried out by PPG addition to a 3 mL PBS solution containing 1 mg of MOFs until the drug adsorption capacity reached saturation. Average sizes were 152.7 ± 20.4 and 173.0 ± 24.3 nm with an encapsulation efficiency of 97.07% and 93.43% for the obtained MIL‐100 (Fe)‐PG and MIL‐100 (Fe)/FA‐PG, respectively. Nanocarriers demonstrated pH‐sensitive PG controlled release, faster in acidic and slower in neutral/basic medium, with 69.25% and 73.06% PG released after 24 h in an acidic environment from MIL‐100 (Fe)‐PG and MIL‐100 (Fe)/FA‐PG, respectively. Also, the kinetic analysis showed a slower release for the functionalized MIL‐100 (Fe)/FA‐PG. Cytotoxicity was investigated against normal skin fibroblast cells and the cancerous MCF‐7 cell line, resulting in an increase of the selectivity index (SI) (IC50 on cancer cell/IC50 on healthy cell) from a SI of 3.21 for free PG, to a SI of 4.08 for MIL‐100 (Fe)‐PG and SI = 12.87 for MIL‐100 (Fe)/FA‐PG. These results demonstrated the MIL‐100 (Fe)/FA formulation capacity to specifically target FA‐overexpressed cells for the controlled and pH‐sensitive release of PG [ ]. Researchers went further on the development of these materials and designed a biological metal–organic framework (BioMOF) modified with an anti‐VEGFR1 scFv antibody (D16F7 scFv) for the smart co‐delivery of PG and Simvastatin (SIM) toward VEGFR1‐overexpressing cancer cells. This PG + SIM‐NP‐D16F7 BioMOF nanocarrier exhibited stronger cytotoxic and anti‐metastatic properties based on a synergistic effect for the co‐delivery of PG and SIM compared to the mono‐treatment with both free drugs and drug‐loaded BioMOFs [ ]. These findings place these new systems as promising strategies for the delivery and controlled release of PG onto specific target cells, thus reducing the necessary doses and unwanted side effects.
Lipid nanoparticle formulations have also had the opportunity to demonstrate their potential for PG delivery. PG was encapsulated into lipid parenteral nanoparticles (PNPs) using the high‐speed homogenization method, and NPs were later freeze‐dried and lyophilized. Synthesized PG‐loaded PNPs presented sizes of about 20–30 nm, EE = 87% and DEL = 28.6. In vitro drug release was evaluated in PBS (pH 7.4), showing a maximum release of 56.7% at 6 h, while free PG released up to 9% within the same period. The in vitro cytotoxicity was evaluated against triple‐negative breast (MCF‐7), lung (A549), and colon (HT29) cancer cell lines. High selective cytotoxicity and changes in cell morphologies were observed in the presence of free PG and PG‐PNPs against triple‐negative breast, lung, and colon cancer cells in comparison to blank PNPs, positive control (ADR), and untreated cell line (negative control). In this way, nano‐sized lipid formulations of PG‐PNPs showed potential in PG delivery and cancer treatments [ , ].
Many biological delivery systems have also been tested recently. BGs, envelopes of bacterial cells emptied of their cytoplasmic and genetic materials, represent an advanced biotechnological platform for drug and gene delivery. BGs offer advantages such as stability in biological environments, spacious internal structures, increased safety permitting larger doses, and inherent targeting capabilities. Since they preserve the outer structure and vital components of native cells, including antigenic proteins recognized by the immune system, that aid in targeting and binding to various cells and tissues, possess therapeutic potential on their own and can enhance the effects of other drugs through their immune‐stimulating properties, acting as natural adjuvants, and also serving as vehicles for delivering vaccines. Among these systems, probiotic BGs stand out due to their health‐promoting effects, proven immunomodulatory capability, and GRAS (generally recognized as safe) nature, enhancing the safety profile of BG‐based drug delivery systems. PG‐functionalized Lactobacillus acidophilus ghosts (LAGs) were proposed as a PG delivery system against CRC [ ]. Obtained LAGs presented relatively small sizes (1.13 ± 0.13 µm), size uniformity (PDI = 0.15 ± 0.09), an internal volume devoid of cytoplasmic and genetic materials of 0.13 µm3 and an unaffected negatively charged envelope. PG was highly bound to the negatively charged cell wall via strong electrostatic interactions within the membrane, generating a physiologically stable bioactive entity (PG‐LAGs). Studies of in vitro release in buffers with different pH values and simulated gastrointestinal fluids at 100 rpm and 37°C indicated the retention of PG by LAGs for 24 h. Despite the lack of PG release, the bioactivity of 40 µg/mg PG‐loaded LAGs against HCT116 CRC cells was demonstrated at both cellular and molecular levels, indicating PG delivery by cellular uptake or fusion of the LAG structure with cell membranes of the target cells, with subsequent release of PG inside the cytoplasm [ ].
In a similar approach, carbon dots (CDs)‐biolabeled with heat‐inactivated Lactobacillus plantarum (HILP) were proposed as a fluorescent trackable hybrid drug carrier. A CDs‐functionalized HILP hybrid (CDs/HILP) was prepared by loading CDs into HILP, and then PG loading was performed by incubating CDs/HILP cells with 1 mL of PG solutions for 2 h at 28°C and 200 rpm. For 5.0 mg/mL initial PG concentration, EE and DLE were 14% and 4.66%, respectively. PG release by PG‐CDs/HILP and PG‐HILP formulations was studied in PBS pH 5.0 and pH 7.4 at 37°C and 100 rpm, revealing a lack of PG release (less than 4% of the initial loaded amount) from both formulations for up to 48 h, thus confirming the strong association of PG with HILP membranes in both absence and presence of CDs. On the other hand, the efficient uptake of CDs and preservation of their fluorescence in aqueous and biological environments confirmed CDs/HILP's capacity for being used as a trackable drug carrier. Finally, cytotoxicity assay using colon Caco‐2 and human lung A549 cancer cells revealed enhanced PG activity by CDs/HILP, with improved cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution of PG [ ].
Given the suggestion of probiotic ghosts as a therapeutic approach against the ZV [ ] potential mechanisms of probiotic antiviral properties against SARS‐CoV‐2 have been proposed [ ]. As the loading and delivering capacity of probiotic ghosts using these systems have already been demonstrated [ , ], it is believed that probiotic ghosts could also be a promising strategy in considering the potential use of probiotic ghosts against COVID‐19.

9.

## Toxicity of PG
As previously discussed, PG has shown extraordinary potential as a biomolecule with numerous pharmacological activities. However, it is mandatory to carefully examine any side effects, toxicities and efficacy at the preclinical and clinical stages before making it available as a new therapeutic molecule.
In pioneering studies evaluating the anticancer effects of PG, it was demonstrated that PG (1–10 µg/mL) could inhibit 40%–100% human hematopoietic cancer cell viability of Jurkat, NSO, HL‐60, and Ramos cell lines without affecting cell survival of Swiss mouse embryo cells (NIH‐3T3) and MDCK (NBL‐2) non‐malignant canine epithelial cells [ ]. Similar PG‐selective cytotoxicity against cancer cells was observed in human colon cancer cells, inhibiting DLD‐1 and SW‐620 colon cancer cells from 400 nM without any toxic effects on non‐tumoral NRK cells for up to 1200 nM [ ]. Furthermore, the potential cancer‐specific activity of PG was evaluated in human lung adenocarcinoma cells (A549) and small airway epithelial cells (HSAEC) [ , ]. The authors reported that 0.3 µM PG promoted a 67% reduction in cell viability in cancer A549 cells, but only a 15% decrease in healthy HSAEC cells. Since both cancerous (A549) and healthy (HSAEC) cells are rapidly dividing cells, it was suggested that a greater reduction in A549 cell viability demonstrates selective toxicity of PG. To understand the reason for promoting the selective action of PG against cancer cells, an RNA‐sequencing experiment was performed and concluded that the toxicity of PG is possibly mitigated through a “balancing act” in HSAEC, where both oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are overexpressed in response to PG treatment [ ]. In another report, the anticancer effects of PG were analyzed in vitro and in vivo in doxorubicin‐sensitive (Dox‐S) and resistant (Dox R) cells. Dox‐R and Dox‐S bearing C57Bl/6 mice were intratracheally (IT) treated with 162 µg/kg and 646 µg/kg of PG once every 5 days for 30 days and the evolution of body weight was recorded. Although PG effectively reduced tumor growth in both Dox‐S‐ and Dox‐R‐inoculated mice, no significant differences were found in the body weights of PG‐treated and non‐treated mice, indicating that there was no acute toxicity induced by PG [ ].
As previously mentioned, the antiviral activity of PG against BmNPV‐infected cells was demonstrated in vitro [ ]. The authors found that PG was selectively cytotoxic against BmNPV‐infected cells, killing almost 100% of the cells at 400 nM, whereas concentrations up to 900 nM did not affect the viability of non‐infected BmN cells.
The antiviral activity of PG against herpes simplex virus (HSV) has also been evaluated [ ]. Corneal epithelial cells were infected with HSV‐1 and HSV‐2 in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo and therapeutically treated with different concentrations of PG. Ocular HSV‐1 infected C57BL/6J mice were topically treated three times a day for 7 days with 50 µM TFT (i.e., a drug commonly used for ocular HSV‐1 infection), 2.5% (v/v) DMSO, and PG 50 µM. Loss of corneal sensitivity was also evaluated as a measure of drug toxicity. DMSO‐treated mice showed signs of viral infection from 3 dpi and severe loss of corneal sensitivity, whereas both TFT‐ and PG‐treated mice did not show any signs of viral infection or significant corneal damage after 7 dpi.
The PG toxicity in vivo was studied in the nematode C. elegans. The worms were fed with extracts of PG producer S. marcescens ATCC 274 wild‐type (Sma 274) and the non‐PG producer S. marcescens Bizio WF mutant ATCC 29635 (WF mutant). The experiments showed no significant differences in the meantime to death (TDmean) and nematode‐killing kinetics between Sma274 (TDmean 112.6 h) and WF mutant (TDmean 104.4 h) feed worms. The authors concluded that PG, in the assayed levels, is not toxic to the eukaryotic host [ ].
The genotoxic and antigenotoxic PG effects were analyzed in L929 healthy mouse fibroblast cells. L929 cells were exposed to up to 25 µg/mL PG for 18 h, and DNA damage in the presence (antigenotoxic) or absence (pro‐genotoxic) of hydrogen peroxide using the Comet Assay. PG was demonstrated not only to be non‐genotoxic but also to present anti‐genotoxic properties in L929 cells exposed to oxidative stress‐induced DNA damage [ ]. In another study, the acute oral toxicity of PG in mice and genetic toxicity using mammalian erythrocyte micronucleus, sperm malformation, and bacterial reverse mutation tests were evaluated. An oral acute LD50 of PG greater than 10 g/kg body weight was found. In addition, all three genetic toxicity tests provided negative results, supporting the classification of PG as a safe and nontoxic compound [ ]. In recent work, the acute toxicity and LD50 of PG in mice were investigated in detail [ ]. For this purpose, increasing concentrations of PG were ip administered to male mice. After 24 h, the mice were sacrificed and the heart, liver, kidney, spleen, intestine, and lung were obtained, fixed, and stained with hematoxylin–eosin. The mice LD50 of PG was 4.500 mg/kg, and minor damage was observed in the spleen, kidney, and liver, without any significant injuries to the other studied organs. These findings suggest that PG may be classified as a safe substance with minimal effects on vital organs. In another study, the gut microbiota composition of mice exposed to 150 µg/kg/day PG administered through drinking water for 18 days was studied [ ]. The mice's health, histopathological observations, and intestinal microbiological evaluations were performed. Although PG promoted a beneficial alteration in gut microbiota composition and activity, no differences between the control and PG‐treated mice were found in body weight or organ and tissue appearance (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) [ ]. In a more recent study, PG‐loaded nano‐ and microparticles were used to conduct toxicity studies in D. magna and zebrafish [ ]. The immobilization test of D. magna is one of the most used assays for assessing the toxicity of many pharmaceuticals [ ]. Both free and PG‐loaded nanoparticles in the 10–500 µg/mL range were nontoxic to D. magna for exposures up to 48 h. On the other hand, no acute toxicity or physiological changes in hematological parameters were observed in zebrafish exposed to 5% PG (free or encapsulated) in the diet (30 g/kg daily diet) for 7 days.
OBX is the PG‐derivative that has achieved higher levels of development as a potential therapy for different types of cancer. In Phase II clinical trials, the most common toxicities related to OBX administration were neurologic and psychiatric adverse events, which were generally reversible and transient and included ataxia, somnolence, mood alterations, and cognitive dysfunction [ , , ]. Neutropenia has also been observed in patients who experienced Grade 3 neurologic events [ ] and in clinical trials studying combinations of OBX and docetaxel [ ]. In any case, clinical development of OBX seems to have been halted. It is to be studied if the use of different dosage schemes or the use of other PG derivatives can improve the safety profile.

10.

## In Silico Studies
The hydrophobic interaction of PG with cellular components is supported by an MD study of PG and a dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine (DPPC) bilayer resembling a biological membrane, using GROMACS 5.1.2 and the GROMOS 54a7 force field. The lipid affinity of PG, and thereby its sparing solubility in water was elegantly demonstrated in the simulation, with the PG molecule almost immediately entering the membrane [ ]. In the above‐cited study, a preferential orientation of PG along the membrane‐water interface is observed, with the pyrrole rings aligned toward this interface and the alkyl chain of PG aligned with the acyl groups of the DPPC stabilized through hydrophobic interactions between them. In addition, hydrogen bonding formation between the PG pyrrole rings with both water and the polar head groups on DPPC also takes place during the simulation. This behavior was also reproduced in small clusters of up to eight molecules, showing a different lipid architecture in the vicinity of PG, with DPPC polar heads oriented toward PG and not with water, thus affecting membrane thickness and fluidity, with a consequent local loss of membrane integrity.
An early report analyzed the in silico binding of PG against several target proteins from enveloped viruses including the hepatitis B virus (HBV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), HCV, and IAV (H1N1) using homology modeling and docking analysis. The study suggested that PG has good potential antiviral activity against HBV, HIV, and H1N1 [ ]. However, further studies of the antiviral in vitro and in vivo activities of PG are required to corroborate these results.
On the other hand, the first and yet only in silico study of PG against non‐enveloped viruses suggested the ability of PG to interact with the viral capsid protein of EV71. Three of this virus' target proteins (2C helicase, 3C protease, and aminoacidic residues on the capsid) exhibited promising interactions with PG. Following these predictions, the virucidal efficacy of PG was assessed in vitro by a suspension test with 1.6 µg/mL PG at 37°C for 30 and 60 min, exhibiting weak ability to inactivate EV71 with intermediate inhibition. Regarding contact time, PG showed a slightly higher virus titer reduction for the longer period, though differences between time intervals were not as significant as expected.
Nevertheless, these not‐so‐encouraging results were correlated to the low PG concentration used. In any case, under these test conditions, the study probed that PG inactivated in vitro EV71. Cytotoxicity assay with Vero cells grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) showed a dose‐dependent PG cytotoxic behavior with an IC50 value of 0.51 mg/mL [ ].
In this regard, the antiviral activity of PG against adenovirus and tobacco mosaic virus (TMV‐CP) was studied in silico [ ]. Docking experiments predicted the binding of PG to the adenoviral E1A protein, which is expressed through viral replication, with a binding energy of −4.1 (Figure  ). The same study reported the binding of PG to the capsid protein of the TMV‐CP with an energy of −4.7 kcal/mol [ ].
 Site 5 addresses three possible sites in the receptor‐binding domain (RBD): the Spike: ACE2 protein–protein interaction (PPI) interface (Site 5α) [ ], the site reported by Dogancı et al. for violacein from a blind docking study on the isolated RBD subunit (Site 5β) [ ], and a site considering the entire RBD subunit to be explored by docking (Site 5γ), applying the same strategy as previously for violacein [ ]. The results obtained for PG are shown in Table  . In the same way, as for violacein, the 5γ site is the most probable binding site for PG considering the three protomers, followed by Sites 2 and 3.
 The potential binding site of PG within the SARS‐CoV‐2 Spike protein was analyzed utilizing molecular docking. Briefly, five potential binding sites reported in the literature were analyzed using AutoDock4, and the cryo‐EM structure of the SARS‐CoV‐2 Spike (PDB: 6XR8).
Two sites within the S2 subunit (Site 1 reported for Arbidol [ ] and Site 2 within the fusion peptide [ ]. In addition, three sites within the S1 subunit (Site 3 was reported as a potential allosteric pocket [ ], Site 4 was reported for Biliverdin [ ], and Site 5 encompasses the RBD were explored.
The exact location of PG within the 5γ site is consistent with the experimental confirmation of fatty acid binding pocket previously reported [ , ], which is conserved in highly pathogenic human coronaviruses (including MERS‐CoV and SARS‐CoV). This highly hydrophobic site is currently being successfully explored in search for small molecules capable of binding and thus blocking the Spike‐ACE2 interaction [ , ].
Figure  shows a superposition of PG and violacein at the 5γ site in protomer A. For PG, a predominance of π‐stacking interactions was found, with a parallel‐displaced π‐stacking with Tyr365A and a π‐stacking with Phe338A (Figure  ).
 PG interactions at the 5γ site were characterized by 50 ns of MD simulation using GROMACS 2020.4 Molecular Dynamics engine [ ]. The root mean square deviation (RMSD) as a function of the simulation time is shown in Figure  . The average RMSD value was 1.34 Å with a standard deviation of 0.20 Å, indicating that the ligand undergoes displacement during MD simulation. Indeed, due to the ligand's nonpolar characteristics (Figure  ), it migrates toward a more buried and hydrophobic region, moving away from the polar residues of the 5γ site in comparison to the starting docking pose (Figure  ), being such transition stabilized by hydrophobic and π‐stacking interactions.
 To analyze the potential new interactions between PG and the 5γ site, the distances between ligand atoms and key binding site residues were measured (Figures  and  ).
 Interestingly, because of migration, the amino acids from the C protomer of the 5γ site are not involved in the interaction with PG, as was observed for violacein in our previous study [ ], and two new residues (Phe392A and Phe515A) participate in the stabilization of the complex (Figures  and  ), in addition to Phe338A (Figure  ) and Tyr365A (Figure  ).

11.

## Conclusions
PGNs are an extensive family of pigments synthesized by microorganisms from diverse environments. However, novel synthetic PGNs can also be produced using metabolic engineering, biochemical, and/or chemical approaches. To date, numerous beneficial activities of PGNs have been reported, including antimicrobial, antifungal, antiparasitic, cytotoxic, and antiviral properties. Future studies should provide novel insights into their biological mechanisms and mode of action.
Novel combined OMIC strategies with MD analyses, in silico studies, and novel developments in drug delivery devices could provide a myriad of new PGNs with specific biological activities required to overcome the sanitary crisis.
The potential use of PGNs for therapeutic use still has some limitations because of the wide biocide molecular mechanisms of many PGNs which require a more detailed and deep analysis for their sanitary uses. This limitation, in some cases could be associated with the lower quantities of synthesized pigments (mass pigment per gram of cells) by the producer strains. In addition, the location of the PGNs in the cells is mainly membrane‐bound and requires some rigorous purification methods for therapeutic applications. In particular, the scale‐up and the purification methods for the PGNs obtained by chemical or partial chemical synthesis could be more complex. Another present limitation is the high hydrophobicity of PGNs (logp > 3.0) which will require the development of molecular controlled release devices for efficient therapeutical administration.
Ideally, the trends for PGN application in biomedicine could include the development of novel strains able to export the pigments out of the cell decreasing inhibition synthesis by intermediary by‐products, and reducing the time of purification steps. Another relevant issue could be the synthesis of many PGNs by a single strain using switch‐on/off metabolic pathways by genetic and metabolic engineering tools.
Advancing the preclinical and clinical development of PGNs seems to be the major challenge for this promising class of compounds, mostly experimentally assayed in vitro or early non‐clinical assays for therapeutic potential. OBX, a PG‐derivative that achieved some level of clinical development, has achieved mixed results as a potential anticancer compound and has shown neurological and psychiatric adverse events, and in some cases neutropenia. This unfavorable safety profile may compromise the development of other potential therapeutic indications, such as antimicrobial uses, where a different risk‐benefit balance is often sought. In any case, the clinical development of OBX is seemingly halted. It is yet to be studied if alternative dosing schemes and dosing devices can provide better tolerability, or if other derivatives can achieve a better safety profile.

## Author Contributions

Melisa E. Gantner: literature survey, computational studies, drawing, writing, and editing. Santiago Rodriguez: literature survey, computational studies, drawing, writing, and editing. María F. Ladetto: literature survey and draft writing. Boris E. Rodenak‐Kladniew: literature survey and draft writing. María L. Cuestas: investigation, conceptualization, literature review and structure, supervision, manuscript draft, and final corrections. Alan Talevi: investigation, conceptualization, literature review and structure, supervision, manuscript draft, and final corrections. Guillermo R. Castro: investigation, conceptualization, literature review and structure, supervision, manuscript draft and final corrections. Finally, all authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript. All authors contributed significantly to the present review's writing and drawing.

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Acknowledgments
The present work was partially supported by the Nanomedicine Nucleus, Fundacao Federal University of ABC (UFABC) Sao Paulo, Brazil, contract 05/2022‐PVS to GRC. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Laboratorio de Investigación y Desarrollo de Bioactivos (LIDeB) for the computational studies, and the Center for Natural and Human Sciences, Federal University of ABC. The graphical abstract was created using Biorender.

Ladetto M. F., Gantner M. E., Rodenak‐Kladniew B. E., et al. “Promising Prodiginins Biological Activities.” Chemistry & Biodiversity
22, no. 9 (2025): 22, e202402940. 10.1002/cbdv.202402940

Funding: This study was supported by Nanomedicine Nucleus, Fundacao Federal University of ABC (UFABC) Sao Paulo, Brazil (contract 05/2022‐PVS).
Dedicated to Professor Dr. Faustino Siñeriz, Leader of Environmental Microbiology in Argentina.

## Contributor Information
Alan Talevi, Email: alantalevi@gmail.com.
Guillermo R. Castro, Email: guillermo.castro@ufabc.edu.br.

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.