eLife1894elifeeLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC4371882PMC4371882.1437188243718822549361810.7554/eLife.04106041061Research ArticleGenomics and Evolutionary BiologyMicrobiology and Infectious DiseaseGenome-wide regulatory dynamics of translation in the Plasmodium
falciparum asexual blood stages
CaroFlorence ). The apparent lack of dynamic
transcriptional regulation suggested that complementary post-transcriptional mechanisms
could play an important role in the regulation of parasite gene expression ( ). This is a reasonable
assumption, given that global or gene-specific translational regulation of gene
expression is a mechanism that allows fast adaptations during drastic changes in
environmental conditions as well as during rapid transitions in developmental programs.
Indeed a few examples of translational control in Plasmodium have been
reported. In sporozoites present in the mosquito salivary gland, phosphorylation of the
eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF2α by the kinase IK2, inhibits
translation and causes accumulation of mRNAs into granules. Translational repression is
alleviated by eIF2α phosphatase during the transition into the mammalian host,
allowing parasites to transform into the liver stages ( ). Similarly, PK4 kinase activity leads to the reduction of
global protein synthesis through phosphorylation of eIF2α in schizonts and
gametocytes and is essential for the completion of the parasite's erythrocytic cycle
( ). Gene-specific
translational regulation has also been observed in P. falciparum and is
mediated by cis-acting sequences in combination with RNA-binding proteins. For example,
dihydrofolate reductase-thymidylate synthase (DHFR-TS) binds within the coding region of
its own cognate mRNA to repress translation ( ) and antifolate treatment has been shown to relieve this
repressive effect without alteration of mRNA levels ( ). In Plasmodium berghei, storage of
translationally repressed mRNAs prior to fertilization is mediated by mRNA binding via
the RNA helicase DOZI and the Sm-like factor CITH ( , ). Upstream
open reading frames (uORFs) found on 5′ UTRs of transcripts have been reported to
regulate the translation of specific genes ( ). In P. falciparum, the only uORF described and
functionally characterized to date is a 120 codon region upstream of the
var2csa (PFL0030c) coding region, a unique variant of the surface
antigen PfEMP1 that mediates adhesion to placenta in pregnant women ( ). In this case, translation of
the uORF modulates repression of var2csa translation. Aside from these examples, the
extent to which global and gene-specific translational control operates in P.
falciparum during the IDC remains sparse.
Since the P. falciparum genome was fully sequenced ( ), several large-scale studies
have provided detailed insights into the expression of genes and proteins across the
parasite's life cycle. Parallel mass spectrometry-based proteomics and genome-wide
expression profiling revealed differences between mRNA abundance and the accumulation of
the corresponding protein, supporting the notion that post-transcriptional regulation of
gene expression is at play in this parasite ( ; ;
 ). These methods, however,
are limited in their ability to measure low abundance proteins and do not capture the
underlying relationship between transcriptional activity and translational efficiency.
More recently, polysome profiling was used to monitor discrepancies between
polysome-associated and steady-state mRNAs in 30% of the P. falciparum
blood stage transcriptome ( );
however, this approach does not reveal the precise localization of the ribosomes, and
thus can not be used to accurately assess the translational efficiency of a given mRNA
( ).
Here, we adapted the ribosome profiling technique ( ) to describe the translational dynamics of the
P. falciparum asexual blood stage transcriptome. We simultaneously
evaluate mRNA abundance, gene structure, ribosome positioning, and translational
efficiency for genes expressed through five stages of the IDC. We demonstrate that the
data are highly reproducible, and we find that the translational efficiency of the
majority of mRNAs expressed follows a narrow distribution, exhibiting a tight coupling
between transcription and translation. Only 10% of the genes expressed deviate from this
trend and are translationally up- or down-regulated. We found a surprising amount of
ribosome density associated with 5′ leaders of transcripts particularly in genes
with functions associated with merozoite egress and invasion. Overall, the precision and
depth of the dataset presented herein add significantly to our understanding of
P. falciparum gene expression by linking transcriptional and
translational dynamics throughout the blood stages.

## Results

## Overview of ribosome profiling in P. falciparum asexual blood
stages
To create whole-genome, high-resolution profiles of mRNA abundance and translation
during in vivo blood stage development of P. falciparum, we adapted
the ribosome profiling technique described by . Ribosome profiling is based on the deep sequencing
of ribosome protected mRNA fragments obtained by nuclease digestion of polysomes,
cycloheximide-arrested ribosomes bound to mRNA. These fragments represent the exact
location of the ribosome at the moment the sample was harvested. Five stages
representative of the 48-hr IDC of P. falciparum were harvested for
both mRNA and polysome isolation; ring, early trophozoite, late trophozoite, schizont
stages, and purified merozoites. To assess the reproducibility of the data, we
harvested independent biological replicates of each stage. Polysomes were isolated in
the presence of the translation elongation inhibitor cycloheximide, then nuclease
digested to produce monosomes, and sedimented by centrifugation on a sucrose gradient
( and ). To minimize isolation of
RNA fragments bound by proteins other than 80S ribosomes, RNA was extracted only from
the fractions of the sucrose gradient containing the monosome peak. The resulting
∼30 nt fragments of RNA, corresponding to ribosome footprints, were processed
into strand-specific deep sequencing libraries in parallel with the mRNA samples,
fragmented to ∼30 nt for consistency. Despite the unusually high AT content of
the P. falciparum genome, over 92% of all 30 nt sequenced reads,
derived from coding sequences (CDSs), mapped uniquely to the genome ( and ). 
 
 

To quantitatively obtain mRNA abundance and ribosome footprint density measures, we
calculated rpkMs (reads per kilobase of exon model per million reads mapped, as in
 for each gene. We
established the minimum number of mRNA reads sequenced per coding region (rM; reads
per million reads mapped) required to confidently include genes in downstream
analyses, to be ≥ 32 rM (‘Materials and methods’, ). Using
this conservative threshold, 3605 genes qualified for further analysis. Between
biological replicates, Pearson correlation values were consistently high, ranging
from r = 0.94 to r = 0.99 ( ), highlighting the quality and
reproducibility of our data. In addition, we compared the RNA-seq transcriptome of
the five stages sampled to our previously published transcriptome data set,
originally generated using long oligo microarrays ( ). The RNA-Seq transcription profiles of the set of
genes shared by the two data sets (n = 1829) were highly correlated (average
r = 0.7) to the corresponding 11, 21, 31, 45, and 2 hr post
merozoite invasion time points of the microarray data set, despite the use of
different methodologies (microarray vs RNA-seq) and the use of different P.
falciparum strains (HB3 vs W2, respectively). Because of the higher
sensitivity of RNA-seq, we were able to accommodate an additional 743 genes into the
cascade-like transcriptome extending it to a total of 3110 genes ( , ). The remaining 495 genes in our RNA-seq data set lacked sufficient
variation over the five time points for inclusion within the phaseogram. These genes,
referred to as non-phasic genes, are nevertheless included in all analyses. 

## Gene expression and translation are tightly coupled during the P.
falciparum IDC
While RNA-Seq reveals the abundance and architecture of individual mRNAs, ribosome
profiling provides a complementary and quantitative measure of mRNA translation.
Ribosome occupancy along the CDS results in a profile that indicates the timing and
magnitude of translation of a given mRNA, thus quantitatively delineating regions of
each mRNA molecule that are actually bound by 80S ribosomes ( ). To inspect translation on a genome-wide
scale, ribosome density values of each gene expressed in the data set were organized
in the same order as the transcriptome. The translational profile of each gene
displayed a cascade-like quality strikingly similar to the transcriptome ( ). Much like mRNA abundance, translation
of phasic genes reaches a single maximum and a single minimum during the IDC. To
determine the exact level of correlation between transcription and translation, we
directly compared mRNA and ribosome footprint density measurements ( ). In general, translation is tightly
correlated with transcription for all phasic and non-phasic genes in rings
(r = 0.85), early trophozoites (r =
0.93), late trophozoites (r = 0.91), schizonts
(r = 0.89), and purified merozoites (r
= 0.86). This indicates that when an mRNA is detected in one stage it is
associated proportionally with ribosomes within the same stage. An example pair of
genes is shown in . Here, mRNA
abundance profiles of eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF2 gamma subunit
(PF14_0104) and the conserved protein PF14_0105, show that peak mRNA abundance for
these two genes occurs at two different stages, early and late, respectively.
Examination of ribosome occupancy of both genes reveals a ribosome density
accumulation profile within the coding sequence that mirrors their respective mRNA
profiles. As for the majority of genes, ribosome footprint density and mRNA abundance
for these two genes are highly correlated (r = 0.98 and 0.93
for PF14_0104 and PF14_0105, respectively), indicating that mRNA translation occurs
proportionally during the same stages at which these genes are transcribed ( ; ).
Globally, 77% of genes expressed in at least three stages of the IDC display high
Pearson correlation (r ≥ 0.7) between mRNA abundance and
translation ( ). Thus, our genome-wide analysis of translation establishes that for the
majority of genes expressed during the IDC, transcription and translation occur proportionally. 

## Ribosome profiling reveals instances of translational control of gene
expression
Ribosome profiling allows the monitoring of translation rates through the
simultaneous quantitative measure of mRNA abundance and ribosome density on mRNAs.
The ratio of the footprint rpkM to the mRNA rpkM for any given gene represents its
relative translational efficiency (TE) ( ). To assess the dynamics of translational control and detect
variations in control within and between developmental stages, we calculated the
relative TE of all expressed genes in our data set ( ). The shape and the range of TE distributions obtained for each
stage sampled is comparable to those seen in other eukaryotes ( ; ). Absolute mean translational efficiencies in all stages
(log2TE µRings = −0.43, log2TE
µE.trophs. = −0.56, log2TE
µL.trophs. = −0.31, log2TE
µSchizonts = −0.16 and log2TE
µMerozoites = −0.68) had a maximum difference of
1.47-fold observed between early trophozoites and schizonts. Translational
efficiencies display a roughly 100-fold range in absolute values in each of the
stages with the exception of the ring and merozoite stages, which exhibit more
extreme values. In these stages, the distribution of absolute TE values displays an
approximately fourfold larger spread than in early trophozoites, late trophozoites,
or schizonts ( , ). In rings the gene with the largest TE is the merozoite surface protein
9 (PFL1385c, log2TE = 4.1) and the gene with the lowest TE is the
FIKK family serine/threonine protein kinase (PF14_0734, log2TE =
−5.1). In merozoites the largest and lowest TE values correspond to the serine
repeat antigen 5 (SERA5, PFB0340c, log2TE = 4.0) and the alpha
adenylyl cyclase (PF14_0788a-c, log2TE = −4.7),
respectively. 
To determine the contribution of translational efficiency to the dynamic range of
gene expression, we examined the genes lying at the extremes of the TE distribution.
For the purpose of this analysis, genes with a translational efficiency of two
standard deviations above or below the mean in any of the stages were considered
translationally up- or down-regulated, respectively. A total of 301 genes, 8.3% of
the transcriptome, are translationally regulated by this metric, with 124 genes
translationally down-regulated and 177 genes translationally up-regulated ( , ). The timing of maximum mRNA expression does not influence TE for either
of these two groups. Translational efficiencies remain high for the translationally
up-regulated and low for the translationally down-regulated genes in all the stages
at which they are expressed, regardless of the stage of peak mRNA abundance,
suggesting that translational efficiency is largely, but not completely, programmed
by the mRNA sequence itself, rather than global factors. For example, translational
efficiency of the merozoite surface protein 6 (MSP6, PF10_0346) remains high
(log2TE ≥ 2) across all stages irrespective of variations in its
mRNA abundance. In contrast TE values for the eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha
kinase 1 (IK1, PF14_0423) are among the lowest measured despite high mRNA abundance
across all stages ( ).
An examination of the 124 translationally down-regulated genes yielded some expected,
and in some cases, unexpected findings. As would be expected, two pseudogenes, the
ring-infected erythrocyte surface antigen 2 (RESA-2, PF11_0512) and reticulocyte
binding protein homologue 3 (PfRh3, PFL2520w), represent a clear example of low
translational efficiency. The PfRh3 pseudogene ribosome profile shows that
translation of the 5′ end of this transcript occurs up until the encounter of
several in-frame stop codons, causing the reduction in ribosome density from this
point on ( , ). This suggests that a
truncated version of the PfRh3 protein is being produced in the W2 strain studied
here. Evidence for peptides corresponding to the 5′ end of PfRh3 has been
found in gametocytes and sporozoites (however not during the asexual stages) using
mass spectrometry ( ;
 ). We note that low
levels of ribosomes can still be detected along the full length of this transcript in
schizonts and merozoites. Whether these footprints derive from a low level of
stop-codon read-through or accumulate via another unknown mechanism remains to be determined. 
 

Ring-infected erythrocyte surface antigen 2, RESA2 (PF11_0512) was first described as
a pseudogene based on the presence of an internal stop codon ( ). Since then, transcription of this gene has
been demonstrated both in vivo ( ) and in vitro ( ). RESA-2 is transcribed but poorly translated in rings, early
trophozoites and merozoites (log2TE −3.2, −2.7, −2.9,
respectively). Accordingly, the ribosome profile of this gene in merozoites shows a
general depletion of ribosomes along the CDS ( ). In rings, ribosome density
diminishes at the second exon. To validate the RESA2 gene model, we used genomic DNA
sequencing data derived from the P. falciparum W2 strain used in
this study. We found that 69% (n = 151) of reads mapping to this locus support a
single base deletion that creates a premature stop codon exactly at the site of
ribosome footprint drop-off ( ). These data suggest that RESA2 is transcribed and
actually translated into a shorter protein product of 461 amino acids. Whether or not
the protein product is functional or undergoes post-translational degradation remains
to be determined.
In addition to expected instances of translational regulation, our data permit the
discovery of previously uncharacterized translational regulation, especially at the
extremes of the TE distributions. One of the most notable examples of translational
silencing is the eIF2α kinase IK1 (PF14_0423) for which ribosome footprints
accumulate at the 5′ leader and 3′ UTR but not on the CDS, resulting in
an extremely low translational efficiency (log2TE = −3.6)
despite relatively high transcript abundance across all stages ( ). The mechanism by which this gene is maintained in a
translationally down-regulated state is unknown. Another example is the erythrocyte
vesicle protein 1 (EVP1, PFD0495c) for which abundant transcript levels can be
detected across all stages, with peak mRNA abundance occurring in rings and schizonts
( ).
Protein levels, however, have been shown to be undetectable ( ). Here, we find that translational
efficiencies of this gene were low across all stages and lowest in rings and early
trophozoites (log2TE = −2.6 and −2.9, respectively)
demonstrating that post-transcriptional regulation at the level of translation is, at
least in part, responsible for its scarcity as a protein.
Thus, our ribosome profiling data set highlights instances of translational control
of genes that may not be detected by proteomic methods. Indeed a search for mass
spectrometric data showed no evidence for ∼70% of genes in this category
( ). Including the
aforementioned examples, our data set describes a total 124 translationally
down-regulated genes (listed in ) for which translational
efficiency values lie at the lower extremes of the distribution.
Protein products of translationally up-regulated genes are likely to be abundant and
readily detected using mass spectrometry. Previous proteomic studies show protein
evidence in the blood stages for almost all (171 of 177) well-translated genes
identified here ( ;
 ). Mass spectrometric
evidence for the remaining six genes is either absent (PFL0245w, PFL2510w, PF11_0204)
or has only been found in sporozoites (PFE1615c, MAL7P1.300, PF13_0069a). Despite the
lack of proteomic data, our data indicate that these genes are both transcribed and
translated during the blood stages of the parasite. Whether post-translational
control points exist for these proteins is unknown.
Among the top ten most highly translated genes are proteins involved in merozoite
egress and invasion MSP3, 6, 7, and 9 (merozoite surface proteins PF10_0345,
PF10_0346, PF13_0197, and PFL1385c), serine repeat antigen 5 (SERA5, PFB0340c), and
RAP1, 2, and 3 (PF14_0102, PFE0080c, and PFE0075c, respectively) ( ). Interestingly, 73 (41%) of all translationally up-regulated genes can
be assigned to the repertoire of canonical functions for merozoite egress and
invasion described to date ( ; ; ; ). Strikingly, for all genes in this set,
maximum mRNA abundance is found during the late stages of the IDC (69 schizont and 4
merozoite stage mRNAs) yet for the majority (50, 70%) peak translational efficiency
occurs in rings. Consistent with this, peptides for most of these merozoite function
proteins (58 of 73) have been detected in rings ( ; ). This mode of translational regulation whereby late stage transcripts
are highly translated in rings was not exclusively limited to genes related to
merozoite egress and invasion. We found evidence for an additional 14 genes with this
profile, including, aquaglyceroporin (PF11_0338, log2TE = 3.8),
tubulin beta chain (PF10_0084, log2TE = 1.8), and early transcribed
membrane protein 2 (PFB0120w, log2TE = 2.5).
Taken together these data demonstrate that transcription and translation are tightly
correlated for the majority of genes expressed during the asexual life cycle of
P. falciparum with few exceptions. These apply to a small subset
of translationally down- and up-regulated genes for which translational efficiencies
appear to be inherent properties of the mRNA, independent of changes in mRNA
abundance. Genes in this category, especially those that exhibit high translational
efficiencies, are enriched with functions associated with merozoite egress and
invasion during the transition from late stages into rings.

## Ribosome occupancy of 5′ leaders is commonly found on genes expressed
during the IDC
Ribosome profiling provides position specific information along each transcript
allowing the detection of changes in ribosome distribution on the mRNA and their
relationship to translational efficiency. To look for ribosome occupancy features
beyond the CDS of transcripts, we first took advantage of the deep coverage and
strand specificity of our RNA-seq data to identify 5′ leaders and 3′
UTRs of the P. falciparum transcriptome. We constructed a hidden
Markov model (HMM) to automatically delineate the boundaries of both 5′
leaders and 3′ UTRs for known gene models (see ‘Materials and
methods’). Within the limits imposed by our data, we were able to describe
5′ mRNA leaders and/or 3′ UTRs for 3569 genes in at least one of the
stages ( ,
 ). 5′ leaders are on average longer than 3′ UTRs in each of
the stages and median lengths across stages vary to a larger degree for 5′
leaders (from 607 to 1040 nt) than for 3′ UTRs (518–622 nt). The
longest 5′ mRNA leader was measured in late trophozoites (8229 nt) for the Ap2
transcription factor, PF11_0404, and the longest 3′ UTR stretched 4773 nt for
60S ribosomal protein L7-3, PF14_0231, in rings. An example pair of genes with mapped
5′ leaders and 3′ UTRs is shown in . Here, our HMM predicts a 636 nt and a 781 nt 5′ leader
and a 468 nt and 423 nt 3′ UTR for the Myb2 transcription factor (PF10_0327)
and the bromodomain protein (PF10_0328), respectively. These genes, encoded on
opposite strands, share a 1536-nt intergenic sequence; however, the span between the
region delimited by their 5′ leader sequence is only 120 nt and presumably
harbors their respective promoters. 

Next, using mRNA boundaries derived from our data, we analyzed ribosome distribution
along each transcript during life cycle progression. More than 80% of the ribosome
footprints in rings, early trophozoites, late trophozoites, and schizonts, were
mapped to CDS regions of the genome, except in merozoites, where only 68% were mapped
to the CDS ( ). On average less than
1% of all reads obtained were mapped to 3′ UTRs in each stage, and most
transcripts had no observed footprints past the stop codon. In contrast, footprints
were far more common in 5′ leaders (9.1%, 4.8%, 7.5%, and 4.8% in rings, early
trophozoites, late trophozoites, and schizonts, respectively) particularly in
merozoites (23%). Footprint enrichment is specific to 5′ leaders and not due
to non-specific background since this would result in an increase of footprints
mapping evenly along the length of the transcript, including the 3′ UTR, and
not just the 5′ leader. Furthermore, these footprints most likely represent
ribosomes because they derive from the 80S monosome fraction of the sucrose gradient,
and their footprint read length distributions are equal to those of CDS mapping
footprints, whereas they are significantly divergent from rRNA or tRNA read length
distributions ( ). 
 
 
 
 
 

Upstream open reading frames are a major source for 5′ leader ribosome density
found from yeast to humans ( ; ), and these
have been shown to play a role in translational regulation of the downstream ORF in a
few well-studied examples ( ). In P. falciparum, ribosomes have been suggested to
accumulate on 5′ leaders of genes displaying a delay in translation presumably
due to long uORFs ( ).
We defined 36,086 possible uORF regions in the 5′ leaders of genes expressed
during the P. falciparum IDC using a liberal definition that
includes any stretch of at least two amino acids, starting with an AUG codon ( ). Regardless of stage, half of the total ribosome footprint coverage in
5′ leaders, in aggregate, or on a gene-by-gene basis did not overlap with
these predicted uORFs ( , ). We could
find no significant correlation between the number of uORFs per gene, the uORF
lengths, or the degree to which ribosome density was enriched in uORFs with
translational efficiency ( ). For example, erythrocyte binding antigen-175 (EBA-175,
MAL7P1.176) is well translated in rings (log2TE = 1.4) and displays a
large amount of 5′ leader ribosome occupancy. Half (49%) of the reads map
within the nine predicted uORFs on the 5′ leader of this gene, the other half
maps outside these uORFs ( ). Using
this liberal definition of an uORF, the data do not support an association between
ribosome occupancy in these regions, nor does it support an association between the
presence of these regions and translational efficiency.
Nonetheless, there exist at least two clear exceptions. First, we were able to
validate translation of the reported uORF present in the 5′ leader sequence of
the var2csa mRNA which is expressed only in rings ( ). The majority of ribosome footprint density localizes
to this uORF, and to a second one just upstream, while the var2csa coding sequence is
largely devoid of footprints (log2TERings = −4.2,
 ),
consistent with its translational repression during growth in the absence of
plancental tissue. Second, another striking example of uORF translation was found on
PFE1550w (unknown function) for which the ratio of uORF to total 5′ leader
mapping reads is 0.9 ( ). Indeed, ribosome footprint density is concentrated on one of
the 6 uORFs predicted in the 5′ leader of this gene, 56 amino acids long. This
gene is also translationally down-regulated in all stages (log2TE =
−2.7 on average). These two genes represent exceptional cases for which uORF
translation negatively correlates with translation of the downstream ORF.
Aside from these two exceptions, for the vast majority of genes, ribosome occupancy
appears spread along 5′ leaders and not preferentially concentrated within
possible uORFs. For this reason, we calculated 5′ leader ribosome density
(5′RD) for each gene expressed during the IDC, defined as upstream ribosome
occupancy normalized for mRNA expression level and size of the leader sequence
(5′ leader ribosome footprint rpkM/5′ leader mRNA rpkM) ( ). No positive correlation exists between the number of uORFs per gene,
the uORF lengths, or the degree to which ribosome density is enriched in uORFs and
5′RD, reinforcing the notion that uORFs are not a requisite for ribosome
association to 5′ leaders ( ). In fact 5′ ribosome density can be
found on transcripts with 5′ leaders completely devoid of AUGs, and thus,
without uORFs by definition, such as the highly translated aquaglyceroporin
(log2TE = 3.8 and log25’RD = 2.9 in rings),
and PFC0486c (unknown function, log2TE = 1.6 and
log25′RD = 1.1 in rings) ( ).
Overall, rings and merozoite stage parasites were found to express transcripts with
the highest 5′RD (mean log25′RD −0.03, and 0.11,
respectively) relative to early trophozoites, late trophozoites, and schizonts (mean
log25′RD −1.11, −0.26, −0.83), where the
range of 5′RD values is also narrower ( ). Interestingly, among genes at the extremes of the 5′RD
distributions (mean ± 1 SD), we also found many of our identified
translationally up- and down-regulated transcripts (66% and 40%, respectively). On
average, 5′RD was enriched on translationally up-regulated transcripts (mean
log25′RD = 0.83) and depleted for translationally
down-regulated transcripts in all stages (mean log25′RD =
−1.11), suggesting the possibility that 5′RD is a byproduct of
translational efficiency itself ( ). 
In order to determine whether a direct relationship between 5′RD and
translational efficiency of the downstream ORF exists, we compared these values for
each gene. 5′RD positively correlates, albeit moderately, with translational
efficiency in all stages, particularly in rings and merozoites (r
= 0.51 and 0.49, respectively). We focused on the subset of genes with highest
and lowest 5′RD values (mean ± 2 SD) and found that only a fraction of
the translationally up- and down-regulated genes overlap with this category of
extreme 5′RDs in each stage ( ). The largest overlap occurred in rings where the highest 5′RD
values were found in 43% (31 genes) of the translationally up-regulated genes,
including MSP6, AQP, and SERA5. These results indicate that while in general a
correspondence between 5′RD and translational efficiency exists, one is not
necessarily predictive of the other and exceptions apply. This is the case, for
example, of the translationally down-regulated transcript of the pseudogene PfRh3,
which in rings has the second highest 5′RD value (log25′RD
= 5.1).
In summary, our data establish ribosome accumulation on 5′ leaders as a common
feature of transcripts expressed during the IDC. Ribosome density is not restricted
to predicted uORFs present within these regions and, with few exceptions, the uORF
number, length, or coverage level, is not a requirement for 5′ ribosome
density and has no measurable effects on the translation of the downstream ORF. Even
though 5′RD is more commonly found on 5′ leaders of highly translated
transcripts, this is not a universal trend since only a moderate correlation exists
between 5′RD and the translational efficiency of the downstream ORF.

## 3′ UTR ribosome occupancy is rare
While our data showed 3′ UTRs to be relatively depleted of ribosomes, we
searched for rare cases of high 3′ UTR ribosome density, possibly arising from
stop codon read-through, alternative stop codon usage, or re-initiation of downstream
ORFs ( ; ). We systematically
searched for transcripts for which coverage, in a sliding window of 30 nt, was
greater in the 3′ UTR than the CDS, and found 19 genes meeting this criterion.
These genes could be qualitatively divided into two categories: 14 with putative stop
codon read-through and/or alternate stop codon usage and 5 genes for which the origin
of the 3′ UTR density is unclear (listed in ). An example of stop codon read-through is the conserved plasmodium
protein (PF13_0160), shown in .
Ribosomes not only extend beyond the annotated stop codon of this transcript but also
skip subsequent in-frame stop codons present on the predicted 644 nt 3′ UTR.
Interestingly, ribosome footprints accumulate in a single large peak approximately
130 nt downstream of the annotated stop codon. On the 1290 nt 3′ UTR of the
sodium-dependent phosphate transporter (MAL13P1.206), two large peaks of ribosome
footprint density, one approximately 560 nt and the other 860 nt from the stop codon,
can be observed ( ). The origin of
these footprints is unclear, and it is possible that these are the product of
nuclease protection by RNA-binding proteins that co-sediment with the 80S monosome.
To confirm that 3′ UTR mapping reads are derived from ribosome footprints, we
compared their cumulative read length distributions against a typical CDS footprint
read length distribution ( ). For the 16 of the 19 genes we observed no significant
difference in footprint size distributions localized to the CDS compared with the
3′ UTR. For the remaining three genes, the sodium-dependent phosphate
transporter (MAL13P1.206), the acyl-Coa synthetase (PFD0085c), and the conserved
plasmodium protein (PF13_0160), 3′ UTR footprint size distributions were
divergent from those on the CDS, implying that footprints found on these genes'
3′ UTRs may be produced by nuclease protection of these regions by factors
other than ribosomes that co-sediment with 80S ribosomes. 

## Antisense detection
Antisense transcription plays an important role in gene regulation from bacteria to
humans, and while its role is increasingly studied in these organisms ( ), less is known
about its relevance in P. falciparum. Previous serial analysis of
gene expression (SAGE) ( ), nuclear run-on experiments ( ), and more recently antisense splicing events
detected by RNA-seq ( ; ),
suggest that antisense RNAs are synthesized by RNA pol II and may constitute up to
∼12% of the erythrocytic-stage steady-state RNA ( ), yet their presence and biological
role, if any, remains unclear. A more recent study found no correlation between
natural antisense transcript levels and protein abundance ( ).
The 30 nt fragmentation and RNA-ligase-based library preparation method employed here
affords exquisite strand specificity by minimizing artifacts associated with random
priming during reverse transcription. As evidence of this specificity, the highest
expressed gene in our data set, histone h2a (PFF0860c), yielded a total of 765,510
reads on the sense strand, and only two reads on the antisense strand, corresponding
to a sense:antisense ratio greater than 105. Furthermore, our HMM mapping
of 5′ leaders and 3′ UTRs facilitates the differentiation between
independently transcribed antisense RNA and transcripts that occur by virtue of being
part of an adjacent gene. We took advantage of the nature of our data set to identify
antisense transcripts and looked for effects on sense mRNA translation.
For this analysis only, we relaxed our stringent coverage threshold from ≥32
rM to ≥16 rM for inclusion of antisense transcripts. We based our threshold on
the presence of an antisense transcript to the sexual stage specific gene pfs16
(PFD0310w) confirmed by strand-specific RT-PCR ( ). This antisense is predicted by the
HMM to be ∼4 kb, extending over the complete coding sequence and beyond and
with a coverage level of 23 rM over the sense CDS. Using the 16 rM threshold, we
detected 84 antisense transcripts to several known ORFs (listed in ), including the nucleoside transporter pfNT4 (PFA0160c) depicted in . The merozoite stage contained the
highest number of antisense transcripts (46), and the fewest (13) were found in early
trophozoites. Manual inspection revealed that in 63% of these instances, the putative
antisense transcript actually emanates from the 5′ leader or 3′ UTR of
a neighboring gene (not defined by the HMM). Antisense reads for the
para-hydroxybenzoate polyprenyltransferase (PFF0370w), for example, are actually
derived from the 3′ UTR of the neighboring conserved protein PFF0375c ( ). 

We next interrogated the impact of this set of antisense transcripts. Overall,
antisense transcripts showed no effect on mRNA abundance and translational
efficiencies of the cognate sense transcript. These observations parallel those
described for antisense transcripts in yeast ( ). Thus, at first approximation antisense transcripts do not
appear to play a role in translational regulation. However, these observations could
be confounded due to the small number of genes in this set, and we cannot exclude the
possibility of sense/anti-sense heterogeneity at the single cell level, obscured here
at the population level.

## Discussion
Herein we present, for the first time, a comprehensive view of the coupled
transcriptional and translational dynamics of the P. falciparum IDC by
determination of transcript abundance and architecture together with ribosomal density
and positioning. The quality of our data relies on several critical features: (1) high
temporal specificity and reproducibility of fully independent biological replicas of
five strictly staged cultures; (2) purified merozoites to allow discrete measurements in
this stage without confounding contributions from schizonts or rings; (3) monosome
isolation from sucrose gradients to specifically enrich for ribosome-derived footprints
and avoid potential complications that can arise with methods like sucrose cushions
which are prone to mRNA contamination; (4) sufficient sequencing depth of biological
replicates to set a statistical threshold for minimum read coverage and to demonstrate
reproducibility; (5) stringent strand specificity to facilitate an HMM for the
description of transcript boundaries and the detection of antisense transcription.
Previous studies of the transcript abundance in the malaria blood stages revealed a
periodic cascade of gene expression, whereby the majority of expressed genes exhibit one
peak of expression per cell cycle ( ). The global profile of transcriptional expression was subsequently found
to be highly stereotypical across strains and appeared to lack dynamic responses to
perturbation ( ; ). It has been suggested that
translational control of protein expression could compensate for the lack of
transcriptional dynamics. Proteomic studies described delays in peak mRNA and
corresponding protein abundance implicating translational or post-translational
mechanisms in the modulation of gene expression ( ; ).
Our ribosome profiling results reveal a tight coupling of transcription and translation
for the majority of expressed genes, indicating that most protein products are
translated with highly similar timing and in proportion to their corresponding mRNA
transcripts. Synthesized proteins are likely to exert their functions immediately upon
translation but post-translational regulation, not captured by our data, could still be
at play. Direct correlations of translational efficiencies measured in this study along
with proteomic data sets are hampered by the reduced sensitivity of the latter and
differences in temporal resolution and staging of the parasites between data sets.
However, the available proteomic evidence is largely consistent with the results
presented here, particularly for highly translated proteins. The simultaneous capture of
mRNA abundance and translation is expected to be a more accurate proxy for protein
levels than measurements of mRNA abundance alone ( ) and provides a critical resource for the identification
of instances of post-translational regulation of gene expression. However, we note that
this data set only provides a direct measure of relative changes in translational
efficiencies rather than changes in bulk transcription and translation.
While no up- or down-regulation of global translation efficiencies were observed in any
particular stage, more extreme translational efficiencies were measured in subsets of
genes expressed in rings and merozoites. We find 177 translationally up-regulated genes
with functions predominantly related to merozoite egress and invasion, with peak mRNA in
schizonts and peak translational efficiency in rings. It is likely that the genes with
unknown functions, regulated in an analogous way during the merozoite to ring
transition, are also associated with this process. Our data support a model whereby the
transcripts of proteins necessary for merozoite structure and function are made in the
previous stage in large abundance, are translationally up-regulated during the invasion
process, and remain highly translated well into the ring stage despite rapid mRNA decay
during this stage ( ). Whether
the accumulation of 5′ leader ribosome density is a mechanism that assists in
this process or is it merely a byproduct of more efficient ribosomal initiation on these
templates remains to be tested. With the emergence of genome editing tools such as
CRISPR/Cas9 ( ), it may be
possible to create versions of genes with altered cis-acting sequences to test for
modulation of 5′ ribosome density and its effect on translational efficiency.
The global nature of ribosome accumulation within the 5′ leader sequences of many
transcripts during the IDC and the lack of an association between 5′RD and the
number or length of uORFs suggests that ribosomes accumulate on 5′ leaders
through means other than a uORF model. For comparison, in yeast under starvation
conditions the fraction of ribosome footprints derived from 5′ leaders is
increased by sixfold and in some cases no single uORF can account for the entire
distribution of ribosomes on the 5′ leader of a gene ( ), much like P. falciparum.
What mechanism could account for global ribosome accumulation in the 5′ leader?
The presence of apparent 80S ribosomes within the 5′ leader sequence, regardless
of whether they cover uORFs or not, suggests an engagement mode in which the fidelity of
start codon recognition is altered or suspended. Current models propose that the 43S
pre-initiation complex loads onto the mRNA with the assistance of other initiation
factors near the 5′ cap and proceeds to scan down the length of the mRNA until it
encounters an AUG codon. This is followed by the assembly of the 48S preinitiation
complex and then finally the 80S complex (for review, see ). The AUG that is ultimately chosen is not always
the first one encountered, and its sequence context is important for recognition. The
factors eIF1, eIF1A, and eIF5 have been implicated in recognition of the
‘correct’ AUG ( ). In the case of P. falciparum, differential regulation
or modification of these factors could plausibly result in altered start codon selection
and 80S assembly. Whether prematurely initiated complexes are able to scan without
synthesizing a peptide or are required to assemble and reassemble until encountering the
right start codon remains an open question. Large 5′ ribosome accumulation on
translationally up-regulated genes in the ring stage suggests that premature initiation
on these transcripts is not detrimental. The development of an in vitro translation
system that recapitulates upstream 80S assembly on P. falciparum
5′ leaders will allow direct testing of premature initiation and its effect on
translational efficiency in this parasite.
Our ribosome profiling data add an important component to the rich compendium of
genome-wide data, including transcript abundance ( ), mRNA decay ( ), splicing ( ), and proteomics for this parasite ( ; ). Features such as 5′ leaders, 3′ UTRs, introns, and antisense
transcripts are clearly visible and often well delineated. While experimental validation
of transcriptional start sites, terminators, and promoters is required, spanning regions
between transcripts, such as the one shown in , can be used for the search and identification of such functional sites in a
reduced sequence space. The data are available at NCBI GEO (accession #GSE58402) to
facilitate future queries and normalized read coverage plots for all 5 timepoints are
available packed as a single Mochiview file ( ). Together our results describe a simplified regulatory architecture
of gene translation, albeit one that includes peculiar and potentially unique mechanisms
specialized for its highly structured and coordinated lifecycle within erythrocytes.
Further biochemical dissection of translational initiation mechanisms and determinants
of translational efficiency unique to Plasmodium may reveal weaknesses
that could be exploited for possible therapeutic intervention.

## Materials and methods

## Cell culture
W2 strain cultures were maintained in Hyperflasks (Corning, Corning, NY) in 500 ml
RPMIc (RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 0.25% Albumax II (GIBCO, Grand Island, NY),
2 g/L sodium bicarbonate, 0.1 mM hypoxanthine, 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), and 50
μg/L gentamycin), at 37°C, 5% O2, and 5% CO2, to
maximum 10–15% parasitemia at 5% hematocrit (HC) and frequent media changes
(at least every 6–8 hr). Cells were synchronized by two consecutive sorbitol
treatments for three generations, for a total of six treatments. Maximum invasion,
point at which half of the culture is either rings or schizonts, was defined as hour
zero and independent time points containing ∼1010 parasites were
harvested 11, 21, 31, and 45 hr later.

## Polysome isolation and library generation
Cultures were incubated for 5 min in 500 ml 37°C RPMIc, 100 µg/ml
cycloheximide (Acros Organics, Bridgewater, NJ) and harvested by centrifugation for 8
min at 3.65×g at room temperature. An aliquot was removed and
flash frozen in liquid nitrogen for total RNA purification, followed by
poly(A)-purification and chemical fragmentation with Zn2+ to
∼30 nt for consistency in mRNA-Seq library preparation. The remaining culture
was treated with ice-cold 0.1% saponin in 1X PBS, 100 µg/ml cycloheximide, for
RBC lysis. Parasites were resuspended in ice-cold parasite lysis buffer (15 mM KOAc,
15 mM MgOAc, 10 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.5% Triton X-100, 100 μg/ml
cycloheximide) and dripped into a conical tube filled with, and immersed in, liquid
nitrogen. Frozen cells transferred placed in liquid nitrogen pre-chilled chambers and
pulverized for 3 min at 15 Hz, on a Retsch MM301 mixer mill. Pulverized cells were
thawed on ice, and cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 4°C,
16,000×g for 10 min. The supernatant was treated with 2.88
U/µg Micrococcal nuclease for 30 min at room temperature and immediately loaded
onto sucrose gradients for ultracentrifugation at 35,000 rpm for 3 hr at 4°C in
a L8-60 M Beckman centrifuge. Monosome fractions only, were collected to generate
ribosome footprint libraries for deep sequencing using the HiSeq 2000 (Illumina, San
Diego, CA), as described ( ).

## Merozoite purification
Late stage schizonts (40–44 hpi) were magnetically purified using MACS LD
columns (Miltenyi Biotec, San Diego, CA) and resuspended in RPMIc without blood
addition. After reaching maximum invasion (1:1 schizont to ring ratio), cultures were
harvested by centrifugation at 1500 rpm at room temperature for 5 min. Pelleted
cultures were resuspended into fresh RPMIc and placed at 37°C. Merozoites in the
supernatant were treated with 100 µg/ml cycloheximide for 5 min at room
temperature, harvested at 4000 rpm at 4°C for 5 min and resuspended in RPMIc and
passaged again through a MACS LD column. Parasite lysis buffer was added to the
merozoite-enriched flow-through and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. This procedure
was repeated three times every 45 min using the original culture. The same procedure
described above was used for RNA extraction and library preparation.

## SNP-corrected W2 genome
W2 strain genomic DNA was isolated from >90% synchronized ring stage cultures.
Paired end libraries were constructed using the Nextera DNA Sample Prep Kit
(Epicenter Biotechnologies, Madison, WI) according to the manufacturer's instructions
reducing PCR cycles from nine to six and using 80% A/T dNTPs. Libraries were
sequenced using the HiSeq 2000 (Illumina). Reads were aligned to the P.
falciparum PlasmoDB 3D7 version 7.1 genome using Bowtie 0.12.1 ( ) with parameters
–v1 –m 1 (one mismatch allowed, unique mapping). A SNP was called when
five or more W2 reads supported, with over 90% agreement, a different base than the
one found in the P. falciparum 3D7 7.1 genome. 19401 SNPs (0.08% of
total bases) were detected and used to produce the SNP-corrected W2 genome based on
the 3D7 genome. Fastq files are available for download at NCBI SRA, accession
#SRP042946.

## Software pipeline, mappability, and rpkM calculation
Quality-filtered ribosome footprints and mRNA sequencing reads were trimmed to remove
library adapter sequence, filtered for P. falciparum rRNA using
blast, and aligned uniquely to the W2 SNP-corrected genome using Bowtie 0.12.1 ( ) allowing no mismatches.
The percentage mappability was calculated using an in silico library
of the P. falciparum W2 SNP-corrected genome created using a single
nucleotide sliding window of 30 nt. The in silico library was
uniquely aligned to the genome allowing no mismatches. The mappability score is given
by the number of 30 nt sequences covering each nt position in the genome, such that
any position has a score that ranges from 0 to 30. Both mRNA and ribosome footprint
rpkMs were calculated as in , excluding the first 50 bases of each gene to eliminate bias
introduced by the observed ribosome accumulation peak near the start codon. Genes
with fewer than 80% mappable bases (248 genes) or any overlapping non-CDS feature on
the same strand (77 genes) were excluded from this calculation. Data are available
for download at NCBI GEO, accession #GSE58402. MochiView genome browser data tracks
are available in ( ).

## Extended phaseogram
The genes of the RNA-seq transcriptome obtained in this work were listed in the same
phaseogram order as the previously published microarray transcriptome ( ). The criteria for
inclusion of a gene into the phaseogram was mRNA ≥ 32 rM, >2 peak to
trough ratios, and Pearson correlation coefficient >0.8 with the expression
profiles of the two neighboring genes.

## Hidden Markov model to describe transcript boundaries
The HMM was built using RNA-Seq data obtained in this study and two states:
transcript (t) or intergenic (i) with three
possible emissions: (1) read present, (2) read not present but position is
unmappable, (3) read not present but the position is mappable. Both state and
emission probabilites were calculated using ∼30 kb training set of manually
identified transcript and non-transcript regions. The initial probabilities were set
to 0.5. Transition probabilities were estimated from the median length of intergenic
regions of (1252 nt) and median lengths of CDS regions (2545 nt), where the
Pt->i = (1/2545), P
t->t = (2544/2545),
Pi->t = (1251/1252), and
Pi->i = (1/1252). We applied the Viterbi
algorithm to predict the optimal path of transcript tracks per time point with a 10
nt window resolution. HMM-defined 5′ leader and 3′ UTR coordinates are
available for download at NCBI GEO, accession #GSE58402.

## Strand-specific RT-PCR
Total RNA from late stage parasites was isolated and reverse transcribed using
SuperScript III (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to manufacturer's instructions,
using either an antisense-specific primer to Pfs16 (PFD0310w) or a random nonamer.
cDNA was amplified using the Pfs16 antisense-specific primer as a forward primer in
combination with one of five reverse primers ( ). 18S rRNA primers were used in the
control reactions with the random nonamer-derived cDNA.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000011Howard Hughes Medical
Institute to Florence Caro, Vida Ahyong, Miguel Betegon, Joseph L DeRisi.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002National Institutes of
Health
UO1 AI075517 to Florence Caro.

## Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr Graham Ruby for technical expertise in devising the
HMM for UTR description and Dr. Giselle Knudsen for technical support. We would also
like to thank members of the Weissman Lab: Dr Eugene Oh, and Dr Gloria Brar for helpful
experimental advice and suggestions for the analysis of data and Dr Jonathan Weissman
for the use of a density gradient fractionator and for helpful discussions during
article preparation.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
The authors declare that no competing interests exist.

## Author contributions
FC, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of
data, Drafting or revising the article.
VA, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of
data, Drafting or revising the article.
MB, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data.
JLDR, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or
revising the article.

## Additional files
10.7554/eLife.04106.033Supplementary file 1.MochiView genome browser data tracks.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04106.033
10.7554/eLife.04106.034Supplementary file 2.RESA2 mapping reads.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04106.034
10.7554/eLife.04106.035Supplementary file 3.Strand-specific RT-PCR primers.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04106.035

## Major datasets
The following datasets were generated:
Caro F,
Ahyong V, Betegon M, DeRisi JL,
2014, Ribosome Profiling in P. falciparum asexual
blood stages, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE58402, Publicly
available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus.
Caro F, Ahyong
V, Betegon M, DeRisi JL, 2014, Publicly
available at NCBI SRA.
Caro F, Ahyong V, Betegon
M, DeRisi JL,
2014, Data from: Genome-wide Regulatory Dynamics of
Translation in the Plasmodium falciparum Asexual Blood
Stages, http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.vb855, Available at
Dryad Digital Repository under a CC0 Public Domain
Dedication.

 10.7554/eLife.04106.036Decision letter
GingerasThomas RReviewing editorCold Spring Harbor Laboratory, United
StateseLife posts the editorial decision letter and author response on a selection of the
published articles (subject to the approval of the authors). An edited version of the
letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the substantive
concerns or comments; minor concerns are not usually shown. Reviewers have the
opportunity to discuss the decision before the letter is sent (see review
process). Similarly, the author response typically shows only responses
to the major concerns raised by the reviewers.
Thank you for sending your work entitled “Genome-wide Regulatory Dynamics of
Translation in the Plasmodium falciparum Asexual Blood Stages”
for consideration at eLife. Your article has been favorably evaluated
by Richard Losick (Senior editor) and 3 reviewers, one of whom is a member of our Board
of Reviewing Editors.
The Reviewing editor and the other reviewers discussed their comments before we reached
this decision, and the Reviewing editor has assembled the following comments to help you
prepare a revised submission.
This manuscript presents genome-wide transcriptional maps and association of the
detected steady-state RNAs to ribosomes as a means of studying the possible use of
translation as a post-transcriptional control mechanism during 5 stages of development
in P. falciparum. The use of such a regulatory strategy would help to
explain why there is a continuous flow of transcription from the majority of genes in
P. falciparum throughout the development cycle in place of a more
regulated and dynamic gene expression strategy. In addition, the authors seek to enhance
our understanding of how this regulatory strategy is enacted in this organism. Thus,
this is a timely and potentially and important manuscript. However, overall, the
manuscript contains several important issues that require attention to help readers
better appreciate the messages communicated.
1) Given the critiques of the riboseq approaches (Chew et al, 2013;119 Guttman et al,
2013) it would be important to firmly establish that the RNAs isolated in the ribosome
protocol are part of a productive polysome translation complex and instead of individual
monosomes. This concern is given support in which shows considerable size 80s peaks in the
untreated samples for the Late Troph, Schizonts and merozoites stages. In short, the
detection of RNA protected by ribosomes in these footprint experiments cannot always be
with associated with RNA destined for translation. Wilson & Masel, 2011 have
reported that non-productive binding of single ribosomes to mRNA do not undergo
productive translation. Thus, RNAseq results obtained from the 80S peak might be
compared to RNAseq results obtained from RNAs isolated from the polysome peak. This
would act as a control against this problematic possibility.
2) Since the authors do not generate a proteomic dataset for their samples, it is not
convincing that the translation efficiency values that they infer from their ribosomal
occupancy profiles are direct indicators of protein synthesis. This is especially true
given the delay in protein as compared to transcript detection observed during the
P. falciparum IDC (Le Roch et al., Genome Biol., 2004 and Foth et
al., Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2011). It is also important to note that select noncoding
RNAs show a translational efficiency similar to coding regions, even though they are not
translated (Ingolia et al., Cell, 2011, and Guttman et al., Cell, 2013); these noncoding
RNAs can be distinguished from coding regions only by their ribosomal release score,
which was not calculated in this study. Together, the translation efficiency measured
here is not enough to indicate if a protein product is being made. The authors have to
provide additional evidence or analyses to conclusively state that there is a lack of
“overt” translational control.
3) Another reason for the detection of a transcript in the ribosomal occupancy profile
could be due to its presence in other ribonucleoprotein complexes that associate or
co-sediment with the 80S monosome fractions. The authors infer the same when they
discuss the 3' UTRs of transcripts ( ). Could this be the case for other regions of apparent ribosomal occupancy such
as the 5' leader sequence? The authors should discuss this in more detail. A
straightforward experiment would be to determine the protein composition of the 80S
monosome fractions isolated for ribosome profiling in different stages of the IDC. A
related question: Is there a lack of polysomes in merozoite stages? This appears to be
the case in .
4) Another concern is that the authors do not discuss their data in light of the
polysome occupancy study published by Bunnik et al., Genome Biology, 2013, and the
delayed translation phenomenon that has been observed by Le Roch et al., Genome Biol.,
2004, and Foth et al., Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2011.
5) The antisense RNAs section is not 'up-to-date' with the literature. Three
recent studies have detected pervasive transcription of the parasite genome –
López-Barragán et al., BMC Genomics, 2011; Siegel et al., BMC Genomics, 2014;
Wei et al., PLOS One, 2014 – none of which are referenced and discussed here.
6) The authors establish a threshold read count, in terms of reads per million mapped
(rM), for downstream analysis. The threshold chosen here seems reasonable for this data
set, but I do think there is an important clarification to be made. There are two
separate questions that might be addressed by a read count threshold: a minimum
expression level for biologically significant effects and a minimum count for
statistically reliable analysis. An rM threshold is reasonable for the former, while a
raw read count seems more appropriate for the latter. Doubling sequence coverage would
permit statistically reliable detection of lower expression levels.
7) At several points the authors discuss a correlation between mRNA abundance and
translation, or between transcription and translation; these seem to be used
interchangeably. The authors seem to mean that the amount of protein produced correlates
well with the abundance of the mRNA that encodes it – but this phrase could also
suggest that more abundant mRNAs are translated more highly. The authors should clarify
this point when it's first mentioned.
8) The authors discuss relative translational efficiency (TE). Measures of overall
translation and TE in different samples are all scaled by the per-million-mapped factor
to correct for differences in sequencing depth, etc. This correction obscures changes in
the bulk mRNA content or translational activity between different stages. These effects
are discussed in e.g. Lovén et al., Cell 2012. The authors state that
“Absolute mean translational efficiencies were the same in all stages” but
this conclusion is almost an arithmetic identity after applying per-million-mapped
normalization. The polysome profiles presented in indicate large changes in overall
translational activity at different developmental stages.
9) In discussing RESA2 I was confused by until I realized that only the truncated reading
frame was shown. It would be great to indicate the full-length reading frame on the
graph.
10) In discussing the eIF2alpha kinase IK1, the authors note that the gene is
translationally silenced, perhaps reflecting one of the few uORF-mediated translational
silencing events in Plasmodium. As eIF2alpha phosphorylation can induce a bypass of such
silencing, this seems like a potentially interesting auto regulatory system – in
animals, the eIF2alpha phosphatase GADD34 is regulated by uORF silencing in order to
provide feedback; here it would seem that positive feedback may act instead.
11) The authors discuss qualitatively the observation that many abundant but poorly
translated mRNAs are not detectable by proteomics, in contrast to well-translated
messages. It would be valuable to quantify detectability, controlling for mRNA
abundance, and test less anecdotally whether detectability, as a proxy for protein
abundance, follows translation better than mRNA abundance.
12) It is striking that the 5' UTRs in Plasmodium were longer than the 3' UTRs
– this differs from the situation in other eukaryotes, over a wide range of
absolute UTR length. The authors should comment on this.
10.7554/eLife.04106.037Author response
1) Given the critiques of the riboseq approaches (Chew et al, 2013;119
Guttman et al, 2013) it would be important to firmly establish that the RNAs
isolated in the ribosome protocol are part of a productive polysome translation
complex and instead of individual monosomes. This concern is given support
in
 
which shows considerable size 80s peaks in the untreated samples for the Late
Troph, Schizonts and merozoites stages. In short, the detection of RNA protected by
ribosomes in these footprint experiments cannot always be with associated with RNA
destined for translation. Wilson & Masel, 2011 have reported that non-productive
binding of single ribosomes to mRNA do not undergo productive translation. Thus,
RNAseq results obtained from the 80S peak might be compared to RNAseq results
obtained from RNAs isolated from the polysome peak. This would act as a control
against this problematic possibility.
We thank the reviewers for pointing out this important issue. Our response to this issue
and #2 are linked; therefore please refer to the section below for our
response.
2) Since the authors do not generate a proteomic dataset for their samples, it
is not convincing that the translation efficiency values that they infer from their
ribosomal occupancy profiles are direct indicators of protein synthesis. This is
especially true given the delay in protein as compared to transcript detection
observed during the P. falciparum IDC (Le Roch et al., Genome Biol., 2004 and Foth et
al., Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2011). It is also important to note that select noncoding
RNAs show a translational efficiency similar to coding regions, even though they are
not translated (Ingolia et al., Cell, 2011, and Guttman et al., Cell, 2013); these
noncoding RNAs can be distinguished from coding regions only by their ribosomal
release score, which was not calculated in this study. Together, the translation
efficiency measured here is not enough to indicate if a protein product is being
made. The authors have to provide additional evidence or analyses to conclusively
state that there is a lack of “overt” translational
control.
To summarize the questions raised by reviewer points #1 and #2:
A) Do monosome fragments actually represent productive translating ribosomes?
B) Given that there are footprints that apparently map to ncRNAs, which, by definition,
are not expected to be translated, what is evidence that the TE values faithfully
reflect translational efficiency?
C) What about the Wilson & Masel findings with regard to unproductive ribosome
binding?
D) Given that we do not have a proteomic dataset to accompany this study, how do we
reconcile our findings with the apparent delay in protein translation that is observed
during the IDC as published by Le Roch and Foth?
Issues A & B are inherently linked. First, a number of methods have recently arisen
to assist in the discrimination of RNA fragments that derive from ribosome protection as
opposed to anything else.
In a recently published study by Ingolia et al. (Cell Rep., September
2014), the authors propose a simple metric to distinguish true ribosome footprints from
either spurious RNA fragments or non-ribosomal RNA binding proteins by comparing the
cumulative read size distribution between protein coding genes and classical non-coding
sequences (such as telomerase RNA or RNAse P). According to this study, comparison of
read size distribution alone is sufficient to identify true ribosome footprints.
Our manuscript actually uses this exact metric of read size distribution comparisons in
Figure S8. Our data clearly shows a difference between footprints mapping to the
5’ leader and CDS, as opposed to noncoding RNA derived fragments (rRNAs, tRNAs).
Thus, for each region with sufficient numbers of mapped fragments, we assess whether the
cumulative distribution of fragment lengths is consistent with ribosome binding or
not.
In another published paper by Guttman et al., the authors use a metric called the
ribosomal release score (RRS) which is similar to the disengagement score (DS) from Chew
et al, to distinguish true coding regions from noncoding RNAs by determining whether
there is evidence for a substantial decrease in the number of ribosome footprints
following the stop codon, a feature that would be expected for a legitimately translated
region.
We have further analyzed our dataset using the ribosomal release score (RSS) metric for
a number of non-coding RNAs for which we have derived TE values and compared these
ncRNAs with the rest of our protein coding genes (below). We find that TE values for
protein coding genes are well correlated with the ribosome release scores (black dots),
yet nearly all ncRNAs yield poor release scores, regardless of TE value (red dots). 
Thus, both the method using cumulative distributions of fragment lengths and the RRS
metric are consistent with ongoing translation in protein coding regions, as opposed to
regions within classic ncRNAs (like tRNAs). However, it should be noted that not all
regions fit neatly into one category or another. Regions such as the 5’ leader
sequences reveal ribosome density with fragment length distributions that are
indistinguishable from those within coding regions, yet in such regions, an RRS metric
cannot be calculated. Ingolia et al. (Cell Rep., September 2014), argue that translation
on transcripts outside of protein-coding regions can in fact produce polypeptides and
therefore a TE value is valid for many non-coding sequences such as 5’UTRs or
lncRNAs.
Within coding regions, the legitimacy of ribosome protected fragments and their
relationship to translational efficiency is now widely supported in a variety of
organisms [Stern-Ginossar et al., Science 2012, Oh et al., Cell 2011, Dunn et al.,
eLife 2013, Ingolia et al. Cell 2011, Smith et al., Cell Rep. 2014,
reviewed in Ingolia, Nat. Rev Genet. 2014], yet clearly there is still some debate in
the field with regard to unexpected ribosome density outside of coding regions.
Realizing the complexity of this issue, we have chosen a conservative path for our
manuscript, whereby we use TE to only refer to protein coding regions, and RD (ribosomal
density) to refer to those outside of the coding regions (like 5’ RD).
C) What about the Wilson & Masel findings with regard to unproductive ribosome
binding?
With specific regard to the Wilson & Masel 2011 paper cited by the reviewer, these
authors report ribosomal association to stable unannotated transcripts, yet did not
actually assess whether these complexes were engaged in actual translation and synthesis
of a peptide. In fact they state:
“While we do not know the extent to which this ribosomal association
leads to translation, these SUTs, apart from RDT1, do not appear to encode functional,
protein-coding genes.”
The authors speculate that perhaps ribosome association to unannotated or short ORFs may
indeed lead to translation “by accident at least at low levels” and
“provide raw material for de novo birth of protein-coding
genes.”
D) How do we reconcile our findings with the apparent delay in protein translation that
is observed during the IDC as published by Le Roch and Foth?
With regards to a comparison between the data presented in this manuscript and previous
mass spectrometry based studies, the reviewer cites two articles which report a delay in
mRNA abundance with respect to protein detection, Le Roch et al., Genome Biol., 2004 and
Foth et al., Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2011.
In Le Roch et al., the authors analyzed a total of 459 mRNA-protein pairs and found that
for 171 genes transcript abundance in one stage correlated better with protein levels of
the next stage (>0.5 increase in Spearman rank correlation). However, it should be
noted that 45 of these 171 transcripts were also better correlated to the proteins in
the previous stage. By excluding these genes, a delay between
transcript abundance and the detection of its corresponding protein may be attributed to
only 129 transcripts.
In Foth et al. the authors analyze 125 mRNA-protein pairs and detect multiple isoforms
for some of the proteins. A delay between mRNA abundance and protein detection is
observed for 63.7% of 237 protein isoforms (it is unclear how many of the 125 genes
analyzed this represents).
Here, we report 177 and 124 translationally up- and down-regulated genes, respectively.
This represents 295 genes, which is more than twice the number detected in Le Roch or
Foth. However, these 295 genes represent only 8% of the 3,605 genes present in our
analysis, and for remaining 92%, we find that transcript abundance is proportional to
ribosome occupancy throughout the lifecycle.
Thus, while we identify more instances of translational control than all prior studies,
these instances appear to be the exception, and not the rule, as the vast majority of
genes appear to lack overt translational control as measured by this assay.
3) Another reason for the detection of a transcript in the ribosomal occupancy
profile could be due to its presence in other ribonucleoprotein complexes that
associate or co-sediment with the 80S monosome fractions. The authors infer the same
when they discuss the 3' UTRs of transcripts ( ). Could this be the case for
other regions of apparent ribosomal occupancy such as the 5' leader sequence?
The authors should discuss this in more detail. A straightforward experiment would be
to determine the protein composition of the 80S monosome fractions isolated for
ribosome profiling in different stages of the IDC. A related question: Is there a
lack of polysomes in merozoite stages? This appears to be the case in
 .
The issue of distinguishing between fragments that derive from actual ribosome binding
as opposed to other RNA binding proteins is discussed above. In short, we use the
cumulative distribution of read lengths in a manner identical to Ingolia et al. (Cell
Rep., September 2014), as a discrimination method. Here, we find that the fragments
deriving from the 5’ leaders show a perfectly overlapping cumulative distribution
to coding regions. This is not the case for known ncRNAs, like tRNAs.
Regardless, whether our 80S fractions contain binding activities other than ribosomes
can be assessed by mass spectrometry, as the reviewer points out. During the course of
this study, we in fact prepared schizont and merozoite monosome fractions and a pooled
schizont polysome fraction for peptide sequencing by tandem mass spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS). The results of this analysis are shown below: 
These results indicate that the monosomes and polysome fractions that we collected
contain mostly ribosomal components (89–100%). The remainder 4.3-10.4% of
Plasmodium proteins that are non-ribosomal constitute highly expressed proteins such as
heat shock proteins, exported proteins, membrane proteins, GAPDH, and other housekeeping
genes.
Only 0.26% of spectral counts in the schizont monosome fraction mapped to putative
non-ribosomal RNA-binding proteins (such as the DNA/RNA-binding protein Alba). While we
cannot exhaustively account for every protein that co-sediments with the 80S peak, this
proteomic evidence confirms that the vast majority of the 80S proteins are
ribosomal.
With regard to the polysome profiles from merozoites, we agree that the relative peak
height of the polysome region compared to the 80S appears reduced. This could be the
result of a global reduction in overall translation at this stage. In this study, it
should be noted that we do not directly assess bulk or absolute levels of overall
translation activity. Rather, this study examines the relative translational efficiency
of transcripts on a per-timepoint, per message basis. In merozoites, we do observe a
slightly broader distribution of efficiencies, but not dramatically so.
4) Another concern is that the authors do not discuss their data in light of the
polysome occupancy study published by Bunnik et al., Genome Biology, 2013, and the
delayed translation phenomenon that has been observed by Le Roch et al., Genome
Biol., 2004, and Foth et al., Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2011.
For a comparison with Le Roch et al., Genome Biol., 2004, and Foth et al., Mol. Cell.
Proteomics, 2011 please see our response to points #1 & #2, part D.
The reviewers ask for a comparison with the work published by Bunnik et al. where
polysome-associated mRNA was compared to total steady state mRNA. A major conclusion of
this paper is that there exists strong translational control for 471 genes, where the
peak of transcriptional abundance is in trophozoite or schizont stage, but they are most
highly associated with polysomes in the ring stage.
There are a number of confounding factors that obstruct a fair comparison on the work
presented here and that of Bunnik et al. These factors include the strain, the time
points sampled, the methodology for isolation of polysomes, and most importantly, the
overall sequencing coverage. We discuss each of these factors below.
In Bunnik et al., the authors used the 3D7 strain of P. falciparum to
assess hours 0, 18, and 36 hours post invasion whereas we used the W2 strain to sample
hours 11, 21, 31, 45 in addition to purified merozoites.
A critical step in ribosome profiling is the isolation of intact polysomes. In our
hands, directly using sucrose gradients yields polysome profiles enriched in higher
order polysomes, with more than 3 ribosomes. Polysome profiles in Bunnik et al. are
obtained by pelleting parasite lysates on sucrose cushions, and re-loading the ribosomal
pellets on sucrose gradients. This additional step may cause the dissociation of
ribosomes from mRNAs, and could explain the reduced amount of higher order polysomes in
their profiles, which in turn may skew their assessment of translation towards lower
values. (Compare Bunnik )
Finally, sequencing coverage and biological replicates are the most important
determinant of obtaining reliable data in our experiments. In Bunnik et al, there is
only a single biological replicate (just the schizont stage). Their deepest exome-wide
coverage for polysomes is 12.7x (Table 1, Bunnik et al), and their average coverage for
polysomes is 5.3x. The average exome-wide coverage of our ribosome footprint data is
159.9x, which is, on average, 30 times greater than Bunnik et al. (table
below). 
More importantly, the major difference between the Bunnik dataset and our own is the set
of 471 genes that the authors identify as being translationally up-regulated in rings.
Approximately 76% of these genes fall below our threshold for minimum read coverage
(32rM) for analysis, despite the fact that our ring stage coverage is 456-fold greater
than the Bunnik zero hour polysome sample (315x coverage compared to Bunnik’s
0.69x).
Of the remaining genes (excluding apicoplast genes, var, rifin, and stevors), we
identified only five genes that we would consider to be translationally up-regulated in
rings.
Through our own biological replicates of each time point and our assessment of
reliability with respect to sequencing coverage ( ), we believe it would be inappropriate to
draw conclusions for genes or whole datasets that lack sufficient coverage, and thus it
is not possible to cleanly compare the two datasets.
5) The antisense RNAs section is not 'up-to-date' with the literature.
Three recent studies have detected pervasive transcription of the parasite genome
– López-Barragán et al., BMC Genomics, 2011; Siegel et al., BMC
Genomics, 2014; Wei et al., PLOS One, 2014 – none of which are referenced and
discussed here.
We thank the reviewers for pointing this out. We updated our antisense section to
reference López-Barragán et al., BMC Genomics, 2011 and Siegel et al., BMC
Genomics, 2014. The text now reads “Previous serial analysis of gene expression
(SAGE) ( ), nuclear run-on
experiments ( ) and more
recently antisense splicing events detected by RNA-seq ( ; ), suggest that antisense RNAs are
synthesized by RNA pol II and may constitute up to ∼12% of the erythrocytic-stage
steady-state RNA ( ), yet
their presence and biological role, if any, remains unclear. A more recent study found
no correlation between natural antisense transcript levels and protein abundance ( ).”
The work by Wei et al. analyzes uncapped/non-adenylated intermediate size ncRNAs, which
we do not focus on.
6) The authors establish a threshold read count, in terms of reads per million
mapped (rM), for downstream analysis. The threshold chosen here seems reasonable for
this data set, but I do think there is an important clarification to be made. There
are two separate questions that might be addressed by a read count threshold: a
minimum expression level for biologically significant effects and a minimum count for
statistically reliable analysis. An rM threshold is reasonable for the former, while
a raw read count seems more appropriate for the latter. Doubling sequence coverage
would permit statistically reliable detection of lower expression
levels.
We took a conservative approach by choosing a minimum of rM of 32 per gene. We agree
with the reviewer that a reliable statistical analysis could still be obtained by
lowering this threshold and we did so for the antisense analysis where we chose a
≥16rM bar. Future studies into these low count reads will be necessary to
establish their biological significance.
7) At several points the authors discuss a correlation between mRNA abundance
and translation, or between transcription and translation; these seem to be used
interchangeably. The authors seem to mean that the amount of protein produced
correlates well with the abundance of the mRNA that encodes it – but this
phrase could also suggest that more abundant mRNAs are translated more highly. The
authors should clarify this point when it's first mentioned.
We fully agree with the reviewers and clarified the ambiguity by changing the text from
“To determine the exact level of correlation between mRNA abundance and
translation we directly compared mRNA and ribosome footprint density measurements ( ). In general, translation is tightly
correlated with transcription for all phasic and non-phasic genes in rings (r =
0.85), early trophozoites (r = 0.93), late trophozoites (r = 0.91), schizonts
(r = 0.89) and purified merozoites (r = 0.86)”, to “To determine
the exact level of correlation between transcription and translation we directly
compared mRNA and ribosome footprint density measurements ( ). In general, translation is tightly correlated with
transcription for all phasic and non-phasic genes in rings (r = 0.85), early
trophozoites (r = 0.93), late trophozoites (r = 0.91), schizonts (r =
0.89) and purified merozoites (r = 0.86). This indicates that when an mRNA is
detected in one stage it is associated proportionally with ribosomes within the same
stage.”
We changed: “The simultaneous capture of transcription and translation is
expected to be…” to “The simultaneous capture of mRNA abundance and
translation is expected to be…”
We changed the phrase “… peak transcription occurring in rings and
schizonts” to “…peak mRNA abundance occurring in rings and
schizonts”.
8) The authors discuss relative translational efficiency (TE). Measures of
overall translation and TE in different samples are all scaled by the
per-million-mapped factor to correct for differences in sequencing depth, etc. This
correction obscures changes in the bulk mRNA content or translational activity
between different stages. These effects are discussed in e.g. Lovén et al., Cell
2012. The authors state that “Absolute mean translational efficiencies were
the same in all stages” but this conclusion is almost an arithmetic identity
after applying per-million-mapped normalization. The polysome profiles presented
in
 
indicate large changes in overall translational activity at different
developmental stages.
This study measures the relative change in translational efficiency on a per-gene,
per-time point basis, and does not measure absolute changes in bulk translation or
transcription, as the reviewer correctly points out. To clarify this for the reader, we
have added a statement in the Discussion highlighting this important point
“However, we note that this dataset only provides a direct measure of relative
changes in translational efficiencies rather than changes in bulk transcription and
translation.”
With respect to the statement that the reviewer highlights regarding mean translational
efficiencies, we have corrected and amended this sentence, since the mean TEs are in
fact not identical in all stages (for example, the mean TE in schizonts compared to
early trophs are 1.47-fold different). As shown in , the shape of the TE distributions are not identical, and thus we
would indeed expect some variation in the mean.
The text now reads:
“Absolute mean translational efficiencies in all stages (log2TE
µRings = -0.43, log2TE
µE.trophs. = -0.56, log2TE
µL.trophs. = -0.31, log2TE
µSchizonts = -0.16 and log2TE
µMerozoites = -0.68) had a maximum fold
difference of 1.47-fold observed between early trophozoites and schizonts.”
9) In discussing RESA2 I was confused by until I realized that
only the truncated reading frame was shown. It would be great to indicate the
full-length reading frame on the graph.
We thank the reviewers for indicating to us how to make the figure clearer. As advised,
we added the annotated gene model described in PlasmoDB version 7.1, which is the
version used for reference in this work. 
10) In discussing the eIF2alpha kinase IK1, the authors note that the gene is
translationally silenced, perhaps reflecting one of the few uORF-mediated
translational silencing events in Plasmodium. As eIF2alpha phosphorylation can induce
a bypass of such silencing, this seems like a potentially interesting auto regulatory
system – in animals, the eIF2alpha phosphatase GADD34 is regulated by uORF
silencing in order to provide feedback; here it would seem that positive feedback may
act instead.
We fully agree with the reviewers. Ribosome footprints partially overlap with 2 of the
18 uORFs counted on the 5’ leader of the eIF2 alpha kinase transcript. Whether
these uORFs or other 5’ leader motifs are responsible for the silencing of the
downstream coding region remains an important question. Additionally, this gene presents
the lowest ribosomal release score calculated, which strongly suggests that it is not
being translated.
11) The authors discuss qualitatively the observation that many abundant but
poorly translated mRNAs are not detectable by proteomics, in contrast to
well-translated messages. It would be valuable to quantify detectability, controlling
for mRNA abundance, and test less anecdotally whether detectability, as a proxy for
protein abundance, follows translation better than mRNA abundance.
We did not wish to make the statement that genes that have high mRNA abundance would not
be detected by proteomic methods, and we thank reviewers for highlighting this
misunderstanding. We have therefore revised our manuscript as following:
We changed the phrase from: “Thus, our ribosome profiling dataset highlights
instances of translational control of genes for which, in the presence of abundant mRNA,
the protein counterpart is unlikely to be detected by proteomic methods” to
“Thus, our ribosome profiling dataset highlights instances of translational
control of genes that may not be detected by proteomic methods.”
12) It is striking that the 5' UTRs in Plasmodium were longer than the
3' UTRs – this differs from the situation in other eukaryotes, over a
wide range of absolute UTR length. The authors should comment on this.
A review of the current literature reveals a wide distribution of different 5’UTR
sizes in different types of organisms. Previous studies found that 5’UTRs of
mRNAs encoding genes which need to be strongly and finely regulated are often longer
than average (Kozak 1987; Hurowitz and Brown 2003; David et al. 2006; Nagalakshmi et al.
2008; Bruno et al. 2010). On the other hand, Lynch et al. (2005) proposed that the
length of the 5’UTR is driven mainly by random genetic drift and mutational
processes that cause stochastic turnover in transcription-initiation sites and premature
start codons, combined with a selective constrain against the premature initiation of
translation. Additional sequencing and mapping of transcript architecture in other
eukaryotes will help establish in the future whether or not P.
falciparum truly lies at the extreme of the distribution.