pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospath101238921plosPLoS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC8544838PMC8544838.1854483885448383461400610.1371/journal.ppat.1009969PPATHOGENS-D-21-010981Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsParasitic DiseasesBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral Transmission and InfectionHost CellsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesCell MembranesBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryEnzymologyEnzymesPhosphatasesAdenosine TriphosphataseBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsEnzymesPhosphatasesAdenosine TriphosphataseBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsPhenotypesBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesCell MembranesMembrane ProteinsBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaProtozoansParasitic ProtozoansMalarial ParasitesBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsContractile ProteinsActinsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsCytoskeletal ProteinsActinsCo-chaperone involvement in knob biogenesis implicates host-derived chaperones in malaria virulence
Chaperone involvement in host cell modificationhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7982-9764DiehlMathiasInvestigationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0018-7349RolingLenaInvestigation https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1559-5097RohlandLukasInvestigationWriting – review & editing WeberSebastianInvestigation CyrklaffMarekInvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3334-3726SanchezCecilia P.ConceptualizationInvestigation https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6027-0796BerettaCarlo A.InvestigationMethodology SimonCaroline S.InvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8762-4259GuizettiJulienInvestigationMethodology HahnJuliaInvestigation SchulzNormaInvestigation https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7859-3112MayerMatthias P.ConceptualizationInvestigationSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3494-7767PrzyborskiJude M.ConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Parasitology, Centre for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg, Germany2
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Justus Liebig University, Gießen, Germany3
Center for Molecular Biology (ZMBH), Heidelberg, Germany4
Electron Microscopy Core Facility, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany5
Nikon Imaging Center, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany6
CellNetworks Math-Clinic at Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, GermanyDeitschKirk W.Editor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript and its files.

## Introduction
Plasmodium falciparum causes the most severe form of malaria in humans, malaria tropica, responsible for over 200 million clinical cases and 400,000 deaths per annum, mainly in children under the age of 5 and mostly in sub-Saharan Africa [ ]. The pathology associated with malaria infection is largely due to the ability of infected human RBCs (red blood cells, RBC) to adhere to a number of receptors on endothelial cells within tissues and organs [ ]. This cytoadherence results in reduced blood flow in the affected areas, hypoxia and (in cerebral malaria) increased intracranial pressure [ , ]. The phenomenon of cytoadherence results from parasite-induced host cell modification in which parasite-encoded proteins are transported to and exposed at the surface of the infected host cell, where they mediate endothelial binding and antigenic variation [ – ]. In addition to these surface proteins, parasites also encode, express, and export a large number of other proteins to the infected RBC [ – , , ]. Many of these proteins are specific to P. falciparum, and their function is still not well understood, partly due to limitations in reverse genetic systems [ , , ].
Within the predicted ‘exportome’ are 19 proteins belonging to the family of J-domain proteins (JDPs, also called HSP40s), and this exported family appears to be expanded in the Laveranian clade, suggesting important functions in these parasite species [ , ]. In other systems, HSP40s act as cochaperones for HSP70, a protein family that lies at the heart of proteostasis and other essential cellular processes [ ]. Previous studies have localised several exported members of the PfHSP40 family to various structures within the infected RBC, including RBC plasma membrane, Maurer’s clefts, knobs, and J-dots [ , , ]. Knockout studies suggest that, although some of the exported HSP40s are essential, others can be deleted without any observable phenotype, and knockout of others results in aberrant cellular morphology, cytoadherence, and rigidity of infected RBC (iRBC), suggesting a potential role for this protein family in host cell modification and virulence characteristics [ , ] ( ). One exported HSP40, PFA66 (encoded by PF3D7_0113700, formerly PFA0660w), was previously localised to J-dots, novel structures within the iRBC containing further exported parasite-encoded HSP40s, an exported parasite-encoded HSP70 (PfHSP70-X), and a number of other exported proteins [ , , ]. An earlier medium throughput knockout study failed to generate parasites deficient in PFA66, and therefore its function in the parasite’s lifecycle remains elusive [ ].
In this study, we utilise selection-linked integration-targeted gene disruption (SLI-TGD [ ]) to generate parasites expressing a non-functional PFA66 truncation mutant and characterise the resulting parasite lines. We find that inactivation of PFA66 function leads to dramatic aberrations in host cell modification, especially in knob morphology, capacity for cytoadherence and surface exposure of the virulence factor PfEMP1. Our data suggest an important role for exported HSP40s in parasite pathogenicity. Additionally, our data strongly implicate residual human HSP70 in parasite-induced host cell modification.

## Results

## Generation of PFA66 truncation and complementation cell lines
Genetic manipulation via single crossover was performed using a selection-linked integration targeted gene disruption strategy [ ]. Integration of the plasmid would lead to the production of a GFP-tagged, truncated, non-functional PFA66 protein lacking the entire C-terminal substrate binding domain (SBD), referred to as dPFA. We transfected CS2 parasites that had previously been freshly selected for binding to chondroitin-sulphate-A (CSA) as this binding phenotype would be essential for later characterisation [ , ]. Plasmid integration into the PFA0660w/PF3D7_0113700 locus was verified via PCR using primers designed to yield products upon integration of the plasmid into the genome via primers spanning the integration site ( ). Appearance of bands representing the 5’ and 3’ integration, as well as the disappearance of bands representing the endogenous PFA0660w locus, demonstrated specific integration of the plasmid into the genome ( and ), yielding parasite line CS2ΔPFA (referred to as ΔPFA). Immunodetection using an α-GFP antibody revealed the presence of dPFA::GFP fusion at the predicted size in cell lysates derived from ΔPFA but not parental CS2 parasites (predicted MW 39 kDa, ). Additionally, one further higher molecular weight band was observed, likely representing a non-skipped fusion (predicted MW 68 kDa, +), similar to that previously reported [ ]. Although levels of the control SERP protein were similar in all samples analysed, verifying equal sample loading, the dPFA::GFP fusion appears to be present at a lower level than in parasites expressing endogenous full length PFA tagged with GFP ( ). Although we are unsure or the reasons for this, the higher abundance of the commonly observed GFP degradation product around 25kDa ( *) may suggest lower protein stability. Together, this data indicated successful integration of the vector into the PFA0660w locus, leading to the production of a truncated product dPFA lacking the substrate binding domain required for correct localisation and function [ ]. To verify that any aberrant phenotypes observed were due to a lack of PFA66 and not second site events, we generated a complementation line that expressed a full-length, functional 3xHA (hemagglutinin)-tagged copy of PFA66 from an episome, under the control of the endogenous PFA66 promoter, referred to as ΔPFA[PFA::HA]. Expression of this complementation construct was verified by immunoblotting using α-HA antibodies ( ).
 

## dPFA is soluble within the host cell cytosol
Full-length PFA66 has previously been localised to the J-dots, and a follow up study suggested that the SBD of exported HSP40s is required for correct localisation [ , ]. Furthermore, the SBD of PFA66 has previously been shown to bind cholesterol, and this is also likely to be required for correct localisation and thus protein function [ ]. As dPFA lacks the SBD, but still contains both an N-terminal signal peptide and a recessed PEXEL trafficking signal, we expect export of dPFA::GFP to the host cell [ , ]. Live cell imaging and IFA failed to detect dPFA. This is likely due to the low abundance, and dispersion of the truncated protein throughout the entire host cell. We therefore used equinatoxin (EQT) to selectively permeabilise the RBC plasma membrane and allow sub-cellular fractionation of iRBC [ , ]. Immunodetection using antibodies against the compartment-specific markers SERP (parasitophorous vacuole), human HSP70 (HsHSP70, RBC cytosol), aldolase (ALDO, parasite cytoplasm), and GFP reveals co-fractionation of dPFA with HsHSP70, verifying that dPFA::GFP is found in the host cell cytosol and furthermore that dPFA::GFP is found in the soluble phase and not in the membrane fraction as we have previously demonstrated for the full-length protein ( [ ]). Taken together, these data suggests that deletion of the SBD of PFA66 leads to a non-functional protein.

## Truncation of PFA66 affects novel permeability pathway (NPP) activity and confers a small growth advantage
Exported parasite proteins carry out a multitude of functions supporting the survival of P. falciparum parasites. One of these is the establishment of NPPs of the iRBC to support the uptake of essential nutrients [ , ]. To investigate a potential role of PFA66 in NPP activity, we used a sorbitol uptake/lysis assay, which revealed that RBC infected with ΔPFA parasites show a small but significantly reduced sorbitol-induced lysis, implying a reduced NPP capacity ( ). To examine whether this reduction in NPP activity affects parasite viability, growth of both cell lines was compared over four growth cycles (~8 days) using flow cytometry. Surprisingly, a slight but significant growth advantage (calculated as below 1% advantage per cycle) of the truncation cell line compared to the parental cell line was observed ( ).

## Truncation of PFA66 causes severely deformed knob morphology
Knobs are electron-dense protrusions of the iRBC surface that help correctly present the major virulence factor PfEMP1, thus facilitating iRBC cytoadhesion and concomitantly increasing clinical pathology [ – , , ]. As exported HSP40s have previously been implicated in knob formation [ , ], we used scanning electron microscopy to visualise knobs on the surface of CS2- and ΔPFA-iRBCs. RBCs infected with the parental parasite line CS2 showed normal knob morphology, with an even distribution of small knobs over the entire surface of the infected cell ( and ). Small variations in knob number and size are observed and are likely due to slightly different developmental stages of the parasite (compare to ). In stark contrast, RBCs containing ΔPFA displayed, in addition to a population of normal knobs, knobs with extremely aberrant morphology. These knobs varied in their aberration, and included vastly extended-, wide tall-, wide flat-, and branched- knobs ( ). Some of the elongated knobs reached lengths of ~0.7 μm. To distinguish these abnormal structures from classical knobs, we will refer to them as “extended knobs” (eKnobs). For purposes of quantification, we manually counted and classified by sight knobs/eKnobs to one of three classes I) normal/small knobs II) abnormal/enlarged eKnobs III) deformed/elongated eKnobs. This analysis revealed a significant reduction in the overall number of knobs/eKnobs in ΔPFA-infected RBCs when compared to wild type CS2 (CS vs ΔPFA, ). 22% of surface structures exhibited abnormal morphology in ΔPFA-infected RBCs ( ). Interestingly, we occasionally observed extended knob-like structures on the surface of RBCs infected with CS2 parasites ( ) at a level of 2%. As a control, we complemented ΔPFA function with full-length PFA66 expressed from an episome (ΔPFA[PFA::HA]), and both density and morphology of eKnobs/knobs returned to wild type levels ( ).
 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) on thin sections prepared from RBCs infected with either WT CS2 or ΔPFA parasites substantiated our observations. CS2 parasites produced clearly defined electron-dense knob structures of a restricted diameter and height above the RBC plasma membrane, whereas ΔPFA displayed eKnobs extending from the RBC surface into the external medium ( and ). The lumen of these eKnobs was often extremely electron dense, hinting at their molecular relation to knobs. Occasionally we observed membrane-bound structures extending from RBCs infected with CS2 parasites, but the lumen of these structures was not electron dense; therefore, these structures cannot be classed as eKnobs. The morphology of Maurer’s clefts showed the normal variation in morphology in both samples ( ). Several clefts appear to lie perpendicular to the host cell membrane, but this phenotype was observed in both samples ( ).

## Electron-dense material is a scaffold for eKnob structure
Intrigued by the apparent electron-dense core of eKnobs in TEM, we conducted electron tomography analysis on thick sections prepared from ΔPFA-iRBCs. Subsequent 3D reconstruction and surface rendering of the distinct densities in tomographic volumes allows a high-fidelity glimpse into the fine structure of eKnobs. This analysis verified the presence of electron-dense material within and at the base of eKnobs ( ). This material fills out the entire eKnob rather than only lining the structure, and the distribution of this material closely matched the structure of the eKnob. In some cases (3 out of 10), the electron-dense material at the base of the eKnob was connected via a thin bridge to the material inside of the eKnob ( , ).

## KAHRP distribution is changed in ΔPFA-iRBCs
KAHRP has long been held to be a crucial knob-associated protein as parasites lacking this protein no longer form knobs [ , ], and KAHRP truncations show varying aberrant knob phenotypes [ ]. For this reason, we investigated the localisation of KAHRP in RBCs infected with our ΔPFA cell line. IFA on fixed cells demonstrated a punctate distribution of KAHRP in cells infected with both wild type and mutant cell lines ( ). Automated analysis with a self-generated ImageJ plugin paired with Ilastik [ ] revealed that structures labelled for KAHRP were equally numerous but statistically larger in diameter in RBCs infected with ΔPFA than with CS2 ( ). Localisation of other exported parasite proteins via IFA showed no dramatic difference between the cell lines ( ). To exclude that the KAHRP result was due to non-specific binding of antibodies, for example, we episomally expressed a KAHRP::mCherry fusion in both WT and ΔPFA parasites ( ). Surprisingly, considering the relatively low resolution of live cell epifluorescence microscopy, (but preserving membrane integrity and cell morphology), structures labelled with KAHRP::mCherry could be seen to emerge from the surface of RBCs infected with ΔPFA, possibly representing eKnobs ( , – Videos). Based on the previous result, we wanted to understand whether KAHRP is directly associated with eKnobs and used immunogold labelling of thin sections derived from CS2 and ΔPFA iRBCs to localise KAHRP. Although we encountered high background staining of the RBC cytosol in both cases, analysis revealed considerably more label was associated with knobs/eKnobs than with the cytosolic background ( ). Analysis of the location of the KAHRP label in relation to the length of the knob/eKnob or the closeness to the RBC membrane (RBCM) showed no difference between WT and mutant, or between knob/eKnob morphologies ( ). To gain more insight into the nature of the structures labelled with α-KAHRP antibodies, we paired membrane shearing with immunolabelling and STED (stimulated emission depletion [ ]) microscopy to study the nature of the structures labelled by α-KAHRP antibodies observed above. RBCs infected with CS2 or ΔPFA were allowed to bind to a cover slip, hypotonically lysed to obtain access to the internal leaflet of the RBC plasma membrane, fixed, immunodecorated using an α-KAHRP antibody, and imaged STED microscopy. This technique allows super-resolution visualisation of KAHRP structures from the luminal side of the RBC plasma membrane and can be used to monitor the assembly of KAHRP into knobs (and in this case, eKnobs). This analysis revealed a punctuate distribution of KAHRP beneath the membrane of RBCs infected with both wild type and mutant ΔPFA cells. Although the data initially suggests that there are more KAHRP structures in membranes from ΔPFA, automated counting and measurement shows that this impression is likely to be imparted due to a higher mean size of KAHRP objects rather than an actual increase in the absolute number of objects ( ).
 

## eKnobs contain ring/tube-like KAHRP structures but only small amounts of actin
To further investigate the relation of KAHRP with eKnob we used rSTED (rescue-stimulated emission depletion [ ]) to image both RBCs infected with CS2 or ΔPFA parasites episomally expressing KAHRP::mCherry as above ( ). Infected cells were treated with RFP booster to amplify the mCherry signal, fluorescently labelled wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) to label the RBC glycocalyx (delineating the RBC membrane, RBCM), and phalloidin to stain host cell actin ( ).
 Line scan analysis reveals that eKnobs are bounded by the RBCM. In most cases, KAHRP is found between the RBCM and the actin cytoskeleton, and the KAHRP::mCherry signal also extends into the central cavity of the eKnobs. Distribution of host actin closely follows that of WGA, apart from at the base of eKnobs where it follows a path below the KAHRP staining. Fortuitous sectioning of several membrane-bounded eKnobs extending from the RBC reveals a ring of KAHRP::mCherry staining lining the luminal face of the eKnob. Phalloidin staining was absent in this case, although it was associated with a shorter eKnob ( , see for CS2 cell line).

## Chelation of membrane cholesterol but not actin depolymerisation or glycocalyx degradation causes partial reversion of the mutant phenotype in ΔPFA
A number of lipid- or protein-dependent mechanisms can induce the initiation of curvature of biological membranes and stabilisation of the resulting structures [ ]. The eKnobs we observe here extend up to 0.7 μm from the surface of the RBC and appear stable enough that we were able to observe them in live cell imaging. To understand how such structures can be generated, we treated RBCs infected with ΔPFA parasites with cytochalasin-D (cyto-D) to depolymerise actin, methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MBCD) to chelate membrane cholesterol, or the glucosidases hyaluronidase (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) to degrade RBC glycocalyx. Following treatment, cells were fixed and prepared for SEM, followed by image acquisition and analysis. Neither cyto-D nor HA/NA treatment caused a statistically significant reduction in the number of eKnobs in cells infected with ΔPFA ( ). Treatment with MBCD, while not causing a total reversion of eKnobs to knobs, did cause a statistically significant alteration in the observed type of eKnobs, with a decrease in the number of deformed, elongated eKnobs, and an increase in abnormal, enlarged eKnobs ( ).

## PFA66 truncation results in negligible cytoadhesion and aberrant PfEMP1 presentation
As previously mentioned, mature stage infected P. falciparum iRBCs develop additional adhesive capabilities to cells of the host, and this process underlies P. falciparum pathogenicity [ ]. Cytoadherence of iRBCs to purified ligands can be assessed with a binding assay [ ]. Prior to genetic manipulation we selected our parasite population for expression of the var2CSA variant of PfEMP1 by repeatedly binding them to CSA [ ]. We chose to use the CS2 strain of P. falciparum as this strain stably expresses var2CSA [ ]. A static cytoadherence assay against immobilised CSA demonstrated that, in direct comparison to the parental CS2 strain, ΔPFA exhibits massively reduced levels of binding ( ). Although all experiments were carried out on parasites that had not been maintained in culture for extended time periods (to avoid switching to another var/PfEMP1 variant), we wanted to verify that ΔPFA still expressed PfEMP1var2csa. We therefore used flow cytometry on intact iRBCs using antisera specific against VAR2CSA (a kind gift of Benoît Gamain) to verify VAR2CSA expression and surface exposure. On RBCs infected with ΔPFA, surface expression of VAR2CSA was reduced 60% compared to wild type parasites ( and for histograms). IFA using the same antisera on fixed cells demonstrated that both CS2 and ΔPFA express VAR2CSA to similar levels, with punctuate staining distributed across the host cell. A control IFA on cells infected with 3D7 strain parasites that had not been selected for VAR2CSA expression showed only background fluorescence, verifying the specificity of the result ( ).
 

## Complementation of PFA66 function requires an intact J-domain
HSP40s such as PFA66 are known interactors and regulators of HSP70s [ , , ], and HSP70-independent functions of HSP40s are rare. The J-domain of HSP40s is crucial both for recruitment of the partner HSP70 and stimulating the ATPase activity of the HSP70 partner [ ]. Having shown above that we can achieve functional complementation via episomal expression of a full-length copy of PFA66, we were interested to know whether a functional J-domain (and hence a functional interaction with a HSP70) is required for phenotypic complementation. To this end, we expressed in the ΔPFA parasite line a full-length copy of PFA66 with a H111Q amino acid replacement converting the HPD motif of the J-domain into the non-functional QPD sequence ( ) and assayed knob/eKnob morphology and density in comparison to the wild-type complementation parasites as a surrogate for all other phenotypic assays. Both wild-type (HPD) and mutant (QPD) fusions were expressed at a similar level, and localised to punctuate structures in the iRBC, suggestive of a correct J-dot localisation ( ). While expression of full-length wild-type PFA66 was able to revert the mutant knob phenotype ( ), similar expression of the non-functional QPD mutant failed to complement the WT phenotype ( ) in either density or morphology of knobs/eKnobs.

## The J-domain of PFA66 can stimulate both parasite-derived and human Hsp70
Knowing that a functional J-domain is needed to maintain normal knob morphology, we wanted to probe for potential HSP70 partners for PFA66 in the RBC. Residual human HSP70s and one parasite exported HSP70 (PfHSP70-X) are present in the RBC and it has been suggested that the parasite hijacks the RBC chaperone machinery by exporting various JDPs to facilitate remodelling of the RBC [ , ]. To test which of these HSP70s functionally interact with PFA66, we performed single turn-over ATPase assays with HsHSP70 (HSPA1A) and HsHSC70 (HSPA8), and the parasite encoded PfHSP70-X [ ]. Previously, using steady state ATPase assays, it has been shown that PFA66 is able to stimulate the hydrolysis of ATP by PfHSP70-X and (at a lower degree) HsHSC70 but not HsHSP70 [ , ]. The basal ATPase activity of HSP70s is generally very low and stimulated in synergism by J-domain proteins and substrates [ , ]. Certain JDPs are able to provide both signals, the J-domain and the substrate, needed to synergistically stimulate the ATPase activity of HSP70s. To rule out the possibility that the lack of stimulation of HsHSP70 by PFA66 that has been observed by Daniyan et al. [ ] is due to PFA66 itself not being a substrate for HsHSP70, we applied the experimental strategy of Landry and colleagues [ ] and designed a minimal J-domain-substrate system by fusing a peptide derived from the human heat shock transcription factor 1 (HsHSF1, S461-Q471, referred to as substrate), that has recently been identified as binding site for HsHSC70 [ ], C-terminally to the PFA66 J-domain (amino acids 81–148, resulting in PFA66JDS). To shield the peptide from degradation, a C-terminal strep-tag (WSHPQFEK) was added to PFA66JDS as well. HsHSP70, HsHSC70, PfHSP70-X, and PFA66JDS were expressed as HIS-SUMO fusions, purified to homogeneity and used to perform ATPase assays under single turn-over conditions. Under such conditions, the hydrolysis of one molecule of ATP per HSP70 molecule is monitored and other potentially rate limiting processes, such as nucleotide exchange, are neglectable. We observe that PFA66JDS is able to stimulate the hydrolysis of ATP by HsHSC70 and PfHSP70-X, as expected, but unexpectedly also by HsHsp70 ( ), to significantly higher rates than the peptide alone, supporting the idea that PFA66 is able to recruit and repurpose the two major human HSP70 homologues in RBCs ( ).
 

## Discussion
Although it has long been recognised that malaria parasites export a substantial number of proteins to their host cell, the mature human RBC, the function of many of these proteins remains unknown [ , , ]. P. falciparum exports a larger number of proteins to the host cell than related species, and one family that is highly represented amongst this expansion is that of J-domain proteins (HSP40s [ ]). A previous medium-throughput study identified the exported HSP40 PFA66 as likely to be essential and resistant to inactivation via double-crossover integration [ ]. In this study, we have used SLI-TGD [ ] to generate parasites expressing a severely truncated form of PFA66. This strategy deletes the entire substrate-binding domain of the expressed protein, resulting in a non-functional truncation mutant that is incapable of carrying out its biological function, and is also present at low abundance. The resulting parasites have normal viability but exhibit severe abnormalities in host cell modification.
Parasite growth following truncation of PFA66 was slightly higher than that of wild type CS2 parasites, this effect only becoming evident after four growth cycles. A similar effect was previously observed in a ΔGEXP07 parasite line; however, the significance of this result remains unclear as the reduction in metabolic burden by the loss of only one gene/protein is likely to be negligible [ ]. Lysis of iRBCs in a sorbitol uptake assay was also slightly reduced, implying either a reduction in novel permeability pathway activity, or potentially an increase in host cell stability via mechanical means. As a reduced NPP activity would be expected to lead to slower, not faster, parasite growth, we interpret this to be the result of increased robustness of the RBC plasma membrane through an unknown mechanism. Alternatively, growth in the rich media we used may not have uncovered a more obscure effect on NPP [ ], and future studies may wish to address this.
The most striking result of our study was the observation that, in the ΔPFA66 cell line, normal knob biogenesis was significantly inhibited with regard to both knob density and morphology. Although earlier knockout studies have observed a reduction in knob formation, or slight alteration in knob morphology, to our knowledge this current study is the first to demonstrate such a dramatic alteration in knob structure upon inactivation of a single gene [ , ]. Indeed, so different are the structures we observe to classic knobs that we suggest calling them eKnob to distinguish them from the ‘normal’ surface extensions. eKnobs differ from knobs both in their size and length, reaching up to 0.7μm from the RBC surface. Additionally, eKnobs that split into separate branches can be observed. KAHRP, a protein known to be required for correct knob formation, can be localised to eKnobs, although its distribution (based on live cell imaging, IFA, and membrane shearing paired with STED microscopy) seems to be different from that observed in cells infected with wild type parasites. Several studies suggest that KAHRP is integrated into higher order assemblies during parasite development, eventually resulting in a ring structure underlying the knob [ , ]. Deletions in specific KAHRP domains lead to less incorporation into such structures and also appear to influence the generation of sub-knob spiral structures of unknown molecular composition [ ]. The possibility exists that KAHRP, while being necessary for correct knob formation, is itself not the major structure-giving component but merely serves as a scaffold for assembly of further higher order molecular structures, which themselves generate the necessary vector force to allow membrane curvature and push the knobs above the surface of the RBC. KAHRP has been proposed to be especially vulnerable to misfolding due to its unusual amino acid composition, which would make it a likely client for chaperones / cochaperone systems [ ]. Following this logic, if PFA66 is involved in the assembly of KAHRP into higher order assemblies, interruption of this process could cause knock-on misassembly of the spiral and therefore aberrant knob structures. Although we were not able to visualise spiral structures at the base of eKnobs, our observed phenotype could be explained by runaway lengthening of such a spiral structure ( ). Indeed, the electron density we observed on tomograms is consistent with a high molecular weight structure as a form-giving scaffold for the formation of eKnobs. Within the resolution limit of our study, KAHRP itself appears to line the inner leaflet of the membrane-bounded eKnobs and is thus unlikely to itself be a major component of the electron dense core of the eKnobs. Host actin is known to be required for the generation of knobs [ ]; however, although we could successfully visualise actin below the RBC plasma membrane, it appears to be largely excluded from eKnobs and thus cannot be responsible for maintaining the form of these structures, a view supported by the lack of action of cyto-D on eKnob structures. Similarly, enzymatic removal of the RBC glycocalyx had no effect on eKnobs, excluding a role for this in membrane shaping. Chelation of membrane cholesterol via treatment with MBCD did cause change in the morphology of eKnobs, but not a complete reversion to normal knob structures. Removal of cholesterol from biological membranes has been observed to cause an increase in membrane stiffness [ , ], and this may explain the morphological reversion upon MBCD treatment, with a stiffer membrane being more resistant to the pushing force within the eKnobs. Alternatively, removal of cholesterol and subsequent breakdown of so-called lipid rafts may interfere with the higher order organisation of membrane-bound factors involved either directly in membrane curvature or required for coordination of proteins internal to the eKnobs that generate force. Taken together, our data strongly implies that both knobs and eKnobs contain a so far unknown component, likely proteinaceous, which is required for force generation, subsequent membrane curvature, and resulting morphology. Interruption of correct assembly of this factor leads to aberrations in knob formation, eventually leading to the appearance of eKnobs. Our, and others’, data implicates KAHRP as having a role in this process, but it is unlikely to be the only structural protein involved.
 In other systems, HSP40s, through their role as regulators of HSP70 chaperone activity, have been shown to have a role in both assembly and disassembly of protein complexes [ ], and it is tempting to suggest that the phenotype we observe here is due to incorrect complex assembly. Alternatively, PFA66 may be required for the correct transport of accessory proteins required for complex formation such as those proposed in a recent study [ ], and thus play an indirect role in correct assembly of high-molecular weight complexes. In support of this hypothesis, PFA66 is known to associate with J-dots, highly mobile structures within the iRBC that are also known to contain a number of HSP70s [ , , , ]. It is also feasible that PFA66 is required for the disassembly of incorrectly folded or assembled knob protein complexes and that our knockout reveals so far unknown quality control mechanisms.
Knobs are required for correct presentation of the major virulence factor PfEMP1, and high affinity binding of such to endothelial receptors [ ]. Although previous studies suggested that KAHRP and PfEMP1 formed a ‘pre-cytoadherence complex’ at the Maurer’s clefts [ ], later evidence suggest strongly that PfEMP1 is incorporated only into knobs once they have been at least partly formed [ , ]. RBCs infected with ΔPFA66 parasites showed a 63% reduction in knob/eKnob density and a 10-fold increase in the frequency of abnormal knob phenotype, and we observed an almost total lack of cytoadherence in iRBC infected with ΔPFA66 parasites. This data strongly supports the view that, even in the normal knobs present, less PfEMP1 was correctly presented and could take part in cytoadherence. Flow cytometry determined an almost 60% drop in cell surface recognition of the VAR2CSA variant of PfEMP1, although IFA suggests that both cell lines express similar amounts of this protein. The total loss of cytoadherence may be the consequence of several distinct factors: a) less total surface PfEMP1, b) fewer knobs with correctly loaded PfEMP1, and c) a significant number of aberrant knobs/eKnobs. Moreover, we cannot exclude that PfEMP1, which needs to be correctly folded to bind specific receptors, does not assume the correct tertiary structure due to the lack of the necessary chaperone-cochaperone system.
As previously mentioned, HSP40s generally act in concert with members of the HSP70 family [ ]. The RBC is known to contain significant amounts of residual human HSP70s [ ] and additionally a parasite-encoded HSP70, PfHSP70-X [ ]. We have previously demonstrated that a knockout of PfHSP70-X leads to a reduction in virulence characteristics, including cytoadherence [ ]. Significantly, however, iRBCs infected with Δ70-X parasites were covered with normal knob structures at a density comparable to that of the wild type [ ] and a further study even suggests that deletion or down-regulation of PfHSP70-X leads to no observable mutant phenotype [ ]. Hence the mutant phenotype of RBCs infected with ΔPFA66 is distinct and significantly more dramatic than that in iRBCs infected with Δ70-X parasites. Considering the difference in phenotype between Δ70-X and ΔPFA66, here we must conclude that, if a HSP70 is involved, it is more likely to be of human rather than parasite origin, a possibility also previously raised by others [ ].
The J-domain of HSP40s contains a characteristic HPD motif that is required both for binding and ATPase activation of partner HSP70s [ ]. As the unlikely possibility existed that our observed phenotype was due to a HSP70-independent function of PFA66, we carried out complementation analysis with a full-length copy of PFA66 expressed from an episome, or a copy containing a H111Q mutation that renders the J-domain inactive. Despite similar expression levels and correct localisation of both fusions, only the wild type protein was able to complement the mutant knob phenotype, clearly demonstrating that recruitment of Hsp70 by PFA66 is essential for the wild type phenotype. We therefore conclude that the effects we observed upon PFA66 truncation are due to either a negative effect of the truncated protein on proper functioning of the HsHSP70 chaperone system within the host RBC or result from a lack of cochaperone activity via deletion of an essential functional domain (SBD) of the HSP40. Either way the results furthermore support HsHSP70 involvement.
To regulate the function of residual human HSP70s, the J-domain of PFA66 should be able to stimulate the ATPase activity of these proteins, however several studies have demonstrated only weak functional interactions. One potential weakness of these published studies is the failure to distinguish between chaperone-cochaperone and chaperone-substrate interactions, which may produce misleading results. To throw more light on this topic, we uncoupled these interactions and reconstituted a minimal J-domain system by fusion of a suitable substrate peptide to the J-domain derived from PFA66. Single-turnover ATPase assays revealed significant stimulation of both the parasite derived PfHSP70-X and human HSP70s compared to controls, further supporting our assertion that the mutant phenotype observed upon deletion of PFA66 is linked to the activity of residual human HSP70. We cannot formally exclude that PFA66 functionally interacts with both human and parasite HSP70 homologues and that the phenotype we observe is a combination of the effect on both chaperones, but the balance of probabilities suggests that morphological abnormalities observed in this current study are largely due to an interruption of functional PFA66-HsHSP70/HSC70 interactions.
A potential role for residual human HSP70 in host cell modification and parasite virulence has been suggested for almost 20 years [ ], but to our knowledge our current study is the first to provide strong experimental evidence directly implicating human HSP70s in these processes. We wish to note that we cannot unequivocally state that our complementation construct caused reversion of all the aberrant phenotypes herein investigated, however we feel it likely that all abnormal phenotypes are linked and thus our “proof of principle” investigation of knob/eKnob phenotypes is likely to be reflected in other facets of host cell modification and can thus be seen as a proxy for such.
To conclude, in this study we show data suggesting that correct biogenesis of knobs in malaria-iRBCs is a complex process necessitating a number of proteins, the molecular identity of some of which remains enigmatic. Our data suggests that KAHRP, while obviously required for knob generation, may not directly provide a scaffold for knob structure. More importantly, our data also reveals that residual human HSP70 within the iRBC is involved in parasite-driven host cell modification processes. To our knowledge, this is the first time a host cell protein has been directly implicated in parasite virulence and protein transport processes, and this observation opens up exciting new avenues not only for intervention strategies, but also for the discovery of other novel cell biological phenomena.

## Materials & methods

## Vector construction
The ~1kbp PFA66 targeting region was amplified using the primers PFA_NotI_F and PFA_MluI_R and cloned into pSLITGD (kind gift of Tobias Spielmann [ ]) using NotI-HF and MluI (NEB). The complementation plasmid PFA::HA was generated by excising the PFA0660w coding sequence and promoter from the plasmid pAD-A660-GFP [ ] with the restriction enzymes NotI-HF and BssHII and cloning them into pARL-PFF1415c-3xHA (BSD, a kind gift of Sarah Charnaud). The resulting plasmid was subsequently used to generate the QPD::HA plasmid via QuickChange PCR using PFA_Quick_QPD_F and PFA_Quick_QPD_R primers. Upon verification of the QPD mutation, the insert consisting of the PFA0660w promoter and coding sequence was re-cloned into the same vector to avoid mutation due to the PCR step. The KAHRP::mCherry plasmid was generated by amplifying mCherry with the primers mCherry_AvrII_F and mCherry_XmaI_R and cloning them into a pre-existing plasmid pARL2_KAHRP containing the native KAHRP promoter and KAHRP coding sequence (kind gift of Cecilia Sanchez). All primers are listed in .

## Cell culture methods
P. falciparum parasites were cultured at 37°C with 90% N2, 5% CO2, and 5% O2 according to established methods [ ]. Parasites were maintained at a haematocrit of ~5% in A+ or O+ human blood obtained from the blood banks in Marburg and Heidelberg and maintained with RPMI1640 (Gibco) containing 200 μM hypoxanthine, 160 μM neomycin (Sigma Aldrich) and 10% human plasma. Parasitaemias were evaluated from smears prepared from the blood cultures, which were fixed in 100% MeOH and stained with ddH2O/10% Giemsa solution (Merck). Parasites were transfected with 150 μg of plasmid and treated with 2.5nM WR99210 (HS lines) or 12μg/ml blasticidin (Invivo Gen). Transfectants were propagated in fresh O- blood using RPMI1640 (Gibco) with 5% human plasma, 5% Albumax II (Invitrogen) and other additives as above until parasites re-appeared [ ]. Selection-linked integration was performed according to Birnbaum et al. [ ]. Briefly, following reappearance after the initial transfection, parasites were treated with 400 μg/ml G418 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) until resistant parasites were observed. Parasites were synchronized before experiments using sorbitol-induced lysis [ ]. For this, mixed-culture parasites were incubated in 5% sorbitol for 10 min, washed with parasite culture medium and re-cultivated. Routine selection for CSA-binding parasites was performed according to standard protocols [ ]. Late-stage parasites were enriched via gelatine flotation for 1 hr / 37°C [ ]. Subsequently parasites were resuspended in cytoadhesion media (pH 7.2, prepared from RPMI1640 powder, Life technologies) and incubated in cell culture flasks pre-treated with CSA (PBS pH 7.2/1 mg/ml CSA overnight / 16°C and blocked with PBS pH 7.2 / 1% BSA) for 1 hr / 37°C. After careful washing with cytoadhesion media, the remaining bound parasites were washed off and re-seeded.

## Chemical or enzymatic treatment of iRBCs
For these experiments, magnetically purified iRBCs (~1 x 107 per condition) were used. Cytochalasin-D treatment was carried out with RPMI1640 / 10 μM cyto-D for 10 min at RT, incubation with RPMI1640/10 mM MBCD was performed for 20 min at 37°C, RPMI1640/ 30mU neuraminidase or RPMI1640/30U hyaluronidase treatments were performed for 1 hr at 37°C. Following treatment, samples were processed for SEM.

## MACS purification
For some protocols, late-stage parasites were magnetically purified using a VARIOMACS with a CS-column. Briefly ~1 ml packed RBCs (~10% parasitaemia) were applied to a CS column, washed with PBS / 3% BSA and finally eluted into PBS.

## Microscopy methods
Live cell imaging was performed on DAPI-stained (1 ng/ml) parasites using a Zeiss Axio-Observer microscope and AxioVision software. For IFA assays, parasites were fixed on microscopy slides using 90% acetone / 10% MeOH for 5 min / -20°C. Cells were then blocked using PBS / 3% BSA for 1 hr / RT and incubated in a humid chamber overnight with the primary antibody diluted in blocking buffer (for antibodies see ). On the next day, PBS-washed slides were treated with the secondary antibody, diluted 1:2000 in blocking buffer for 2 hr / RT, subsequently washed again, DAPI stained (0.1 ng/ml in PBS), and imaged using a Zeiss Axio-Observer microscope and AxioVision software. RSTED imaging was carried out as recently reported in great detail [ ]. Wheat germ agglutinin Alexa Fluor 488 conjugate (Thermo Fisher) was used according to the supplier’s specification. Phalloidin–Atto 647N (Thermo Fisher) was diluted 1:500 in PBS and incubated for 30 min / RT to stain the actin cytoskeleton. RFP booster ATTO594 was used 1:200/2hr/RT to enhance RFP fluorescence. IMSpector imaging software (Abberior Instruments GmbH) was used for image capture and deconvolution of STED images, and AxioVision software was used for other acquisitions. Images were processed using ImageJ. Brightness and contrast were adjusted to reduce background and enhance visibility. No gamma adjustments were applied to any images, and all data is presented in accordance with the recommendations of Rossner and Yamada [ ].

## Protein-based methods
Protein extracts were prepared from 1 x 108 MACS-purified iRBCs. These were resuspended in PBS and boiled in Laemmli loading buffer for 10 min at 99°C. Soluble fractions were separated via centrifugation (4°C, 35,000 g) and an equivalent of 1 x 107 parasites loaded onto each well of 12% acrylamide gels. Equinatoxin (EQT) treatment and fractionation of MACS-purified iRBCs was carried out as described by Külzer et al. [ ] but using 4 haemolytic units of EQT at RT for 6 min. Western blot / immunodetection was carried out via semi-dry blotting, blocking in 5% milk powder (1 hr / RT), incubation with primary (overnight / 4°C), washing three times with PBS, incubation with the secondary (2 hr / RT) antibody in blocking buffer, washing three times with PBS, and visualization via x-ray films. Antibody sources and dilutions can be found in .

## Membrane shearing
For investigation of the internal structure of the RBC cytoskeleton membrane shearing was employed according to established protocols [ , ]. Briefly, a (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane-treated ibidi dish was incubated with 150 μl PBS / 1 mM with Bis(sulfosuccimidyl)suberate for 30 min / RT, washed with PBS, and incubated with 150 μl ddH2O / 0.1 mg/ml erythroagglutinating phytohaemagglutinin for 2 hr / RT. Dishes were rinsed three times with PBS and quenched using PBS / 0.1 M glycine for 15 min / RT. Approximately 1 x 107 MACS-purified iRBCs were added and incubated for 3–4 hr, washed, and sheared using 5P8-10 buffer (5 mM Na2HPO4 / NaH2PO4, 10 mM NaCl, PH 8), while angling the dish at 20°. Samples were then blocked using 150 μl of PBS / 1% BSA, treated with the primary α-KAHRP antibody overnight / 4°C in blocking buffer, washed three times, incubated with the secondary α-mouseATTO549 for 1 hr / RT in blocking buffer, and finally washed three times before imaging via rSTED.

## Sorbitol lysis
Assessment of NPP activity was carried out according to Baumeister et al. [ ]. For each measurement, 40 μl of 2% trophozoite culture was resuspended in 150 μl lysis buffer (290 mM sorbitol, 5 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) and incubated for 30 min / 37°C. Remaining RBCs were then pelleted at 1,600 g / 2 min, and the absorbance of the resulting supernatant was measured at OD570nm. The highest value obtained in a biological replicate was set to 100% to ease comparison of datasets We carried out 10 biological and 4 technical replicates.

## Flow cytometry
IRBCs were fixed for 24 hr at 4°C using PBS/4% paraformaldehyde/0.0075% glutaraldehyde and stained with DAPI (1 ng/ml) prior to analysis with a BD Canto. In the growth experiments, both cell lines were diluted after every growth cycle with the same factor in order to support parasite growth. Both parasite cell lines were seeded with the same parasitaemia and diluted after every cycle to avoid ‘crashing’ the culture. Parasitaemias were measured before and after every dilution by staining of iRBCs with DAPI and flow cytometry. For staining VAR2CSA on the RBC surface, live parasites were incubated with VAR2CSA antiserum (11P, rabbit, a kind gift of Benoit Gamain) and α-rabbit-Cy3 for 30 min each and then processed for flow analysis as detailed above.

## Cytoadherence
IRBC cytoadhesion to immobilised CSA was investigated using MACS-purified late-stage parasites [ ]. Parasites were applied in cytoadhesion media (pH 7.2, made from RPMI1640 powder, Life technologies) to pre-treated spots (PBS pH 7.2/1 mg/ml CSA overnight at 16°C, blocked with PBS pH 7.2/1% BSA for 1 hr at RT), and then washed with PBS on a Petri dish. After incubation for 1 hr at RT, non-bound parasites were washed away using cytoadhesion medium. Parasites were then fixed using PBS/2% glutaraldehyde for 2 hr at RT and stained with PBS/10% Giemsa for 10 min at RT prior to imaging using a Zeiss Axio Observer microscope and counting with Ilastik [ ] and ImageJ software.

## Electron microscopy
For scanning electron microscopy, purified parasites were fixed using PBS /1% glutaraldehyde for at least 30 min at RT. After washing, parasites were bound to coverslips (pre-treated with 0.1% polylysine for 15 min at RT), washed again, and dehydrated in acetone gradients (ddH2O, 25% Ac, 50% Ac, 75% Ac, 100% Ac, 10 min each) followed by critical point dehydration and coating with 5 nm Pd-gold. Cells were imaged using a Zeiss Leo 1530 electron microscope (SE2 detector, ~12,000 x magnification [ ]. For transmission electron microscopy, parasites were fixed in 100 mM Ca-cacodylate/4% paraformaldehyde/ 2% glutaraldehyde, embedded in Spurr and cut into ~70 nm sections. Some samples were fixed using 100 mM Ca-cacodylate/4% paraformaldehyde/ 0.1% glutaraldehyde and treated according to the Tokuyasu protocol for immunogold labelling of KAHRP using an α-KAHRP (rabbit) antibody and a secondary goat α-rabbit-gold conjugated antibody [ ]. Some of the EM sections were used without post-contrasting, while some were post-contrasted using 3% uranyl acetate and ddH2O/0.15 M Na-citrate/0.08 M Pb(NO3)2 / 0.16 M NaOH for 2 min. Imaging was performed using a Jeol 1400 microscope operating at 80kV. For electron tomography ~350 nm thick sections were used and examined in a TECNAI F30, 300kV FEG, FEI electron microscope (EMBL Heidelberg). The resulting tomograms were processed using IMOD, ETOMO image/ volume processing software package and the Amira, volume visualisation software.

## Statistics
Statistics were calculated in prism or Excel using unpaired, two-tailed t-tests. p > 0.05 = non-significant (ns); *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.00. Figs show mean and standard deviation.

## ImageJ macro
The ImageJ/Fiji [ ] macro computes the local maxima of each object on the smooth probability map (PM) images generated by ilastik pixel classification. The ilastik [ ] pixel classification workflow is used to reduce the background in the images and enhance the foreground pixels. To segment each object in the probability map images the local maxima is used as a seed for the 3D watershed plugin. The approach allows to separate close objects and creates masks that are used to measure size and intensity on the raw images. The macro and the instructions on how to use it can be found at: https://github.com/cberri/2D_AutomatedObjectsDetection_ImageJ-Fiji

## Protein expression and purification
The J-domain fusion construct, PFAJDS used in this work was expressed in the E. coli BL21 Rosetta strain as N-terminal SUMO fusion protein with a C-terminal Strep-tag (WSHPQFEK) and incubated at 30°C during all steps of expression. Multiple transformed colonies were used to inoculate 100 ml of 2xYT medium supplemented with kanamycin (50μg/ml) and 25 ml of overnight culture used the next day to inoculate 3 l of 2xYT medium containing kanamycin. The culture was grown until an OD600 of 1.2 was reached and induced with 1 mM IPTG and the protein was expressed for 2h. Cells were then harvested at 5000 g for 15 min at RT and cell pellets resuspended in 25 ml of chilled lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.9, 500 mM NaCl, 0,6% Brij58, 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 μg/ml DNaseI, 8 μg/ml pepstatin, 10 μg/ml aprotinin and 5 μg/ml leupeptin) per 1.5 l of culture and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -20°C. All subsequent steps were carried out at 4°C or on ice if not indicated otherwise. Cell lysis was performed by passing the cells two times through a MicroFluidizer (Avestin, Ottawa, Canada) after fresh proteinase inhibitors were added. The obtained lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 20.000 g for 30 min. The supernatant was mixed with 2 g of protino beads (Ni-IDA, Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) and incubated for 20 min rotating. The protino was subsequently collected in a gravity-flow column and washed first with 12.5 column volumes (CV) of wash buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.9, 500 mM NaCl, 0.1% Brij58 and 2 M Urea) and then with 12.5 CV of wash buffer with 1.5 M NaCl. The protein was then washed with 12.5 CV elution buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.9, 500 mM NaCl, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and 2 M Urea) to remove detergent and afterwards supplemented with another 6 ml of elution buffer, the flow stopped and 8 mg of Ulp1 (produced in the Mayer laboratory) were added and the column was incubated rotating for 2 h. After 2hs of incubation, 0.32 g of fresh protino was added and incubated for 20 mins to remove Ulp1. After Ulp1 removal, the supernatant was collected and the protein dialyzed against 2 l dialysis buffer (40 mM HEPES/KOH pH 7.6, 300 mM KCl, 2 β-Mercaptoethanol and 10% glycerol) overnight. The next day, the protein was aliquoted and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Human HSC70(HSPA8)/HSP70(HSPA1) were purified as His6-SUMO fusions after overproduction in E. coli BL21 (DE3) Rosetta. Cells were resuspended in Hsp70 lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, Saccharose 10%) supplemented with 3 mM β-mercaptoethanol, DNase I and protease inhibitors (10 μg/ml aprotinin, 10 μg/ml leupeptin, 8 μg/ml pepstatin, 1 mM PMSF) and lysed using a chilled microfluidizer (Avestin, Ottawa, Canada). The resulting lysate was centrifuged (33000 x g, 4°C for 30 min) and the supernatant incubated for 25 min at 4°C with 1.5 g Protino Ni-IDA resin (Macherey Nagel) on a rotation shaker. Afterwards, the resin was transferred to a gravity-flow column, washed with 200 ml of Hsp70 lysis buffer, followed by an ATP wash with 50 ml ATP buffer for 30 mins (Hsp70 lysis buffer with 5 mM ATP). Subsequently, the ATP was removed by washing with 50 ml lysis buffer and the bound protein was eluted with Hsp70 lysis buffer containing 300 mM imidazole, 3 mM β-mercaptoethanol and protease inhibitors. Protein containing fractions were pooled, dialyzed against HKMG150 buffer (25 mM HEPES/KOH pH 7.6, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol) and digested with 400 mg of Ulp1 overnight. After proteolytic cleavage, the protein was incubated with 1.5 g Protino Ni-IDA resin (Macherey Nagel) for 25 min at 4°C to remove His6-SUMO. Flowthrough containing Hsc70/Hsp70 was buffer exchanged into HKMG10 (25 mM HEPES/KOH pH 7.6, 10 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol) using a HiPrep 26/10 column and further purified using an 1 ml RESOURCE Q column (10–1000 mM KCl in 16 CV in HKMG buffer) on an ÄKTA purifier system (Cytiva). Fractions containing the target protein were collected, concentrated to around 50 μM, aliquoted, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at 80°C. PfHSP70-X was expressed and purified as previously described [ ].

## ATPase assays
The ATPase activities of HsHSC70, HsHSP70 and PfHSP70-X were determined under single-turnover conditions as previously described [ ]. The HSP70–ATP complexes (final volume 52 μl) were formed by mixing 50 μl of 30 μM HSP70 with 2 μl of ATP-mix (20mM ATP, 12 μCi [α32P]-ATP) in reaction buffer (25 mM HEPES/KOH pH 7.6, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT) and leaving the mixture for 2 min on ice. The complexes were separated from unbound ATP at RT by gel filtration on NICK columns (Cytiva), pre-saturated with 1 ml of a BSA solution (1 mg/ml) and pre-equilibrated with 3 column volumes of chilled reaction buffer. Twenty fractions (one drop per fraction) were collected on ice in cooled tubes. The first four fractions containing radioactivity as detected by Geiger counter were pooled, divided into 6.5 μl aliquots, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C. For the ATPase activity determination, HSP70–ATP complex solutions were thawed by hand and, after withdrawal of 0.5 μl for the zero-time point, mixed with 44 μl reaction buffer containing either no cofactors or 1 μM pepHsf1(S461-Q471) or 1 μM PFAJDS protein. At given time points, 2 μl were withdrawn from the reaction mixture and spotted onto a thin layer chromatography plate (PEI Cellulose, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), which was pre-spotted with 5 μl of a mixture of 5 mM ADP and 5 mM ATP. Developing the plates in 400mM LiCl in 10% acetic acid separated ADP from ATP. Dried plates were exposed to fluoroimaging screens overnight and relative amounts of ATP and ADP were quantified by Fuji FLA 2000 Phosphoimager.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## dPFA::GFP fusion protein is exported to the iRBC.
A) Upper panel, schematic of integration PCR strategy; Lower, integration PCR in original uncropped version. Table shows primer combinations and predicted result. B) An equinatoxin lysis experiment demonstrates export of truncated PFA::GFP. Equinatoxin (EQT) treatment selectively lyses the RBC membrane but leaves the PVM and PPM intact. Consequentially, parasite proteins exported to the host cell are found in the supernatant, while other parasite proteins remain in the pellet. Detection of the PV protein SERP and the parasite protein ALDO in the pellet fraction demonstrates intactness of the PV membrane and PPM, respectively. Truncated PFA::GFP was detected alongside human HSP70 in the supernatant fraction, demonstrating its export to the iRBC. C) ΔPFA display a slight decrease in NPP activity when compared to CS2. iRBCs were incubated with the hypotonic agent sorbitol, and NPP activity was assessed by measuring the OD of the supernatant. Results are shown for ten biological replicates. D) Growth of CS2 and ΔPFA was measured over four cycles via flow cytometry of DAPI-stained, fixed parasites. ΔPFA show a slight growth advantage over CS2 in the last cycle. Results are shown for three independent experiments.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## SEM gallery.
SEM image of a non-iRBC and additional SEM images of CS2, ΔPFA and ΔPFA[PFA::HA]. Included is a display of aberrant eKnob morphologies.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Additional TEM images of CS2 and ΔPFA.
Marked areas are enlarged in the bottom panels to show Maurer´s cleft morphology in more detail.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## IFA localisation of exported proteins.
Investigation of marker protein localisation using specific antisera in MeOH acetone-fixed ΔPFA with an IFA assay. No drastic difference in the localisation of EXP2, HSP70x, SBP1, REX2, PFEMP3, or PHISTC was found.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## KAHRP distribution within eKnobs.
A) Verification of CS2[KAHRP::mCherry] and ΔPFA[KAHRP::mCherry] via Western blot verifies the production of KAHRP::mCherry protein in the cell lines using an α-mCherry antibody (expected MW 92kDa). The parasite protein aldolase (ALDO) was used as a loading control. B) Investigation of label distribution in the α-KAHRP immuno-TEM. Distance of label from the base of the knob was measured using ImageJ and expressed relative to the length of the entire knob in percentages (0% being the base and 100% the top). The distribution of label along the full length of the knobs did not differ between the strains and knob types, C) Distance of label to the closest membrane was measured using ImageJ, revealing no difference between the strains and knob types. D) RSTED images of CS2[KAHRP::mCherry] reveal close association of KAHRP::mCherry with the cytoskeleton and glycocalyx. Larger aggregates of KAHRP::mCherry were, in contrast to ΔPFA[KAHRP::mCherry], not observed.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## Investigation of chemical or enzymatic treatment of iRBCs on eKnobs.
A) Treatment with the actin depolymerizing agent cytochalasin-D does not resolve knob density (A) and eKnob morphology (B, N = 15). Investigation of treatment with the lipid raft disruptor MBCD (C, D) the glucosidases hyaluronidase (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) (E) on knob-type distribution in the two cell lines. N = 15. F) Concatenation of all iRBC data from the experiments in also shows a decrease in surface exposed in ΔPFA across all experiments. Total number of single cells: 1,798,268 (CS2) and 1,799,274 (ΔPFA). G) Investigation whether MeOH-fixed parasites with an α-VAR2CSA antibody demonstrate that both CS2 and ΔPFA express var2CSA to similar levels. H) Comparison of episomally expressed trans-gene (PFA::HA, QPD::HA) expression levels in ΔPFA. The parasite protein SERP was used as a loading control. I) Immunofluorescence verifies export of episomally expressed PFA::HA and QPD::HA fusions to the host cell.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## Full-length versions of all Western blots.
A) Western blot verifies truncation of PFA0660w in ΔPFA [ ]. B) Verification of the complementation cell line ΔPFA[PFA::HA] [ ]. C) Equinatoxin experiment demonstrates export of the dPFA::GFP fusion protein to the iRBC [ ]. D) Verification of KAHRP::mCherry expression in CS2[KAHRP::mCherry] and ΔPFA[KAHRP::mCherry] [ ]. E) Comparison of episomally expressed trans-gene (PFA::HA, QPD::HA) expression levels in ΔPFA [ ].
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Video

## 3D reconstruction and surface render of eKnob depicted in .
Red, RBC plasma membrane; blue, electron dense material.
(MOV)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Video

## Z-stack of RBCs infected with CS2[KAHRP::mCherry] in mCherry channel.
(AVI)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Video

## Z-stack of RBCs infected with CS2[KAHRP::mCherry] in mCherry channel.
(AVI)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Video

## Z-stack of RBCs infected with ΔPFA[KAHRP::mCherry] in mCherry channel.
(AVI)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Video

## Z-stack of RBCs infected with ΔPFA[KAHRP::mCherry] in mCherry channel.
(AVI)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Predicted exported P. falciparum HSP40s and previously observed phenotypes.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Sequences of primers used in this study.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Antibody sources and usage conditions.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

We wish to thank the blood banks of the University Hospitals in Giessen and Marburg for providing blood. Further we would like to thank the EMCF at the University of Heidelberg (in particular Stefan Hillmer), the EMCF of EMBL Heidelberg (Yannick Schwab and Martin Schorb), the FACS core facility at the ZMBH (Monika Langlotz), Moritz Koch for purifying HsHSP70 and HsHSP70, as well as the Infectious Diseases Imaging Platform (Vibor Laketa) and Marie Freudenberg. The great generosity of colleagues who provided reagents (noted in the text) should be recognised. We thank Tim Bostick for proofreading.

## Abbreviations
(i)RBC(infected) red blood cell
(r)STED(rescue) stimulated emission depletion
BSDblasticidin
CSAchondroitin-sulphate-A
EQTequinatoxin
IFAimmunofluorescence assay
KAHRPknob-associated histidine-rich protein
NPPnew permeability pathway
PPMparasite plasma membrane
PV(M)parasitophorous vacuole (membrane)
RBCMRBC membrane
SEMscanning electron microscopy
SLI-TGDselection-linked integration targeted gene disruption
TEMtransmission electron microscopy
 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009969.r001Author response to previous submission
Submission Version0
26 May 2021

AttachmentSubmitted filename: 115450_1_rebuttal_2058392_qsc6mk.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.ppat.1009969.r002Decision Letter 0
DeitschKirk W.Section Editor© 2021 Kirk W. Deitsch2021Kirk W. Deitschhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
28 May 2021

Dear Dr Przyborski,
We received your recent submission to Reviews Commons, along with the reviewers' critiques, for consideration for publication in PLOS Pathogens. In light of the generally positive reviews and the appropriateness of the subject, we would like to invite the resubmission of a significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments.
We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Kirk W. Deitsch
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kirk Deitsch
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here on PLOS Biology: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.ppat.1009969.r003Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
27 Aug 2021

AttachmentSubmitted filename: R2_Response_Diehl_24_8.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.ppat.1009969.r004Decision Letter 1
DeitschKirk W.Section Editor© 2021 Kirk W. Deitsch2021Kirk W. Deitschhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
13 Sep 2021

Dear Dr Przyborski,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Co-chaperone involvement in knob biogenesis implicates host-derived chaperones in malaria virulence" for consideration at PLOS Pathogens. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important topic. Based on the reviews, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, providing that you modify the manuscript according to the review recommendations.
As you will see from the written critiques, all three reviewers were largely satisfied with the revised version of the manuscript that you submitted. However, please address the minor suggestions and comments that the reviewers provided (no additional experiments are requested). 
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 30 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to all review comments, and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript.
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Kirk W. Deitsch
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kirk Deitsch
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: In this paper the function of Plasmodium falciparum exported protein PFA66, is investigated by replacing its functionally important dnaJ region with GFP. These modified parasites grew fine but produced elongated knob-like structures, called eknobs, at the surface of the parasites infected RBCs. Knobs are elevated platforms formed by exported parasite proteins at the surface of the infected RBC that are used to display PfEMP1 cytoadherance proteins which help the parasites avoid host immunity. The eknobs still display some PfEMP1 and contain exported proteins such as KAHRP but can no longer facilitate cytoadherence. Complementation of the truncated PFA66 with full length protein restored normal knob morphology however complementation with a non-functional HPD to QPD mutant did not restore normal morphology implying interaction of the PFA66 with a HSP70 possibly of host origin is important for function. The authors investigate the potential interaction of PFA66 with two human RBC HSP70s and an exported HSP70x of parasite origin by showing that a recombinant PFA66 fused to a HSP70 substrate peptide can stimulate the ATPase activity of the 3 HSP70s. It has long been suspected that because parasites export many dnaJ domain proteins into their RBCs that they must be exploiting human HSP70s to promote parasite virulence and survival. This paper now not only shows this is likely but also alludes as to what specific functions ie, knob formation, that the PFA66 protein is involved in.
Reviewer #2: This manuscript by Diehl et al reports on the function of the exported J-domain protein PFA66 in remodeling the infected RBC. The authors have largely resolved my earlier concerns and have also provided new data that indicate PFA66 is able to stimulate the ATPase activity of both HSP70s present in the host cytosol. This was carried out by fusing a known HsHSP70 substrate motif from HSF1 to the C-terminus of PFA66, providing both the J-domain protein and substate together so that HSP70-stimulation can be observed even when the J-domain itself is not a bona fide substrate. Using this system in single turn-over ATPase assays, a significant increase in activity for the parasite HSP70x as well as the two host HSP70s present in the RBC cytosol (HsHSP70 and HsHSC70) is observed over the substrate alone. Given that the PFA66 HPD motif is required to rescue the eKnob phenotype and that knockout of HSP70x (the only parasite HSP70 exported to the host cytosol) does not produce a knob phenotype, this result strengthens the implication that PFA66 performs its role through a partner HSP70 of host origin.
Reviewer #3: The revised manuscript addresses a key knowledge gap in how Plasmodium parasites create knob-like structures on the surface of the host RBC. The knobs act as antigen-presenting platforms and play a critical role in the pathogenesis of malaria. The data are excellent, experiments are well controlled, and the conclusions are mostly sound. The authors should be commended on discovering an interesting mechanism for Plasmodium knob formation, one I suspect will greatly help understand malaria pathogenesis.
The in vitro assays demonstrating the enhancement of human Hsp70’s APTase activity by PFA66 are very well done. In particular, the inclusion of the minimal substrate peptide shows that it is the tripartite complex that is essential for this activation. The assays are well controlled and add much to the discussion.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: I have already critiqued this paper for Review Commons where the major issue was a lack of physical evidence for the interaction of PFA66 with human and parasite HSP70s. Physical interactions of HSPs are highly transient and difficult to capture but the biochemical assays presented largely address the protein interaction issues. Other shortcomings with the PCR and western blot validations of the integration and expression of the GFP insertion into the PFA66 gene have been resolved.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: All the minor issues from the previous version appear to have been addressed.
Reviewer #2: Minor comments
-Line 122: Please state the expected fusion sizes for the skipped and unskipped as well as the PFA66-GFP fusion in the text and/or in the figure. I would also recommend providing a reference to the observation that these T2A fusions typically only skip ~50% of the time in Plasmodium, such as PMID 24160265 or 31164473.
-Line 911: Given that ~50% of the protein is not skipped, I would change “ensured” to something like “mediated”. Also, the * and + designations on the WB should be described in the figure or figure legend.
-Figure S1B: it appears the 43 kD marker is pointing to the top of the anti-GFP blot. I assume this should be the bottom of the Aldolase blot. Please adjust.
-The complementation line is introduced as ∆PFA[PFA::HA] in line 132 but then this name is not used in lines 185-187 when it is introduced again as a control for the eKnob phenotype. I assume it’s the same line – if so I would refer to it consistently to avoid any confusion.
-Were specific length or width thresholds use to quantify knob morphology categories in Figure 2C, 5D and S6B,D,E or was this done by eye? I didn’t find this in the methods or legends – sorry if I missed it but if it is not there, please add clarification on how the quantification was done.
-Line 192: “the lumen of these eKnobs was often extremely dense” It appears that it is not the lumen (or core) but the tip of the eKnob that is electron dense by TEM while the lumen of the eKnobs shown in Fig 2D, 3E and S3 is generally less dense. The tomography seems to show a dense core but I’m not seeing it in the TEMs being described here.
-Line 219-220: Were these other exported proteins quantified in the same way? The main text here states “no significant difference” which implies a statistical test was applied but the legend for Fig S4 says “no drastic difference”. From the response comments, it appears that the authors were unable to identify a difference by eye in a blinded check of the images. If so, “no significant difference” is misleading and should be removed from the text.
-Line 1005: The legend indicates GBP was detected in S1B but it is not there in the figure.
-Line 1023-1025: Please state the expected size of the KAHRP-mCherry fusion in the legend.
Line 326: references #43 and #44 are not right here. I think you mean Daniyan et al (#39) and Day et al 2019 (which appears to have been inadvertently deleted from the revised manuscript).
-Lines 364-366: The authors should note that some NPP phenotypes are obscured by rich media (for example, Gupta et al 2020, PMID: 32069335). The co-chaperone function of PFA66 could play a role in supporting the establishment of PSAC/NPPs at a level that does not produce a fitness cost without nutrient limitation. Seems this warrants a comment in the discussion.
Grammar
-Line 238: should be “imaged by STED microscopy”
-Line 469: “lead to misleading” is repetitive. Consider revising to “produce misleading”
-Line 951: “remaining” and “remained” is repetitive. Consider revising.
Reviewer #3: Lines 329-228: The JDS isn’t defined, what were the amino acid numbers?
Line 655: The ‘S’ in JDS is lowercase unlike in the rest of the manuscript.
Line 674: What was the source of ULP1 protease?
Line 714: There’s a typo, ‘JDH’ instead of ‘JDS’
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Josh Beck
Reviewer #3: No
Figure Files:
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
Data Requirements:
Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.
Reproducibility:
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
References:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
10.1371/journal.ppat.1009969.r005Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
23 Sep 2021

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Diehl_Revision_ReviewersComments.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.ppat.1009969.r006Decision Letter 2
DeitschKirk W.Section Editor© 2021 Kirk W. Deitsch2021Kirk W. Deitschhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
24 Sep 2021

Dear Dr Przyborski,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Co-chaperone involvement in knob biogenesis implicates host-derived chaperones in malaria virulence' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Kirk W. Deitsch
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kirk Deitsch
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
10.1371/journal.ppat.1009969.r007Acceptance letter
DeitschKirk W.Section Editor© 2021 Kirk W. Deitsch2021Kirk W. Deitschhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
4 Oct 2021

Dear Dr Przyborski,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Co-chaperone involvement in knob biogenesis implicates host-derived chaperones in malaria virulence," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens. 
Best regards,
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064