pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC9635732PMC9635732.1963573296357323633198310.1371/journal.pone.0276956PONE-D-22-139601Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesParasitologyParasite GroupsApicomplexaPlasmodiumBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGenomicsBiology and Life SciencesComputational BiologyGenome ComplexityIntronsBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGenomicsGenome ComplexityIntronsBiology and Life SciencesComputational BiologyGenome AnalysisGenome AnnotationBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGenomicsGenome AnalysisGenome AnnotationBiology and Life SciencesComputational BiologyGenome AnalysisTranscriptome AnalysisBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGenomicsGenome AnalysisTranscriptome AnalysisBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaProtozoansParasitic ProtozoansMalarial ParasitesPlasmodium FalciparumBiology and life sciencesMolecular biologyMolecular biology techniquesSequencing techniquesRNA sequencingResearch and analysis methodsMolecular biology techniquesSequencing techniquesRNA sequencingBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNAMessenger RNATranscriptomic complexity of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum revealed by long-read sequencing
Transcriptomic long-read sequencing of Plasmodium falciparumhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3913-3057ShawPhilip J.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7760-3158KaewprommalPavitaData curationFormal analysisMethodologySoftware WongsombatChayaphatData curationMethodology NgampiwChumpolData curationInvestigationSoftware https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0890-8748TaechalertpaisarnTanaData curationInvestigationMethodology KamchonwongpaisanSumaleeFunding acquisitionProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1491-1839TongsimaSissadesConceptualizationProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing PiriyapongsaJittimaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathum Thani, Thailand2
National Biobank of Thailand (NBT), National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Pathum Thani, Thailand3
Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, ThailandPainArnabEditor ]. The majority of malaria cases are attributed to Plasmodium falciparum infection. P. falciparum belongs to the protist phylum Apicomplexa, which includes many other disease-causing parasites. Motile P. falciparum sporozoites infect humans via the bites of Anopheles spp. mosquitoes. The parasites initially invade human liver cells, where they multiply and then egress into the bloodstream as merozoites capable of invading mature erythrocytes. Parasites reproduce asexually inside erythrocytes during the approximately 48 h intraerythrocytic development cycle (IDC), passing through the morphologically distinct ring, trophozoite, and schizont developmental stages. IDC stages are amenable to continuous in vitro culture [ ], which has facilitated molecular studies of the parasite.
A major landmark in the understanding of P. falciparum biology was the sequencing of the genome [ ]. The P. falciparum genome is gene-dense in common with other apicomplexan parasite species [ ]. Approximately half of P. falciparum annotated genes have introns. Most annotated splicing junctions in P. falciparum genes have been validated by short-read RNA-Seq data. Isoform events, including retained introns, exon-skipping, and alternative 5′ and 3′ splicing junctions, have been described [ – ]; however, the true level of isoform events in P. falciparum is thought to be substantially higher [ ].
The untranslated regions (UTRs) flanking open reading frames (ORFs) of P. falciparum protein-coding genes are extremely AT-rich, low-complexity sequences, which have hampered comprehensive annotation of transcripts. De novo assembly of transcripts from RNA-Seq data [ – ] revealed long UTRs consistent with earlier estimates from northern blotting [ ]; however, gaps in RNA-Seq coverage led to the erroneous assignment of many UTRs as novel long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) [ ]. To overcome the problem of discontinuity in RNA-Seq coverage, RNA-Seq data obtained using an amplification-free approach helped to map the furthest extents of UTRs with much greater accuracy [ ]. The current P. falciparum 3D7 nuclear genome annotation (PlasmoDB [ ] release 58) includes UTR features for the majority of the 5,318 protein-coding genes (not including pseudogenes) based on these data. 67(1%) of the genes have annotated alternative transcripts; however, RNA-Seq studies using specialized protocols to enrich fragments of 5′ capped transcript ends have indicated that isoforms with alternative 5′ ends showing differential abundance across the IDC are expressed from many more genes [ , ].
Long-read, single-molecule transcriptomic sequencing using Pacific Bioscience (PacBio), and Nanopore platforms can provide full-length isoform sequences. Data from the PacBio platform are more accurate than Nanopore owing to the lower error rate; however, Nanopore experiments can yield substantially more data. The full-length isoform sequences from long-reads reveal a greater diversity of isoform events and transcript structures than short-read RNA-Seq [ , ]. Long-read RNA-Seq data have been reported for P. falciparum using the PacBio [ , ] and Nanopore platforms [ ]. Despite the availability of these data for P. falciparum, no attempt has been made to comprehensively annotate isoforms and associated isoform events, particularly alternative ends.
In this study, we generated long-read RNA-Seq data for P. falciparum IDC stages. Samples of total and nuclear-enriched parasite RNA were obtained and subjected to enrichment for 5′ capped mRNA. The mRNA samples were converted to cDNA and sequenced using the PacBio and Nanopore platforms. Candidate non-redundant isoforms were identified in each dataset, together with long-read RNA-Seq data from previous studies. A comprehensive isoform annotation was created from the available data and isoform events were characterized in detail.

## Results

## Long-read cDNA sequencing and construction of the transcriptomic catalog
Previous long-read RNA-Seq studies of the P. falciparum transcriptome were performed with total RNA [ ] or polyA-enriched mRNA [ , ]. As no 5′ end enrichment was performed in these studies, sequences originating from degraded mRNA lacking a 5′ cap could obscure the identification of isoforms with alternative 5′ capped ends. To increase the representation of isoforms with alternative 5′ ends, we enriched 5′ capped mRNA from samples of P. falciparum IDC stages using a 5′ cap-binding protein as described in previous studies [ , ]. For this study, we used recombinant human eIF4E fused to a fragment of human eIF4G [ ]. The fusion protein demonstrated 5′ cap-binding activity and was purified for enriching 5′ capped mRNA ( ). In addition to 5′ capped mRNA enrichment, we sought to increase the representation of nuclear isoforms by subcellular fractionation. Nuclear localization of P. falciparum mRNAs has been reported, including antisense lncRNA regulators of var genes [ ]. The purity of isolated nuclei was assessed by confocal microscopy, which revealed intact nuclei separated from other cellular structures ( ).
5′ cap-enriched mRNA samples were used to construct cDNA libraries for sequencing on Nanopore and PacBio platforms. The Nanopore platform has a higher base-calling error rate than that of the PacBio platform, which could lead to incorrect annotation, in particular, if inappropriate analysis methods are used. RNA sequin synthetic RNAs [ ] were spiked into the P. falciparum RNA samples for the construction of cDNA libraries for Nanopore sequencing, and we used the RNA sequin data to identify the most suitable data analysis method. The first step of transcriptome annotation involves clustering long reads to generate candidate non-redundant isoform sequences. Technical noise, including truncated fragments and sequencing errors, can lead to spurious candidate isoforms from clustering [ ]. The noise can be identified if ground-truth transcriptomic annotation is available. From the comparison of candidate isoforms with annotation, all tools assigned more isoforms to classes other than the ground truth class, with the majority of incorrectly assigned isoforms belonging to truncated fragment classes ( ). Although the StringTie2 [ ] and FLAIR [ ] tools were more sensitive than TAMA collapse with a greater number of ground truth transcripts reported, StringTie2 and FLAIR falsely assigned isoforms from misaligned reads (identified from isoforms mapping to non-exonic regions including antisense). We selected the TAMA collapse tool [ ] with low stringency settings for assigning P. falciparum isoforms because it is less likely to assign false isoforms from misaligned reads with sequence errors than other tools, while it is able to detect most of the expressed isoforms.
 Candidate non-redundant P. falciparum isoforms were assigned from available data. Summary statistics of read processing, alignment, and candidate non-redundant isoforms for each dataset together with details of sampled developmental stage, RNA fraction, and sequencing platform are provided in . The new data generated in this study comprise a greater number of mapped reads and candidate isoforms than those from previous long-read transcriptomic studies combined. Candidate isoforms from all datasets were merged ( ). Novel isoforms (isoforms not currently annotated as transcripts in PlasmoDB [ ]) were filtered to remove those with non-canonical splicing junctions, lacking supporting evidence of 5′ capped end and identified from only a single sample ( ). The final transcriptomic catalog included 5,568 reference transcripts and 12,495 novel isoforms ( and ). 12,440/12,495 (99.6%) novel isoforms are supported by PacBio data ( ) indicating that the exon junctions for most isoforms are defined using data from the more accurate long-read sequencing platform. 9,004 of the 12,495 novel isoforms are supported by data from other studies in combination with data from this study. However, 3,155 novel isoforms are supported by data in this study only, and 336 novel isoforms are supported by data from other studies only ( ). For further assessment, the length distributions of novel isoforms were compared with reference transcripts ( ). The mean lengths of all novel isoforms (2.2 kb), novel isoforms unique to this study (2.1 kb), and novel isoforms only from other studies (1.9 kb) are markedly less than that of reference transcripts (3.1 kb). The difference in mean length is expected because the majority of reference transcripts define the longest transcript for each gene.

## Isoform events among novel isoforms
Isoform events were annotated among the catalog of transcripts ( ). Among reference transcripts, the most common events are alternative transcription start site (ATSS) and alternative transcription termination site (ATTS), which represent 82/216 (38%) and 80/216 (37%) of the total, respectively ( ). Among the events identified in the novel isoforms, ATSS and ATTS are the most common, comprising 10,716/25,056 (43%) and 9,963/25,056 (40%) of the total, respectively ( ). In contrast to reference transcripts, retained intron (RI) is the next most common event among the novel isoforms (3,599/25,056; 14%). The other types of isoform events are markedly less frequent for both reference and novel transcripts ( ).
 The most common isoform event among novel isoforms, ATSS, was investigated in detail. It should be noted that the 5′ ends of 1,535 novel isoforms are within 50 bp of a reference TSS, such that we considered these positions as matching reference TSS. Reference TSS positions correspond to genomic regions of locally elevated H2A.Z epigenetic marks (data from [ ]), in which the majority of sites have log-normalized occupancy greater than zero; in contrast, a bimodal distribution is apparent among the 10,323 5′ end positions represented in the novel isoforms ( ). Two clusters of alternative 5′ end positions were assigned by unsupervised clustering using log-normalized H2A.Z occupancy data. The genomic sequence in the vicinity of reference TSS is characterized by an elevated frequency of thymine upstream and adenine downstream ( ). Cluster C1 containing the majority of alternative 5′ end positions (7,937) displays a similar genomic sequence pattern ( ). In contrast, cluster C2 (2,283 5′ end positions) is characterized by an elevated frequency of adenine up and downstream ( ). The C1 and C2 clusters of alternative 5′ end positions also differ in genomic locations with respect to protein-coding sequence (CDS) regions, in which C1 positions are located mostly outside, whereas C2 positions are mostly within CDS ( ). As most C2 5′ ends are present within CDS, we wondered if C2 could represent 5′ ends generated post-transcriptionally, perhaps by co-translational cleavage and re-capping as described in other eukaryotes [ ]. We examined the frequency of all 64 codons in the vicinity of the C2 5′ ends present within CDS ( ). Comparison of the distributions by Kolmogorov-Smirnov test showed that 11 codons are significantly different among C2 5′ ends compared with randomly selected nucleotides from the same transcripts ( ). The codons more frequently associated with C2 5′ ends than random comprise lysine (AAA and AAG), glutamate (GAA and GAG), the arginine codon AGA, and the aspartate codon GAC. The codons less frequently associated with C2 5′ ends than random comprise TAT (tyrosine), TTT (phenylalanine), ATA and ATT (isoleucine), and TAA (stop).
 The next most common isoform event among novel isoforms, ATTS, was investigated in detail. P. falciparum TTS positions have been previously mapped from short-read [ , ], and long-read RNA-Seq data [ ]. However, to our knowledge, no sequence analysis of TTS, including investigation of polyadenylation signals, has been described for this organism. A high local frequency of adenine is apparent at reference TTS, which extends a short distance and is flanked by a longer distal region with an elevated frequency of thymine compared with random positions ( ). Inspection of the most-over-represented 6-mer at each position upstream of reference TTS revealed 37 different 6-mers ( ; full results and statistics in ), meaning that it is not possible to define a single major polyadenylation signal motif for this species. The 10,753 ATTS represented among the novel isoforms show an even more pronounced adenine-rich signal ( ). One important caveat for the analysis of ATTS is that these events lack corroborative evidence from feature-enriched short-read RNA-Seq, unlike ATSS. Spurious ATTS events can arise from 3′ truncated sequences generated by template switching and internal priming during cDNA synthesis [ ]. In mammalian transcriptomic studies, these artifacts can be eliminated by removing isoforms with 3′ ends mapping to locally adenine-rich genomic regions and considering ATTS as genuine only if canonical polyadenylation signals are present upstream [ , ]. However, the presence of adenine-rich motifs in the vicinity of bona fide reference TTS and the lack of a definitive canonical upstream polyadenylation signal disqualifies this filtering approach for P. falciparum. We investigated ATTS with supporting evidence from direct RNA sequencing, which can be used for validation [ ]. ATTS supported by direct RNA sequencing (943 positions) show a similar base frequency pattern to all ATTS ( ).
 The next most common type of isoform event, RI, was investigated in detail. Comparison of the percent GC and length distributions by Kolmogorov-Smirnov test showed significant differences between RI and spliced introns, in which RI are skewed towards higher percent GC ( ) and shorter length ( ) compared with spliced introns; however, it should be noted that the mean differences are small. Base composition plots of 5′ and 3′ splicing junctions did not reveal marked differences between RI and spliced introns, which show essentially the same pattern of adenine-rich sequence flanking either side of the 5′ junction ( ) and thymine-rich sequence upstream of the 3′ junction ( ).
 

## Expression patterns of retained introns and antisense isoforms
We obtained total and nuclear RNA samples of parasites at different stages of development for constructing PacBio libraries. From these PacBio library datasets, we obtained information on stage and nuclear representation for 11,325 of the novel isoforms in our catalog. We investigated whether different structural categories of the novel isoforms were over-represented exclusively in the nucleus or at different developmental stages by Fisher’s exact test ( ). The structural category “novel_in_catalog”, and the subcategories “intron_retention” and “mono-exon_by_intron_retention” showed significantly greater odds ratios among isoforms exclusively represented by nuclear datasets. The same structural category and sub-categories showed significantly greater odds ratios for the trophozoite and schizont stage datasets. The “antisense” category showed a significantly greater odds ratio in exclusively ring- and schizont-stage datasets. It should be noted that the antisense isoform category does not include transcripts in which the UTRs extending from annotated protein-coding genes overlap adjacent genes on the other strand.
 Next, we sought additional evidence to support the expression across the IDC for RI and antisense transcribed regions of the genome represented by novel isoforms. Independent short-read RNA-Seq data obtained using a directional, amplification-free protocol [ ], which were not used to construct the isoform catalog, were analyzed for features of interest ( ). The RI and antisense features were assigned by unsupervised clustering of short-read RNA-Seq patterns into three groups, following the assumption of three transcriptional transitions during the IDC [ ]. The assigned clusters revealed different patterns across the IDC, with clusters showing predominantly schizont-stage expression (40–48 hours post-invasion [hpi]) apparent for both RI and antisense isoforms. Clusters with predominantly ring-stage (0–16 hpi) and trophozoite-stage (24–32 hpi) expression were observed for antisense and RI isoforms, respectively, and a cluster with ring/trophozoite expression (8–24 hpi) was observed for both types of isoform. Notwithstanding the generally lower expression of antisense novel isoforms compared with their reference sense strand counterparts, some antisense isoforms show short-read RNA-Seq coverage along most of their length supporting the annotation from the long-read transcriptomic catalog ( ).
 

## Analysis of alternative ORFs and encoded proteins
The novel isoforms may contain alternative ORFs (altORFs) that code for proteins not present in the current proteome annotation [ ]. We translated the novel isoform sequences and analyzed all encoded proteins with protein databases. The query sequences were grouped according to BLASTp [ ] results ( ) as follows: 15,328 query sequences showed no significant match (no_hit), 6,713 matched P. falciparum proteins (Plasmodium_falciparum), and 424 matched proteins from other taxa (other_taxa). The comparison of protein length distributions by Kolmogorov-Smirnov test showed significant differences among all groups ( ). In the Plasmodium_falciparum group, 1,734 proteins matched a P. falciparum 3D7 reference protein with less than 100% identity, but with a median match length of 109 residues ( ). Discrepancies were apparent among the Plasmodium_falciparum group ( ), including i) short matches to P. falciparum proteins by altORFs in genomic regions not annotated as protein-coding, i.e., intergenic (50 altORFs) and antisense (34 altORFs) isoforms, ii) short matches to proteins from other organisms when searching the non-redundant database (604 altORFs), and iii) short matches to a non-reference P. falciparum protein, i.e., from a different strain, but no match to a P. falciparum 3D7 reference protein (480 altORFs). Five proteins from the other_taxa group ( ) also matched proteins with descriptions in the eggNOG database [ ].
 Given that most altORF-encoded proteins in antisense and intergenic isoforms do not show any similarity to known proteins, additional evidence is needed to determine whether proteins can be produced from these altORFs. Ribosome profiling (ribo-seq) is an established method for assessing ribosome engagement, and is a proxy for protein synthesis [ ]. We analyzed previously published P. falciparum ribo-seq data [ ] to assess ribosome engagement in altORFs within antisense and intergenic isoforms, and in ORFs for annotated proteins within reference transcripts. We did not determine ribosome engagement in novel isoforms overlapping annotated genes owing to confounding ribo-seq signals from the reference transcripts. Translational efficiency (TE) and ribosome release scores (RRS) were determined from the data. TE provides a measure of 80S ribosome density normalized to mRNA abundance, which correlates with the abundance of encoded protein [ ]. However, TE is not a robust classifier of protein-coding RNA; RRS is a more discriminating metric that distinguishes functional protein-coding transcripts from the pattern of translational termination at the end of the ORF [ ]. Ribosome engagement was found to be low overall for altORFs, as TE and RRS could be determined for only 106/417 (25%) of altORFs in intergenic isoforms and 246/1,665 (15%) of altORFs in antisense isoforms ( ). Moreover, the distributions of TE and RRS in altORFs are significantly different from ORFs in reference transcripts by Kolmogorov-Smirnov test ( ), with the exception of late-trophozoite stage TE for intergenic altORFs. No significant differences in TE or RRS distributions were observed for altORFs in intergenic isoforms compared with antisense isoforms.
In addition to new gene models to accommodate antisense and intergenic isoforms, it may be necessary to accommodate other types of novel isoforms. The transcript catalog includes novel isoforms that overlap two or more genes ( ). We investigated the gene overlaps in more detail and identified 228 novel isoforms that completely span two or three genes among 114 separate genomic regions ( ). Of this group, 168 are polycistronic that span multiple genes in the same orientation (head-to-tail), and 60 span adjacent genes in head-to-head or tail-to-tail opposite orientations. Some polycistronic isoforms code for multiple annotated proteins from different genes, whereas novel proteins are encoded by some polycistronic isoforms owing to isoform events. Finally, we investigated the nearest adjacent annotated features to 167 intergenic isoforms ( ). Eight intergenic isoforms are closest to pseudogenes, seven to telomeres, 12 to annotated non-coding RNA genes, and 140 to protein-coding genes. Gene ontology (GO) analysis of the 140 intergenic isoforms closest to protein-coding genes revealed significant enrichment of the GOslim molecular function term GO:0003700 DNA-binding transcription factor activity (Bonferroni-corrected P = 1.34e-6).

## Discussion
Despite the wealth of RNA-Seq data for P. falciparum and the availability of a finished reference genome sequence, transcriptomic annotation is sparse for most genes and does not catalog the full transcriptomic repertoire (isoform diversity) for this species. We addressed this need by creating a transcriptomic catalog from long-read RNA-Seq data. Although long-read RNA-Seq reveals a great diversity of isoforms, technical and biological noise confounds isoform annotation, in particular, the assignment of exon boundaries [ , ]. From the analysis of spike-in RNAs, we observed that filtering of candidate isoforms is required to eliminate 5′ truncated noise ( ). We used 5′ capped nucleotide signals generated from short-read RNA-Seq data to filter P. falciparum isoforms. The majority of 5′ capped nucleotide signals are broad, with a mean interquartile width >100 bp [ ]. We selected candidate isoforms with 5′-ends not further than 50 bp from the dominant 5′ capped nucleotide in each signal. Furthermore, the reference transcript 5′ ends were assigned the highest priority, such that candidate isoforms with nearby (less than 300 bp) downstream 5′ ends assigned from long-read data were filtered as noise in the transcriptomic merge step of catalog construction. Hence, although ATSS is the most common isoform event ( ), our transcriptomic catalog may still underrepresent the diversity of alternative 5′ ends. We filtered candidate isoforms with non-canonical splicing junctions, because P. falciparum is thought to possess minimal splicing machinery that is only capable of splicing canonical (GT:AG and GC:AG) junctions [ ]. Although 105 reference transcripts contain non-canonical splicing junctions ( ), all but five are pseudogene transcripts. Non-canonical junctions are not spliced in pseudogenes, as shown by a cDNA analysis of the SURFIN4.1 pseudogene transcript [ ]. The non-canonical splicing junctions for reference transcripts of protein-coding genes are present in UTRs, which may represent uncorrected RNA-Seq alignment errors in low-complexity sequences.

## Alternative ends represent the majority of isoform events
ATSS and ATTS represent the majority of isoform events among reference transcripts and novel isoforms ( ), which reflect the most frequent isoform events in the human transcriptome [ ]. The majority of ATSS represented among novel isoforms correspond to genomic locations with elevated H2A.Z occupancy throughout the IDC ( ). Elevated H2A.Z occupancy is a TSS marker in a variety of eukaryotes including P. falciparum; furthermore, reduced H2A.Z occupancy upstream of P. falciparum genes is associated with transcriptional silencing [ ]. The minority of alternative 5′ ends assigned to the C2 cluster correspond to genomic locations with reduced H2A.Z occupancy, different base composition, and are mostly within CDS ( ). Notwithstanding the possibility that alternative 5′ ends can arise from transcription initiation in genomic regions with an unfavorable nucleosomal architecture, we consider C2 5′ ends as unlikely to be transcription initiation sites.
Eukaryotic transcripts with alternative 5′ ends mapping to CDS can be generated post-transcriptionally by co-translational cleavage and recapping [ ]. Co-translational cleavage is known to occur at ribosome stalling sites, which include codons for charged residues such as lysine [ ]. The ends of endonucleolytically-cleaved mRNA fragments in human cells frequently overlap lysine, GAC (aspartate), and GAA (glutamate) codons [ ]. As the same codons are significantly over-represented in the vicinity of C2 5′ ends of novel isoforms ( and Figs), co-translational cleavage is plausible. P. falciparum can translate mRNA with consecutive lysine codons and other features that typically stall ribosomes more efficiently in human cells without triggering mRNA decay [ ]. We conjecture that ribosome stalling triggers co-translational mRNA cleavage in P. falciparum, but translation can continue past the stalling sites, possibly even on endonucleolytically-cleaved mRNA fragments that persist owing to inefficient mRNA decay. The uncapped 5′ ends of endonucleolytically-cleaved mRNA may be recapped via a cytoplasmic mRNA capping complex [ ] and manifest as C2 5′ capped ends.
Several different 6-mer motifs are over-represented upstream of reference TTS ( ); however, no single polyadenylation motif was apparent, unlike the majority of metazoan transcripts that possess a conserved upstream AATAAA polyadenylation signal motif [ ]. The transcription termination signals in P. falciparum are thus similar to other Apicomplexa species that also possess prominent adenine-rich regions in the vicinity of the TTS, but otherwise lack distinct polyadenylation signals [ ]. Although similar termination signals were observed among ATTS, we cannot exclude the possibility that ATTS are technical artifacts arising from internally-primed cDNA synthesis (especially those without direct RNA support). Nonetheless, less than 2% of ATTS determined from PacBio data are artifactual because of internal priming [ ]. Several novel isoforms terminate within CDS, such that they contain ORFs but lack a stop codon. The eukaryotic non-stop RNA decay mechanism recognizes such mRNAs as aberrant and destroys them [ ]; however, the machinery for removing aberrant mRNAs in P. falciparum is inefficient because it lacks key non-stop and no-go decay components [ , ]. Novel isoforms lacking a stop codon may be translated if the downstream poly(A) tail functions as a poly-lysine stop to terminate translation. In support of this conjecture, it has been reported that 24 consecutive lysine codons can act as an efficient translation termination signal without triggering mRNA decay in P. falciparum [ ].

## Retained introns are common isoform events
RI was identified as a frequent isoform event among the novel isoforms ( ). The RI sequences tend to be shorter and possess greater GC content than spliced introns ( ), in common with RI in other eukaryotes [ ]. However, the small differences in intron composition and the conservation of splicing junction sequence suggest that other factors are involved in P. falciparum RI. From the isoform representation among our PacBio datasets, novel isoforms with RI were more prevalent in nuclear RNA and later (trophozoite and schizont) stages of development ( ). RI clusters with different expression patterns throughout the IDC were resolved using independent short-read RNA-Seq data ( ). A possible connection between nuclear localization and differential patterns of RI across development is the PfSR1 RNA binding protein, which is known to promote splicing in P. falciparum [ ]. Interestingly, the localization of this protein changes throughout the IDC from predominantly nuclear (ring) to cytoplasmic (schizont) [ – ], suggesting that the reduction of nuclear-localized PfSR1 during IDC progression could generally lead to increased RI and nuclear retention of incompletely spliced isoforms. However, we recognize that it is difficult to make generalizations as RI is likely to be controlled by other factors, including other RNA binding proteins also present in the nucleus, such as PfCELF1 [ ].

## Protein-coding potential of altORFs
The majority of altORF-encoded proteins show no similarity to annotated proteins and are also shorter than the 100 residue threshold commonly employed for the annotation of protein-coding genes [ ] ( ); hence, additional evidence is needed to distinguish altORFs encoding small novel proteins from ORFs occurring at random. The altORFs encoding small proteins with discrepant BLASTp hits to P. falciparum proteins and hits to proteins in organisms other than P. falciparum ( ) are also unlikely to produce proteins. Ribosome engagement was found to be significantly lower for altORFs in antisense and intergenic isoforms compared with annotated protein-coding ORFs in the reference transcripts ( ; ) indicating that these isoforms represent lncRNA. Although most altORFs may not produce proteins, they may still engage with the translational machinery as regulators. Upstream ORFs (uORFs) are present in the 5′-UTRs of P. falciparum mRNA and they act to tune the translational efficiencies of the downstream protein-coding ORF [ – ]. AltORFs, including some that overlap annotated CDS, may act like uORFs to modulate protein synthesis in novel isoforms. Notwithstanding the majority of altORFs that are not likely to produce proteins, some altORF-encoded proteins with long (>100 residues) matches to P. falciparum 3D7 reference proteins but with less than 100% identity could represent protein isoforms ( ). P. falciparum protein isoforms have been previously reported, including truncated isoforms resolved by two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis [ ]. Some of these truncated isoforms may be produced by altORFs in novel mRNA isoforms; examples of three genes with reported protein isoforms [ ] and expressed as mRNA isoforms with altORFs are shown in .

## Polycistronic, antisense and lncRNA
The annotation of 168 polycistronic novel isoforms that span two or more genes ( ) is in accordance with previous reports of polycistronic mRNA in P. falciparum [ , ]. As translation initiation in P. falciparum follows the 5′ cap-dependent eukaryotic paradigm [ , ], downstream ORFs in polycistronic mRNA are likely to be translated by less efficient leaky scanning or reinitiation mechanisms [ ], or be dependent on specific translational activators such as var2csa [ ]. The novel isoforms that span adjacent genes on opposite strands include genes previously reported with antisense RNA expression, e.g. msp2 [ ]. The 491 novel isoforms in the antisense structural category are assigned to novel genes ( ) and thus are distinct from polycistronic isoforms with antisense overlapping regions. The novel isoforms in the antisense structural category thus expand precedent reports of antisense lncRNAs with transcriptional repression [ ] and activation functions [ ]. The expression of the majority of the antisense structural category novel isoforms is more apparent in ring and schizont stages of the IDC than the trophozoite stage (Figs and ). Recently, it has been shown that a greater proportion of protein-coding mRNA is present in RNA duplexes in ring and schizont stages compared with the trophozoite stage, and that sense-antisense transcript pairs can form stable RNA duplexes [ ]. Increased stability of mRNA when duplexed with an antisense partner could explain the general trend of increased mRNA stability in the schizont stage [ , ], perhaps leading to the storage of some transcripts that persist until the early ring stage after reinvasion. In addition to antisense novel isoforms, 167 intergenic isoforms were annotated in the catalog. From nearest-feature analysis ( ), the intergenic isoforms near telomeres are consistent with a previous report of lncRNAs transcribed from P. falciparum subtelomeric regions [ ]. The enrichment of the GO term DNA-binding transcription factor activity among genes near intergenic isoforms could indicate that these intergenic RNAs have important regulatory functions in shaping the local chromatin environment, e.g., by recruiting chromatin modifiers that permit control of transcription in response to stimuli [ ].

## Limitations of the study
The transcriptomic catalog presented in this study does not include isoforms expressed in other stages of development, i.e., gametocyte, mosquito, and liver stages. With improvements in long-read RNA-Seq technologies (particularly minimum sample requirements), these stages will become accessible to transcriptomic annotation in the future. We did not quantify isoform abundance across the IDC from the stage-specific PacBio library data because quantification accuracy is limited by the low depth of sequencing compared with short-read RNA-Seq, and the non-uniform coverage of isoforms in which 5′ ends are less likely to be covered by sequencing reads compared with 3′ ends [ ]. Isoform abundance across the IDC can be quantified using alternative methods such as isoform-specific reverse-transcription quantitative PCR [ ]. The assessment of altORF protein-coding potential from ribo-seq data was limited to intergenic and antisense isoforms. The altORFs in other isoforms can be assessed using alternative approaches such as global translation initiation sequencing [ ] and N-terminal proteomics [ ].
In conclusion, the P. falciparum transcriptomic catalog described herein adds an important resource for this pathogen. The details of isoform structures, classification, and isoform events are provided for future studies ( , and Tables). The major isoform events highlighted in this work (ATSS, ATTS, and RI) prompt questions to be addressed, including what mechanisms are responsible for generating these isoform patterns, and what biological roles (if any) these isoforms play? The encoded proteins from the novel isoforms ( ) can be used to test whether altORFs contribute toward an expanded proteome, with the caveat that validation is challenging with current proteomic technologies [ ].

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
Human erythrocytes and serum were obtained from donors after providing informed written consent, following a protocol approved by the Ethics Committee, National Science and Technology Development Agency, Pathum Thani, Thailand, document no. 0021/2560.

## In vitro culture of Plasmodium falciparum, subcellular fractionation, and RNA extraction
Plasmodium falciparum reference strain 3D7 (NCBI: txid36329) was used for all transcriptomic experiments. To assess the method for isolation of nuclei, transgenic P. falciparum GAL4-GFP expressing a nuclear-localized GFP reporter protein [ ] was used. Parasites were cultured in vitro in human O+ erythrocytes and buffered Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 medium containing 8% pooled, heat-inactivated human serum as described previously [ ]. Cultured parasites were synchronized by 60% percoll gradient separation to enrich late stages followed by enrichment of ring stages by sorbitol treatment [ ]. Parasites were harvested immediately (ring stage), 12 h (trophozoite stage), and 24 h (schizont stage) after synchronization. Parasites were liberated from host cells by treatment with 0.1% (w/v) saponin. Parasite pellets were washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (1x PBS; 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 8 mM Na2HPO4, and 2 mM KH2PO4). For extraction of total RNA, the washed pellet of saponin-liberated parasites was suspended in TRIzol™ reagent and RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer’s instructions (#15596026, Invitrogen). For subcellular fractionation, saponin-liberated parasites (obtained from independent synchronized cultures from those used to prepare total RNA) were disrupted by trituration in 0.3 mL of parasite lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.8, 10 mM KCl, 15 mM MgCl2 1 mM DTT, 1x cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail no EDTA (#04693132001, Roche), 40 U/mL SUPERas•In RNase inhibitor (#AM2694, Invitrogen), and 0.65% Nonidet P-40). Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 2500 × g for 5 min and the supernatant was removed by aspiration. Nuclei were washed three times with 1 mL parasite lysis buffer. Nuclei were resuspended in glycerol containing Hoechst 33342 for microscopic analysis. Nuclei were mounted on a glass slide and visualized using an Olympus FV1000 confocal microscope. The Hoechst 33342 signal was obtained using 346/460 (excitation/emission) filters, and the GFP signal was obtained using 490/525 (excitation/emission) filters. RNA was extracted from nuclei using TRIzol™ reagent, as described for total RNA. Purified RNA samples were stored in 75% ethanol at -80°C before use. On the day of cDNA synthesis, the RNA was dried and re-suspended in nuclease-free water. RNA concentration was estimated by NanoDrop ND-1000 (Thermo Scientific), assuming A260 = 1.0 is equivalent to 40 μg/mL RNA.

## Production of recombinant HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His fusion protein
Human eIF4E and eIF4G1 gene sequences were obtained by reverse-transcription PCR using Universal Human Reference RNA as a template (#740000, Agilent). The RNA was reverse transcribed with oligo dT and Superscript IV enzyme as recommended by the manufacturer (#18090010, Invitrogen). The eIF4E and eIF4G1 gene sequences were PCR-amplified with Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase (#F-530XL, Thermo Scientific) and primer pairs Hs4EF/Hs4ER and Hs4G1F/Hs4G1R ( ), respectively. The amplified eIF4E and eIF4G gene sequences were ligated via a common KpnI restriction site to make a fusion gene, as previously described [ ]. The fusion gene (1.1 kb) encodes a fusion protein with eIF4E and eIF4G1 domains separated by a flexible linker peptide (GGGGSGGGGTGGGGS) and a C-terminal six-histidine tag to allow immobilization of the fusion protein on a Ni2+ solid matrix. The fusion gene PCR product was cloned into the pET17b vector (Novagen) via the unique EcoRI and XhoI sites and sequenced by the Sanger dideoxy method (Macrogen). The recombinant plasmid, named HseIF4E_eIF4G_x6His ( ), was transformed into Escherichia coli strain BL21(DE3) for expression of recombinant protein. The 5′ cap-binding activity of the recombinant protein was assessed by specific elution from a 5′ cap analog matrix as previously described [ ].

## Purification of HseIF4E-eIF4G fusion protein and 5′ capped RNA
A 1 L culture of E. coli BL21(DE3) cells transformed with HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His was harvested after 20 h induction with 0.4 mM isopropyl ß-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside at 20°C. The induced cells were re-suspended in 30 mL of ice-cold buffer Ni-A (300 mM NaCl, 50 mM imidazole, 50 mM Na2HPO4, and 15% glycerol pH 8.0) and disrupted by French Press. The disrupted cell suspension was clarified by centrifugation and filtration and applied to a 5 mL HisTrap FF Ni2+-Sepharose column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with buffer Ni-A at a flow rate of 1 mL/min controlled using an ÄKTA system (GE Healthcare). After sample loading, the column was washed with buffer Ni-A until the UV signal reached the baseline. The recombinant protein was eluted in a 200 mL gradient of 50% buffer Ni-B (300 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, 50 mM Na2HPO4, and 15% glycerol pH 8.0). Peak elution fractions were pooled and diluted ten-fold in buffer Q-A (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, and 15% glycerol). Diluted protein was applied to a 10 mL Q-Sepharose FF column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated in buffer Q-A at a flow rate of 1 mL/min controlled using an ÄKTA system. After sample loading, the column was washed with buffer Q-A until the UV signal reached the baseline. Recombinant HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His protein was eluted in a 200 mL gradient of 50% buffer Q-B (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1000 mM NaCl, and 15% glycerol). Peak fractions of eluted protein were combined, aliquoted, and stored at -80°C before use. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Biorad).
In Nanopore RNA-Seq experiments, RNA sequin synthetic spike-in RNAs [ ] were added to parasite RNA to guide downstream data analysis. MixA RNA sequins were a gift from Dr. Jim Blackburn (Garvan Institute, Sydney, Australia) and were 5′ capped using the Vaccinia virus 5′ capping system, following the manufacturer’s recommended protocol (New England Biolabs). 10–30 ng of the 5′ capped RNA sequin mixture was added to P. falciparum total RNA (extracted from mixed IDC stages) before purification of 5′ capped RNA.
For purification of 5′ capped RNA, purified HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His protein (50 μg) was immobilized on 40 μL of HisPur Ni-NTA Magnetic Beads (#88831, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated with RNase-free 1XPBS (Ambion). A 50–100 μg sample of P. falciparum total RNA (with or without spike-in RNA) was incubated with protein-immobilized beads to capture 5′ capped RNA. Beads were washed three times with 1 mL 1XPBS, and 5′ capped RNA was eluted in a solution of 1% SDS, 200 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA. 5′ capped RNA was purified by acidic phenol:chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation. The 5′ capped RNA pellet was re-dissolved in 20 μL of nuclease-free water, and genomic DNA was removed using a TURBO DNA-free kit, following the manufacturer’s instructions (#AM1907, Invitrogen).

## PacBio Sequel RNA-Seq
Samples of purified 5′ cap-enriched RNA (100–300 ng) were converted to cDNA using a SMARTer™ PCR cDNA Synthesis Kit (#634928, Takara), as recommended by the manufacturer. Double-stranded cDNA was PCR-amplified following the recommendations for PacBio Iso-Seq Template Preparation for Sequel Systems (PacBio). The amplified DNA was initially purified using 0.4× AMPure beads, and a portion of each was gel-purified to enrich for fragments >4 kb using a Gel extraction kit (Qiagen). The gel-purified fraction was combined with the remainder of non-size selected DNA. The pooled DNA was purified using 0.4× AMPure beads. Purified DNA samples were sent on dry ice to Novogene AIT (Singapore) for PacBio Sequel sequencing service. PacBio Sequel raw data were delivered in.bam format. The raw data were processed using the Iso-Seq 3 application in the SMRT Link v6.0 program suite (PacBio). Full-length, non-chimeric circular consensus sequences (FLNC CCS) were reported from Iso-Seq3. The term “full-length” refers to sequences with cDNA adapters at both ends, although incomplete cDNA that does not extend to the original 5′ end of the mRNA can acquire a 5′ adapter by template switching during cDNA synthesis [ ]. Low quality (lq, accuracy < 0.99) and high quality (hq, accuracy >0.99) sequences were reported in.fastq format. The lq and hq sequences were aligned separately to the P. falciparum 3D7 v3.2 reference genome [ ] using the minimap2 tool [ ] in the spliced alignment mode guided by PlasmoDB-53 reference genome annotation with maximum intron 5 kb, settings: -ax splice:hq -uf -G 5k —secondary = no—junc-bed. Reference genome sequence and annotation files were downloaded from PlasmoDB [ ].
Candidate non-redundant isoforms were generated from the aligned reads using the Transcriptome Annotation by Modular Algorithms (TAMA) program suite [ ]. Aligned read.sam outputs from minimap2 were used as inputs for the TAMA collapse tool with “low” [ ] settings: -x capped -rm low_mem -sj sj_priority -log log_off -lde 5 -sjt 20 -a 100 -z100 -m 20.

## Nanopore RNA-Seq
First-strand cDNA synthesis reactions contained purified 5′ capped RNA spiked with RNA sequin (100–300 ng) as described above, RTSMARTCDS primer ( ), and Superscript IV (Thermo Scientific). RNA was removed by treatment with 0.2 N sodium hydroxide, and first-strand cDNA was purified using 0.5× AMPure XP beads as recommended by the manufacturer (#A63880, Beckman Coulter). A double-stranded 5′ adapter was made by annealing SPLADAP and SPN6 oligonucleotides ( ). 5′ adapter was ligated to 50–100 ng cDNA using T4 DNA ligase (New England Biolabs). The excess adapter was removed, and cDNA purified using 0.5× AMPure XP beads. Double-stranded cDNA was obtained by PCR amplification with primers ABRIDGEDPE1 and SMARTPCRII ( ) and KAPA HiFi HotStart Ready mix (Kapa Bioscience). The reaction conditions used were: 95°C 5 min; 15–20 cycles of 98°C 15 s, 62°C 5 min 30 s. DNA was purified using 0.5× AMPure XP beads and converted to a Nanopore DNA sequencing library using a 1D ligation kit as recommended by the manufacturer (#SQK-LSK109, Oxford Nanopore Technologies). The DNA sequencing library was quantified by Quant-iT dsDNA HS assay (#Q33120, Invitrogen) and agarose gel electrophoresis. Approximately 20 fmol of library DNA was sequenced on a SpotON MkI flow cell (R9.4) in a Minion device (Oxford Nanopore Technologies). Data were collected over 24 h runs using MinKnow software (Oxford Nanopore Technologies). The signals were converted to sequences in.fastq format using Scrappie basecalling software (Oxford Nanopore Technologies). Cutadapt version 2.8 [ ] was used to identify reads containing both 5′ and 3′ cDNA adapters, trim adapters, and reverse-complement first-strand cDNA reads. The settings used were: cutadapt—rc—discard-untrimmed -g CTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT…AAAAAAAAAGTACTCTGCGTTGATACCACTGCTT -e 0.2. The processed reads were aligned to the P. falciparum 3D7 v3.2 reference genome using the minimap2 tool in the spliced alignment mode guided by genome annotation with maximum intron 5 kb with settings: minimap2 -ax splice -uf -k14 -G 5k —secondary = no—junc-bed. For assessing the accuracy of RNA sequin isoform annotation, alignment was performed to the combined P. falciparum 3D7 v3.2/ RNA sequin in silico chromosome (chrIS) reference genome, guided by the combined reference genome annotation with the same parameters, except that the maximum intron was increased to 550 kb (-G 550k) to account for the larger introns in the chrIS gene models. Candidate non-redundant isoform sequences were generated from reads aligned to chrIS using different tools. The TAMA collapse tool was employed with “low” settings: -x capped -rm low_mem -sj sj_priority -log log_off -lde 5 -sjt 20 -a 100 -z100 -m 20 -icm ident_map and “high” settings: -x capped -rm low_mem -sj sj_priority -log log_off -lde 1 -sjt 20 -a 300 -z300 -m 20 -icm ident_map. The StringTie2 tool [ ] was employed with the following settings: long read (-L), no assembly (-R), and disable trimming (-t). The FLAIR tool [ ] was employed guided by the chrIS annotation. Candidate non-redundant isoforms were called by the FLAIR tool using the flair.py script with the following settings:—no_end_adjustment—trust_ends -n longest -s 2. The consistent and inconsistent isoforms returned by FLAIR were combined for further analysis. Candidate non-redundant isoform sequences reported by each tool were compared with the chrIS annotation using the GffCompare tool [ ].

## Generation of candidate non-redundant isoforms from external long-read RNA-Seq data
Direct RNA sequencing data obtained from the Nanopore platform [ ] were downloaded from the Sequence Read Archive database under accession number SRR11094274. The raw data were processed using the isONcorrect pipeline [ ]. The processed reads were aligned to the P. falciparum 3D7 v3.2 reference genome, guided by the PlasmoDB-53 reference genome annotation using the minimap2 tool as described above for Nanopore RNA-Seq. Candidate non-redundant isoforms were obtained from the aligned read data using TAMA collapse low as described above.
Data from two cDNA libraries sequenced using PacBio Sequel [ ] were downloaded as raw.bam files from the Genome Sequence Archive (accession numbers CRR216516−CRR216520). FLNC CCS sequences were obtained from the data as described above for PacBio Sequel RNA-Seq. The high-quality and low-quality FLNC CCS from each of the two libraries constructed were aligned separately to the P. falciparum 3D7 v3.2 reference genome using the minimap2 tool and candidate non-redundant isoforms obtained using TAMA collapse low as described above for PacBio Sequel RNA-Seq. RNA-Seq data obtained using PacBio RS [ ] were downloaded from the European Nucleotide Archive (accession numbers ERR2282005–ERR2282008). FLNC CCS were obtained using SMRT analysis 2.3.0 (PacBio). The FLNC CCS were aligned to the P. falciparum 3D7 v3.2 reference genome using the minimap2 tool and candidate non-redundant isoforms were obtained using TAMA collapse low as described above for PacBio Sequel RNA-Seq. Because only 31 isoforms were generated by TAMA collapse low ( ), we decided not to use these data for constructing the transcriptomic catalog.

## Analysis of external short-read RNA-Seq data
Directional, amplification-free short-read RNA-Seq data for P. falciparum 3D7 strain parasites sampled at 8 h intervals during the IDC [ ] were downloaded from the European Nucleotide Archive database (accession numbers ERR2234550–ERR2234556 and ERR2234564–ERR2234570). The data were processed with fastp [ ] using default parameters and aligned to the P. falciparum 3D7 v3.2 reference genome using the HISAT2 tool [ ] guided by the reference genome annotation with maximum intron 5 kb. Simplified annotation files were created for retained intron and antisense features and used with the aligned read.bam files to obtain counts of mapped reads with the featureCounts tool [ ] with options selected for paired, strand-specific reads (-p -s 2). The raw counts for each feature were normalized to the total of mapped reads in each dataset and scaled to counts per million mapped reads (cpm). Heatmaps were generated using the ComplexHeatmap package in R [ ]. Data frames of cpm values for features of interest were used as input to ComplexHeatmap, in which cpm values were transformed to row z-scores and features (rows) were clustered using the k-means algorithm with k = 3. RNA-Seq coverage tracks for visualization in the IGV tool [ ] were created from the.bam files. The.bam files were filtered to retain the first read from each pair using the SAMtools program [ ] view function, with the following options: -b -F 64. Bedgraph coverage files for each strand were generated from the filtered.bam files using BEDTools [ ], which were then used to generate BigWig files using bedGraphToBigWig [ ].

## Annotation of 5′ capped nucleotides for validating 5′ ends of novel isoforms
5′ capped nucleotide signals were obtained from CAPture-enrichment [ ] and 5′ cap end sequencing [ ] experimental data reported previously. The signals were annotated from these data using the CAGEr program [ ] as previously reported [ ]. The signals (CAGEr clusters) were concatenated, i.e., the union of signals from different data sources, into a single “CAGE peak BED file” for SQANTI3 [ ]. The “dominant.ctss” nucleotide reported by CAGEr for each signal was assigned as the middle point of each signal, as per the requirement for SQANTI3.

## Construction of transcriptomic catalog
Candidate non-redundant isoforms in.bed12 format obtained from TAMA collapse analysis of each long-read sequencing dataset were merged with the PlasmoDB-53 reference genome annotation using TAMA merge [ ] with the following parameter settings: -a 300 -z 300 -m 20 -d merge_dup. Under these settings, isoforms with 5′ or 3′ ends within 300 bp of the common end for the group were collapsed. TAMA merge was run with the reference transcripts set to cap-mode and full priority (1,1,1), and all test data candidate isoforms were set to no-cap mode. Candidate isoforms from PacBio hq FL CCS data were given the next highest priority (2,2,2), followed by PacBio lq FL CCS and Nanopore cDNA (3,3,3). Direct RNA isoforms were given second-highest priority for transcript 3′ ends (3,3,2). The isoforms from TAMA merge were used as input together with the CAGE peak BED file described above and the PlasmoDB-53 reference annotation to the SQANTI3 tool for classifying isoforms [ ]. The output_classification.txt file from SQANTI3 and the tama_merge_trans.txt file from TAMA merge were used for transcript filtering. Reference transcripts were defined as isoforms classified by SQANTI3 under the “structural_category” as “full-splice_match” if both “diff_to_TSS” and “diff_to_TTS” were less than 50 bp, i.e., the 5′ and 3′ ends were within 50 bp of reference transcription start site (TSS) and transcription termination site (TTS) ( ). All putatively novel isoforms not classified as reference transcripts were filtered with the following criteria: (i) length greater than 200 bp, (ii) all-canonical splice junctions, (iii) “dist_to_cage_peak” less than 50 bp (evidence of 5 capped end), and (iv) candidate isoform detected in more than one biological sample (using the tama_merge_trans.txt output from TAMA merge for guidance). 12,495 novel isoforms remained after filtering ( ).

## Characterization of isoform events
The structural categories and subcategories of novel isoforms reported by SQANTI3 were used for the initial assessment of isoform events. 11,325 novel isoforms are represented among one or more PacBio datasets generated in this study ( ). Isoform events were investigated among these isoforms as follows. For each SQANTI3 structural category and subcategory, the isoforms represented exclusively among one or more nuclear-sourced libraries (i.e., not represented in total RNA) were tallied. The isoforms represented among one or more total RNA-sourced libraries were tallied for comparison. One-way Fisher’s exact tests were performed using the rstatix package in R [ ], with the null hypothesis that the odds ratio of exclusively nuclear isoforms was not greater than one. Holm-Bonferroni-corrected P < .05 was considered significant. The same analysis was performed for isoforms represented exclusively among ring, trophozoite, and schizont stage-sourced libraries compared with isoforms represented by libraries from two or three different developmental stages (not exclusive to one stage). The odds ratios and associated lower confidence intervals from row-wise Fisher’s exact tests were plotted using the ggplot2 package in R [ ].
Isoform events were identified among novel isoforms and reference transcripts using the CATANA tool [ ] with default settings. The transcript annotation (.gtf) file together with the PlasmoDB-53 annotation were used as inputs for CATANA. Isoform events among the reference transcripts were identified and separated. Isoform events were filtered by retaining events reported as exclusive to the reference transcripts to account for redundancy among novel isoforms. The sequences of 2,710 retained introns (identified as novel events by CATANA) and spliced introns (all introns in the reference transcripts with no associated retention event detected by CATANA; 6,258 sequences) were obtained from the P. falciparum 3D7 v3.2 reference genome using BEDTools. Intron sequences shorter than 34 bp were excluded because flanking partial exon sequences could confound pattern analysis. The percent GC and length values for each intron sequence were obtained using the SeqKit tool [ ]. The distributions of intron length and percent GC were plotted using the ggplot2 package in R. Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sided, two-group tests comparing the distributions of retained and spliced introns were performed using the stats package in R [ ], in which Holm-Bonferroni adjusted P < .05 was considered significant.
Novel isoforms completely spanning two or more annotated protein-coding genes, and the nearest annotated features to intergenic isoforms were identified using BEDTools with intersect and closest functions, respectively. Gene ontology (GO) analysis of 140 intergenic isoforms closest to protein-coding genes was performed using the PlasmoDB GO enrichment analysis web application [ ].

## Analysis of transcript 5′ ends
Transcript 5′ end positions were obtained from the.gff annotation files for reference and novel isoform transcripts. H2A.Z ChIP-seq data reported in a previous study [ ] were used to calculate genome-wide normalized occupancy as described previously [ ]. The normalized occupancy values at the transcript 5′ end positions were natural log-transformed and the distributions were plotted using the ggplot2 package in R. Principal component scores of the log-transformed normalized occupancy values at novel isoform 5′ end positions were calculated using the MacroPCA package in R [ ]. The first principal component scores were used for unsupervised clustering of 5′ end positions using the cross entropy clustering (CEC) package in R [ ] with card.min = 15%. Under this setting, CEC resolved two clusters, designated as C1 and C2. Plots of average base frequency in the vicinity of 5′ end positions were performed using the seqPattern package in R [ ].
Codon composition analysis was performed for C2 cluster positions within annotated protein-coding sequence (CDS) regions (1896 positions). An SQLite database was constructed for these positions, together with a.bed file of CDS region coordinates and a.fasta file of CDS region sequences using an in-house script (available from: https://github.com/PavitaKae/PrepareCodonComposition/blob/main/preparecodoncomposition.py). The SQLite database,.bed file, and.fasta files were provided as input to the codon composition tool [ ]. The tool outputs the counts of all 64 codons within 20 bp windows spanning positions of interest and randomly selected positions from the same genes. The distributions of codon counts between C2 and random position groups were compared by two-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests using an in-house script (available from: https://github.com/PavitaKae/PrepareCodonComposition/blob/main/ks.py). Holm-Bonferroni adjusted P < .05 was considered significant.

## Analysis of transcript 3′ ends
Transcript 3′ end positions were obtained from the annotation files for reference and novel isoform transcripts. Plots of average base frequency were performed using the seqPattern package in R. 5,560 random positions were obtained from the P. falciparum 3D7 v3 reference genome using BEDTools. Genomic sequences flanking random positions (control set) and reference TTS were obtained using the seqPattern package in R. Analysis of over-represented 6-mers in the vicinity of reference TTS was performed using the kpLogo tool [ ] using the control set sequences as background and other settings as default.

## Analysis of encoded proteins in novel isoforms
Novel isoform sequences in.fasta format were obtained using GffRead [ ]. The sequences were translated using the orfipy tool [ ], with all complete ORFs considered and a minimum protein length of 29 amino acid residues (equal to the smallest currently annotated P. falciparum 3D7 protein PF3D7_1133000.1). The output of 40,036 was filtered to 22,465 non-redundant protein sequences with the SeqKit tool. Encoded protein sequences were queried using the BLASTp web application hosted by NCBI [ ] against the non-redundant and P. falciparum 3D7 databases using default parameters. BLASTp hits with E-value <1e-04 were considered significant, but only the top-ranked hits were recorded. Significant hits to P. falciparum proteins were considered a greater priority than hits to other species with equal or lower E-values. The queried protein sequences were also submitted to the eggNOG-mapper v2 web application [ ] and searched with default parameters.

## Analysis of protein coding function from ribosome profiling
Translation of ORFs in reference transcripts and novel isoforms during the P. falciparum IDC was assessed using ribosome profiling (ribo-seq) data published in Caro et al [ ]. We first generated a P. falciparum W2 strain variant-corrected genome index for read alignment as this strain was used for ribo-seq. Whole genome sequence (WGS) data of the P. falciparum W2 strain reported in [ ] under SRA accession number SRR1335983 were analyzed using tools hosted by the public server at usegalaxy.org [ ]. The WGS data were pre-processed using the Trimmomatic tool, aligned to the P. falciparum 3D7 v3.2 reference genome and variants called following the recommendations for haploid genomes [ ]. Raw variants were filtered to remove indels, and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with more than one alternative base, spanning more than one position e.g., AA–AT, and with variant quality score (QUAL) less than 40. 32,060 SNPs remained after filtering. The filtered SNPs were used with the P. falciparum 3D7 v3.2 reference genome to generate a genome index with HISAT2. Ribo-seq data were obtained from NCBI via accession numbers SRR1378560−SRR1378563 (run1) and SRR2014726−SRR2014729 (run2). Data from merozoite stage parasites were not analyzed as ribosome footprints were of much lower density overall for this stage [ ]. Matching short-read RNA-Seq data from the same biological samples were obtained from NCBI via accession numbers SRR1378555–SRR1378558 (run1) and SRR2014721–SRR2014724 (run2). The raw data were processed using the fastp tool with the following options: adapter sequence specified (-a CTGTAGGCACCATCAATTCGTATGCCGTCTTCTGCTTG) and trimmed read length limited from 18 to 30 bp (-l 18 -b 30). Reads matching P. falciparum rRNA and tRNA were filtered out from processed reads using the sortmerna2.1b tool [ ]. Filtered reads were aligned to the P. falciparum W2 genome index using HISAT2 guided by the P. falciparum 3D7 reference genome annotation with maximum intron 5 kb. Aligned reads from replicates of the same developmental stage were merged into one.bam file with SAMtools. To obtain read counts for the features of interest, simplified annotation files (SAF) were created for ORFs and downstream 3′-UTRs. We generated SAFs for annotated protein ORFs in reference transcripts ( ) and altORFs in intergenic and antisense novel isoforms ( ). 3′-UTR features accompanying ORFs and altORFs were defined as sequence from the stop codon to the 3′ end of the same RNA. SAFs and merged.bam files were used to obtain counts of mapped reads using the featureCounts tool with options selected for single, strand-specific reads (-s 1) and counting only reads with 100% feature overlap (—fracOverlap 1). Translational efficiency (TE) was determined from the ratio of normalized counts (ribo-seq: RNA-Seq). Counts were normalized by reads per kilobase per million mapped reads (rpkM) accounting for the length of the feature and the total number of mapped reads in the merged.bam file. Ribosome release score (RRS) was determined from the ribo-seq and RNA-Seq counts in ORF and downstream 3′-UTR features, as described previously [ ]. TE and RRS were not determined for any ORF with zero counts, or zero counts in the accompanying 3′-UTR, or with a 3′-UTR shorter than 50 bp. TE and RRS values in at least one developmental stage were determined for 3,565 ORFs in reference transcripts, 246 altORFs in antisense isoforms, and 106 altORFs in intergenic isoforms. The TE and RRS values were log2 transformed and plotted using the ggplot2 R package. Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sided, two-group tests comparing the distributions of TE and RRS were performed using the stats package in R. Holm-Bonferroni adjusted P < .05 was considered significant.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## SDS-PAGE analysis of HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His recombinant 5′ cap binding protein.
Recombinant protein was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) transformed with HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His plasmid. Protein samples were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. (A) 5′ cap-binding assay by specific elution from aminophenyl-m7GTP (C10-spacer) agarose (Jena Bioscience). The migrations of prestained protein marker bands (Thermo Scientific) are indicated to the left of the lane marked M. Lane 1, crude soluble protein extract; lanes 2–5, m7GTP eluted fractions; lane 6, void volume from NAP-25 Sephadex gel-filtration column; lanes 7–9, fractions 1−3 eluted from gel filtration column. The protein band of the size expected for HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His fusion protein (46 kDa) is marked by an arrow. (B) HisTrap FF Ni2+-Sepharose purification of HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His recombinant protein. Lane C, crude soluble extract; lane FT, flow-through of unbound protein; lane M, PageRuler Plus prestained protein marker (Thermo Scientific); lanes E1−E20, imidazole gradient elution fractions. HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His protein (46 kDa, arrowed) eluted in fractions E2 and E3. (C) Q-Sepharose FF purification. Fractions E2 and E3 from HisTrap FF Ni2+-Sepharose were applied to the column. Lane M, PageRuler Plus prestained protein marker (Thermo Scientific); lanes 2−26, NaCl gradient elution fractions. HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His protein (46 kDa, arrowed) eluting in fractions 12−15 was used for the enrichment of 5′ capped mRNA.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Isolation of Plasmodium falciparum nuclei.
Nuclei were isolated from GAL4-GFP P. falciparum transgenic parasites [ ] by differential lysis and centrifugation. Four different fields of view are shown in separate rows, with columns labeled A–E showing different signals of the same field of view. (A) channel 1, Hoechst 33342 signal; (B) channel 2, GFP signal; (C) merged channel 1 and 2; (D) brightfield and (E) merged channel 1,2 and brightfield. Scale bars (2, 2, 2, and 1 μm) are shown in column (E).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Construction of Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 isoform catalog (raw data to merged candidate isoforms).
Flowchart shows the data analysis steps used to construct the isoform catalog from raw long-read RNA-Seq data to merged candidate non-redundant isoforms. Raw data sources are shown as P (PacBio data from this study), PE (PacBio data from the Yang et al study [ ]), N (Nanopore data from this study), and NE (direct RNA Nanopore data from the Lee et al study [ ]). Figure was created using Diagrams.net (available from https://app.diagrams.net/).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## Construction of Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 isoform catalog (filtering of merged candidate isoforms to final catalog).
Flowchart shows the final data analysis steps used to construct the isoform catalog. The TAMA merge file outputs of source information (TAMA_trans_report.txt) and merged candidate non-redundant isoforms (TAMA_merge.gtf) were used to construct the final isoform catalog. Figure was created using Diagrams.net (available from https://app.diagrams.net/).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## Codon composition analysis.
Plots show the percent frequency of each codon in analysis windows (selected Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 v3 genomic positions, 10 bases upstream and downstream) in annotated protein-coding sequence regions. Selected positions corresponding to the 5′ end positions of novel isoforms assigned to the C2 cluster (C2 5′ end) are in blue and randomly selected positions from the same genes are shown in red.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## Empirical cumulative distribution frequency plots of codons.
The plots of all 64 codons are shown for analysis windows corresponding to Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 C2 5′ ends (blue) and randomly selected positions (red). The distributions were compared by two-sample, two-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test; unadjusted test P-values are shown on each plot and Holm-Bonferroni adjusted P < .05 are indicated in magenta.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## Examples of genes with isoforms coding for truncated proteins.
Screenshots from the IGV genome browser [ ] are shown for selected regions of Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 chromosome 10 (enolase gene top), and 9 (RhopH2 gene middle and RhopH3 gene bottom). Truncated protein isoforms expressed from these genes were reported previously from two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis [ ]. The structures of PlasmoDB [ ] annotated genes and catalog isoforms are shown in the “Annotated genes” and “Catalog isoforms” tracks, respectively (boxes, exons; thick boxes, open reading frames; lines, introns, and arrows, strand orientation). In the "Catalog isoforms" track, reference transcripts are in blue and novel isoforms are in red. The color hue of each isoform reflects the level of support from long-read RNA-seq data (darker, more support). Isoform identifiers ( ) are indicated after the gene identifier.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Summary statistics of long-read RNA-Seq data.
Long read RNA-Seq data were obtained from four studies as indicated in row 1: Lee et al [ ], Yang et al [ ], this study, and Chappell et al [ ]. The data were obtained from independent biological samples of Plasmodium falciparum indicated in row 2. Data from samples 1–10 were used to construct the transcriptomic catalog. Details of developmental stage and RNA fraction for each sample are shown in rows 3 and 4, respectively. Long-read sequencing platform is indicated in row 5. Processed read datasets obtained from each sample are indicated in row 6; datasets from PacBio sequencing have “lq” or “hq” suffixes to indicate low quality or high-quality assignment from Iso-Seq3 read processing. The dataset labels shown in this row are consistent with dataset source labels in (columns 33, 36−38). The numbers of processed reads available for alignment in each dataset are shown in row 7. Row 8 shows the number of reads aligned to the P. falciparum 3D7 v3.2 reference genome [ ] by minimap2 [ ]. Row 9 shows the number of candidate non-redundant isoforms assigned by TAMA collapse [ ] from the aligned reads for each dataset.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Transcriptomic catalog isoform classification.
The Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 transcriptomic catalog constructed from long-read sequencing data is shown for 5,568 reference transcripts (S2A) and 12,495 novel isoforms (S2B). Details are shown for the classification.txt output from SQANTI3 (columns 1−32, headers in orange; for explanation of column headers, see S1 & S2 Tables in Tardaguila et al [ ]). The tama_merge_trans.txt output from TAMA merge [ ] is shown in columns 33−38 (headers in blue). Column 33 (sources) refers to candidate non-redundant isoforms assigned by TAMA collapse [ ] for each long-read RNA-Seq dataset for alignment described in . Columns 34 (start_wobble_list) and 35 (end_wobble_list) refer to the "wobble", or range of exon start and end coordinates, respectively among candidate isoforms from different data sources merged into the final isoform. Columns 36 (exon_start_support) and 37 (exon_end_support) list the source data information of candidate isoforms used for assigning the 5′ and 3′ ends, respectively of the final merged isoform. Column 38 (all_source_trans) lists all candidate isoforms and data sources used for merging.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Isoform events in the transcriptomic catalog.
Isoform events identified by CATANA [ ] among reference transcripts (S3A) and novel isoforms (S3B). Event identifier is shown in column 1 (event). Isoforms inclusive (column 2) and exclusive (column 3) of the event are indicated by catalog isoform identifiers ( and ). Column 4 (code) refers to the exon usage pattern among isoforms. Column 5 (strand) indicates which annotated genome strand (+ or–) the isoforms map to.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Table

## Significant 6-mers in the vicinity of reference transcript termination sites.
Tabulated results from kpLogo analysis [ ] are shown for the most significant 6-mer at each position from 50 bp upstream (−50) to 45 bp downstream (45) of Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 reference transcript termination sites (TTS). 5,560 genomic sequences in the vicinity of TTS (test) and random (background) positions were used for analysis. Results shown from column 1 to 10: 6-mer sequence, nucleotide position relative to TTS, shift, enrichment test statistic, P-value (−log10 transformed), bonferroni-corrected P-value (−log10 transformed), the observed fraction of input sequences with this k-mer at this position allowing this amount of shift, the expected fraction of sequences with this k-mer at this position allowing this amount of shift, ratio (column 7 divided by column 8), and column 7 divided by the average of other positions.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Table

## Proteins encoded by novel isoforms.
Encoded proteins 29 residues or greater from all open reading frames among 12,495 novel isoforms were queried against protein databases. Proteins are grouped according to BLASTp results: no hit (S5A); Plasmodium falciparum protein hit (S5B); protein hit to other taxa (S5C). Query protein information is shown in columns 1–6 with gray headers. The identifier and SQANTI3 classification ( ) of the isoform encoding the protein are shown in columns 1–3. The protein identifier, amino acid sequence, and number of residues are shown in columns 4–6, respectively. Top-ranked BLASTp hit details are shown for searches with the NCBI web application [ ] against the non-redundant protein database (columns 7–12 with red headers) and the P. falciparum 3D7 protein database (columns 13–17 with blue headers). Search results with the eggNOG web application [ ] are shown in columns 18–33 with purple headers.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Table

## Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests comparing distributions of translational efficiency and ribosome release score.
P-values and Holm-Bonferroni adjusted P-values are shown from two-sample two-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests comparing distributions of log2 translational efficiency (TE) and log2 ribosome release score (RRS) among open reading frames in Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 reference transcripts, intergenic and antisense isoforms ( ). TE and RRS metrics were determined from ribo-seq data of ring, early trophozoite, late trophozoite and schizont sampled stages of development [ ]. Pairwise comparisons were made among isoform groups for each metric and stage of development as indicated in columns 1–4. Unadjusted P-values shown as 2.20E-16 represent the minimum P-value that can be reported in R [ ].
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Table

## Polycistronic isoforms.
Novel isoforms completely spanning two or more annotated Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 genes were identified with BEDTools [ ]. The isoforms were assigned to 114 non-overlapping genomic regions indicated in column 1. Isoform identifier ( and ) is shown in column 2. Information of annotated genes overlapping the isoform is shown in columns 3–15. Column 16 indicates whether polycistronic mRNA was reported previously from the same genomic region in Shaw et al [ ].
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S8 Table

## Nearest annotated feature to intergenic isoforms.
Nearest annotated Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 features to novel isoforms classified as intergenic were identified with BEDTools [ ]. Genomic annotations of the isoform and the nearest genomic feature are shown in columns 1−5 and 6−11, respectively. The distance (nt) from the isoform to the nearest genomic feature (irrespective of strand) is shown in column 12. Description of the nearest feature is shown in columns 13−15.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S9 Table

## Oligonucleotide sequences.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Dataset

## Transcript annotation file.
Reference and novel isoform transcript annotations in.bed12 format associated with the Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 v3.2 reference genome [ ] (Fields 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11 & 12). Field 4 contains the isoform identifier and PlasmoDB [ ] associated gene as shown in . Field 5 contains an arbitrary score denoting the degree of support from long-read RNA-Seq datasets from 166 (2 datasets) to 945 (18 datasets). Field 9 contains a color code denoting reference transcript (0, 0, 255) or novel isoform (255, 0, 0).
(BED)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Text

## HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His plasmid sequence.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Jim Blackburn for RNA sequins, Khi Pin Chua (PacBio Singapore Pte. Ltd.) and Mengquan Yang for assistance with PacBio data analysis, and Manolis Maragkakis for assistance with codon composition analysis.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0276956.r001Decision Letter 0
PainArnabAcademic Editor© 2022 Arnab Pain2022Arnab Painhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
6 Jul 2022

PONE-D-22-13960Transcriptomic complexity of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum revealed by long-read sequencingPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. %Shaw%,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
In the reviewer's comments, you will notice that while the reviewers have found your study novel and adding to our current knowledge on transcriptomic plasticity of P. falciparum parasites, they have raised a few major concerns and put forward some useful suggestions (such as wet-lab validations of transcript isoforms) to improve the quality of this manuscript. Please address these concerns while revising the manuscript.
Please submit your revised manuscript by August 20th 2022. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:

A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Arnab Pain, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf.
2. We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
3. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels. 
  
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Partly
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: N/A
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: It is generally known that genes are transcribed in different pattern resulting isoforms. Plasmodium falciparum is one of the most important pathogens and model strain of Apicomplexan parasites as well. However, its isoforms in transcripts has not described enough. Here, the authors provided a comprehensive catalog of the isoforms using long-read sequencing.
To obtain full-length complete cDNA, they utilized an improved eIF4E system for capturing of 5’ capped mRNA. Analytical pipeline for identification of isoforms were optimized using sequin RNA. Comprehensive TSS data sets in public were utilized for filtering possible artificially truncated isoforms. Those started at low chromatin density region were excluded as well. Resulting isoforms were compared with the standard gene model then 12,495 novel isoforms were identified.
The provided gene model including multiple isoforms are quite informative and will contribute for further analyses in the parasites biology after substantial revision.
Major points:
1.
Line 28, alternative 5’ and 3’ are not a part of alternative splicing. It is better to use “isoform” instead of alternative splicing. Line 59 and others as well.
2.
The gtf you provide will be quite useful information for further studies in research community.
However, there are some lack in information for convenient use. If you provide additional gff/gtf integrating the standard gff in PlasmoDB into yours, it will be much beneficial. In the gff/gtf, differentiate your sequences from the PlasmoDB gff and previous studies (maybe using column 2 “source”), add gene description to yours as well, and select and note representative one if gene has multiple isoforms. It might be decided by number of sequence reads.
3.
Line 287 and Fig 1A, almost 50% reads were truncated at their 5’ terminal. How did it happen? Was it caused by insufficient optimization in analytical pipeline or TSS enrichment using the eIF4 system? According to the reference #17 which applied the similar system, distribution of TSSs are around 100 bp. There are other TSS specific methods such as CAGE and oligo-capping. Have you compared the performance among them and described why you used the eIF4 system among them?
4.
Making transcriptomic catalog is one of the major achievements of this study; however, the process is complicated to understand at a glance. Please provide a flowchart as a supplemental figure.
5.
Line 316 and Fig 3A, have you include or exclude the C2 isoforms from the final transcriptomic catalog? Besides, if C2 5’ ends are less likely true TSS, how were these caused? You have described it in the following paragraph (line 319-329); however, co-translational chevage generates cap less RNA then the eIF4 system excludes the RNA; therefore, 5’ end generated by co-translational chevage should not be observed in your study.
6.
Line 190, what is the 37 different 6-mers? Also, it seems that there are a position constrained conserved sequence from -44 to -26. Have you searched any motifs using other tools such as MEME?
7.
Deposit the sequence data to INSDC (International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration).
Minor points:
1.
Line 205-208, I can not find any difference between spliced and retained.
2.
Fig 1C, Fig 3A, Fig 5A and B, and Fig 8, what does “density” in the vertical axis means?
3.
S1 Table, need more descriptions. For example, what is the directRNA, Yang1hq, ringtotalhq, NPcDNA, and Chappell PacBio RS? The other supplemental tables lack sufficient information as well.
Reviewer #2: In the manuscript entitled “Transcriptomic complexity of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum revealed by long-read sequencing”, authors attempted to improve the P. falciparum transcriptomic catalog by producing the novel gene isoforms and rigorously analyzed the different Alternative splicing events observed in the cDNA sequences. The manuscript is written and organized in a systematic manner, especially materials and methods. However, I have few minor comments and request authors to address these in the next version of the manuscript.
o Line 140: "9,004 of the 12,495 novel isoforms were supported by data…” Please specify the why authors are calling these transcripts as novel even though they are reported in previous studies. Definition of term ‘novel’ is confusing here.
o Authors must recommend how the novel datasets (isoforms) presented in this study can further be used for the subsequent analysis, especially from the bioinformatics perspective.
o Please add a study limitation sub-section in the discussion section.
o Are these isoforms and AS sites is specific to IDC stage only. Please discuss.
Reviewer #3: The manuscript addresses one of the major challenges in transcript annotation for P falciparum but needs to address the following issues specifically an experimental validation of the results using isoform specific qCPR and the details of the analyses performed outlined below.
Major points:
Every statement claiming significant differences should accompany the appropriate statistical test.
1. The enrichment of the new cap binding protein should be demonstrated using a qPCR and the statement five-fold better enrichment should be statistically tested.
2. 2. Line 129: How was the TAMA tool selected over the other tools should be discussed in detail by statistically substantiating the statement "these tools falsely assigned isoforms from misaligned reads to non-exonic regions including antisense". For example - What percentatge of the reads were falsely assigned? Was the false assignment significantly different statistically?
3. Line 135: Please detail how were the isoforms combined ? Were they collapsed if they were within xxx bases at either ends ?
Line 138: "lacking supporting evidence of 5′ capped end" - What dataset was used as supporting evidence for 5' capped ends. The strategy used by Adjalley et al 2016 is enzymatic while the one used by authors of the current group is pull-down based. How are the two kinds of datasets reconcilled?
4. Line 207-208: "higher percent GC (Fig 5A) and shorter length (Fig 5B) compared with spliced introns; however, it
should be noted that the mean differences are small." Please add numbers and appropriate tests to support these statements.
5. Does the analysis of ATSS and ATTS clusters change if only the consensus isoforms (isoforms with support from other studies) are used
6. An isoform specific qPCR is a must to validate the results which could be done on retained introns isoforms or stage specific isooforms.
7. The authors state that both PacBio and Nanopore sequencing was used, but a comparison between of data generated using the two techniques is currently missing. Given that the data is not always concordant such an analysis is paramount to generate a viable annotation.
Minor points
1. In multiple places the statement "we utilized long-read platforms to sequence cDNA of P. falciparum IDC stages" is used. This should mention what platforms and which stages clearly. Also, the number of samples (replicates) read depths, coverage and other sequencing QC information should be clearly mentioned in the text.
2. Line 141: "9,004 of the 12,495 novel isoforms were supported by data from other studies in combination with data from this study", supported by atleast one oher study or all the studies
3. Line 155-158: Please indicate the percentages of different events in the text as well.
4. Line 166: Please give reference of the H2A.Z dataset
5. This study will be extremely useful to the community if an updated gtf file is provided with new isoforms along with the level of support for it ( ex. supported by 2 studies, 3 studies etc)
6. Manuscript should have a data availability statement.
Reviewer #4: Shaw et al., in the current manuscript have catalogued additional alternative splicing (AS) events in P. falciparum IDC stages using the long read next generation sequencing technologies like PacBio and Nanopore platforms. Of the 12,495 novel mRNA isoforms detected by them, majority were either alternative 5' or 3' events. They have also identified a good number of intron retention events. This study further provides information about the in-silico identification of additional proteins that adds to the current proteome repertoire. Long read sequencing technologies identify AS events more accurately and hence this study provides important information related to unidentified AS events that can assist in understanding gene and protein regulation in the deadly malaria parasite P. falciparum.
Minor comments:
1. In case of intron retention events that were reported, it would have been great to validate a couple of intron retention events using reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR by targeting primers to the retained intron region.
2. I understand that alternative ORFs can code for variant proteins that have not been annotated yet. I will be happy to see if the authors can validate a few intergenic isoforms for their ability to code proteins. This may also include a couple of isoforms that span two or more genes.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes: AMIT KUMAR SUBUDHI
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0276956.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
5 Sep 2022

PONE-D-22-13960
Transcriptomic complexity of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum revealed by long-read sequencing
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Shaw,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript
that addresses the points raised during the review process.
In the reviewer's comments, you will notice that while the reviewers have found your study novel and adding to our current knowledge on transcriptomic plasticity of P. falciparum parasites, they have raised a few major concerns and put forward some useful suggestions (such as wet-lab validations of transcript isoforms) to improve the quality of this manuscript. Please address these concerns while revising the manuscript.
Please submit your revised manuscript by August 20th 2022. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
• A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
• A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
• An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Arnab Pain, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf.
2. We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
3. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels. 
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Partly
Reviewer #4: Yes
________________________________________
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: N/A
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes
________________________________________
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes
________________________________________
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
________________________________________
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: It is generally known that genes are transcribed in different pattern resulting isoforms. Plasmodium falciparum is one of the most important pathogens and model strain of Apicomplexan parasites as well. However, its isoforms in transcripts has not described enough. Here, the authors provided a comprehensive catalog of the isoforms using long-read sequencing.
To obtain full-length complete cDNA, they utilized an improved eIF4E system for capturing of 5’ capped mRNA. Analytical pipeline for identification of isoforms were optimized using sequin RNA. Comprehensive TSS data sets in public were utilized for filtering possible artificially truncated isoforms. Those started at low chromatin density region were excluded as well. Resulting isoforms were compared with the standard gene model then 12,495 novel isoforms were identified.
The provided gene model including multiple isoforms are quite informative and will contribute for further analyses in the parasites biology after substantial revision.
Response: We thank the reviewer for the succinct summary. However, we wish to correct potential misunderstanding in the sentence: “Those started at low chromatin density region were excluded as well.” We did not filter isoforms using chromatin density data.
Major points:
1.
Line 28, alternative 5’ and 3’ are not a part of alternative splicing. It is better to use “isoform” instead of alternative splicing. Line 59 and others as well.
Response: We agree that alternative splicing events are distinct from alternative start and termination sites. To avoid potential confusion, we changed “alternative splicing” to “isoform” or “isoform events” as suggested in the revised manuscript. 
2.
The gtf you provide will be quite useful information for further studies in research community.
However, there are some lack in information for convenient use. If you provide additional gff/gtf integrating the standard gff in PlasmoDB into yours, it will be much beneficial. In the gff/gtf, differentiate your sequences from the PlasmoDB gff and previous studies (maybe using column 2 “source”), add gene description to yours as well, and select and note representative one if gene has multiple isoforms. It might be decided by number of sequence reads.
Response: 
We agree with the reviewer that a single comprehensive genome annotation file incorporating the new transcriptomic information consistent with the PlasmoDB format would be of most benefit to the community. However, the task of revising the genome annotation is best left to the PlasmoDB curators. Rather than attempting to make a new, comprehensive genome annotation file, we decided to make a simpler transcript annotation file with features that researchers may find useful for transcriptomic studies to complement the current PlasmoDB genome annotation. 
In the revised manuscript, we replaced the S1_dataset.gtf file with a more compact S1_dataset.bed file. The revised annotation file in .bed12 format includes reference transcripts and novel isoforms assigned in S2 Table. The fourth field of the S1_dataset.bed file includes the isoform identifier shown in S2 Table and gene identifiers in the current PlasmoDB nomenclature, e.g. PF3D7_0417200. Therefore, gene descriptions and other information of interest can be obtained by cross-referencing with PlasmoDB. Reference transcripts have a blue color code, whereas novel isoforms are coded in red. Every isoform also has a score to denote the level of support from long-read RNA-Seq datasets as shown in S2 Table (column 33). When displayed on genome browser software such as IGV, the scores indicating the level of support are displayed as different color hues, with darker hues indicating greater levels of support. Note that all mRNA reference transcripts in the current PlasmoDB genome annotation are present in the revised S1_dataset.bed file, including reference transcripts for which there are no supporting long-read RNA-Seq data. 
3.
Line 287 and Fig 1A, almost 50% reads were truncated at their 5’ terminal. How did it happen? Was it caused by insufficient optimization in analytical pipeline or TSS enrichment using the eIF4 system? According to the reference #17 which applied the similar system, distribution of TSSs are around 100 bp. There are other TSS specific methods such as CAGE and oligo-capping. Have you compared the performance among them and described why you used the eIF4 system among them?
Response: A major difficulty for transcript isoform annotation is the noise of reads with truncated 5′ ends, which is addressed in detail in the Kuo et al papers (originally cited references 26 and 41). Truncated cDNA (cDNA that does not extend to the original mRNA 5′ end) occurs because of pausing at RNA secondary structure and degradation of RNA template during the reverse transcription reaction (Das et al 2001, DOI: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.2001.6.2.57). Although we enriched 5′ capped mRNA using the HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His fusion protein, we cannot prevent the truncated cDNA products of reverse-transcription. We tried enrichment of full-length cDNA with the HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His fusion protein after the cDNA synthesis step (Shaw et al., 2021; originally cited reference 17), but the yield was too low to be practical for constructing long-read RNA-Seq libraries. The CAGE method mentioned by the reviewer is currently only employed for short-read RNA-Seq and captures only 5′ terminal fragments of full-length cDNA via the Cap-Trapper enrichment strategy. To our knowledge, there is no published long-read RNA-Seq protocol based on the CAGE method for enriching full-length cDNA representing complete mRNAs (from the original 5′ to 3′ ends), although an unpublished preprint describes a long-read RNA-Seq protocol with Cap-Trapper enrichment in development (Pardo-Palacios et al 2021; DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-777702/v1). The oligo-capping method mentioned by the reviewer is also inefficient, although it has been used in a few studies in other organisms, e.g., chicken (Kuo et al 2020, originally cited reference 41). The currently commercially available Teloprime kit (Lexogen company) for enriching full-length cDNA after the cDNA synthesis step is biased towards short cDNA (Cartolano et al., 2016; originally cited reference 78), and our preliminary testing of the Teloprime kit with P. falciparum samples showed strongly biased representation of short cDNA <1 kb, which was communicated to the manufacturer. 
Instead of using an inefficient enrichment method for full-length cDNA after the cDNA synthesis step, we chose to enrich mRNA with a 5′ cap binding protein to increase representation of isoforms with alternative 5′ capped ends. We filtered isoforms bioinformatically using the 5′ cap signals from short-read RNA-Seq to eliminate truncated cDNA artifacts. This approach has been used in other long read RNA-Seq studies, e.g., the rat hippocampus (Wang et al 2019; DOI: 1038/s41467-019-13037-0), and is an integral part of the SQANTI isoform filtering pipeline (Tardaguila et al., 2018; originally cited reference 34). We appreciate the reviewer’s concerns over our experimental protocol for enriching 5′ capped mRNA. However, we think that extensive comparison of methods for enrichment of full-length cDNA would detract from the story and so prefer not to add this information to the manuscript. 
4.
Making transcriptomic catalog is one of the major achievements of this study; however, the process is complicated to understand at a glance. Please provide a flowchart as a supplemental figure.
Response: we added flowchart diagrams describing the catalog construction process as suggested by the reviewer in new Supplementary figures S3 and S4 in the revised manuscript.
5.
Line 316 and Fig 3A, have you include or exclude the C2 isoforms from the final transcriptomic catalog? Besides, if C2 5’ ends are less likely true TSS, how were these caused? You have described it in the following paragraph (line 319-329); however, co-translational chevage generates cap less RNA then the eIF4 system excludes the RNA; therefore, 5’ end generated by co-translational chevage should not be observed in your study.
Response: we included all isoforms after filtering in the final catalog, including those with C2 5′ ends. We did not address how C2 5′ ends were generated in this manuscript, but speculated that they are generated post-transcriptionally. According to the available information in other eukaryotes, we conjecture that 5′ capping machinery is also present in the parasite cytoplasm which can add a new 5′ cap structure to co-translationally cleaved mRNA in a process described as mRNA re-capping. This process is reviewed by Trotman and Schoenberg (originally cited reference 31), which was first mentioned in the results section of the original manuscript (line 176−179). In the revised manuscript, we clarified the Discussion section by adding that isoforms with C2 5′ ends could be generated post-transcriptionally by re-capping after co-translational cleavage (line 351−353; please refer to the line numbering in the clean Manuscript file). 
6.
Line 190, what is the 37 different 6-mers? Also, it seems that there are a position constrained conserved sequence from -44 to -26. Have you searched any motifs using other tools such as MEME?
Response: 
We apologize for our oversight that all overrepresented 6-mers at each position upstream of the TTS are not obvious in Fig. 4B, in particular the 6-mers with low –log10(P) value that are displayed as small features on the figure. In the revised manuscript, we added a supplemental data file (new S4 Table) of all motifs reported by kpLogo, which are displayed graphically in Fig. 4B. We used the kpLogo tool as this is specifically designed for finding short motifs (2–6 nt). Our search was based on the assumption from other eukaryotes that polyadenylation signals constitute short motifs �6 nt (Neve et al 2017, originally cited reference 48). The MEME suite of tools is better suited for finding longer sequence motifs 6−50 nt in length (Bailey et al 2006; DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkl198). 
To answer the reviewer’s question, we tested the STREME and CentriMo programs in the MEME suite (available at https://meme-suite.org/meme/; last accessed 03/08/22) using the same sequences as used for kpLogo. These tools showed three motifs with significant (P<.05) positional enrichment in the vicinity of reference TTS, i.e., ATATATATAT, AAAAAAAAAAAAAAK, and AAAAAAAAA as shown below: 
Figure response to comment 6 from reviewer #1. 
CentriMo 5.4.1 display of positional enrichment for motifs identified as over-represented in 5560 P. falciparum 3D7 sequences in the vicinity of reference transcript termination sites (-50 to +50) compared with 5560 random genomic sequences of the same length. Over-represented motifs were first identified with STREME using settings: limit motifs to 10, align center, minimum word length 6, and maximum word length 15. The top five motifs found by STREME were: AAAAAAAAAAAAAAK (2551 occurrences), AAAAAAAAA (2116 occurrences), ATATATATAT (3840 occurrences), CTATTCTTYTAATAA (110 occurrences), and TAAAATAAAATA (278 occurrences). Positional enrichment of these motifs was assessed with CentriMo run in the enrichment mode with control random sequences as background, and searching given strand only with default settings. 
The AAAAAAAAAAAAAAK and AAAAAAAAA motifs are enriched in close proximity downstream of the TTS, whereas the ATATATATAT motif is enriched further downstream. As (AT) dinucleotides are generally present at higher frequencies in the more A/T rich intergenic regions of the P. falciparum genome, we think that the ATATATATAT motif found by the MEME suite is unrelated to transcriptional termination. The AAAAAAAAAAAAAAK and AAAAAAAAA motifs are supportive of the adenine-rich significant 6-mers found by kpLogo and the base composition plots shown in Fig. 4. In summary, the analysis by the MEME suite of tools supports our original conclusion that in P. falciparum has prominent adenine-rich regions in the vicinity of the TTS, but otherwise lacks distinct polyadenylation signals. 
7.
Deposit the sequence data to INSDC (International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration).
Response: all raw sequence data are already deposited in the NCBI GEO under accession number GSE186109, as indicated in the “Data Availability statement” in the manuscript. The NCBI GEO database is a widely accepted resource for archiving of raw data and associated meta-data which are indexed, cross-linked and searchable (Barrett et al 2013; DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks1193). The raw sequencing data (SRA files) associated with the GEO accession will be made publicly available upon acceptance of the manuscript. 
Minor points:
1.
Line 205-208, I can not find any difference between spliced and retained.
Response: the distributions of intron length and %GC are significantly different by two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sided test as indicated in the Fig. 5 legend. For clarity, we added that distributions were compared by Kolmogorov-Smirnov test in the body of the text in the revised manuscript (line 209). In the Discussion, we did emphasize that the differences in distributions are small and practically not sufficient to explain the biological phenomenon of intron retention. 
2.
Fig 1C, Fig 3A, Fig 5A and B, and Fig 8, what does “density” in the vertical axis means?
Response: 
The axes labelled “density” refer to the probability density function of the variable from the kernel density calculated by the ggplot2 R package. We added this information to the figure legends (revised Fig 1C, Fig 3A, Fig 5A and B, and Fig 8A). 
3.
S1 Table, need more descriptions. For example, what is the directRNA, Yang1hq, ringtotalhq, NPcDNA, and Chappell PacBio RS? The other supplemental tables lack sufficient information as well.
Response: We added descriptions for all rows and columns to the S1 Table and other Supplementary tables (S2−S8 Table). 
Reviewer #2: In the manuscript entitled “Transcriptomic complexity of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum revealed by long-read sequencing”, authors attempted to improve the P. falciparum transcriptomic catalog by producing the novel gene isoforms and rigorously analyzed the different Alternative splicing events observed in the cDNA sequences. The manuscript is written and organized in a systematic manner, especially materials and methods. However, I have few minor comments and request authors to address these in the next version of the manuscript.
o Line 140: "9,004 of the 12,495 novel isoforms were supported by data…” Please specify the why authors are calling these transcripts as novel even though they are reported in previous studies. Definition of term ‘novel’ is confusing here.
Response: Although our isoform catalog was created using previously published long-read RNA-Seq data in addition to our new data, surprisingly none of these earlier studies actually provided individual isoform structures in detail, e.g. as .gff/.gtf annotation data files and only representative examples of isoforms were illustrated in figures. Moreover, the P. falciparum transcriptome annotation in PlasmoDB (release 58: 23rd June 2022) has not been updated using these data. We included a definition of “novel isoforms” in the original Methods section (line 661−669), although we agree with the reviewer that this may be difficult for some to follow because of the obfuscating bioinformatic details. We revised the Results section with a simpler definition of novel isoforms as those “not currently annotated as transcripts in PlasmoDB” in the revised manuscript (line 135–136). 
o Authors must recommend how the novel datasets (isoforms) presented in this study can further be used for the subsequent analysis, especially from the bioinformatics perspective.
Response: The S1 Dataset, S2 Table and S3 Table are important resources for further bioinformatic study of isoforms. The translated protein sequences of the novel isoforms in S4 Table (S5 Table in revised manuscript) can be used in proteomic studies. We added this information to the concluding paragraph of the Discussion (line 455–462). 
o Please add a study limitation sub-section in the discussion section.
Response: in the revised manuscript, we included a “limitations of the study” sub-section as suggested (line 441−453). This section highlights the following limitations: lack of data for other stages of the life cycle, no information of isoform abundance, and protein-coding potential assessed only in intergenic and antisense isoforms. 
o Are these isoforms and AS sites is specific to IDC stage only. Please discuss.
Response: we identified structural categories of isoforms exclusively represented among PacBio datasets from different intra-erythrocytic (IDC) stages (Fig. 6), although we do not claim that isoforms and associated alternative transcript events are stage-specific, since this would require quantitative analysis of isoform abundance across the IDC stages. Quantitative analysis of isoform abundance from PacBio data is inherently challenging because the depth of sequencing is much lower than short-read RNA-seq, and the coverage of isoforms is non-uniform since the 5′ end is less likely to be covered by sequencing reads compared with the 3′ end. We are aware of a recent publication which addresses these challenges using an Expectation-Maximization approach for estimating the relative abundance of isoforms from PacBio data (Hu et al 2021; DOI: 10.1186/s13059-021-02399-8); however, this approach can only detect differential alternative splicing among two conditions and cannot quantify changes across multiple conditions, e.g., developmental time-points. Readers may find the TAMA merge output information in the S2 Table (column headers in blue) useful to identify individual isoforms that could be more abundant in one stage than another based on their representation in different RNA-Seq libraries. However, independent data of isoform abundance are needed to prove stage-specificity. We added this limitation to the “limitations of the study” discussion sub-section of the revised manuscript (line 441–453). If the reviewer is also asking whether the isoforms we reported are specific to the IDC stages, we cannot answer this as we don’t have long-read RNA-Seq data for comparison from other stages of the parasite life cycle, i.e., gametocyte, mosquito and liver stages. We highlighted the lack of data for these stages of the life cycle in the “limitations of the study” sub-section of the revised Discussion (line 441–453). 
Reviewer #3: The manuscript addresses one of the major challenges in transcript annotation for P falciparum but needs to address the following issues specifically an experimental validation of the results using isoform specific qCPR and the details of the analyses performed outlined below.
Major points:
Every statement claiming significant differences should accompany the appropriate statistical test.
Response: We apologize that for every statement of “significant differences” in the body of the text referring to a figure we did not include details of the statistical tests performed and P-values, which were indicated in the figure or figure legends. The details of all tests used, including thresholds for significance, are given in the materials and methods section. For clarity, we revised the manuscript by adding details of which test was performed to all statements of significance in the body of the text. For brevity and readability, we prefer to present P-values from test statistics in the figure (Fig 6; S6 Fig), figure legends (Fig 5; Fig 8A) or Supplementary Table (new S4 and new S6 Table). 
1. The enrichment of the new cap binding protein should be demonstrated using a qPCR and the statement five-fold better enrichment should be statistically tested.
Response: We provided evidence from 5′ cap binding assay (pull-down with aminophenyl-m7GTP (C10-spacer) agarose) in S1 Fig that the HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His fusion protein has the expected binding activity for the 5′ cap structure on mRNA and we successfully used this protein to enrich P. falciparum mRNA for constructing sequencing libraries. Hence, we are satisfied that the HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His fusion protein was a suitable tool for enriching 5′ capped mRNA to construct long-read RNA-Seq libraries. In the original manuscript, we paraphrased the claims from US patent 6,703,239 (Guegler et al 2004; originally cited reference 23) that eIF4E-eIF4G fusion protein has five-fold or better enrichment than eIF4E alone (line 107−108), but we did not intend to make a claim of enrichment efficiency specifically for the HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His protein that we produced. 
As suggested by the reviewer, we tested the performance of the HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His fusion protein for enrichment of 5′ capped transcripts by reverse-transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) assay. We synthesized cDNA from a sample of P. falciparum mixed-stage total RNA and enriched for cDNA derived from 5′ capped transcripts using recombinant 5′ cap binding protein immobilized on beads. We measured the abundance (Cq) of the cDNA made from lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) transcript normalized to that of an uncapped mitochondrial RNA (cox3) using primers and assay conditions described in Shaw et al 2007 (originally cited reference 22). The enrichment factor was determined as the normalized abundance (2�Cq) in enriched sample compared with the flow-through sample. The result (see below) shows that the HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His protein has a greater enrichment factor than the GST-PfeIF4E originally described in Shaw et al 2007 (originally cited reference 22), although we did not replicate the experiment to determine whether the difference was significant. 
Figure response to point 1 reviewer #3. 
Enrichment of cDNA from a 5′ capped transcript (ldh) normalized to that of an uncapped transcript (cox3) was determined by reverse-transcription quantitative PCR. The cDNA from 5′ capped transcripts was enriched using 5′ cap binding proteins HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His described in this manuscript and GST-PfeIF4E described previously (Shaw et al 2007). 
We do not want to make claims on whether the HseIF4E-eIF4G_x6His fusion protein is superior to other 5′ cap binding proteins for enrichment of 5′ capped mRNA, and so we changed the text to mention only that the fusion protein was used for enrichment of 5′ capped mRNA with reference to our previous work (revised manuscript line 100−103).
2. 2. Line 129: How was the TAMA tool selected over the other tools should be discussed in detail by statistically substantiating the statement "these tools falsely assigned isoforms from misaligned reads to non-exonic regions including antisense". For example - What percentatge of the reads were falsely assigned? Was the false assignment significantly different statistically?
Response: We used the same .SAM alignment file with all isoform annotation tools; therefore, the aligned reads are the same for all tools. The tools differed in how they assigned isoforms from the aligned reads. The FLAIR and stringtie2 tools assigned isoforms to misaligned reads that were not considered by TAMA collapse. This is because by default, the TAMA collapse tool only considers aligned reads with 1% or less of soft-clipped bases (bases at the end the read that are not part of the alignment, usually representing untrimmed adapter) and less than 15% mismatched bases in the part of the read aligned to the genome. In contrast, the stringtie2 and FLAIR tools use all aligned reads, including low-quality reads with many soft-clipped bases and mismatches. It is difficult to make a fair statistical test of tool performance, e.g., using evaluation metrics from Receiver Operator Characteristic analysis because the tools assign isoforms by different criteria. The FLAIR tool requires a reference transcript annotation and all isoforms not matching the reference transcripts are put into a separate category as “inconsistent isoforms”. In contrast, the TAMA collapse and stringtie2 tools assign isoforms in a manner naïve to reference annotation. From analysis of our data, TAMA collapse low and stringtie2 gave very similar performance overall with the latter assigning slightly more isoforms matching the ground truth, in agreement with the TAMA collapse publication (Kuo et al 2020; originally cited reference 26). However, we attached more importance to the isoforms identified by GffCompare in the low priority classes, i.e., greatest divergence from the ground truth as these isoforms are assigned from misaligned reads. From the analysis of RNA sequin data, we selected TAMA collapse low for assigning P. falciparum isoforms as this tool is least likely to assign false isoforms from misaligned reads, while still capable of detecting most of the expressed isoforms. In the revised manuscript, we added a sentence to clarify the choice of TAMA collapse low tool for assigning P. falciparum isoforms (revised manuscript 125–128). 
3. Line 135: Please detail how were the isoforms combined ? Were they collapsed if they were within xxx bases at either ends ?
Response: as stated in the materials and methods section (line 653), the settings for TAMA merge were: -a 300 -z 300 -m 20 -d merge_dup. Under these settings, isoforms with 5′ or 3′ ends within 300 bp of the common end for the group are collapsed. These settings were used in the Kuo et al 2020 paper (originally cited reference 26) describing the TAMA merge tool. To aid readers unfamiliar with the tool, we added a brief explanation of the TAMA merge settings used in the methods section of the revised manuscript (line 684−685). 
Line 138: "lacking supporting evidence of 5′ capped end" - What dataset was used as supporting evidence for 5' capped ends. The strategy used by Adjalley et al 2016 is enzymatic while the one used by authors of the current group is pull-down based. How are the two kinds of datasets reconcilled?
Response: 
We apologize for the unclear wording in the Methods section (line 639–647). We combined the 5′ cap signals from the Adjalley et al 2016 data (originally cited reference 16) and data from 5′ cap binding protein-based enrichment (Shaw et al 2021; originally cited reference 17) by concatenating them into one file, i.e., the supporting evidence for 5′ capped ends is the union of the 5′ cap signals from different studies. We revised this section to clarify how the 5′ cap signal information was prepared (line 675–677). Although there is considerable overlap among the 5′ cap signals from these two different data sources, some signals are unique to each study, which could reflect 5′ end sequence biases inherent to each method (Shaw et al 2021; originally cited reference 17). Hence, the 5′ cap signals from the two datasets are complementary and combining them increases the representation of all 5′ capped isoforms expressed during the IDC. 
4. Line 207-208: "higher percent GC (Fig 5A) and shorter length (Fig 5B) compared with spliced introns; however, it
should be noted that the mean differences are small." Please add numbers and appropriate tests to support these statements.
Response: the details of statistical tests performed and P-values were included in the Fig 5 legend. For clarity, we added that Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests were performed to the body of the text (line 209). 
5. Does the analysis of ATSS and ATTS clusters change if only the consensus isoforms (isoforms with support from other studies) are used
Response: We understand the reviewer’s concern that the overall patterns of ATSS and ATTS could be different if only the subset of isoforms with support from all independent studies was used, as the full isoform catalog is biased by the much larger body of data from our study compared with others. To address this concern, we defined consensus isoforms as the subset of isoforms with support from all four sources of long-read RNA-seq data (Yang et al PacBio data, PacBio and Nanopore cDNA data from our study, and the Lee et al direct RNA data). Data support for each isoform was determined using the TAMA_merge_trans.txt output (blue headed columns) in S2B Table to identify the consensus isoforms. We then repeated the analysis of ATSS and ATTS using the 779 consensus isoforms (see figure below). The consensus isoforms encompass 645 different ATSS positions with associated H2A.Z occupancy data. The distribution of these epigenetic data shows a similar bimodal pattern as the full ATSS dataset. We calculated the first two principal component (PC) scores from the H2A.Z occupancy data. We then performed unsupervised clustering of these positions using the PC scores with the CEC R package under the same settings as used for all ATSS, which resolved two clusters. The patterns of base composition of flanking genomic sequence are similar to the C1 and C2 clusters in the full isoform dataset, in which the largest cluster shows elevated frequency of T upstream of the ATSS position, whereas the smaller cluster shows elevated frequency of A and G downstream of ATSS. The majority of positions in the largest cluster are also located outside of annotated protein coding regions. 
With regard to ATTS, the consensus isoforms encompass 546 different ATTS positions. The pattern of base composition of ATTS flanking genomic sequence is similar to the full dataset. We conclude that the patterns of ATSS and ATTS are essentially unchanged when using the consensus isoforms.
Figure response to comment 5 from reviewer #3.
779 consensus isoforms were identified with long-read RNA-Seq data support from four sources (Yang et al 2021 PacBio (at least one of two sample replicates), Lee et al 2021 Nanopore direct RNA, PacBio data from this study (at least one sample replicate), and Nanopore cDNA from this study). Part (A) shows the distribution of natural log normalized H2A.Z histone occupancy (data from Bartfai et al 2010; data were obtained from 10, 20, 30 and 40 hours post-invasion [hpi]) of 640 genomic positions corresponding to isoform 5′ ends as shown by kernel density plot, in which the vertical axis is the probability density function of the variable (natural log normalized H2A.Z histone occupancy). (B) Average base composition of genome sequence flanking 100 bp on either side of consensus isoform 5′ ends for the cluster C1 (486 positions) and C2 (154 positions) assigned from H2A.Z histone occupancy data. (C) Location of C1 and C2 consensus isoform 5′ ends with respect to annotated protein-coding sequence (CDS) regions. (D) Average base composition of genome sequence flanking 100 bp on either side of alternative transcript termination sites (ATTS) for consensus isoforms (546 positions). 
6. An isoform specific qPCR is a must to validate the results which could be done on retained introns isoforms or stage specific isooforms.
Response: We appreciate the reviewer’s concern for validation of isoforms with retained introns. However, we already validated the presence of retained intron events using short-read RNA seq data from the Chappell et al 2020 study (cited reference 15) as shown in Fig. 7A. These data were not used to construct the isoform catalog and thus are qualified as independent data for validation. Short-read RNA-Seq data are suitable for detecting retained intron events (reviewed by Broseus and Ritchie 2020; DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2020.02.010). We did not attempt to quantify differences in the abundance of isoforms with retained intron across the IDC. Instead, we clustered retained intron events based on their expression pattern throughout the IDC. We agree with the reviewer that reverse-transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) with isoform-specific primers can quantify relative isoform abundance including that of retained intron isoforms, albeit with the limitation to two mutually exclusive isoforms differing by a single alternative splicing event (Camacho Londoño and Philipp 2016; DOI: 10.1186/s12867-016-0060-1). This condition does not apply to many genes in which we identified multiple isoforms carrying the same retained intron event and multiple isoforms carrying the intron-spliced event. As an example below, we show isoforms assigned to the FPPS/GGPPS gene (PF3D7_1128400) with 11 annotated introns.
Figure response to comment 6 from reviewer #3.
Screenshot from IGV software showing PlasmoDB annotated genes (track labeled PlasmoDB-57_Pfalciparum3D7.gff) and catalog annotated isoforms in the track labeled S1_Dataset.bed. Reference transcripts are in blue and novel isoforms are in red. The color hue reflects the level of support from long-read RNA-Seq data (darker, more support). 
As shown in the figure above, there are three isoforms with retention of intron 2 (G3932.10, G3932.14 and G3932.16). Isoform G3932.16 also has retention of intron 3. Isoforms G3932.11 and G3932.12 (reference transcript in blue) show splicing of intron 2. Intron 3 is spliced in isoforms G3932.10, G3932.11, G3932.12, and G3932.14. The retained intron events in these isoforms were reported in the study by Gabriel et al 2015 (DOI: 10.1038/srep18429), which employed pyrosequencing of gene-targeted RT-PCR products. In the revised manuscript, we reworded the results and discussion to avoid claims of quantitative differences in expression or abundance at different stages of development (line 232−233; 380−382). We highlighted the lack of quantitative data for isoform abundance in the “limitations of the study” sub-section of the revised Discussion (line 445–450). 
7. The authors state that both PacBio and Nanopore sequencing was used, but a comparison between of data generated using the two techniques is currently missing. Given that the data is not always concordant such an analysis is paramount to generate a viable annotation.
Response: The reviewer has raised an important issue, namely possible discordancy of candidate isoforms generated from PacBio data compared with those from Nanopore data owing to the differences in base-calling and alignment accuracy among the two sequencing platforms. To obtain the most accurate isoform annotation with respect to exon boundaries, PacBio data should be given priority over the less accurate Nanopore data. The isoform catalog was constructed by merging candidate isoforms assigned separately from PacBio and Nanopore data in which PacBio data were given priority over Nanopore data for assigning the merged isoform 5′ terminus and internal splicing junctions (original manuscript line 653−657). Direct RNA Nanopore data were given equal priority with PacBio data for assigning the 3′ terminus as direct RNA is not prone to internal priming artifacts (Balázs et al 2019; cited reference 33). As shown in S2B Table, the vast majority of novel isoforms (99.6%) have support from PacBio data. Only 55 novel isoforms have support from Nanopore data (direct RNA and cDNA data), but with no PacBio data support. Hence, the structures of most isoforms in the catalog were inferred with support from the more accurate PacBio data. In the revised manuscript, we added to the results section with reference to S2B Table that exon junctions for most isoforms are defined using data from the more accurate long-read RNA-Seq platform (line 139−141).
Minor points
1. In multiple places the statement "we utilized long-read platforms to sequence cDNA of P. falciparum IDC stages" is used. This should mention what platforms and which stages clearly. Also, the number of samples (replicates) read depths, coverage and other sequencing QC information should be clearly mentioned in the text.
Response: We wish to clarify that the statement, “we utilized long-read platforms to sequence cDNA of P. falciparum IDC stages” was used once at the end of the Introduction section (line 87). We prefer not to distract the reader with experimental details in the Introduction. The summary statistics for all sequenced samples are provided in S1 Table, which was cited in the body of the text in the Results section (line 132–134). As suggested by the reviewer we added details of sequencing platform, sampled stage of development and RNA fraction to the S1 Table and mentioned in the text what details are included in S1 Table (revised manuscript line 130– 133). 
2. Line 141: "9,004 of the 12,495 novel isoforms were supported by data from other studies in combination with data from this study", supported by atleast one oher study or all the studies
Response: changed to “at least one other study”
3. Line 155-158: Please indicate the percentages of different events in the text as well.
Response: we added the percent of total isoform events for the major categories (ATSS, ATTS and RI) to the text for clarity as suggested by the reviewer (revised manuscript line 155–159). 
4. Line 166: Please give reference of the H2A.Z dataset
Response: The H2A.Z dataset was cited in the Fig. 3 legend (Bártfai et al 2010; originally cited reference 32) and in the Materials and methods section (line 711–712). We added the citation of this reference to the results section as well for clarity (revised manuscript line 165). 
5. This study will be extremely useful to the community if an updated gtf file is provided with new isoforms along with the level of support for it ( ex. supported by 2 studies, 3 studies etc)
Response: we agree that it would be useful for the isoform annotation file to show the level of support so that the reliability/reproducibility of different isoforms for each gene can be easily visualized and compared. In the revised manuscript, we replaced the S1_Dataset.gtf with a new isoform annotation data file in .bed12 format (S1_Dataset.bed). The new file contains an arbitrary score for each isoform which reflects the level of support from different datasets shown in the S2 Table. The scores can be displayed as different color hues in genome browser software such as IGV, i.e., darker hues indicate greater level of support. Moreover, we colored reference transcripts in blue and novel isoforms in red so that reference transcripts can be distinguished from novel isoforms (related to comment 2 by reviewer #1). 
6. Manuscript should have a data availability statement.
Response: all raw sequence data are already deposited in the NCBI GEO under accession number GSE186109, as indicated in the “Data Availability statement” in page 5 of the original manuscript file (appears above the Cover letter). The raw sequencing data in the accession (SRA files) will be made publicly available upon acceptance of the manuscript.
Reviewer #4: Shaw et al., in the current manuscript have catalogued additional alternative splicing (AS) events in P. falciparum IDC stages using the long read next generation sequencing technologies like PacBio and Nanopore platforms. Of the 12,495 novel mRNA isoforms detected by them, majority were either alternative 5' or 3' events. They have also identified a good number of intron retention events. This study further provides information about the in-silico identification of additional proteins that adds to the current proteome repertoire. Long read sequencing technologies identify AS events more accurately and hence this study provides important information related to unidentified AS events that can assist in understanding gene and protein regulation in the deadly malaria parasite P. falciparum.
Minor comments:
1. In case of intron retention events that were reported, it would have been great to validate a couple of intron retention events using reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR by targeting primers to the retained intron region.
Response: We appreciate the reviewer’s concern for validation of retained intron events. However, we already validated the presence of these events using independent short-read RNA seq data from the Chappell et al 2020 study (cited reference 15) as shown in Fig. 7A (see response to similar comment 6 by reviewer #3).
2. I understand that alternative ORFs can code for variant proteins that have not been annotated yet. I will be happy to see if the authors can validate a few intergenic isoforms for their ability to code proteins. This may also include a couple of isoforms that span two or more genes.
We thank the reviewer for this suggestion and agree that additional data on the ability of alternative ORFs (altORFs) to code proteins would be useful. Ribosome profiling (ribo-seq) is an established method for assessing ribosome engagement and is a proxy for protein synthesis (Ingolia et al. 2009; DOI: 10.1126/science.1168978). We re-analyzed the P. falciparum ribo-seq data published in Caro et al 2014 (cited reference 10) to assess the protein-coding potential of novel isoforms. We determined the translational efficiency (TE) and ribosome release scores (RRS) (Gutmann et al 2013; DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.009) for altORFs among intergenic and antisense isoforms. We did not consider altORFs in polycistronic or other isoforms spanning annotated genes as the ribo-seq signals could not be distinguished from ORFs in overlapping reference transcripts. The TE and RRS scores are shown in the revised Fig. 8B and statistical tests of distributions are shown in a new S6 Table. In agreement with our original conclusion from protein sequence analysis, most altORFs in intergenic and antisense isoforms do not appear to be protein coding as their TE and RRS distributions are significantly different from annotated protein ORFs in reference transcripts. Details of the ribo-seq data analysis are provided in a new Materials and methods sub-section (line 790–832), and text was added to revised Results (line 266–284) and Discussion (line 399–401) sections. 
________________________________________
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes: AMIT KUMAR SUBUDHI
________________________________________
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0276956.r003Decision Letter 1
PainArnabAcademic Editor© 2022 Arnab Pain2022Arnab Painhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
18 Oct 2022

Transcriptomic complexity of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum revealed by long-read sequencing
PONE-D-22-13960R1
Dear Dr. %Shaw%,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Arnab Pain, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #3: No
**********