SOURCE URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10187251/
FINAL URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10187251/
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=utf-8
======================================================================
FET fusion oncoproteins disrupt physiologic DNA repair and create a targetable opportunity for ATR inhibitor therapy - PMC

 Skip to main content

 An official website of the United States government

 Here's how you know 

 Here's how you know 

 Official websites use .gov 

 A
 .gov website belongs to an official
 government organization in the United States.

 Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 

 A lock (

 ) or https:// means you've safely
 connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
 information only on official, secure websites.

 Search

 Log in 

 Dashboard

 Publications

 Account settings

 Log out

 Search…

 Search NCBI

 Primary site navigation

 Search

 Logged in as:

 Dashboard

 Publications

 Account settings

 Log in

 Search PMC Full-Text Archive 

 Search in PMC 

 Journal List

 User Guide

 PERMALINK

 Copy 

 As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
 the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.

 Learn more:
 PMC Disclaimer 
 |
 
 PMC Copyright Notice

 This is a preprint.

 It has not yet been peer reviewed by a journal. 

 The National Library of Medicine is running a pilot to include preprints that result from research funded by NIH in PMC and PubMed.

 bioRxiv 
 [Preprint]. 2025 May 7:2023.04.30.538578. Originally published 2023 May 1. [Version 4] doi: 10.1101/2023.04.30.538578 

 Other versions 

 PMC10187251.1; 2023 May 1 

 PMC10187251.2; 2023 May 16 

 PMC10187251.3; 2024 Nov 21 

 PMC10187251.4; 2025 May 7 

 Search in PMC 

 Search in PubMed 

 View in NLM Catalog 

 Add to search 

 FET fusion oncoproteins disrupt physiologic DNA repair and create a targetable opportunity for ATR inhibitor therapy
 
 Shruti Menon 
 Shruti Menon 

 1 Tow Center for Developmental Oncology and Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY, 10021.

 2 Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 444 East 68th Street, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10065.

 Find articles by Shruti Menon 

 1, 2, * , Daniel Gracilla 
 Daniel Gracilla 

 1 Tow Center for Developmental Oncology and Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY, 10021.

 2 Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 444 East 68th Street, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10065.

 Find articles by Daniel Gracilla 

 1, 2, * , Marcus R Breese 
 Marcus R Breese 

 3 Division of Pediatric Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.

 Find articles by Marcus R Breese 

 3 , Yone Phar Lin 
 Yone Phar Lin 

 3 Division of Pediatric Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.

 Find articles by Yone Phar Lin 

 3 , Filemon Dela Cruz 
 Filemon Dela Cruz 

 2 Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 444 East 68th Street, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10065.

 Find articles by Filemon Dela Cruz 

 2 , Tamar Feinberg 
 Tamar Feinberg 

 2 Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 444 East 68th Street, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10065.

 Find articles by Tamar Feinberg 

 2 , Elisa de Stanchina 
 Elisa de Stanchina 

 2 Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 444 East 68th Street, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10065.

 Find articles by Elisa de Stanchina 

 2 , Ana-Florina Galic 
 Ana-Florina Galic 

 2 Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 444 East 68th Street, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10065.

 Find articles by Ana-Florina Galic 

 2 , Hannah Allegakoen 
 Hannah Allegakoen 

 3 Division of Pediatric Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.

 Find articles by Hannah Allegakoen 

 3 , Shruthi Perati 
 Shruthi Perati 

 3 Division of Pediatric Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.

 Find articles by Shruthi Perati 

 3 , Nicholas Wen 
 Nicholas Wen 

 1 Tow Center for Developmental Oncology and Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY, 10021.

 Find articles by Nicholas Wen 

 1 , Ann Heslin 
 Ann Heslin 

 3 Division of Pediatric Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.

 Find articles by Ann Heslin 

 3 , Max A Horlbeck 
 Max A Horlbeck 

 4 Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115.

 Find articles by Max A Horlbeck 

 4 , Jonathan Weissman 
 Jonathan Weissman 

 5 Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave, 68-132, Cambridge, MA 02139.

 Find articles by Jonathan Weissman 

 5 , E Alejandro Sweet-Cordero 
 E Alejandro Sweet-Cordero 

 3 Division of Pediatric Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.

 Find articles by E Alejandro Sweet-Cordero 

 3 , Trever G Bivona 
 Trever G Bivona 

 6 Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.

 7 Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA 94158.

 Find articles by Trever G Bivona 

 6, 7 , Asmin Tulpule 
 Asmin Tulpule 

 1 Tow Center for Developmental Oncology and Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY, 10021.

 2 Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 444 East 68th Street, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10065.

 Find articles by Asmin Tulpule 

 1, 2, # 

 Author information 

 Copyright and License information 

 1 Tow Center for Developmental Oncology and Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY, 10021.

 2 Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 444 East 68th Street, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10065.

 3 Division of Pediatric Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.

 4 Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115.

 5 Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave, 68-132, Cambridge, MA 02139.

 6 Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.

 7 Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA 94158.

 * Denotes equal contribution.

 Author Contributions

 SM, DG, TGB, ASC, and AT conceived and designed the study. SM, DG, YPL, AFG, HA, SP, NW, AH, and AT conducted the experiments and collected data. MB designed the computational algorithms and analyzed data. FDC, TF, and EDS performed the PDX experiments. SM, DG, MH, TGB, and AT analyzed and interpreted the data. JW and ASC provided support for the CRISPR screening and computational analysis respectively. SM, TGB, and AT wrote the manuscript.

 # Correspondence to: Asmin Tulpule MD PhD, tulpulea@mskcc.org 

 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License , which allows reusers to copy and distribute the material in any medium or format in unadapted form only, for noncommercial purposes only, and only so long as attribution is given to the creator.

 PMC Copyright notice 

 PMCID: PMC10187251 PMID: 37205599 

 Updated version available: A peer-reviewed version of this article, " FET Fusion Oncoproteins Disrupt Physiologic DNA Repair and Create a Targetable Opportunity for ATR Inhibitor Therapy ", has been published in Cancer Research .

 The complete version history of this preprint is available at bioRxiv .

 Abstract

 In cancers with genetic loss of specific DNA damage response (DDR) genes (i.e., BRCA1/2 tumor suppressor mutations), synthetic lethal targeting of compensatory DDR pathways has translated into clinical benefit for patients. Whether and how growth-promoting oncogenes might also create tumor-specific vulnerabilities within DDR networks is not well understood. Here we focus on Ewing sarcoma, a FET fusion oncoprotein (EWSR1-FLI1) driven pediatric bone tumor, as a model for the class of FET rearranged cancers. Native FET family members are among the earliest factors recruited to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), though the function of both native FET proteins and FET fusion oncoproteins in DNA repair remains to be defined. We discover that EWSR1-FLI1 and other FET fusion oncoproteins are recruited to DNA DSBs and impair the activation and downstream signaling of the DNA damage sensor ATM. In multiple FET rearranged cancers, we establish the compensatory ATR signaling axis as a collateral dependency and therapeutic target using patient-derived xenograft models. In summary, we describe how oncogenes can disrupt physiologic DNA repair and provide the preclinical rationale for specifically testing ATR inhibitors in FET rearranged cancers as part of ongoing early phase clinical trials.

 The DNA damage response (DDR) is a tightly regulated and redundant network that tailors specific repair complexes to address a diverse set of genotoxic insults 1 . In cancer, oncogene-induced hyper-proliferation and replication stress activate the DDR which can trigger senescence or cell death programs 2 , 3 . Thus, the physiologic DDR represents an important barrier to oncogenic transformation and genetic loss of tumor-suppressive DDR pathways or downstream effectors are frequent cooperating events in cancer (e.g., ATM or p53 mutations) 4 , 5 . Loss of these DDR genes can also create collateral dependencies and therapeutic opportunities in specific cancers as exemplified by the use of poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors to target defective homologous recombination (HR) repair in BRCA1/2 mutant breast and ovarian cancers 6 , 7 . Outside of HR deficient cancers, while multiple synthetic lethal DDR dependencies have been described (e.g., oncogene-induced replication stress and ATR 3 ), the clinical benefit of DDR-targeting therapies is less established and the mechanisms underlying many of these aberrant DDR dependencies remain to be defined 8 . More generally, whether and how oncogenes themselves regulate physiologic DNA repair to create functional defects or dependencies within DDR networks is poorly understood.

 The FET family of intrinsically disordered proteins (FUS, EWSR1, TAF15) are frequent 5’ oncogenic transcription factor (TF) fusion partners in a diversity of sarcomas and leukemias 9 . These TF fusion oncoproteins are often the sole oncogenic driver alteration in these cancers and due to the difficulty in pharmacologic targeting of TFs, precision medicine approaches have been lacking. The most studied cancer in this class is Ewing sarcoma (ES), a pediatric bone tumor driven by the EWSR1-FLI1 TF fusion oncoprotein. Patients with relapsed or metastatic ES continue to have dismal outcomes despite maximally intense combination cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens 10 . Paradoxically, decades of clinical experience and laboratory testing of ES cancer cell lines have shown ES to be among the most chemo- and radiosensitive cancers 11 – 14 , at least initially. It has long been hypothesized that ES tumors harbor an intrinsic DNA repair defect that explains their underlying sensitivity to DNA damaging therapies. The prevailing model is that ES belongs to a family of “BRCA-like” tumors that are functionally deficient in BRCA1 (due to sequestration of BRCA1 protein by RNA-DNA hybrid structures known as R-loops) and therefore defective in HR double-strand break (DSB) repair 15 . However, both xenograft studies 13 and clinical trials in ES patients 16 failed to demonstrate any benefit for PARP inhibitor monotherapy, in stark contrast to the impressive clinical responses seen across HR deficient BRCA mutant and BRCA-like cancers 17 , 18 . Thus, the precise nature of the DNA repair defect in ES remains uncertain.

 Native FET family proteins contain an N-terminal intrinsically disordered region (IDR) required for interactions amongst FET family members and a C-terminal domain with positively charged RGG (arginine-glycine-glycine) repeats, which mediate recruitment to DSBs via high affinity interactions with negatively charged poly-ADP ribose (PAR) molecules 19 , 20 . All 3 FET family members are rapidly recruited to DSBs in a PARP-dependent manner 20 , 21 , where they undergo liquid-liquid phase separation that is thought to enable compartmentalization of DSB repair proteins 22 – 24 , though the specific role of FET proteins in DSB repair is not well defined. Interestingly, all oncogenic FET fusion proteins including EWSR1-FLI1 share a similar structure: the N-terminal IDR of the FET protein fused to the DNA binding domain of a transcription factor (e.g., FLI1), with loss of the C-terminal RGG repeats 25 .

 In this study, we address the role of the oncogenic fusion protein EWSR1-FLI1 in regulating the DNA damage response in ES. Contrary to the current classification of ES as a BRCA-like tumor with defective HR 15 , we nominate suppression of ATM activation and signaling as a new DDR lesion in ES cells and identify the compensatory ATR signaling axis as a synthetic lethal therapeutic strategy for the class of FET rearranged cancers.

 Results

 ES cells are dependent on specific HR factors for survival.

 To address the uncertainty surrounding putative DNA repair defect(s) in ES, we set out to identify genes that modulate ES cell survival in response to doxorubicin, a DNA DSB-inducing agent and major component of current chemotherapy regimens 26 ( Fig. 1A ). We selected a CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) based screening approach given the concern of studying DSB repair phenotypes using an active Cas9 that generates DSBs 27 , 28 . Surprisingly, we found that key HR factors BRCA1 and PALB2 were essential for the growth of ES cells even in the absence of doxorubicin ( Fig. 1B ). Given the prevailing model that ES is a functionally HR-deficient, BRCA-like tumor 15 , the screen results were unexpected. We validated the finding of specific HR factor dependency using two independent guide RNAs (gRNAs) against BRCA1 and PALB2 in the screening cell line (A673) and two additional ES cell lines TC-252 and ES-8 ( Figs. 1C - E and S1A , B ). The same BRCA1 and PALB2 gRNAs had limited effects on cell growth in two non-ES cancer cell lines, which was consistent with the set of published CRISPRi screens 27 , 29 , 30 and suggests the observed dependency on HR factors may be specific to ES cells ( Figs. S1C , D ). To test the role of EWSR1-FLI1 in inducing this dependency, we utilized an ES cell line with a doxycycline-inducible shRNA against EWSR1-FLI1 31 ( Fig. S1E ). EWSR1-FLI1 knockdown rescued the growth defects caused by BRCA1 or PALB2 loss, confirming that the oncogenic fusion protein is necessary for the observed dependency on these specific HR factors in ES cells ( Fig. 1F ).

 Figure 1: ES cells are dependent on specific HR factors for survival.

 Open in a new tab 

 A) Schematic of CRISPRi genetic screen of 7,000 cancer associated genes in ES cell line A673.

 B) Volcano plot of sgRNA log 2 fold change (X-axis) vs -log10(p value), average of 2 biologic replicates. Full screen results in Supplementary Table 1 .

 C-E) Growth assays in dCas9 expressing ES cell lines upon introduction of 2 independent sgRNAs against BRCA1, PALB2, or control. n = 4.

 F) Growth assays in ES cell line A673 with doxycycline-inducible shRNA against EWSR1-FLI1. For all panels, error bars represent ± SEM, ∗∗p < 0.01 by one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s HSD test.
 CRISPRi screening also identified genes whose loss sensitized ES cells to doxorubicin including LIG4 and NHEJ1/XLF ( Fig. S1F ). The presence of key canonical non-homologous end joining (c-NHEJ) genes as top chemo-sensitizer hits validated our experimental approach as this pathway is critical for repairing both drug and ionizing radiation (IR)-induced DSBs and provides evidence for a functional c-NHEJ pathway in ES cells. The final category of screen hits were genes whose loss promoted survival under high doses of doxorubicin (LD97), mirroring the residual disease state in ES patients ( Fig. S1G ). SLFN11 is a notable hit as loss of SLFN11 has been shown to promote chemotherapy resistance in multiple cancer subtypes including ES 32 , 33 . The complete screen results are provided in Supplementary Table 1 (see Supplemental Note 1 for discussion of DepMap results). Given the paradoxical finding of HR factor dependence in ES, we chose to focus on the regulation of DSB repair in ES and whether ES tumors are properly classified as BRCA-like cancers.

 ES patient tumors do not display the genomic scars of HR deficiency.

 We next directly examined genomic DNA from 100 ES patient tumor samples 34 for evidence of functional HR deficiency. This is a validated strategy in BRCA1/2 mutant and BRCA-like tumors wherein defective HR repair results in specific genomic scars that result from increased utilization of compensatory pathways such as alternative end-joining (alt-EJ) and single-strand annealing (SSA) 35 , 36 . We developed a custom bioinformatics pipeline to analyze the genomic landscape of ES tumor genomes, using BRCA1/2 mutant and wild-type breast cancer genomes (from EGAD00001001322 35 ) to validate our algorithms. The ES cohort was reported in Tirode et al to represent diagnostic, pre-treatment biopsies of the primary tumor site, with 63% of patients having localized disease 34 . The ES whole genome sequencing data were previously deposited in the European Genome-phenome Archive (EGAS00001000855, EGAS00001000839).

 At least 99 (single base substitution) mutational signatures have been identified in human cancers with Signature 3 being the most highly associated with BRCA1/2 mutant cancers 35 . Our analysis confirmed high levels of Signature 3 in BRCA mutant as compared to BRCA wild-type tumors but did not show increased levels of Signature 3 in ES tumors ( Figs. 2A and S2A ). In addition to increased Signature 3, BRCA1/2 mutant tumors displayed an increase in the number and size of deletions compared to BRCA wild-type tumors ( Figs. 2B , C and S2B - D ) consistent with previous reports 35 . ES tumors are clearly distinct from BRCA1/2 mutant tumors displaying few deletions per genome and a size distribution skewed further towards small deletions than even BRCA wild-type tumor samples ( Figs. 2B , C and S2B - D ).

 Figure 2: ES patient tumors do not display the genomic scars of HR deficiency.

 Open in a new tab 

 A) Weight of mutational signature 3 shown for BRCA mutant, wild-type, and ES tumor samples.

 B) Total number of unique deletions per sample.

 C) Size of MuTect deletions compared across tumor groups.

 D) For all samples, deletions were first subdivided into specific base pair (bp) length bins, then the fraction of deletions with 2–6bp microhomology (MH) was plotted (Y-axis) vs. the fraction of deletions present in this bin (X-axis).

 E) Breakout of the 7–28bp deletion length bin showing the distribution of deletions with microhomology (2–6bp).

 For all panels, *** denotes p< 0.001, ns denotes not significant by Mann-Whitney test. European Genome-phenome Archive accession numbers: ES samples (EGAS00001000855 - Institute Curie cohort and EGAS00001000839 - St. Jude’s cohort) 34 , breast cancer samples (EGAD00001001322) 35 .
 We further examined the sequences flanking deletion sites for short stretches of overlapping microhomology (MH). Defective HR repair in BRCA mutant or BRCA-like tumors results in increased usage of the error prone DSB repair pathway alt-EJ that employs MH for initial annealing of resected DSB ends 37 . We utilized BRCA mutant/wild-type samples to computationally define deletion size bins and identified an increase in the proportion of intermediate size deletions (7–28 base pairs (bp), 29–45 bp) in BRCA mutant samples as reported previously ( Figs. S2E , F ). We then verified a significant increase in breakpoint MH at intermediate size (7–28bp and 29–45bp) deletions in BRCA mutant tumors compared to wild-type and no increase in MH at small deletions (1–6bp) where c-NHEJ predominates ( Figs. 2D , E , and S2E - G ), both consistent with published findings 35 . ES samples clustered with BRCA wild-type tumors and display a trend toward even less MH-mediated DSB repair than BRCA wild-type samples ( Figs. 2D , E , and S2G ). Our findings in ES were independent of the recurrent STAG2 and p53 mutations that occur in a subset of these cancers ( Figs. S2H , I ). Taken together, these results demonstrate that ES patient tumors do not display the genomic signatures of BRCA1/2 mutant cancers and lack the footprint of isolated HR deficiency.

 EWSR1-FLI1 reduces resection-dependent DSB repair

 The absence of HR deficient genomic scars in ES tumors and paradoxical requirement of specific HR factors (e.g., BRCA1) for ES cell survival prompted us to systematically re-examine how EWSR1-FLI1 impacts DSB repair pathway utilization ( Fig. 3A ). We posited that previous reports of defective HR in ES might alternatively be explained by a more general upstream defect in DSB repair. We utilized a set of well-established DSB repair reporter cell lines wherein expression of the I-SceI endonuclease induces a DSB within an interrupted GFP reporter cassette, such that utilization of a particular DSB repair pathway restores the GFP coding sequence enabling a quantitative readout of individual repair pathway efficiency 38 . The use of fluorescently tagged plasmids enabled detection of DSB repair events specifically in cells that expressed both EWSR1-FLI1 (or empty vector) and I-SceI ( Fig. S3A ).

 Figure 3: EWSR1-FLI1 reduces resection-dependent DSB repair.

 Open in a new tab 

 A) Schematic of DSB repair. DSBs either undergo direct repair via c-NHEJ or bi-directional end-resection to create an intermediate for HR, alt-EJ, or SSA.

 B-E) Relative repair efficiency as measured by GFP positivity in pathway-specific DSB repair reporters for HR (DR-GFP), alt-EJ (EJ2), SSA, and c-NHEJ (EJ5) upon expression of empty vector (EV), EWSR1-FLI1, or siRNA gene knockdown for 72 hours.

 For all panels, error bars represent ± SEM, ** denotes p < 0.01 by one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s HSD test. n=4 for all panels.
 To examine HR repair, we utilized the DR-GFP reporter and observed a small reduction in HR upon EWSR1-FLI1 expression, consistent with previous reports 15 ( Fig. 3B ). However, EWSR1-FLI1 expression also reduced the efficiency of MH-mediated alt-EJ repair (EJ2) and long-stretch MH mediated-SSA repair ( Figs. 3C , D ). EWSR1-FLI1 mediated reductions in HR, alt-EJ, and SSA repair efficiency were modest compared to knockdown of the key end-resection factor CtIP that is required for all resection-dependent DSB repair 39 or the relevant pathway specific controls ( Figs. 3A - C ). These data indicate EWSR1-FLI1 expression does not result in isolated HR defects, but instead an intermediate reduction in the efficiency of all three resection-dependent DSB repair pathways.

 We also evaluated c-NHEJ, a fast-acting DSB repair pathway which does not require end-resection, and observed an increase in c-NHEJ utilization upon EWSR1-FLI1 expression using the EJ5 reporter system ( Fig. 3E ). Using a distinct I-SceI based DSB repair reporter 40 , we directly examined the junctional sequences after DSB induction for evidence of c-NHEJ or MH-mediated alt-EJ repair (HR and SSA events are not evaluable in this system) and confirmed an increase in c-NHEJ and decrease in alt-EJ upon expression of EWSR1-FLI1 ( Fig. S3B ). We verified that the repair phenotypes were not the result of EWSR1-FLI altering cell cycle profiles or causing a cell cycle arrest in these short-term assays ( Figs. S3C , D ). In summary, we demonstrate that EWSR1-FLI1 does not induce isolated HR deficiency but instead moderately reduces the efficiency of all three resection-dependent DSB repair pathways.

 ATM activation and signaling is suppressed by the Ewing sarcoma fusion oncoprotein

 To explain our finding that EWSR1-FLI1 expression leads to intermediate reductions in resection-dependent DSB repair efficiency, we focused on the upstream regulation of the DDR in ES cells ( Fig. 3A ). An important component of the initial DDR is a partially redundant signaling network with three principal kinases, DNA-PK, ATM, and ATR, each of which control distinct aspects of DDR signal amplification and DSB repair pathway choice 41 . We tested whether EWSR1-FLI1 affects the activation and function of these three apical DDR kinases; in particular, ATM was a logical candidate since it promotes DNA end-resection and ATM loss creates a synthetic lethal dependence on specific HR proteins such as BRCA1 42 , 43 .

 We utilized 3 distinct ES cell line models with inducible EWSR1-FLI1 depletion: A673 and TC-32 ES cells with doxycycline-inducible shRNA’s targeting EWSR1-FLI1 (either the junctional sequence or the 3’ FLI1 portion of the fusion, see Methods ) and A673 “EWSR1-FLI1 degron” cells with an auxin-inducible degron (AID) tag inserted at the endogenous EWSR1-FLI1 locus 44 . Short-term EWSR1-FLI1 depletion did not impact the baseline low-level activation of the three DDR kinases or cell viability in the absence of exogenous DNA damage (auxin-mediated depletion is within 3 hours and maximal shRNA depletion is ~70% at 72 hours) ( Figs. 4A - D , and S4A - F ). However, depletion of EWSR1-FLI1 prior to ionizing radiation (IR) treatment increased both ATM activation (autophosphorylation) and downstream ATM signaling (phosphorylation of key downstream targets CHK2 and KAP1) consistently across all three ES cell systems ( Figs. 4A - D and S4A , B ). In contrast, IR or radiomimetic neocarzinostatin (NCS)-dependent activation of the other apical DDR kinases (DNA-PK, ATR) was unaffected by EWSR1-FLI1 knockdown in ES cells ( Figs. S4C - S4F ).

 Figure 4: ATM activation and signaling is suppressed by EWSR1-FLI1.

 Open in a new tab 

 A-D) Western blotting and quantification upon IR (5Gy) in A673 “EWSR1-FLI1 degron” ES cells +/− 200 μM IAA (auxin) for 3 hours to degrade endogenous EWSR1-FLI1 prior to IR or TC-32 ES cells with doxycycline-inducible shRNA against EWSR1-FLI.

 E, F) Representative images and quantification of p-ATM foci number in A673 “EWSR1-FLI1 degron” ES cells +/− 200 μM IAA for 3 hours to deplete EWSR1-FLI1 prior to 0.5 Gy IR. ** denotes p < 0.01 by unpaired t-test.

 G-J) Representative Western blots and quantification upon IR (5 Gy) at indicated time points in non-ES cell lines (U2OS, MEFs) upon expression of EV (empty vector) or EWSR1-FLI1.

 K, L) ATR inhibitor (elimusertib) dose-response curves for ES cell lines A673 and TC-32 with dox-inducible shRNA against EWSR1-FLI1, p<0.05 for both comparisons, paired t-test.

 For all panels, error bars represent ± SEM for at least 4 replicates for each panel.
 We measured p-ATM foci formation in A673 “EWSR1-FLI1 degron” ES cells as a complementary test for ATM activation. In the absence of exogenous DNA damage, depletion of EWSR1-FLI1 did not alter p-ATM foci number ( Figs. 4E , F ). Upon IR treatment, ES cells with intact endogenous EWSR1-FLI1 display a minimal increase in p-ATM foci, whereas rapid depletion of EWSR1-FLI1 prior to IR significantly increased p-ATM foci number, consistent with our Western blotting results ( Figs. 4E , F ). The rapid (3 hour) depletion of EWSR1-FLI1 and unchanged basal levels of DDR kinase activation suggest the observed ATM effects are not secondary downstream consequences from loss of the oncogenic driver in ES cells, but instead may result from EWSR1-FLI’s partial suppression of IR-dependent ATM activation.

 To test this directly, we performed the reciprocal experiment by expressing EWSR1-FLI1 in 2 non-ES cell lines (U2OS cancer cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts, MEFs) to determine whether ectopic EWSR1-FLI1 expression could impair IR-dependent ATM activation. In both cell lines, EWSR1-FLI1 reduced ATM activation (p-ATM) and downstream ATM signaling (p-KAP1/p-CHK2) only in response to IR (and not at baseline) ( Figs. 4G - J , see Methods on measuring CHK2 phosphorylation by mobility shift in MEFs 45 , 46 ). Consistent with our finding in ES cells, ectopic EWSR1-FLI1 expression did not impact DNA-PK or ATR activation and signaling ( Figs. S4G , H ). These data indicate EWSR1-FLI1 (either directly or indirectly) regulates the activation and downstream signaling of ATM, without affecting the other two apical DDR kinases.

 We note that EWSR1-FLI1 does not completely suppress ATM functionality, as all three modifications (p-ATM/p-CHK2/p-KAP1) are induced to some extent upon irradiation of ES cell lines. To determine the biologic and therapeutic significance of partial ATM suppression in ES cells, we performed the following studies:

 We benchmarked our effect size to loss of well-characterized activators of ATM including the MRN (MRE11/RAD50/NBS1) complex, MDC1, RNF8 and RNF168 41 , in order to contextualize the extent of ATM suppression in ES and establish the biological significance. There is a hierarchy amongst genes regulating ATM activity in response to DSBs: the MRN complex is required for ATM activation 47 , 48 and serves as an upper bound for effect size, while the scaffolding protein MDC1 49 , 50 and E3 ubiquitin ligases RNF8 51 – 53 and RNF168 54 , 55 have an intermediate phenotype given their important but not essential role in amplifying ATM signaling. Importantly, even loss of intermediate phenotype genes (i.e., MDC1 49 , RNF8 51 or RNF168 54 ) still produces a significant functional impact in terms of increased sensitivity to DSB-inducing drugs and IR. Using both ectopic expression in MEFs and endogenous depletion of EWSR1-FLI1 in ES cells, we show the suppressive effects of EWSR1-FLI1 on ATM activation/signaling is indeed not equivalent to the near complete functional ATM deficiency seen with loss of the MRN complex (~30–60%), but overall comparable with loss of MDC1, RNF8, or RNF168. We provide a detailed description of these experiments in Supplemental Note 2 and accompanying Supplemental Figure 7 . In summary, by benchmarking EWSR1-FLI1 to loss of established ATM regulators and showing similar effect sizes, these data provide context for the magnitude of ATM suppression in ES reported here and establish the biological significance.

 Next, we tested the functional relevance and therapeutic consequence of the partial ATM defects in ES cells. Both ATM and ATR coordinate aspects of resection-dependent DSB repair ( Fig. 3A ) and ATM mutant tumors display synthetic lethality with ATR inhibitors, reflecting the vital compensatory role of the ATR signaling axis in the absence of ATM 56 , 57 (note ATR signaling itself is not increased in the setting of ATM loss, consistent with our findings in ES cells). We therefore asked whether the extent of ATM suppression in ES was sufficient to induce a collateral dependence on the ATR signaling axis. Indeed, A673 and TC-32 ES cells displayed nanomolar range sensitivity to the ATR inhibitor elimusertib (IC50’s of 28 and 34nM respectively, comparable to cancer cell lines with known pathogenic ATM loss of function mutations 58 ), and ATR inhibitor sensitivity was significantly reversed by EWSR1-FLI1 knockdown in both cell lines ( Figs. 4K , L ).

 Previously described mechanisms of ATR sensitivity, most notably replication stress (RS) 59 , could also contribute to the elimusertib effects that we observed. To test this directly, we expressed RNAseH1, which degrades R-loops, the major source of oncogene-induced replication stress in ES 15 , in A673 ES cells. RNAseH1 expression did not alter the ATR inhibitor sensitivity of ES cells, ( Figs. S4I , J ), suggesting that the molecular basis of ATR inhibitor response in ES cells may largely be a consequence of ATM suppression. EWSR1-FLI1 knockdown also reversed ES cell sensitivity to an inhibitor of ATR’s key downstream target, CHK1, and to treatment with the DSB-inducing chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin ( Figs. S4K - M ), further establishing the functional relevance and therapeutic consequence of the partial ATM defects in ES cells.

 We note here that the above data do not exclude additional roles for EWSR1-FLI1 in regulating the DDR that may contribute to the chemosensitivity of these tumors, and we address the genomic instability of ATM mutant tumors and the need to define mutational/deletion signatures as a comparator for ES tumors in our Discussion. In summary, our collective findings nominate partial suppression of ATM activation/signaling and resultant synthetic lethality with the compensatory ATR signaling axis as a new and therapeutically relevant DNA repair lesion in ES.

 EWSR1-FLI1 and other FET fusion oncoproteins are recruited to DNA double-strand breaks.

 How does EWSR1-FLI1, a transcription factor fusion oncoprotein, regulate DNA repair to suppress IR-dependent ATM activation? To assess how EWSR1-FLI1 regulates the transcription of DDR and DSB repair genes, we analyzed published RNA-sequencing data in ES cells before and after EWSR1-FLI1 knockdown 60 ( Fig. S5A ). Interestingly, we found that EWSR1-FLI1 either increased or had minimal effect on the expression of key genes involved in ATM activation (e.g., MRN complex, MDC1, RNF8, RNF168, ATM, CHK2). We also readily detected these same ATM regulators by Western blotting in A673 and multiple other ES cell lines. These data suggest EWSR1-FLI1’s transcriptional effects do not create a state of low/absent DNA repair factors (e.g., MRN complex deficiency) that would explain the suppression of IR-dependent ATM activation/signaling that we observe here.

 As an alternate hypothesis, we tested whether previously reported interactions between EWSR1-FLI1 and native FET proteins (e.g., EWSR1) 61 , 62 might contribute to the observed ATM effects, given that native FET proteins localize to DSBs and are thought to nucleate initial compartmentalization of DSB repair factors. Consistent with these prior studies, EWSR1-FLI1 and another native FET family member (FUS) coprecipitated with FLAG-tagged EWSR1 ( Fig. S5B ). The strength of these interactions was unchanged in the setting of the DNA DSB-inducing agent NCS indicating a high affinity interaction not disrupted by the DDR.

 We then directly tested whether the native EWSR1::EWSR1-FLI1 interaction could promote localization of the fusion oncoprotein to DNA DSBs. Indeed, we discovered that EWSR1-FLI1, like native EWSR1, is recruited to laser-induced DSBs ( Figs. 5B - E ). The kinetics of EWSR1-FLI1’s DSB recruitment were delayed compared to native EWSR1, whose rapid recruitment is attributed to C-terminal, positively charged arginine-glycine-glycine (RGG)-rich domains not present in EWSR1-FLI1 ( Figs. 5A - E ). To test how loss of these RGG domains impact DSB recruitment of EWSR1-FLI1, we reintroduced either 1 or all 3 RGG-rich domains (the entire EWSR1 C-terminus) into the fusion oncoprotein. In an RGG dose-dependent manner, the RGG containing versions of EWSR1-FLI1 displayed earlier DSB recruitment kinetics and higher levels of overall recruitment when compared to EWSR1-FLI1 ( Figs. S5C , D ). Moreover, the full (3) RGG domain containing version of EWSR1-FLI1 further suppressed ATM signaling beyond the effects seen with EWSR1-FLI1 ( Figs. S5E , F ), suggesting a potential correlation between the extent of EWSR1-FLI1 DSB recruitment and ATM suppression.

 Figure 5: EWSR1 fusion oncoproteins are recruited to DNA DSBs.

 Open in a new tab 

 A) Structure schematic of FET proteins with N-terminal intrinsically disordered regions (IDR) and C-terminal Arginine-glycine-glycine (RGG) repeats, not present in FET fusion oncoproteins like EWSR1-FLI1.

 B-E, H, I) Representative images and quantification of protein accumulation at laser-induced DSBs in U2OS cells expressing either GFP-EWSR1 (B, C), GFP-EWSR1-FLI1 (D, E), or GFP-EWSR1-ATF1 (H, I). Quantification of at least 30 cells in 3 replicates.

 F, G) IP of FLAG and GFP tagged constructs (or EV) expressed in 293T cells +/− 5Gy IR, followed by Western blotting for MRN complex members.

 For all panels, error bars represent ± SEM, at least 3 replicates for each panel.
 Importantly, EWSR1-FLI1 recruitment to DSBs represents an unanticipated neomorphic property of the fusion protein contributed by the N-terminal intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of EWSR1. Control experiments with the full-length FLI1 protein showed no accumulation at laser-induced DSBs ( Fig. S5G ). Consistent with the N-terminus of EWSR1 mediating DSB recruitment, mutation of the DNA binding domain of FLI1 (R2L2 mutant of EWSR1-FLI1 63 ) had no effect on the DSB localization of EWSR1-FLI1 ( Fig. S5H ). Lastly, knockdown of native EWSR1 (using siRNA’s targeting C-terminal sequences not present in the fusion) reduced accumulation of EWSR1-FLI1 at laser-induced DSB stripes, indicating that the localization of EWSR1-FLI1 to DSBs depends, at least in part, on native EWSR1 ( Fig. S5I ).

 Given the aberrant localization of EWSR1-FLI1 to DNA DSBs, we asked whether EWSR1-FLI1’s effects on ATM might result from direct protein-protein interactions with critical DDR factors that promote ATM activation. We utilized a candidate-based approach and performed co-IP experiments using EWSR1-FLI1 as the bait, both at baseline and after IR treatment. Interestingly, we found that EWSR1-FLI1 demonstrates an IR-independent interaction with all 3 members of the critical ATM activating MRN complex (MRE11, RAD50, NBS1) using both GFP and FLAG tagged versions of EWSR1-FLI1 ( Figs. 5F , G ). We also compared EWSR1-FLI1 with full-length native EWSR1 and FLI1 to assess domain contributions to MRN complex binding. EWSR1-FLI1 demonstrated greater binding to MRN complex members than either native full-length EWSR1 or full-length FLI1 (note the higher relative expression/IP levels for EWSR1 and FLI1, and that differences are most prominent for MRE11, Fig. 5G ). These data suggest that suppression of ATM signaling in ES may result from re-localization of EWSR1-FLI1 to DNA DSBs and interaction/interference with the MRN complex, though further studies are needed to define the exact nature (i.e., direct or indirect) and functional impact of EWSR1-FLI1’s binding to the MRN complex, as well as contributions from other EWSR1-FLI1 interactions (e.g., with native FET proteins) not tested here.

 Finally, we tested the generalizability of the concept that N-terminal IDRs, as a shared structural feature of FET fusion oncoproteins ( Fig. 5A ), could promote aberrant DSB recruitment in other tumors within this class. EWSR1-ATF1 is the sole oncogenic driver of clear cell sarcoma (CCS) and contains the identical N-terminal IDR sequence as EWSR1-FLI1. The EWSR1-ATF1 fusion oncoprotein localized to laser-induced DSBs with delayed recruitment kinetics similar to EWSR1-FLI1, though with differences in departure timing ( Figs. 5H , I ). Like EWSR1-FLI1, reintroduction of either 1 or all 3 RGG-rich domains into EWSR1-ATF1 resulted in earlier DSB recruitment kinetics and higher levels of overall recruitment in an RGG dose-dependent manner ( Fig. S5J ).

 Analogous to our findings in ES, CCS cells are dependent on HR factors PALB2 and BRCA1 for survival ( Fig. S5K , L ). Moreover, transient knockdown of EWSR1-ATF1 in a patient-derived CCS cell line increased IR-dependent downstream ATM signaling (phosphorylation of ATM targets CHK2 and KAP1), with either no effect (DNA-PK) or slight decrease (ATR) in activation of the other upstream DDR kinases ( Figs. S5M - P ). These data also reveal differences between FET fusion oncoproteins which may relate to the efficiency of EWSR1-ATF1 knockdown in these experiments or to fusion-specific biology; only EWSR1-FLI1 affected the initial activation of ATM (autophosphorylation), while both EWSR1-ATF1 and EWSR1-FLI1 caused suppression of downstream ATM signaling. Despite these differences, the consequence of partial suppression of ATM signaling was a similarly increased reliance on the compensatory ATR signaling axis, as CCS cells displayed EWSR1-ATF1-dependent, nanomolar range sensitivity (IC50: 27nM) to ATR inhibitor treatment with elimusertib ( Fig. 5SQ ). Taken together, our results support a model in which EWSR1 fusion oncoproteins are aberrantly recruited to DSB repair sites and impair ATM function.

 Anti-tumor activity of ATR inhibitor elimusertib across FET rearranged PDX models

 Lastly, we tested ATR inhibition as a therapeutic strategy in FET fusion oncoprotein-driven cancers. We hypothesized that the ATM/ATR synthetic lethality seen in ATM mutant (loss of function) cancers 56 – 58 might extend to FET rearranged tumors with partial ATM defects caused by the FET fusion oncoproteins themselves. First, we determined whether FET fusion oncoprotein-driven cancer cell lines display increased sensitivity to the ATR inhibitor elimusertib that is currently being tested in multiple early phase clinical trials 64 . Our panel included 4 ES cell lines with varying TP53 and STAG2 status (see Supplementary Note 3 ), 1 CCS (EWSR1-ATF1), 2 desmoplastic small round cell tumor (EWSR1-WT1), and 1 myxoid liposarcoma cell line (FUS-CHOP), and multiple non-FET rearranged cancer cell lines as controls. FET fusion-driven cancer cell lines were significantly more sensitive to ATR inhibitor treatment than the control cell lines tested, with IC50’s between 20–60 nM ( Fig. 6A ) comparable to previously reported elimusertib IC50’s for ATM mutant cancer cell lines 65 . To test our hypothesis in a larger unselected panel of cancer cell lines, we utilized DepMap screening data for elimusertib in 880 cancer cell lines which included 17 ES samples. ES cell lines were again significantly more sensitive to ATR inhibition than the larger cohort of cancer cell lines ( Fig. 6B ), though our data does not exclude alternate mechanisms of sensitivity to ATR inhibition in non-ES cells such as ATM and other DDR gene mutations as previously reported 58 .

 Figure 6: Anti-tumor activity of ATR inhibitor elimusertib in FET fusion PDXs.

 Open in a new tab 

 A) ATR inhibitor (elimusertib) dose-response curves for FET rearranged (red) and non-FET fusion driven cancer cell lines. MLS denotes myxoid liposarcoma.

 B) Analysis of DepMap Elimusertib sensitivity scores with samples divided into Ewing sarcoma (ES) and non-ES samples. ** denotes p<0.01 using unpaired t-test.

 C-G) Tumor volume measurements (mm 3 ) of 5 FET rearranged PDX tumors treated with vehicle or elimusertib 40 mg/kg twice daily per oral gavage, on a 3 days-on/4 days-off schedule. All five models show significant anti-tumor responses with p<0.01 by unpaired T-test.

 For all panels, error bars represent ± SEM, at least 3 replicates in panel A, 4–8 mice per arm of PDX experiment.
 We then tested whether the observed in vitro sensitivity to ATR inhibition would translate to in vivo patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of FET rearranged cancers. Elimusertib was tested in 5 PDX models: 2 ES models (ES-1 from initial diagnosis and ES-2 from a multiply relapsed patient), 2 CCS models (CCS-1 from initial diagnosis and CCS-2 from relapsed disease), and 1 desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) PDX derived from a post-treatment surgical resection, for which we also verified that the DSRCT fusion EWSR1-WT1 is recruited to laser-induced DSBs with similar kinetics to EWSR1-FLI and EWSR1-ATF1 ( Figs. S6A , B ). Clinical details on the tumor models are provided in Supplementary Table 2 . Elimusertib was dosed at 40 mg/kg twice daily per oral gavage, on a 3 days-on/4 days-off schedule until tumors exceeded prespecified size endpoints as previously described 65 . There was minimal toxicity associated with this treatment regimen as assessed by weights and general activity scores, suggesting good tolerability of this dosing schedule.

 Single-agent ATR inhibitor treatment significantly decreased tumor growth and increased progression-free survival in all 5 PDX models including those derived from relapsed ES and CCS patients ( Figs. 6C - G ). The DSRCT xenograft showed the best response (partial by RECIST criteria, >50% reduction in tumor volume, Fig. 6E ). Interestingly, the ES-1 and CCS-1 PDX models from initial diagnosis showed prolonged stable disease (18 days of stable disease compared to immediate progression in vehicle treated tumors at day 4) and better overall response to elimusertib than the ES-2 and CCS-2 PDXs derived from relapsed disease, though testing of additional ES and CCS PDX models will be important to clarify whether PDXs derived from diagnostic and relapsed disease have differential responses to ATR inhibition.

 To identify pharmacodynamic markers of elimusertib activity, we performed immunohistochemistry (IHC) for Ki-67 (cell proliferation), cleaved caspase-3 (apoptosis), and DNA damage (gamma-H2AX, gH2AX). We observed decreased Ki-67 in elimusertib treated tumors compared to vehicle controls reflecting decreased proliferation, while increased cleaved-caspase 3 was only observed in the 2 ES PDXs ( Figs. S6C - F ). Consistent with prior reports 66 , 67 , we were unable to validate a direct biomarker of ATR inhibition as p-ATR could not reliably be assessed by IHC and its downstream target p-CHK1 did not show a significant difference between vehicle and elimusertib treatment ( Figs. S6C - F ), which may reflect the low-level of ATR pathway activation at baseline. However, gH2AX proved to be a reliable biomarker for elimusertib activity. The fraction of gH2AX positive cells was significantly increased in all elimusertib treated tumors compared to vehicle controls, consistent with unrepaired and ongoing DNA damage as the mechanism of cell death and anti-tumor activity. Taken together, our data demonstrate that FET rearranged cancers are preferentially sensitive to ATR inhibition and that single agent treatment with the ATR inhibitor elimusertib has in vivo anti-tumor activity across multiple FET fusion oncoprotein-driven PDX models.

 Discussion

 Here we describe how an oncogene can disrupt physiologic DNA damage repair by suppressing ATM activation and downstream signaling. We establish the compensatory DDR kinase, ATR, as a collateral dependency and therapeutic opportunity to target the (partial) ATM defects induced by the oncoproteins themselves using multiple FET fusion-driven cell line and PDX models. These data provide a template for the broader utilization of DDR-directed therapies in cancer through improved understanding of oncogene-DDR network interactions.

 The specific nature of the DNA repair defect in ES has been the subject of much debate given the strong clinical and laboratory-based data demonstrating chemo- and radio-sensitivity 11 – 15 . Our discovery that ES tumors are not “BRCA-like”, but instead harbor partial ATM defects, may help explain the lack of clinical responses to PARP inhibitor monotherapy in ES patients 16 , 68 (unlike HR deficient BRCA mutant and BRCA-like cancers 17 , 18 ). ES cells are dependent on key HR genes for survival and direct analysis of ES patient tumors revealed none of the genomic hallmarks of HR loss. Instead, we show that EWSR1-FLI1 suppresses ATM activation and downstream signaling in response to DNA damage (IR), without impacting the other apical DDR kinases (DNA-PK and ATR). While we do not exclude the possibility that additional DNA repair defects contribute to the DSB-sensitivity of ES cells, our finding of ATM (and not HR) impairment has important clinical implications for ongoing attempts to target the DDR in this disease, especially relating to ongoing PARP inhibitor combination trials 69 .

 To contextualize the magnitude and biological relevance of the partial ATM defects reported here, we benchmarked EWSR1-FLI1 against loss of canonical ATM activators. The effect size of EWSR1-FLI1 mediated suppression of ATM activation/signaling is comparable to loss of established ATM activators including MDC1 49 , RNF8 51 or RNF168 54 (whose loss confer significant radio-sensitivity to IR), but only ~30–60% of the near-complete functional ATM deficiency seen with loss of the MRN complex. Thus, the magnitude of ATM impairment in ES is biologically significant, but not absolute. We further demonstrate the functional importance and therapeutic relevance of partial ATM suppression through increased reliance on a compensatory DDR kinase, ATR, and EWSR1-FLI1-dependent synthetic lethality with inhibitors of ATR and its major downstream target CHK1. The observed ATM effects do not appear to depend on TP53 or STAG2 status as the phenotypes were observed in both mutant and wild-type ES cell lines (see Supplemental Note 3 for additional discussion). We note that the genomic instability of ATM mutant (loss of function) tumors has not been associated with a specific mutational or copy number alteration (CNA) signature 70 thus precluding comparison here, though ES tumors do display recurrent CNAs (trisomy 8 in ~50% of cases, ~20% with trisomy 12 or 1q gain 34 ) which warrant further study. In total, our data nominate partial suppression of ATM as a therapeutically targetable DNA repair lesion in ES.

 How does EWSR1-FLI1, a TF fusion oncoprotein, create these DNA repair defects in ES? We did not identify a set of EWSR1-FLI1 transcriptional targets that explain these ATM effects (e.g., MRN complex genes were not transcriptionally suppressed nor absent at the protein level by Western blotting). Instead, we find that EWSR1-FLI1 is recruited to DNA DSBs through homotypic intrinsically disordered region (IDR) domain interactions with native EWSR1. Moreover, we show that EWSR1-FLI1 directly interacts with all three members of the MRN complex that is essential for ATM activation. Both DSB recruitment and MRN complex binding represent neomorphic functions of the fusion protein contributed by the EWSR1 N-terminal IDR, thus distinguishing EWSR1-FLI1 from wild-type, full-length FLI1. The specific nature of EWSR1-FLI1’s interaction with the MRN complex (e.g., direct or indirect, effect on MRN complex function) and whether other DNA repair proteins interact with EWSR1-FLI1 and contribute to the observed ATM effects (e.g., native EWSR1) are important unanswered questions for future studies to address. In summary, we show that EWSR1-FLI1 is unexpectedly recruited to DNA DSBs and interacts with the MRN complex, which may provide a molecular basis for the partial ATM defects in ES that we describe here.

 More generally, the shared structural organization across the class of FET fusion oncoproteins (i.e., retention of N-terminal IDRs that mediate homotypic and heterotypic FET protein interactions and loss of C-terminal RGG domains that promote rapid DSB recruitment, Fig. 5A ) raised the intriguing hypothesis that FET fusion-driven cancers harbor a common set of DNA repair defects. Indeed, we show that the clear cell sarcoma fusion oncoprotein EWSR1-ATF1 localizes to DNA DSBs and induces similar suppression of IR-dependent ATM signaling (though with differences in ATM autophosphorylation that may relate to efficiency of EWSR1-ATF1 knockdown, Fig. S5M ). Analogous to our findings in ES, CCS cells also display FET fusion oncogene-dependent nanomolar range sensitivity to the ATR inhibitor elimusertib. These data prompted us to test ATR inhibition across the class of FET rearranged cancers as a synthetic lethal therapeutic strategy to target partial ATM defects induced by FET fusion oncoproteins.

 We selected a potent ATR inhibitor in clinical development (elimusertib) and observed nanomolar range IC50’s and preferential sensitivity of FET fusion-driven cancer cell lines in vitro (IC50 range: 20–60nM, comparable to reported elimusertib IC50’s in cell lines with pathogenic loss of function ATM mutations 65 ). Moreover, we tested single agent elimusertib treatment in 5 PDX models including 2 ES, 2 CCS, and 1 DSRCT model. All 5 models showed significant decreases in tumor growth and prolongation of progression-free survival including ES and CCS PDXs from multiply relapsed patients. Given that PDXs are a stringent bar in terms of disease control due to their inherent heterogeneity and single agents are highly unlikely to be curative for these set of diseases, the ability of ATR inhibitor monotherapy to control tumor growth in all 5 models was a striking finding. Our findings are consistent with published reports testing elimusertib in pediatric cancer PDX’s (ES was the only FET rearranged tumor tested) 71 , but differ from a recent report with another ATR inhibitor in clinical trials (berzosertib) that showed no anti-tumor activity as monotherapy in ES cell line xenografts 72 , suggesting important potential differences between ATR inhibitors that warrant future study. We note that previously described mechanisms of ATR inhibitor sensitivity such as PGBD5 transposase expression 73 or replication stress 15 could also contribute to the elimusertib effects that we observed. In total, these data provide strong preclinical rationale for specifically testing elimusertib (and combinations thereof) in FET rearranged cancers as part of ongoing early phase clinical trials.

 Finally, what might be the selective advantage for an oncogene to also suppress physiologic DNA repair? We speculate here that by partially disabling DDR signaling, cells with FET fusion oncoproteins can tolerate high levels of DDR activation caused by transcription and replication stress induced by the oncoprotein itself and thus overcome an important barrier to cellular transformation. Whether other TF fusion oncoproteins (or oncogenes more generally) interact with or disrupt tumor suppressive DDR signaling networks as part of oncogenesis will be an intriguing topic for future work. In summary, our study describes how growth-promoting oncogenes can also interfere with physiologic DNA damage repair and provides rationale for a new targeted therapeutic strategy in ES and the broader class of undruggable FET fusion-driven cancers.

 Methods:

 Cell lines and culture conditions.

 U2OS, DL-221, HeLa, and 293T cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM)-High glucose (Cytiva) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) and streptomycin/penicillin (100 μg/ml). A673, TC-32, ES-8, RD-ES, SU-CCS-1, A549, H3122, and HCC364 cells were grown in RPMI-1640 (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FCS and streptomycin/penicillin (100 μg/ml). BER and BOD cells were cultured in DMEM/F12-High glucose with 10% FCS. Cell lines were maintained at 37 °Celsius in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. All cell lines were subjected to STR analysis and mycoplasma testing.

 A673 cells with a doxycycline(dox)-inducible shRNA against EWSR1-FLI1 were a kind gift from Franck Tirode 31 (clone 1c); the shRNA sequence (GGCAGCAGAACCCTTCTTAT) targets the EWSR1-FLI1 junction. TC-32 cells with a dox-inducible shRNAs against EWSR1-FLI were a kind gift from Dr. David McFadden and the shRNA sequence (ATCCGACCGAGTCGTCCATGTA) targets the 3’ portion of FLI present in the EWSR1-FLI fusion (native FLI1 is not expressed in TC-32 cells). A673 “EWSR1-FLI1 degron” cells were also a kind gift from Dr. David McFadden and the experimental details regarding cell line generation are referenced in McGinnis et al, 2024, bioRxiv 44 . MEF models of ataxia telangiectasia-like disease (ATLD) 45 or Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) 77 were a kind gift from Dr. John Petrini.

 CRISPR-interference screen.

 Ewing sarcoma cell line A673 was transduced with dCas9-KRAB-BFP and then doubly sorted for BFP positive cells. Lentiviral particles were generated from 293T cells transduced with pooled sgRNA libraries (7000 genes, 10 guides per gene) as described previously 27 and then used to infect A673 dCas9-KRAB cells at a multiplicity of infection of 0.3. Cells were selected in puromycin for 48 hours and an aliquot was frozen for t 0 analysis. The remainder of cells were seeded in 500 cm 2 tissue culture plates at equal density (1 × 10 7 cells/plate) and then treated with vehicle (DMSO) or 12.5 nM/40 nM doxorubicin for 72 hours. After 72 hours, cells were trypsinized, counted and pooled every 3 days, and then replated in media without doxorubicin at the same density to maintain minimum 500× coverage of each sgRNA construct. Cells were viably frozen after 10 days and cell counts were used to determine actual lethal dose (LD) values. 2 biologic replicates were performed, and data combined.

 Deep sequencing and data analysis were performed as described 27 . Briefly, genomic DNA was extracted from t 0 and t end cells using a DNEasy Blood & Tissue kit (Qiagen), digested to enrich for lentiviral integration sites, and sgRNA sequences were amplified by PCR for subsequent sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq. Reads were aligned to the sgRNA library and fold-change from t 0 to t end in the DMSO, low and high doxorubicin conditions were calculated. A gene-level score was then calculated as the mean of the top 3 scoring sgRNAs targeting a given transcript.

 CRISPRi growth assays.

 dCas9-KRAB expressing cells were infected with gRNAs (sequences below) and then selected with puromycin for 48 hours. 50,000 cells were then re-plated in a 6 well plate and cell counts were obtained by trypsinization and counting at day 5. For experiments in A673 cells with dox-inducible shRNA against EWSR1-FLI1, 1μg/ml Dox (or vehicle) was added upon replating the puromycin selected, gRNA-expressing cells. gRNA sequences are as follows:

 sgBRCA1–1: GCGTAAGGCGTTGTGAACCCT

 sgBRCA1–2: GCTCGCTGAGACTTCCTGGAC

 sgPALB2–1: GCGCACTGAGGGTGCGATCC

 sgPALB2–2: GATTTAATTGGCCGGAGTTT

 sgControl-1: GGCTCGGTCCCGCGTCGTCG

 sgControl-2: GAACGACTAGTTAGGCGTGTA

 Computational analysis of genomic data.

 Whole genome sequencing (WGS) data from known BRCA mutant/wildtype breast cancer patient samples and Ewing sarcoma samples were obtained from the European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA). The WGS data for the ES cohort was published in Tirode et al, 2014 34 and deposited with study accession numbers: EGAS00001000855 (Institute Curie cohort) and EGAS00001000839 (St. Jude’s cohort). The breast cancer WGS was reported in 2016 35 and deposited under EGAD00001001322, as part of a larger WGS of 560 breast cancer samples (overall project accession number EGAS00001001178).

 FASTQ files were aligned to the GRCh38 (patch 5) human genome reference using BWA MEM 85 , with pre- and post-alignment filtering and processing using NGSUtils 86 and GATK 87 . Insertions and deletions (indel) were called using MuTect 2 for short indels 88 and Delly for larger indels 89 . For each indel, the amount of microhomology at the flanking ends was calculated using the custom software “mhscan”. Briefly, for each indel, mhscan will determine the number of bases of homology between the insert or deletion and the flanking sequence. All indels with between 2–6 bp of homology were classified as microhomology (MH) positive. Mutational signatures were calculated using the somatic single-nucleotide variants for each sample. COSMIC v2 90 , 91 signatures were calculated using deconstructSigs 92 .

 Determining deletion length bins.

 The binning ranges were determined by calculating the ability for the number of deletions of each length (1–100 bp) to accurately separate the BRCA wild type (wt) / mutant (mut) samples into two groups. The deletions were classified as either MH-positive or MH-negative and the total number of deletions for each length was calculated for BRCA wt and BRCA mut samples (data were aggregated for all samples in the group). For each deletion length, a Fisher exact test was used to calculate the statistical significance of whether the MH-positive to MH-negative ratio separated the BRCA wt/mut groups ( Fig. S2F ). The distribution of p-values was used to determine appropriate bin sizes for downstream analysis. Deletions were binned into ranges of 1–6 bp, 7–28 bp, 29–45 bp, 46–100 bp, and 101–1000 bp.

 DSB Repair reporter assays.

 HR, Alt-EJ, SSA and c-NHEJ efficiencies were measured using previously established DR-GFP, EJ2-GFP, SA-GFP and EJ5-GFP reporter systems respectively 38 . Briefly, dual promoter plasmids co-expressing mTagBFP and EWSR1-FLI1 (or empty vector, EV) were generated by replacing the puromycin cassette with mTagBFP in the plasmid pCDH-CMV-EWSR1-FLI1 (Addgene #102813). Co-expression plasmids were delivered by nucleofection into U2OS DSB reporter cell lines using the SE Cell Line 4D-Nucleofector XL Kit (Lonza Biosciences). To induce a DSB, the I-SceI-P2A-mCherry plasmid which we generated by replacing AmCyan with I-SceI in the bicistronic plasmid Amcyan-P2A-mCherry (Addgene #45350) was delivered by nucleofection after 24 hours. Flow cytometry was performed 72 hours after I-SceI introduction. DSB repair efficiency was calculated by determining the percentage of GFP positive cells within the BFP and mCherry double-positive population (see Fig. S3A ). For siRNA experiments, siRNA (5nM) was delivered by transfection using Dharmafect transfection reagent (Dharmacon) 72 hours prior to I-SceI introduction. To directly examine junctional sequences after DSB induction for evidence of cNHEJ or alt-EJ ( Fig. S3B ), we utilized a distinct I-SceI based DSB repair reporter described here 40 . Briefly, 5μg of the NHEJ reporter was transfected into EWSR1-FLI1 (or EV) expressing U2OS cells, GFP+ cells were sorted at 72 hours for genomic DNA isolation, and then DSB junctional sequences analyzed by recircularization of the repaired NHEJ reporter and plasmid sequencing.

 DDR signaling experiments.

 For experiments in A673 and TC-32 cells with dox-inducible shRNA against EWSR1-FLI1, knockdown was induced by either addition of 1μg/ml dox (A673) or 200 ng/mL (TC-32) for 72 hours followed by IR treatment. For A673 “EWSR1-FLI1 degron” cells, 200 μM IAA (auxin, Sigma) was added 3 hours prior to IR treatment for EWSR1-FLI1 depletion. For the ectopic expression experiments in U2OS cells, the respective fusion proteins (EWSR1-FLI1-GFP, EWSR1-ATF1-GFP, or EV-GFP) were introduced via nucleofection with homemade buffers (Solution 1: 2g ATP-disodium salt, 1.2g MgCl 2 .6H 2 0 in 10ml water; Solution 2: 6g KH 2 PO 4 , 0.6g NaHCO 3 , 0.2g Glucose in 500ml water, pH 7.4. Solutions were stored at −20°C and 80μl of Solution1 was mixed with 4ml of solution 2 at the time of nucleofection). GFP positive cells were selected by FACS and 24 hours after sorting, subjected to IR. MEF cells were infected with pCDH-EWSR1-FLI1 (Addgene plasmid #102813) lentivirus or EV, selected with puromycin within 72 hours, and then subjected to IR.

 For the shRNA experiments testing knockdown of ATM regulators in A673 “EWSR1-FLI1 degron” or MEF cells, Mission pLKO.1 shRNA viruses (sequences below) were used to infect target cells and selection with puromycin was completed within 72 hours to minimize effects on cell viability, followed by IR treatment. For experiments in SU-CCS-1 cells, siRNA against EWSR1-ATF1 was delivered by nucleofection 72 hours prior to IR. For improved induction of ATR/CHK1 signaling, cells were treated with neocarzinostatin (NCS) at 200ng/mL for 30 minutes. Lysates were collected at defined time points post-IR (or post-NCS) and subjected to Western blotting.

 Western blotting and quantification.

 Cells were washed with 1X PBS and scraped in RIPA buffer (25 mM TrisHCl (pH 7.6), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS), supplemented with 1X HALT protease inhibitor cocktail and 1X HALT phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. Cells were lysed using a syringe and cellular debris were separated by centrifugation. Lysates were quantified using Bradford’s reagent and 15μg lysate was loaded onto SDS-PAGE gels followed by blotting of separated proteins. Blots were blocked with 5% BSA in TBS-T for 30 minutes at room temperature followed by incubation with primary antibody overnight at 4°C. After 1 hour incubation with the appropriate HRP-conjugated secondary antibody, signal was detected using ECL Prime reagent (Amersham, Cytiva) on an ImageQuant LAS 4000. Quantifications were performed using Fiji and all protein levels were normalized to loading control Actin. To measure CHK2 phosphorylation in MEFs as no reliable mouse p-CHK2 antibody is commercially available, we quantified the intensity of the upper band (after IR) on total CHK2 immunoblots which corresponds to the phosphorylated species, as utilized previously by multiple groups 46 , 49 .

 The list of antibodies utilized in this study includes: FLI1 (Abcam, ab133485, 1:500), CtIP (Cell Signaling Technologies (CST), D76F7, 1:000), 53BP1 (Abcam, ab153909, 1:1000), p-ATM (Invitrogen, MA5–32751), ATM (CST, 2873S, 1:1000), pCHK2-T68 (CST, 2661S, 1:1000, Human only), CHK2 (CST, 2662S, 1:1000), p-KAP1 (Novus Biologicals, A700–013, 1:1000), KAP1 (Novus Biologicals, A700–014, 1:1000), p-DNA-PK (CST, 68716S, 1:1000), DNA-PK (CST, 4602T, 1:1000), p-ATR (Genetex, GTX128145, 1:1000), ATR (Novus Biologicals, A300–138A, 1:1000), pCHK1-Ser317: (CST, 2344, 1:1000), CHK1 (CST, 37010, 1:1000), GFP (CST, 2956S, 1:1000), EWSR1 (Genetex, GTX114069, 1:1000), beta-Actin (Sigma, A2228, 1:2000), anti-Flag (Sigma, F3165, 1:2000), ATF1 (Novus Biologicals, A303–036A, 1:1000), FUS (Novus Biologicals, A300–302A-1:1000), RNaseH1 (Genetex, GTX117624, 1:1000), MRE11 (CST, 1:1000, 4895S), NBS1 (CST, 1:1000, 14956), RAD50 (CST, 1:1000, 3427S), MDC1 (Invitrogen, MA5–27650, 1:1000), RNF8 (Proteintech, 1:1000, 14112–1-AP), RNF168 (EMD Millipore, 1:1000, ABE367, Mouse only), and RNF168 (Thermo, 1:1000, H00165918-MO1, human).

 siRNA/shRNA sequences.

 siRNA sequences:

 EWSR1: Mix of two siRNAs targeting the C-terminus of EWSR1: GGAACAGAUGGGAGGAAGA and AGGAAAGCCCAAAGGCGAU

 CTIP: On-TARGETplus SMARTpool siRNA (Dharmacon, L-011376–00-0005)

 BRCA1: On-TARGETplus SMARTpool siRNA (Dharmacon, L-003461–00-0005)

 POLQ: On-TARGET plus SMARTpool siRNA (Dharmacon, L-015180–01-0005)

 53BP1: On-TARGETplus SMARTpool siRNA (Dharmacon, L-003548–00-0005)

 MRE11: On-TARGETplus SMARTpool siRNA (Dharmacon, L-009271–00-0005)

 EWSR1-ATF1: GCGGUGGAAUGGGAAAAAUUU

 shRNA targeting sequences (pLKO.1 Mission shRNA):

 LIG4: TATGTCAGTGGACTAATGGAT

 Mouse MDC1: mixture of 2 shRNAs, AGCATGCCTCACTCCTATAAG and GAGCCTCAATGGCACTCAAAT

 Mouse RNF168: mixture of 2 shRNAs, GCCAACTTCTACTCAAGATAA and CCTTGGCTTCTCCTTTGAGTT

 Human MRE11A: mixture of 2 shRNAs, ACGACTGCGAGTGGACTATAG and TGTTGGTTTGCTGCGTATTAA

 Human NBS1: mixture of 2 shRNAs, CCTCTTGATGAACCATCTATT, and GCTCGAAAGAATACAGAACTA

 Human MDC1: mixture of 2 shRNAs, CCCTGAATCAACTGTCCCTAT, CGGACCAAACTTAACCAAGAA

 Human RNF168: mixture of 2 shRNAs, GCAGTCAGTTAATAGAAGAAA, and CGTGGAACTGTGGACGATAAT

 Human RNF8: mixture of 2 shRNAs, TGGAGCAACTAGAGAAGACTT, and CCAAAGAATGACCAAATGATA

 Cell survival assays.

 350,000 cells were seeded in 6-well plates, 24 hours prior to drug treatment. Cells were treated with varying doses of ATR kinase inhibitor elimusertib (Selleckchem) +/− doxorubicin (Sigma) or CHK1 inhibitor LY2603618 (Selleckchem) for 3 days at the end of which cells were counted to determine fractional cell survival. For dox-inducible EWSR1-FLI1 knockdown in A673 and TC-32 cells, shRNA was induced by treatment with dox for 72 hours prior to ATR or CHK1 inhibitor treatment. For RNAseH1 experiments, A673 cells were infected with pLV-EF1a-RNAseH1-IRES-Blast lentivirus (derived from Addgene plasmid #85133) or empty vector and selected for stably infected cells.

 Laser micro-irradiation.

 Laser micro-irradiation was performed as previously described 21 . Briefly, U2OS cells expressing EWSR1-GFP, EWSR1-FLI1-GFP, EWSR1-ATF1-GFP, EWSR1-WT1-GFP or the various mutant forms of the fusion oncoproteins were seeded in 8-well Lab Tek II Chamber Slides (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 24 hours. Cells were treated with 1μg/ml Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 minutes prior to micro-irradiation. Live cell microscopy was performed using Nikon Ti microscope with a CSU-W1 spinning disk confocal using a 100X/1.4 Plan Apo VC objective at the UCSF Center for Light Microscopy. To induce DNA damage, 5-pixel wide stripes were drawn in every cell nucleus to label the region of interest (ROI) and irradiated with a 405nm diode laser (40mW). Images were acquired pre-irradiation and at 1-minute intervals post-laser damage for 15 minutes. To plot recruitment kinetics, the pre-irradiation fluorescence intensity was subtracted from the intensity of the ROI for every nucleus.

 Co-Immunoprecipitation (co-IP) experiments.

 For EWSR1 co-IP experiments, 293T cells were transfected with Flag-EWSR1 and EWSR1-FLI1 (or empty vector) for 48 hours. Cells were then treated with NCS (200ng/mL) for 30 minutes and cells were collected at 15 minutes, 30 minutes and 1 hour post NCS treatment. Nuclear co-IP was performed using the Nuclear Co-IP kit (Active Motif) according to the manufacturer’s instructions followed by IP using M2 Flag beads (Sigma). For GFP co-IP experiments, 293T cells were transfected with EWSR1-FLI1-GFP, FLI1-GFP, EWSR1-GFP, or GFP empty vector for 24 hours, followed by IR treatment (5Gy), cell collection at specified time points, the same nuclear co-IP protocol, and IP using ChromoTek GFP-Trap Agarose beads (Proteintech).

 Cell cycle analysis.

 U2OS cells were nucleofected with the dual promoter pCDH-EWSR1-FLI1-EF1a-mtagBFP (or empty vector) and analyzed at 48 hours. Cells were fixed using 4% formaldehyde for 15 minutes at room temperature. After washing with 1% BSA in PBS, cells were resuspended in 500μl of FxCycle ™ PI/RNAse Solution (ThermoFisher Scientific) for 30 minutes at room temperature. Cell cycle profiles were also analyzed using Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 488 Flow Cytometry Assay Kit (Invitrogen). Cells were pulse labelled with 10μM EdU for 30 minutes and processed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Flow cytometry was used to analyze the cell cycle profile for BFP positive, EWSR1-FLI1 (or empty vector) expressing cells.

 Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) experiments.

 The establishment of PDX models was performed by the laboratory of Dr. Filemon Dela Cruz and Dr. Andrew Kung from patients at MSKCC according to the institutional animal and IRB protocols. Tumor fragments from patients were serially transplanted into athymic nude (Foxn1 nu ) mice from Charles River Laboratories to establish the PDX for 3–5 passages, after which time seeds were implanted to begin the PDX experiments. When average tumor volumes exceeded 150mm 3 , mice were randomized into either elimusertib or vehicle group. Elimusertib was dosed at 40 mg/kg twice daily, 3 days-on/4 days-off as previously reported 71 , and dissolved in 60% polyethylene glycol 400, 10% ethanol, and 30% water to a 4 mg/mL solution. The same solution without compound was used as vehicle control. Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation once the tumor volume exceeded 2000 mm 3 or body weight loss was higher than 20% (which did not occur), and tumors were collected for immunohistochemistry (IHC).

 For IHC studies, paraffin cross-sections (thickness = 5μm) of PDX tumor tissues were applied to Superfrost Plus microscope slides (Fisher, #1255015) for immunohistochemical analyses. After heat-mediated antigen retrieval (48 minutes, Cell Conditioning 1) (Ventana, #950–500), PDX tumor cross-sections were incubated for 4 hours at room temperature with the following primary antibodies: rabbit polyclonal Cleaved Caspase-3 (Cell Signaling Technology, #9661, 0.05mg/mL), rabbit monoclonal Ki67 (Cell Signaling Technology, #9027, 0.25mg/mL), gH2AX Ser139 (Cell Signaling Technology, #9718, 1:1,000 dilution), p-CHK1 (Cell Signaling Technology, #2348, 1:100 dilution), or normal rabbit polyclonal control IgG (Invitrogen, #10500C). After sequential washes with PBS, sections were incubated for 20 minutes with Omni Map anti-Rb HRP (Roche, #760–4311), followed by DAB ChromoMap Kit amplification (Ventana Medical Systems, #760–159). The slides were counter-stained with hematoxylin and mounted with Permount (Fisher Scientific). Analysis was performed in a blinded fashion using QuPath software.

 Statistics.

 Data from at least three independent experiments were used to calculate P values which were determined with Student’s t tests and ANOVA using GraphPad software.

 Supplementary Material

 Supplement 1 

 media-1.xlsx (2.6MB, xlsx) 

 Supplement 2 

 media-2.xlsx (9.8KB, xlsx) 

 Supplement 3 

 NIHPP2023.04.30.538578v4-supplement-3.pdf (8MB, pdf) 

 Acknowledgements

 This project is supported by the Tow Center for Developmental Oncology, the V Foundation, Hyundai Hope on Wheels, the Sarcoma Center at MSKCC, NIH/NCI Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA008748, Alex’s Lemonade Stand, the A.P. Giannini Foundation, and the St. Baldrick’s Foundation (to A.T), as well as NIH/NCI U54CA224081, R01CA169338, R01CA211052, R01CA204302, U01CA217882 (to T.G.B). A.T. was an advisor to Faze Medicines. T.G.B. is an advisor to Novartis, Astrazeneca, Revolution Medicines, Array/Pfizer, Springworks, Strategia, Relay, Jazz, Rain, EcoR1 and receives research funding from Novartis and Revolution Medicines and Strategia. The authors would like to acknowledge A. Yasemin Goksenin and Zoji Bomya for experimental help, Amit Sabnis, Alan Ashworth, John Petrini, and Alex Kentsis for scientific input and manuscript review, Jeremy Stark for the DNA double-strand break reporter cell lines, the Center for Advanced Light Microscopy at UCSF for technical help, and the Molecular Cytology Core Facility at MSKCC for IHC staining. We especially thank the lab of Dr. David McFadden for sharing unpublished reagents including the A673 “EWSR1-FLI1 degron” cells and TC-32 cells with dox-inducible shRNAs against EWSR1-FLI, as detailed in the Methods .

 Data and Code Availability.

 All data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper and its Supplementary Information . Code for “mhscan” is available on request.

 References:

 1. Lanz M. C., Dibitetto D. & Smolka M. B.
DNA damage kinase signaling: checkpoint and repair at 30 years. Embo j
38, e101801 (2019). 10.15252/embj.2019101801
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 2. Di Micco R. et al. 
Oncogene-induced senescence is a DNA damage response triggered by DNA hyper-replication. Nature
444, 638–642 (2006). 10.1038/nature05327
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 3. Kotsantis P., Petermann E. & Boulton S. J.
Mechanisms of Oncogene-Induced Replication Stress: Jigsaw Falling into Place. Cancer Discov
8, 537–555 (2018). 10.1158/2159-8290.Cd-17-1461
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 4. Halazonetis T. D., Gorgoulis V. G. & Bartek J. An oncogene-induced DNA damage model for cancer development. Science
319, 1352–1355 (2008). 10.1126/science.1140735
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 5. Bartkova J. et al. 
DNA damage response as a candidate anti-cancer barrier in early human tumorigenesis. Nature
434, 864–870 (2005). 10.1038/nature03482
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 6. Bryant H. E.
et al. 
Specific killing of BRCA2-deficient tumours with inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Nature
434, 913–917 (2005). 10.1038/nature03443
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 7. Farmer H. et al. 
Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA mutant cells as a therapeutic strategy. Nature
434, 917–921 (2005). 10.1038/nature03445
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 8. Groelly F. J., Fawkes M., Dagg R. A., Blackford A. N. & Tarsounas M. Targeting DNA damage response pathways in cancer. Nature Reviews Cancer
23, 78–94 (2023). 10.1038/s41568-022-00535-5
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 9. Schwartz J., Cech T. & Parker R. Biochemical Properties and Biological Functions of FET Proteins. Annual review of biochemistry
84 (2014). 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060614-034325 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 10. Grünewald T. G. P.
et al. 
Ewing sarcoma. Nature Reviews Disease Primers
4, 5 (2018). 10.1038/s41572-018-0003-x [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 11. Krikelis D. & Judson I. Role of chemotherapy in the management of soft tissue sarcomas. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
10, 249–260 (2010). 10.1586/era.09.176
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 12. Garnett M. J.
et al. 
Systematic identification of genomic markers of drug sensitivity in cancer cells. Nature
483, 570–575 (2012). 10.1038/nature11005
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 13. Stewart E. et al. 
Targeting the DNA repair pathway in Ewing sarcoma. Cell Rep
9, 829–841 (2014). 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.09.028
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 14. Ewing J. R.
Diffuse endothelioma of bone. Proceedings of the New York Pathological Society
450, 12:17 (1921). [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 15. Gorthi A. et al. 
EWS-FLI1 increases transcription to cause R-loops and block BRCA1 repair in Ewing sarcoma. Nature
555, 387–391 (2018). 10.1038/nature25748
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 16. Choy E. et al. 
Phase II study of olaparib in patients with refractory Ewing sarcoma following failure of standard chemotherapy. BMC Cancer
14, 813 (2014). 10.1186/1471-2407-14-813
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 17. Kondrashova O. et al. 
Methylation of all BRCA1 copies predicts response to the PARP inhibitor rucaparib in ovarian carcinoma. Nat Commun
9, 3970 (2018). 10.1038/s41467-018-05564-z
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 18. Lee J. m., Ledermann J. A. & Kohn E. C.
PARP Inhibitors for BRCA1/2 mutation-associated and BRCA-like malignancies. Annals of Oncology
25, 32–40 (2014). 10.1093/annonc/mdt384
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 19. Schwartz J. C., Cech T. R. & Parker R. R.
Biochemical Properties and Biological Functions of FET Proteins. Annual Review of Biochemistry
84, 355–379 (2015). 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060614-034325 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 20. Altmeyer M. et al. 
Liquid demixing of intrinsically disordered proteins is seeded by poly(ADP-ribose). Nature Communications
6, 8088 (2015). 10.1038/ncomms9088 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 21. Izhar L. et al. 
A Systematic Analysis of Factors Localized to Damaged Chromatin Reveals PARP-Dependent Recruitment of Transcription Factors. Cell Rep
11, 1486–1500 (2015). 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.04.053
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 22. Levone B. R.
et al. 
FUS-dependent liquid-liquid phase separation is important for DNA repair initiation. J Cell Biol
220 (2021). 10.1083/jcb.202008030 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 23. Singatulina A. S.
et al. 
PARP-1 Activation Directs FUS to DNA Damage Sites to Form PARG-Reversible Compartments Enriched in Damaged DNA. Cell Rep
27, 1809–1821.e1805 (2019). 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.04.031
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 24. Chappidi N. et al. 
PARP1-DNA co-condensation drives DNA repair site assembly to prevent disjunction of broken DNA ends. Cell
187, 945–961.e918 (2024). 10.1016/j.cell.2024.01.015
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 25. Kovar H. Jekyll and Hyde: The Two Faces of the FUS/EWS/TAF15 Protein Family. Sarcoma 2011, 837474 (2011). 10.1155/2011/837474 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 26. Cote G. M. & Choy E. Update in treatment and targets in Ewing sarcoma. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
27, 1007–1019 (2013). 10.1016/j.hoc.2013.07.001
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 27. Gilbert L. A.
et al. 
Genome-Scale CRISPR-Mediated Control of Gene Repression and Activation. Cell
159, 647–661 (2014). 10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.029
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 28. Fielden J. et al. 
Comprehensive interrogation of synthetic lethality in the DNA damage response. Nature
640, 1093–1102 (2025). 10.1038/s41586-025-08815-4
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 29. Daggubati V. et al. 
Smoothened-activating lipids drive resistance to CDK4/6 inhibition in Hedgehog-associated medulloblastoma cells and preclinical models. The Journal of Clinical Investigation
131 (2021). 10.1172/JCI141171 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 30. Rosenbluh J. et al. 
Complementary information derived from CRISPR Cas9 mediated gene deletion and suppression. Nat Commun
8, 15403 (2017). 10.1038/ncomms15403
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 31. Tirode F. et al. 
Mesenchymal Stem Cell Features of Ewing Tumors. Cancer Cell
11, 421–429 (2007). 10.1016/j.ccr.2007.02.027
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 32. Coleman N., Zhang B., Byers L. A. & Yap T. A.
The role of Schlafen 11 (SLFN11) as a predictive biomarker for targeting the DNA damage response. British Journal of Cancer
124, 857–859 (2021). 10.1038/s41416-020-01202-y
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 33. Tang S. W.
et al. 
SLFN11 Is a Transcriptional Target of EWS-FLI1 and a Determinant of Drug Response in Ewing Sarcoma. Clin Cancer Res
21, 4184–4193 (2015). 10.1158/1078-0432.Ccr-14-2112
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 34. Tirode F. et al. 
Genomic landscape of Ewing sarcoma defines an aggressive subtype with co-association of STAG2 and TP53 mutations. Cancer Discov
4, 1342–1353 (2014). 10.1158/2159-8290.Cd-14-0622
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 35. Nik-Zainal S. et al. 
Landscape of somatic mutations in 560 breast cancer whole-genome sequences. Nature
534, 47–54 (2016). 10.1038/nature17676
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 36. Polak P. et al. 
A mutational signature reveals alterations underlying deficient homologous recombination repair in breast cancer. Nat Genet
49, 1476–1486 (2017). 10.1038/ng.3934
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 37. Nik-Zainal S. et al. 
Mutational processes molding the genomes of 21 breast cancers. Cell
149, 979–993 (2012). 10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.024
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 38. Gunn A. & Stark J. M.
I-SceI-based assays to examine distinct repair outcomes of mammalian chromosomal double strand breaks. Methods Mol Biol
920, 379–391 (2012). 10.1007/978-1-61779-998-3_27
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 39. Bennardo N., Cheng A., Huang N. & Stark J. M.
Alternative-NHEJ is a mechanistically distinct pathway of mammalian chromosome break repair. PLoS Genet
4, e1000110 (2008). 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000110
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 40. Seluanov A., Mao Z. & Gorbunova V. Analysis of DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair in mammalian cells. J Vis Exp (2010). 10.3791/2002 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 41. Blackford A. N. & Jackson S. P.
ATM, ATR, and DNA-PK: The Trinity at the Heart of the DNA Damage Response. Mol Cell
66, 801–817 (2017). 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.05.015
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 42. Chen C. C.
et al. 
ATM loss leads to synthetic lethality in BRCA1 BRCT mutant mice associated with exacerbated defects in homology-directed repair. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
114, 7665–7670 (2017). 10.1073/pnas.1706392114
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 43. Cai M. Y.
et al. 
Cooperation of the ATM and Fanconi Anemia/BRCA Pathways in Double-Strand Break End Resection. Cell Rep
30, 2402–2415.e2405 (2020). 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.01.052
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 44. McGinnis J. H.
et al. 
Endogenous EWSR1-FLI1 degron alleles enable control of fusion oncoprotein expression in tumor cell lines and xenografts. bioRxiv, 2024.2010.2027.620498 (2024). 10.1101/2024.10.27.620498 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ]

 45. Theunissen J.-W. F.
et al. 
Checkpoint Failure and Chromosomal Instability without Lymphomagenesis in Mre11ATLD1/ATLD1 Mice. Molecular Cell
12, 1511–1523 (2003). 10.1016/S1097-2765(03)00455-6
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 46. Kim J. H.
et al. 
The Mre11-Nbs1 Interface Is Essential for Viability and Tumor Suppression. Cell Reports
18, 496–507 (2017). 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.12.035
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 47. Uziel T. et al. 
Requirement of the MRN complex for ATM activation by DNA damage. The EMBO Journal
22, 5612–5621 (2003). 10.1093/emboj/cdg541
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 48. Carson C. T.
et al. 
The Mre11 complex is required for ATM activation and the G2/M checkpoint. The EMBO Journal
22, 6610–6620 (2003). 10.1093/emboj/cdg630
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 49. Lou Z. et al. 
MDC1 maintains genomic stability by participating in the amplification of ATM-dependent DNA damage signals. Mol Cell
21, 187–200 (2006). 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.025
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 50. Chapman J. R. & Jackson S. P.
Phospho-dependent interactions between NBS1 and MDC1 mediate chromatin retention of the MRN complex at sites of DNA damage. EMBO reports
9, 795–801-801 (2008). 10.1038/embor.2008.103 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 51. Wu J. et al. 
Chfr and RNF8 synergistically regulate ATM activation. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology
18, 761–768 (2011). 10.1038/nsmb.2078 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 52. Kolas N. K.
et al. 
Orchestration of the DNA-Damage Response by the RNF8 Ubiquitin Ligase. Science
318, 1637–1640 (2007). doi: 10.1126/science.1150034
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 53. Mailand N. et al. 
RNF8 Ubiquitylates Histones at DNA Double-Strand Breaks and Promotes Assembly of Repair Proteins. Cell
131, 887–900 (2007). 10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.040
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 54. Stewart G. S.
et al. 
The RIDDLE Syndrome Protein Mediates a Ubiquitin-Dependent Signaling Cascade at Sites of DNA Damage. Cell
136, 420–434 (2009). 10.1016/j.cell.2008.12.042
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 55. Doil C. et al. 
RNF168 Binds and Amplifies Ubiquitin Conjugates on Damaged Chromosomes to Allow Accumulation of Repair Proteins. Cell
136, 435–446 (2009). 10.1016/j.cell.2008.12.041
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 56. Min A. et al. 
AZD6738, A Novel Oral Inhibitor of ATR, Induces Synthetic Lethality with ATM Deficiency in Gastric Cancer Cells. Mol Cancer Ther
16, 566–577 (2017). 10.1158/1535-7163.Mct-16-0378
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 57. Menezes D. L.
et al. 
A synthetic lethal screen reveals enhanced sensitivity to ATR inhibitor treatment in mantle cell lymphoma with ATM loss-of-function. Mol Cancer Res
13, 120–129 (2015). 10.1158/1541-7786.Mcr-14-0240
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 58. Wengner A. M.
et al. 
The Novel ATR Inhibitor BAY 1895344 Is Efficacious as Monotherapy and Combined with DNA Damage-Inducing or Repair-Compromising Therapies in Preclinical Cancer Models. Mol Cancer Ther
19, 26–38 (2020). 10.1158/1535-7163.Mct-19-0019
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 59. Saldivar J. C., Cortez D. & Cimprich K. A.
The essential kinase ATR: ensuring faithful duplication of a challenging genome. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
18, 622–636 (2017). 10.1038/nrm.2017.67
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 60. Riggi N. et al. 
EWS-FLI1 utilizes divergent chromatin remodeling mechanisms to directly activate or repress enhancer elements in Ewing sarcoma. Cancer Cell
26, 668–681 (2014). 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.10.004
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 61. Embree L. J., Azuma M. & Hickstein D. D.
Ewing sarcoma fusion protein EWSR1/FLI1 interacts with EWSR1 leading to mitotic defects in zebrafish embryos and human cell lines. Cancer Res
69, 4363–4371 (2009). 10.1158/0008-5472.Can-08-3229
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 62. Boulay G. et al. 
Cancer-Specific Retargeting of BAF Complexes by a Prion-like Domain. Cell
171, 163–178.e119 (2017). 10.1016/j.cell.2017.07.036
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 63. Bailly R. A.
et al. 
DNA-binding and transcriptional activation properties of the EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein resulting from the t(11;22) translocation in Ewing sarcoma. Molecular and Cellular Biology
14, 3230–3241 (1994). doi: 10.1128/mcb.14.5.3230-3241.1994
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 64. Ngoi N. Y. L.
et al. 
Targeting ATR in patients with cancer. Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology
21, 278–293 (2024). 10.1038/s41571-024-00863-5 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 65. Wengner A. M.
et al. 
The Novel ATR Inhibitor BAY 1895344 Is Efficacious as Monotherapy and Combined with DNA Damage–Inducing or Repair–Compromising Therapies in Preclinical Cancer Models. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics
19, 26–38 (2020). 10.1158/1535-7163.Mct-19-0019
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 66. Yap T. A.
et al. 
Camonsertib in DNA damage response-deficient advanced solid tumors: phase 1 trial results. Nature Medicine
29, 1400–1411 (2023). 10.1038/s41591-023-02399-0 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 67. Dillon M. T.
et al. 
Durable responses to ATR inhibition with ceralasertib in tumors with genomic defects and high inflammation. The Journal of Clinical Investigation
134 (2024). 10.1172/JCI175369 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 68. Gruber J. J.
et al. 
A phase II study of talazoparib monotherapy in patients with wild-type BRCA1 and BRCA2 with a mutation in other homologous recombination genes. Nature Cancer
3, 1181–1191 (2022). 10.1038/s43018-022-00439-1
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 69. Gupta A. et al. 
Consensus recommendations for systemic therapies in the management of relapsed Ewing sarcoma: A report from the National Ewing Sarcoma Tumor Board. Cancer
130, 4028–4039 (2024). 10.1002/cncr.35537
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 70. Park W. et al. 
Clinico-genomic Characterization of ATM and HRD in Pancreas Cancer: Application for Practice. Clin Cancer Res
28, 4782–4792 (2022). 10.1158/1078-0432.Ccr-22-1483
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 71. Pusch F. F.
et al. 
Elimusertib has Antitumor Activity in Preclinical Patient-Derived Pediatric Solid Tumor Models. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics
23, 507–519 (2024). 10.1158/1535-7163.Mct-23-0094
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 72. Jess J. et al. 
Cell Context Is the Third Axis of Synergy for the Combination of ATR Inhibition and Cisplatin in Ewing Sarcoma. Clin Cancer Res
30, 3533–3548 (2024). 10.1158/1078-0432.Ccr-23-3063
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 73. Henssen A. G.
et al. 
Therapeutic targeting of PGBD5-induced DNA repair dependency in pediatric solid tumors. Sci Transl Med
9 (2017). 10.1126/scitranslmed.aam9078 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 74. Tsherniak A. et al. 
Defining a Cancer Dependency Map. Cell
170, 564–576.e516 (2017). 10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.010
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 75. Morgens D. W., Deans R. M., Li A. & Bassik M. C.
Systematic comparison of CRISPR/Cas9 and RNAi screens for essential genes. Nature Biotechnology
34, 634–636 (2016). 10.1038/nbt.3567 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 76. Evers B. et al. 
CRISPR knockout screening outperforms shRNA and CRISPRi in identifying essential genes. Nature Biotechnology
34, 631–633 (2016). 10.1038/nbt.3536 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 77. Williams B. R.
et al. 
A Murine Model of Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome. Current Biology
12, 648–653 (2002). 10.1016/S0960-9822(02)00763-7
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 78. Lou Z., Minter-Dykhouse K., Wu X. & Chen J. MDC1 is coupled to activated CHK2 in mammalian DNA damage response pathways. Nature
421, 957–961 (2003). 10.1038/nature01447
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 79. Crompton B. D.
et al. 
The genomic landscape of pediatric Ewing sarcoma. Cancer Discov
4, 1326–1341 (2014). 10.1158/2159-8290.Cd-13-1037
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 80. Adane B. et al. 
STAG2 loss rewires oncogenic and developmental programs to promote metastasis in Ewing sarcoma. Cancer Cell
39, 827–844.e810 (2021). 10.1016/j.ccell.2021.05.007
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 81. May W. A.
et al. 
Characterization and Drug Resistance Patterns of Ewing’s Sarcoma Family Tumor Cell Lines. PLOS ONE
8, e80060 (2013). 10.1371/journal.pone.0080060
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 82. Solomon D. A.
et al. 
Mutational inactivation of STAG2 causes aneuploidy in human cancer. Science
333, 1039–1043 (2011). 10.1126/science.1203619
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 83. Kovar H. et al. 
Among genes involved in the RB dependent cell cycle regulatory cascade, the p16 tumor suppressor gene is frequently lost in the Ewing family of tumors. Oncogene
15, 2225–2232 (1997). 10.1038/sj.onc.1201397
 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 84. Stolte B. et al. 
Genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 screen identifies druggable dependencies in TP53 wild-type Ewing sarcoma. Journal of Experimental Medicine
215, 2137–2155 (2018). 10.1084/jem.20171066
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 85. Li H. & Durbin R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics
26, 589–595 (2010). 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp698
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 86. Breese M. R. & Liu Y. NGSUtils: a software suite for analyzing and manipulating next-generation sequencing datasets. Bioinformatics
29, 494–496 (2013). 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts731
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 87. McKenna A. et al. 
The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing next-generation DNA sequencing data. Genome Res
20, 1297–1303 (2010). 10.1101/gr.107524.110
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 88. Benjamin D. et al. 
Calling Somatic SNVs and Indels with Mutect2. bioRxiv, 861054 (2019). 10.1101/861054 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ]

 89. Rausch T. et al. 
DELLY: structural variant discovery by integrated paired-end and split-read analysis. Bioinformatics
28, i333–i339 (2012). 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts378
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 90. Tate J. G.
et al. 
COSMIC: the Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer. Nucleic Acids Res
47, D941–d947 (2019). 10.1093/nar/gky1015
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 91. Alexandrov L. B.
et al. 
Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature
500, 415–421 (2013). 10.1038/nature12477
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 92. Rosenthal R., McGranahan N., Herrero J., Taylor B. S. & Swanton C. DeconstructSigs: delineating mutational processes in single tumors distinguishes DNA repair deficiencies and patterns of carcinoma evolution. Genome Biol
17, 31 (2016). 10.1186/s13059-016-0893-4
 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]

 Associated Data

 This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. 

 Supplementary Materials

 Supplement 1 

 media-1.xlsx (2.6MB, xlsx) 

 Supplement 2 

 media-2.xlsx (9.8KB, xlsx) 

 Supplement 3 

 NIHPP2023.04.30.538578v4-supplement-3.pdf (8MB, pdf) 

 Data Availability Statement

 All data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper and its Supplementary Information . Code for “mhscan” is available on request.

 Articles from bioRxiv are provided here courtesy of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Preprints 

 ACTIONS

 View on publisher site 

 PDF (12.0 MB) 

 Cite 

 Collections 

 Permalink 

 PERMALINK

 Copy 

 RESOURCES

 Similar articles

 Cited by other articles

 Links to NCBI Databases

 Cite

 Copy 

 Download .nbib 
 .nbib 

 Format: 

 AMA

 APA

 MLA

 NLM

 Add to Collections

 Create a new collection 

 Add to an existing collection 

 Name your collection
 * 

 Choose a collection

 Unable to load your collection due to an error

 Please try again 

 Add

 Cancel

 Follow NCBI

 NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 

 NCBI on Facebook 

 NCBI on LinkedIn 

 NCBI on GitHub 

 NCBI RSS feed 

 Connect with NLM

 NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 

 NLM on Facebook 

 NLM on YouTube 

 National Library of Medicine
 
 8600 Rockville Pike
 Bethesda, MD 20894 

 Web Policies

 FOIA

 HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

 Help

 Accessibility

 Careers

 NLM

 NIH

 HHS

 USA.gov

 Back to Top