pmcPalliat Care Soc PractPalliat Care Soc Pract3758pcsp101754997PCRPalliative Care and Social Practice2632-3524SAGE PublicationsPMC9382062PMC9382062.19382062938206210.1177/2632352422111994110.1177_263235242211199411Abstracts7th Public Health Palliative Care International Conference
138202220221639841726323524221119941130820221808202221022025© The Author(s), 20222022SAGE Publications Ltd unless otherwise noted.
Manuscript content on this site is licensed under Creative Commons
Licenseshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further permission
provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages
(https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NCcover-dateJanuary-December 2022typesetterts1

## Democratizing caring, dying and grieving: participation, action, understanding and
evaluation

## 20-23 SEPTEMBER 2022 - BRUGES, BELGIUM www.PHPCI2022.com

## Welcome from the PHPCI President
Dear colleagues
As President of Public Health Palliative Care International, it is a pleasure to
welcome you to the 7th Public Health Palliative Care International Conference
in Bruges, Belgium.
Three years ago in the Blue Mountains, Australia, we could never have imagined what was
ahead of us. Many of you know that the magnificent natural environment around that venue
was decimated by fire just a few months later when bushfires raged through many parts of
Australia. And then, of course, the COVID-19 pandemic began and we have all experienced
its impact in different ways. We pay tribute to the dedicated and resilient communities
and healthcare service personnel who have supported others during this time, and honour
all those whose lives have been lost, and those who grieve them.
Like many other Associations, PHPCI has not been immune from the pandemic’s impact. Our
practice has been to provide a conference every two years, but it was not possible to do
this in 2021. In consultation with the PHPCI Council, the Conference Organising
Committee committed to deliver the conference after a year’s postponement. I express my
gratitude to Prof. Luc Deliens and Prof. Joachim Cohen and their team for this assurance
to continue with their preparations to meet face-to-face once more.
The scientific and cultural programs have been carefully prepared by the committees and
this gathering promises to showcase the many elements of public health palliative care
from all over the world. Future-focussed thinking and innovation will stimulate our
vision for the future. The cultural engagement with the City of Bruges provides an
opportunity to see how the civic, social and healthcare worlds can partner to support
whole communities.
It is also an opportunity to see how Public Health Palliative Care International plays
a role in the promotion of public health approaches to the issues of dying, death,
grieving and caregiving. Please consider joining us as members (go to www.phpci.org) and
contribute to this work.
On behalf of the Council of PHPCI, I wish us all a stimulating and engaging
7th International Conference.

Dr John Rosenberg
President, Public Health Palliative Care International

## Welcome from the joint chairs of the Scientific Committee
It is our great pleasure to welcome you all to the 7th World Congress of Public Health
Palliative Care International, PHPCI 2022, in Bruges. This congress brings together the
state of the art in the science and practice of public health and palliative care. We
welcome you also to the beautiful city of Bruges in Belgium and to Compassionate
Bruges.
There is increasing recognition that the challenges around serious illness, caregiving,
dying and bereavement go beyond the scope of professional health care services.
Promoting health and wellbeing in these domains entails societal and civic responses
complementary to health service responses. For instance, governments, health and
wellbeing organizations, workplaces, schools, churches, neighbourhoods and health care
services can collaborate to develop supportive social environments, policies, health
services, skills and community action.
The worldwide Covid pandemic reminds us all of the importance of public health. This
common pandemic experience should boost palliative care communities, associations or
societies to make public health palliative care one of their main policy priorities.
Palliative care clinicians and health care providers cannot solve all the problems of
death, dying and bereavement by themselves, so they should collaborate more with
community workers, social change workers, health promotors, sociologists, city planners,
adult educators, public health professionals, etc. in order to design and develop, in
co-production with local communities, societal solutions to the major challenges around
serious illness, caregiving, dying and bereavement.
Thanks are due to our Scientific Committee for putting together an excellent program
with content for all. Our plenaries, themed sessions, oral presentation sessions and
poster sessions include diverse speakers from a wide range of countries and continents,
presenting important topics related to public health and palliative care.
And thanks are due to you all for coming to the PHPCI 2022 conference in Bruges and for
your dedication to the field of public health and palliative care.
We look forward to interacting with all of you at the conference in Bruges!
Luc Deliens                               Joachim Cohen

Joint chairs of the Scientific Committee
7th World Congress of PHPCI

Scientific Committee 2022

Samar Aoun, La Trobe University and Perron Institute, Australia
Joachim Cohen, End-of-Life Care Research Group VUB & UGent, Co-Chair
Liesbeth De Donder, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium
Luc Deliens, End-of-Life Care Research Group VUB & UGent, Chair
Steffen Eychmüller, Universitäres Zentrum für Palliative Care, Switzerland
Rebecca Hilton, Stockholm University of the Arts, Sweden
Bregje Onwuteaka-Philipsen, VUmc, Nederland
Denise Marshall, McMaster University, Canada
John Rosenberg, President of Public Health Palliative Care International
Libby Sallnow, member of council Public Health Palliative Care International
Carol Tishelman, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden
Raymond Voltz, Uniklinik Köln, Germany
Klaus Wegleitner, University of Graz, Austria

Cultural Committee 2022

Alana Boone, Policy officer, Local social policy unit at city of Bruges, Belgium (&
member of Compassionate Bruges team)
Louise D’Eer, PhD researcher, End-of-Life Care Research Group VUB & UGent,
Belgium
Marijke Dheedene, Coordinator communication & valorisation, End-of-Life Care
Research Group VUB & UGent, Belgium
Rebecca Hilton, Stockholm University of the Arts, Sweden
Ruth Raes, project coach Compassionate Bruges, End-of-Life Care Research Group VUB
& UGent, Belgium
Julie Rodeyns, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium
Else Gien Statema, Communication Trainer, End-of-Life Care Research Group VUB &
UGent, Belgium, Chair

Organizing Committee 2022

Alana Boone, Policy officer, Local social policy unit at city of Bruges, Belgium (&
member of Compassionate Bruges team)
Joachim Cohen, End-of-Life Care Research Group VUB & UGent
Luc Deliens, End-of-Life Care Research Group VUB & UGent
Nadine De Mot, management assistant, End-of-Life Care Research Group VUB &
UGent
Marijke Dheedene, coordinator communication & valorisation, End-of-Life Care
Research Group VUB & UGent
Geertje van Duijnhoven, management assistant, End-of-Life Care Research Group VUB &
UGent, Chair

## Reviewers
Luc Deliens, Belgium
Deborah De Moortel, Belgium
Aline De Vleminck, Belgium
Leigh Donovan, Australia
Sarah Dury, Belgium
Malin Eneslätt, Sweden
Steffen Eychmüller, Switzerland
Valentina Gonzalez, Switzerland
Eman Hassan, Canada
Katharina Heimerl, Austria
Rebecca Hilton, Australia
Vicky Jones, New Zealand
Max Kleijberg, Sweden
Daniel Lowrie, Australia
Denise Marshall, Canada
Elisabeth Medicus, Austria
Saif Mohammed, India
Kerrie Noonan, Australia
Bregje Onwuteaka-Philipsen, The Netherlands
Lara Pivodic, Belgium
Elisabeth Reitinger, Austria
Julie Rodeyns, Belgium
John Rosenberg, Australia
Libby Sallnow, United Kingdom
Joseph Sawyer, United Kingdom
Patrick Schuchter, Austria
Tinne Smets, Belgium
Carol Tishelman, Sweden
Annicka van der Plas, The Netherlands
Steven Vanderstichelen, Belgium
Filip Van Droogenbroeck, Belgium
Raymond Voltz, Germany
Klaus Wegleitner, Austria
Jacqueline Williams, Australia
Gabriel Zajur, Belgium

## Programme abstracts

Abstract ID: 20

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Health Promoting Palliative Care

## The First Oxford Textbook of Public Health Palliative Care

Julian Abel*1, Allan Kellehear2, Libby
Sallnow3

1Director Compassionate Communities UK, 2Clinical Professor,
University of Vermont, 3St Christopher’s Hospice and University College
London
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
julianabel@compassionate-communitiesuk.co.uk
The First Oxford Textbook of Public Health Palliative Care is a significant step forward in
the development of the whole field of palliative care. In this text, we cover the case for
public health palliative care, basic concepts and theory, basic practice methods, population
based approaches, the evidence base and education and training. It is an extensive text
written by 44 contributing authors who are internationally recognised specialists in their
field.
We specifically examine the role of the ‘new’ public health, sometimes also known as health
promotion. Health promotion is a major departure from the emphases on surveillance, disease,
and health services by placing its gaze and efforts on practice solutions, health and
wellbeing, and community and civic involvement in healthcare – in this case, palliative
care. This Oxford Textbook of Public health Palliative Care is an introduction to this
dimension of practice.
In addition, how to involve the community has at times been eclipsed by the need to
establish the credibility of clinical practice. ‘Community’ often became places from which
to recruit volunteers, raise funds and awareness of the new service, and locations to
deliver new forms of day care or home care. The direct service emphasis had gradually
distorted our understanding of ‘community’ by often making this appear singular rather than
plural, by making it appear as target and receiver rather than partner and participant, by
locating it on the periphery of care instead of understanding its necessary and central
position.

Competing Interests

The editors of the book received a fee for their work and have a royalty interest.

Abstract ID: 21

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Policy and Vision

## Through the looking glass: what’s on the other side of palliative care
guidelines?

Keyla Cooper*1

1School of Social Work & Social Policy, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow,
UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
keyla.montenegro-cooper@strath.ac.uk
Background: The publication of WHO guidelines has had international influence
in the development of pain relief and palliative care strategies. Despite some progresses
towards development in some countries, palliative care services continue to be largely
unequal, mainly limited to high-income countries. To facilitate the development of
palliative care, especially in low and middle-income countries, WHO has published guidelines
to advise on implementation. However, questions remain on the extent to which these efforts
help address implementation challenges. This research aims to bring critical attention to
the deep-seated assumptions within WHO guidelines.
Method: This research was conducted by applying What’s the Problem Represented
to Be? framework to WHO guidelines. In this research, the WPR was conducted was follows:
Discourse analysis to identify problem representation – what is proposed as ‘change’ signals
how the problem is represented. An archaeology analysis was conducted to identify the
concepts, knowledge and assumptions that constitutes the identified representation;
genealogy traced the practices and discourses that allowed this representation of the
problem to emerge; identification of silences; analysis of effects of representations such
as ways of thinking, subject positioning and consequences for practice.
Findings: The representations identified within guidelines from 1990 to 2018
conceptualized as ‘inadequacy’ and ‘inequality’ suggests a constricted understanding of
‘palliative care’. The first representation is deeply rooted in clinical efficiency of pain
relief and symptom management, while the second focuses on increasing services to address
structural inequalities rather than improving care. Both representations contribute to
leaving the cultural and social dimensions of ‘palliative care’ unchallenged. Questions on
equity and colonialism are downplayed to emphasize the clinical efficiency and
cost-effectiveness of palliative care measures.
Conclusion: Rather than contributing to a ‘global’ perspective of palliative
care, the guidelines contribute to constrict palliative care to the realm of therapeutics
and professional expertise. This indicates that current efforts from WHO remain contributing
to leaving deep-seated premises unchallenged.

Abstract ID: 23

Abstract Type: Workshop

## The Mallon Micro-model: creating and maintaining compassionate communities when someone
is dying at home

Annetta Mallon*1,2,3

1Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia, 2Navitas, Sydney,
Australia, 3Wicking Dementia Centre, University of Tasmania, Australia
*Correspondence should be addressed to: info@gdep.com.au
A compassionate community for someone who wishes to die at home requires at least 16 people
in a network – but there are no standardised approaches to forming and maintaining these
small-scale, micro networks. The macro/meso Abel model of compassionate communities has been
fundamental in informing public policy and driving social change in terms of compassionate
community and city formation; however, the micro level (for a domestic, small-scale
compassionate community) is absent. Based on original research undertaken with end of life
doulas in four countries, a micro model for forming, facilitating and maintaining
compassionate communities when someone wishes to die at home has been developed. Not only
does this model fill the gap in Abel’s original template, but as it is simple in design and
standardised it is easy to reproduce, and permits a good deal of flexibility for those in a
caring network around someone at end of life. In this workshop, all three roles in the
Mallon compassionate community micro model will be explained and explored from a variety of
personality, task, and relationship perspectives. Included in the workshop are opportunities
to explore what shifting roles can look and feel like for individuals within the micro
compassionate community network, how to avoid carer burnout with the model, and how friends
and family of those at end of life can contribute in ways that are meaningful and
appropriate to their own needs. End of life doulas as well as health workers will benefit
from this model, as it functions for expected, terminal illness deaths – including voluntary
assisted dying (VAD) which take place in the home. By the end of the workshop participants
will understand all three roles, be proficient in the way the model functions as a whole,
and be skilled and ready to incorporate the model into their end of life care work and
practices.

Abstract ID: 24

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community engagement and development

## Dying at home - a functional micro compassionate community model to avoid burnout and
build networks

Annetta Mallon*1,2,3

1Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia, 2Navitas, Sydney,
Australia, 3Wicking Dementia Centre, University of Tasmania, Australia
*Correspondence should be addressed to: info@gdep.com.au
Background: after working as an end of life consultant and researching end of
life doula (EOLD) practices in Australia, Canada, the UK and the USA it became apparent that
nowhere in the world is there a standardised, readily replicable micro-model approach to
compassionate community formation and facilitation for those who wish to die at home.
Non-medical end of life workers, including EOLDs interviewed by the author, rely on ad hoc
approaches and personal methods which take time to personalise for every individual
situation. A qualitative research project was designed to find out what EOLDs think about
compassionate community formation (facilitators and obstacles), and how they think their
clients see them as lynchpins for death literacy and compassionate community advocates.
Methods: audio recorded semi-structured interviews took place via Zoom (with
the single exception of a face-to-face interview in Australia), the transcribed recordings
were returned to participants for editing and final approval and thematic analysis was
undertaken of the approved transcripts.
Results: while supporting people in a non-medical role at end of life in a
variety of locations, including homes, EOLDs rely on ad hoc and highly personalised
approaches to compassionate community formation for each home death (and to a lesser extent
hospice/aged care facility (ACF) deaths. This ad hoc approach takes time and energy to
accomplish and may act as a distraction from the work of focusing on the needs of the person
at end of life, and a standardised, readily replicable model will fill an information and
practice gap.
Conclusion: a three-level micro-model for compassionate community formation
and facilitation was developed based on the findings from the research project. Personality
type, relationship to the person at end of life, work/personal schedules and energy levels
are all accommodated in the Mallon model, offering a standardised approach to functional,
practical compassionate communities when someone is dying at home.

Abstract ID: 25

Abstract Type: Poster – COVID

## Are we now more empathetic, compassionate, and understanding towards
difference?

Vilma Oliveros1*

1BSc Counselling Psychology – Logotherapist, Community Engagement Coordinator,
HOPE HOUSE COMMUNITY HOSPICE, www.hopehousehospice.com
*Correspondence should be addressed to: v.oliveros@hopehousehospice.com
At the end of September 2021, almost 5 Million people had died over the world due to
Covid-19. These numbers do not consider the increase in suicides observed especially in
youth due to pre-existing mental illness, or related deaths due to poor access to health,
discrimination, social, and economic barriers.
It is vital to ask ourselves: Am I more aware of my privilege? Am I more understanding of
the disadvantages that other members of my community and the world (immigrants, homeless,
mentally ill, isolated) may face everyday? How will I apply my new knowledge to my
Palliative/Bereavement care Practice?
We have to consider that the social determinants of health (Income and social status,
Social support networks, Education and literacy, Employment/working conditions, Social
environments, Physical environments, Personal health practices and coping skills, Healthy
child development, Biology and genetic endowment, Health services, Gender, Culture) make a
huge difference on how we have been impacted by this pandemic.
In this workshop we will create a safe space to reflect on our own experiences. We will
learn from each other. We will develop an increased awareness on how to better support our
communities every day.

Abstract ID: 27

Abstract Type: Poster – Loss and Grief

## The Wind Telephone

Mo Blishen*1, Dawn Pegram2

1District Nurse, Clinical Nurse EB for DEBRA NZ, 2District Nurses,
MIQ Nurse
*Correspondence should be addressed to: mo.blishen@debra.org.nz
Background: A disconnected rotary phone for ‘calling’ lost loved ones offered
a unique way of dealing with grief in disaster-stricken Japan. I decided to set one up in my
local street in New Zealand.
Method: I got an old rotary phone and had a containment constructed to house
it on the beach in my street. I used qualitative methods to get information about how people
felt about the phone.
Results: Overwhelmingly positive feedback about the phone.
Conclusions: Expressions of grief and methods of relief come in strange
packages.

https://procaffenation.com/did-you-know-a-telephone-booth-connects-people-to-the-dead-ones/

https://www.stuff.co.nz/dominion-post/news/101835768/phone-booth-on-wellingtons-south-coast-allows-people-to-call-the-afterlife

Abstract ID: 28

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Volunteers and compassionate neighbors

## Hospice Volunteers in Europe and North America: Who Are They and What Do They
Experience?

Caroline Varay*1, Olivier Lareyre2, Carolina
Baeza-Velasco1,3,4

1Université de Paris, Laboratoire de Psychopathologie et Processus de Santé,
Boulogne Billancourt, France, 2Univ. Paul Valéry Montpellier 3-EPSYLON EA 4556,
Montpellier, France., 3Département d’Urgences et Post-Urgences Psychiatriques,
CHU de Montpellier., Montpellier, France., 4IGF, Univ. Montpellier, CNRS, INSERM,
Montpellier, France
*Correspondence should be adressed to: c.varay@gmail.com
Background: The need for support at the end of life continues to grow with the
development of chronic diseases, which are the leading cause of mortality in the world.
Volunteers are an integral part of the palliative care system, but these essential players
are largely unknown.
Aims: The aim of the present work was to review literature concerning
organizational aspects, psychosocial aspects, and issues for the future of hospice
volunteering in Europe and North America.
Methods: This review is based upon a search conducted in scientific online
databases supplemented by manual searches.
Results: The organizational context of hospice volunteering in the countries
studied is heterogeneous. For example, the regulations, the places of intervention, the role
and the training of volunteers vary widely. However, the psychosocial profile of volunteers
and the experience of their involvement seem similar. Volunteers are most often women, at
least 55 years old, empathetic, with traits of agreeableness, extraversion, openness and
emotional stability. They perceive their involvement as fulfilling, despite difficulties
related to the delimitation of their role, communication and integration into the care team.
Meeting these organizational and emotional needs appears to be a current challenge as it
would contribute to sustain the commitment and increase the number of these essential
actors.
Conclusion: This study provides scientific elements which may be useful for
the selection, training and support of hospice volunteers. More broadly, this research
attempts to contribute to the dissemination of palliative culture by broadening knowledge
about the people involved.

Abstract ID: 29

Abstract Type: Free Communication: Community engagement and development

## Using a participatory community development approach within a paediatric children’s
hospice in Queensland, Australia

Peter Westoby1*, Elham Day2, Paul Toon3, Kelly
Oldham4, Fiona Hawthorne5

1Community development practitioner, Hummingbird House; Adjunct associate
professor, social science/community development, Queensland University of Technology,
2Manager Family and Community Support Team, Hummingbird House,
3Community Development Worker, Hummingbird House, 4Team Leader,
Hummingbird House @ Home., 5General Manager, Hummingbird House
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
Peter.Westoby@hummingbirdhouse.wmq.org.au
This presentation is both a story of participatory community development (CD) practice
within the paediatric palliative care and bereavement space - and a portrayal of
phenomenological reflective practice. The story and portrayal are about a tradition of work
– understood as participatory community development (CD) – amplified, made more visible and
alive by a phenomenological reflective practice.
The presentation will examine the rationale for using a participatory community development
approach to sit alongside the traditional service-delivery work of a children’s hospice -
Hummingbird House, a 5-year-old hospice, mandated to work within the whole of Queensland,
Australia.
The paper will consider how reflective and therefore adaptive practice ensures that the
participatory community development approach remains responsive to the voices of families
engaged by Hummingbird House (families whose children have life-limiting illnesses) and
responsive to partnerships established (with neighbourhood centres; local government
authorities and so forth). The community development program framework will be explained and
some case studies of grounded projects will be shared. Initial evaluation data, from
Queensland University of Technology (QUT), will also be presented.

Abstract ID: 31

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community engagement and development

## Putting your house in order: Finding the carrot for community engagement on dying,
death & bereavement

Rebecca Lloyd*1

1Irish Hospice Foundation
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
rebecca.lloyd@hospicefoundation.ie
Background: A growing body of literature, policy and practice has emerged
about end-of-life care in recent years. Nonetheless, there are few concrete, repeatable
examples offered in this field. In this research, we present a method of involving
communities in end-of-life planning. The Putting Your House in Order (PYHIO) workshops are
intended to inspire, educate, and empower communities. The program aims to raise awareness
in the Irish public about end-of-life wishes and to educate people who care about them about
how to communicate those wishes. As part of our partnership with Age Friendly Ireland, we
designed the event to encourage a positive dialogue, to give people the opportunity to ask
questions, to seek advice, and to clarify any concerns they may have about end-of-life
planning.
Method: A community-based assets approach means local people led PYHIO and
hosted within their communities. Community members also arrange refreshments and
invitations. The sessions followed a similar format each day, with an end-of-life expert, a
solicitor, and an official from the health service presenting information, along with time
for questions and comments. Six talks were held throughout County Clare and Seven throughout
County Limerick to over 1000 members of Age Friendly Ireland.
Monitoring and evaluation of each event identified what worked well and what needed to be
improved. There was a range of findings from the practical - not being able to hear at the
back of the room, more time for questions, to the profound, children managing parents’
affairs after dementia rendered them incapable.
Conclusion: Feedback from participants confirmed the right approach in
planning and implementing the sessions. Participants reported they gained a better
understanding of how to plan ahead, with many expressing surprise at how straightforward it
was. Participants commented on the delivery of the talks being compassionate and empathetic,
which helped them to deal with their fears and to engage. Learning about others’ experiences
also helped them.
IHF and AFI are collaborating on the PYHIO project with the goal of establishing talks in
every county of Ireland by 2022. This initiative has won an award for age-friendly
innovation in 2020.

Abstract ID: 32

Abstract Type: Workshop

## End of Life Aid Skills for Everyone (EASE)

Rebecca Patterson*1, Caroline Gibb1, Mark
Hazelwood1

1Scottish Partnership for Palliative Care
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
rebecca@palliativecarescotland.org.uk
Objective: This workshop will give delegates the opportunity to experience an
excerpt from the End of Life Aid Skills for Everyone (EASE) course, and to learn about its
aims, approach, development and delivery model.
Overview: Family, friends and communities have an important role to play in
providing informal support when someone is faced with deteriorating health, caring
responsibilities, death or bereavement. However, unless individuals and communities have a
certain level of end of life literacy, they will lack the confidence and skills to offer
this support.
Public education is one example of a public health approach to palliative care that can be
used to develop individual skills and knowledge about various aspects of death, dying and
bereavement. There are many ways to approach public education. In Scotland the Scottish
Partnership for Palliative Care has developed End of Life Aid Skills for Everyone
(EASE).
EASE is a course designed to enable people to be more comfortable and confident supporting
family and community members with issues they face during dying, death and bereavement.
It is delivered free of charge by volunteer EASE Facilitators, and takes approximately 8-12
hours to complete over a period of four weeks, either face-to-face or online.
It is designed for members of the public, and welcomes adults of all ages, experiences and
walks of life.
Learning outcomes: This workshop will explain why the SPPC chose this
particular approach to public education, and give an overview of the development process,
delivery model, feedback and learning so far. To allow delegates the opportunity to reflect
on the value of this approach, we’ll run an hour’s excerpt from the course, with plenty of
opportunities for delegate interaction.

Abstract ID: 33

Abstract type: Free Communication - Family caregiving

## A systematic review of concordance and discordance between people with advanced illness
and their caregivers in palliative care

Sophie Mulcahy Symmons1, Karen Ryan2,3,4, David
Mockler5, Samar Aoun6, Andrew Davies1,4,7, Lucy
Selman8, John Lombard 9, Suzanne Guerin10, Nicola
Cornally11, Michael Connolly7,12, Regina McQuillan2,13,
Norma O’Leary7,14, Mary Rabbitte15 and Geraldine
Foley*1

1School of Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland, 2St. Francis
Hospice, Dublin, Ireland, 3Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin,
Ireland, 4School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Ireland,
5John Stearne Medical Library, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland,
6Palliative Care Unit, School of Psychology and Public Health, La Trobe
University, Australia, 7Our Lady’s Hospice and Care Services, Dublin, Ireland,
8School of Population Health Sciences, University of Bristol, United Kingdom,
9School of Law, University of Limerick, Ireland, 10School of
Psychology, University College Dublin, Ireland, 11School of Nursing and
Midwifery, University College Cork, Ireland, 12School of Nursing, Midwifery and
Health Systems, University College Dublin, 13Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland,
14St. James’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 15All-Ireland Institute of
Hospice and Palliative Care, Ireland
*Correspondence should be addressed to: foleyg3@tcd.ie
Background: Family caregivers participate in decision-making in palliative
care. Patients and family caregivers can have both similar and different preferences for
care. However, what underpins concordance and/or discordance between patients and family
caregivers in decision-making in palliative care is not well understood.
Objectives: To identify key factors which underpin concordance and/or
discordance between patients and family caregivers in decision-making in palliative
care.
Methods: A systematic review of original studies published in full between
January 2000 and June 2021, was conducted. The search and extraction were carried out in
line with Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA).
Databases used included Embase, CINAHL, Medline, AMED, PsycINFO, PsycARTICLES, Web of
Science, and Social Sciences Full Text. A narrative synthesis of the selected studies was
undertaken.
Results: Thirty-nine studies met inclusion criteria after full text review.
Studies focused on patient and family caregiver preferences for patient care as opposed to
family caregiver formal support and care. Patient illness progression and patient and family
caregiver recognition and/or acceptance of patient impending death, were key factors that
fostered consensus between patients and family caregivers. Discordance between patients and
family caregivers was underpinned by relational conflict and by a lack of open communication
between the patient and family caregiver about each other’s preferences for care.
Conclusion: Patients and family caregivers in palliative care can approximate
to each other’s preferences for care. Research on patient and family caregiver concordance
and discordance pertaining to family caregiver formal supports warrants investigation.
Interventions focused on aiding patients and family caregivers to communicate openly with
one another about each other’s preferences for care could prove beneficial for both patients
and family caregivers.

Abstract ID: 35

Abstract Type: Workshop

## The Truacanta Project: supporting compassionate communities

Rebecca Patterson1, Caroline Gibb*1, Mark
Hazelwood1

1Scottish Partnership for Palliative Care
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
caroline@palliativecarescotland.org.uk
Objective: This workshop will give delegates the chance to learn about the
background, aims and development of The Truacanta Project; to hear from representatives of
the Truacanta communities about their experiences of building compassionate communities in
Scotland; and to participate in an interactive creative visioning exercise.
Overview: The Truacanta Project is a compassionate communities, community
development initiative run by the Scottish Partnership for Palliative Care and funded by
Macmillan Cancer Support. The project was set up in 2019 to support local communities across
Scotland who are interested in taking community action to improve people’s experiences of
death, dying, loss and care.
The focus of a local project and the actions taken are determined by the community
themselves. However, being part of the Truacanta Project gives local community projects
access to:
community development support and advice
networking and learning opportunities
support with evaluation
The project began in May 2019 by asking for expressions of interest. A shortlist of eleven
were then supported for six months to create a vision for change, which became a formal
application to be part of the project.
The final five projects were selected in January 2020, with the aim of launching the local
projects in May 2020. Each of the five projects has therefore faced the challenge of
starting to build a compassionate community during a pandemic, and each project has their
own story to tell about their successes, opportunities, challenges and hopes.
Learning outcomes: At this workshop delegates will learn about the Truacanta
model for building compassionate communities, why it was chosen and what evaluation
indicates thus far. Delegates will also hear first-hand how local experiences of a national
project have been, and will have the chance to understand some of the approaches used in
development of the Truacanta Project through participating in a creative visioning exercise
relevant to their own context.

Abstract ID: 36

Abstract Type: Poster – ACP & End of Life communication

## Medical end-of-life decision-making in a small resource-poor Caribbean country: a
mortality follow-back study of home deaths

Nicholas Jennings*1,2, Kenneth Chambaere1, Cheryl C.
Macpherson3, Karen L. Cox4, Luc Deliens1,5, Joachim
Cohen1

1End-of-life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) & Ghent
University, Brussels, Belgium, 2Bioethics Department, St. George’s University,
St. George’s, Grenada, 3Bioethics Division, St. George’s University School of
Medicine and Windward Islands, Research and Education Foundation, St. George’s, Grenada,
4Palliative Care Unit, Caura Hospital, North Central Regional Health Authority,
Trinidad & Tobago, 5Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: nicholas.jennings@vub.be
Background: In resource-poor countries, including in Latin American and the
Caribbean, empirical information about the characteristics and incidence of medical
end-of-life decisions (MELDs)—withholding or withdrawing potentially life-prolonging medical
treatments—is largely absent.
Methods: The aim was to describe the incidence and decision-making
characteristics of MELDs taken prior to the death of people who died at home in Trinidad and
Tobago (T&T). A mortality follow-back study was used where a representative sample of
deaths occurring at home in 2018 was drawn from death certificates at the national death
registry. The general practitioners who certified the deaths were sent a questionnaire.
Results: The sample consisted of 309 adult deaths and the response rate was
31% (N=96). Physicians were: mostly male (79.2%), practiced medicine for more than
twenty-years (63.5%), had no formal palliative care training (69.8%). Non-sudden deaths
represented 76% (N=73), of these, medications to alleviate pain and symptoms in the last 7
days of life were administered in 65.8%, including opioids 21%. Potentially life prolonging
treatments were withheld in 9.6% but none withdrawn. No physician/patient discussions about
various end-of-life treatment options occurred in 61.6%. Compared to physicians with no
formal training in palliative care, those with training more often: prescribed or
administered opioids in the last 7 days of life (35.7% vs. 11.1%, P=0.01), had discussions
with patients about end-of-life treatment options (60.7% vs. 24.4%, P=0.002), and discussed
medication use to alleviate pain and other symptoms with patients (50% vs. 17.8%,
P=0.004).
Conclusions: Differences in the care and treatment general practitioners
provided to their patients could be associated with them having been formally trained in
palliative care. The necessary support to further develop palliative care in T&T is
needed.

Abstract ID: 37

Abstract Type: Poster - Literacy & Education

## Education for palliative representatives increases the quality of palliative
care

Linda Frode*1, Zara Hook1, Johan Sundelof1

1Palliative Care unit, Uppsala University Hospital
*Correspondence should be addressed to: linda.frode@akademiska.se
Background: The coverage rate in the Swedish palliative care register shows
that Uppsala County is third from the end nationally according annual report (2019). The
palliative care team (PKT) in Uppsala has a county-wide assignment to educate care staff
regardless of professional title and employer in palliative care. All care units must have
at least one palliative care representative who passes the knowledge forward about
palliative care. In order to achieve good quality palliative care in Uppsala County in
accordance with the National Board of Health and Welfare’s quality indicators, PKT
identified a need for competence development.
Aim: How are the working methods and level of knowledge of care staff affected
by an education directed to the palliative care representatives in general palliative
care?
Method: PKT designed and carried out a pilot project in the spring of 2021 in
Östhammar municipality. Due to the pandemic, it was carried out digitally. The participants
chiefs were informed before the education to facilitate implementation. In preparation the
participants; nursing staff, paramedics and nurses were asked to complete the online
education “Palliation ABC” (web-based learning platform). The education was divided into two
occasions; a full day + a half day. On the first day, all representatives participated, on
the second day, only nurses participated. They received a copy of educational material
created by PKT; “POFF”; Palliative care in pocket format and the booklet “Palliative care at
the end of life”. The material contains various symptom reliefing nursing measures for
common symptoms in the end of life, a comprehensive description of the division of
responsibilities in palliative care and a structured symptom assessment model. The education
was based on the material and the representatives passed forward the knowledge to their
colleagues, who also each received the material. Monthly reconciliations with the
representatives were carried out after the education, as well as sending out monthly
letters.
Results: Follow-up review of the municipality’s data in the Swedish Palliative
Care Register shows overall improved results after completing the project.
Conclusion: An educational effort in the form of representative education
increases the knowledge in general palliative care among care staff.

Abstract ID: 43

Abstract Type: Poster – Health Promotion

## Exploring a Public Health Palliative Care Approach to Emergency Medical
Services

Madeleine Juhrmann*1,2, Caleb Hanson Gage3, Andrea
Grindrod4

1Northern Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney,
Australia, 2HammondCare Centre for Learning and Research in Palliative Care,
Greenwich Hospital, Australia, 3Division of Emergency Medicine, University of
Cape Town, South Africa, 4School of Psychology and Public Health, La Trobe
University, Australia
*Correspondence should be addressed to: mjuh9730@uni.sydney.edu.au
Background: Emergency Medical Services (EMS) are a highly skilled and unique
workforce, attending to patients in the community 24 hours a day, seven days a week across
low, middle and high-income countries. As global populations continue to age and community
preferences to die at home are increasing, new models of community-based EMS are evolving to
include palliative and end-of-life care. This broadening of scope challenges the traditional
role of EMS – to deliver emergency care and transportation to hospital – and highlights an
unharnessed public health asset of adjunct palliative care delivery available to health
systems worldwide. However, the way in which EMS can best fit into a public health
palliative care approach remains unknown.
Methods: Through reflective discussion we draw upon the skills and
perspectives of an international team of EMS, public health and palliative care researchers
to discuss the potential role of EMS in a public health palliative care approach. Employing
a South African and Australian lens, the key objectives of the study include (1) delineating
current public health palliative care frameworks involving EMS provision of palliative care,
(2) discussing the utility of EMS use in a public health palliative care approach, (3)
identifying and discussing barriers preventing public health approaches to EMS palliative
care provision, and (4) outlining a way forward for future research, policy, education and
practice.
Results and conclusion: Public health palliative care policies addressing EMS
are absent in both South Africa and Australia. Integrating EMS into a public health
palliative care approach could achieve greater palliative care equity, access and
integration across multidisciplinary teams. However, a range of structural, cultural and
practice barriers are hindering EMS from becoming involved. A comprehensive framework
recognising the role EMS can play in public health approaches to palliative care could help
develop stronger models of integrated care delivery and reduce health inequalities amongst
palliative patients.

Abstract ID: 44

Abstract Type: Poster – Cancer

## Experience from the use of oxycodone / naloxone versus morphine in the treatment of
severe cancer pain in palliative care in the Republic of North Macedonia

Lidija Veterovska Miljkovic*1, Salija Ljatif Petrusovska1,
Lazo Jordanovski1, Marika Ivanovska1, Elena Brezovska1,
Natasa Zdraveska1, Glorija Gaspar1

1Specialised Hospital for geriatric and palliative medicine 13 November Skopje,
Republic North Macedonia
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
lidijaveterovskamiljkovic@yahoo.com
Background: oxycodone / naloxone is a well-known strong opiate analgesic,
which can be administered as the first strong opiate analgesic when weak opiate analgesics
are no longer effective, or when other strong opiate analgesics are ineffective. In case of
insufficient analgesia and / or intense side effects such as sedation, hallucinations and
nausea / vomiting, switching from another opioid to oxycodone / naloxone may be helpful. It
became available in our country in 2018 as the first strong oral opiate analgesic with
prolonged action. Its benefits have been felt by many patients with severe cancer pain, who
had previously been on an injectable form of morphine, which was the only one available in
our country. To compare the quality of life of patients between oxycodone / naloxone and
morphine in routine clinical practice.
Methods: A total of 151 patients requiring 24-hour opioid pain treatment were
screened for morphine or oxycodone / naloxone (1: 1) therapy. The changes were monitored
until the 10-th week, in assessing the quality of life, used EQ-5D-5L, which consists of
EQ-5D descriptive analysis, and EQ-VAS visual scale.
Results: The EQ-5D-5L score showed a significant improvement in the quality of
life of all patients over 10 weeks, but with a significantly larger difference (73% vs. 27%)
than oxycodone / naloxone. There was a significant difference with respect to EQ-5D
(approximately 95% of patients) showing significantly better parameters (mobility, care
independence, routine activities, presence of pain, and presence of anxiety /
depression.
Conclusion: Treatment of severe cancer pain with strong opiate analgesics
significantly improves quality of life during 10 weeks of follow-up. In the study group,
treatment with oxycodone / naloxone compared with morphine showed significantly better
results.

Keywords:
 oxycodone/naloxone, strong opiod analgetics, quality of life

Abstract ID: 45

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate communities research

## Compassionate communities approaches to end of life care as a Therapeutic
Landscape

Manjula Patel*1

1University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: manjulapatel@nhs.net
Objective: to share research findings and extend understanding of compassionate communities
Public health approaches within palliative and end of life care has gained momentum, in
particular compassionate communities as one of the components of the concept. However, there
is limited evidence of how compassionate communities are being implemented. This original
empirical research study explores and extends the understanding of compassionate communities
approaches in the UK. A qualitative case-study design includes three different research
sites providing palliative care services, two are hospices and one is a community
organisation. The main data collection methods include semi-structured interviews and focus
groups exploring the perspective of: people living with a life limiting condition at end
life (primary participants), their family members, friends, volunteer befrienders, community
palliative care nurses, care coordinators, chaplain, bereavement counsellor, compassionate
communities coordinators, community worker and organisation leaders.
Although, there are differences in the compassionate communities approaches across all
three sites as defined by research participants, this research study has identified shared
characteristics. The first characteristic is home as the preferred place of care with
physical, social and psychological symbolic meanings; second is of formal and informal care
interface within and across inner and outer circles of care; third is the essential role of
volunteer befriender within the inner circle of care strengthens the interface between
formal and informal care. The participants considered the relational aspect of and between
formal and informal care to be important. These characteristics are elements found within
Therapeutic Landscapes, site-specific places with healing properties and/or the maintenance
of health and wellbeing. This research study frames the concept of a compassionate
communities approach within the theoretical framework of a Therapeutic Landscape, extending
the understanding of a compassionate communities.

Abstract ID: 46

Abstract Type: Poster - Family caregivers

## Empowerment of carer in outpatient home care through small chunks of accessible
intel

Tineke De Keyser*1, Ann Huyghe1

1Wit Gele Kruis Oost-Vlaanderen, Ghent, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: tineke.dekeyser@wgkovl.be
Background: Taboo on the subject matter of palliative care seems to be myriad.
Particularly once the word ‘palliative’ is mentioned most, health professional or not, tend
to freeze. Tiptoeing around the matter. Walking on egg shells. A feeling of awkwardness
tends to surface amongst many carers. That feeling is amplified by cultural or societal
mindsets existing around dying, and/ or by the misguided notion that once curative
treatments stop palliative care means one will die within weeks.
But it might also, or rather on top of those, be derived from the insecurity regarding all
that entails palliative care. For instance: How do I open a conversation with both family
and doctor on advanced care planning (DNR, will statements. . .), on what the patient wishes
in the (mostly unknown) remaining time of their life? How do I spot the phase in which a
patient is entering their end of life care stage?
On a meso level, as an outpatient home care organization (Wit Gele Kruis Oost-Vlaanderen),
it leaves us with a significant challenge: how do we empower our care staff to the extent it
doesn’t generate more admin which could become so time consuming it overtakes their care
time?
Aim: Empowerment of the carer through small chunks of accessible
information.
Methods: After reviewing of the present information flow internally by using
the indicators, such as ‘how up to date’, ‘which relevance’, ‘how accurate’, and pinpointing
the strong points and challenges around processes, documents, systems, internal information
flows we came up with an action plan.
Keeping in mind some of the organization’s quality indicators such as promoting lifelong
learning and informing the stakeholders, it came only natural to design a yearlong
information flow.
To prevent ourselves from tapping only into top down information we established focus
groups with the specialized teams and with a few individuals from our local teams asking
them to grant us feedback on the contents of our intended information and on the manner of
distributing that intel.
Results: (by Autumn 2022)
A one year long information flow:
Information through different channels with background, but mostly practical tips and
tools, eg.:
Triggers to recognize a palliative care situation at home
Understanding the difference with the triggers for end of life care
Comfort care explained
Pain therapy with and without medication therapy
Tips on communication with the patients, its family/ informal carer and the general
practitioner
Information on law & regulations (will statements, authorization, assisted dying/
euthanasia, DNR, advanced care planning, palliative care bonus, palliative care leave,
etc)
Smart tree (or Flow Sparks) questionnaire to get informal feedback
E-newsletter for general practitioners
Implementation of the PICT scale into the electronic patient file/ intranet
Emphasis on the surprise question
Installation of the LEA app (LEA Levenseinde App) from LEIF (www.leif.be) on the
tablets (+ introductory note on the weekly newsletter on how to use it)
The commitment of the care department to establish a ‘theory’ reminder each year around
the day of (Oct 9th)
Onboarding trajectory for new personnel: revised intel

Prospected conclusion:

A positive care experience for all stakeholders (doctor, nurse, informal carer, family,
patient)
Moving forward towards an integrated palliative care mentality

Abstract ID: 47

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community engagement and development

## Forming a Citizen-led Community of Practice to Implement the Compassionate City
Charter

Guy Peryer*1,2, Kevin Vaughn3, Jo Bidmead 3, Judy
Newman4

1Palliative and End of Life Care Theme, NIHR ARC East of England, UK,
2Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of East Anglia, UK,
3Pear Tree Fund, Halesworth, Suffolk, UK, 4St Elizabeth Hospice,
Suffolk, UK
* Correspondence should be addressed to: g.peryer@uea.ac.uk
Background: In 2021 the National Health Service in England adopted six
ambition statements to improve the quality and accessibility of support for people of all
ages living with dying, death, loss and grief. Our work focussed on Ambition Six: ‘Each
Community is Prepared to Help’.
In the East of England, we aimed to establish a Citizen-led Community of Practice (CoP) to
enact elements of the Compassionate City Charter to spread awareness of a public health
approach to palliative and end of life care.
Methods: CoP members used an Asset Based Community Development (ABCD) approach
to build on existing connections and relationships to support participatory action and
learning. The core group of CoP members comprised representatives from local charities,
schools, volunteer groups, special interest groups (e.g. dementia carers), the church,
artists, end-of-life doulas, and the town council.
We used ‘Contribution Analysis’ to evaluate citizens’ responses to this approach. We
performed a context mapping exercise at the start and co-developed our outcome framework
together. Data collection used six constructs: Charter Activities, Network Building,
Experience of Convening a Citizen-led CoP, Changes in Knowledge, Skills and Community
Capacity, Changes in Policy or Practice, and Perceived Value.
Results: Over 12 months CoP activities included: inviting local residents to
generate a ‘treasure map’ of their area via a community asset walk, launching a bereavement
cookbook with stories of living with grief, organising a memorial event hosted by the local
forest school, training volunteers to act as community connectors, joining forces with a
mental health charity to offer support during COVID, liaising with primary schools to
implement a ‘remembrance heart’ project (reflecting on experiences of loss), and training
citizens to become ‘conversation partners’ to support members of the public with advance
care planning. Our activities were transformed into a narrative performed to music by a
street poet, and an audio play was written by a CoP member.
Conclusion: The Citizen-led CoP was well-received by all. Members embraced
this new way of working. There was a good interface with statutory services that enabled a
local resident to die at home following a rapid transfer from hospital. We aim to spread
this practice across our region.

Abstract ID: 48

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Loss and grief

## Black Doulas Matter: Exploring the Intersection of Black Lives, Black Death and White
Supremacy

Jamie Eaddy Chism*1

1Founder of Thoughtful Transitions, Director of Program Development-
International End of Life Doula Association
*Correspondence should be addressed to: DrJay@Thoughtfultransitions.org
Grief, loss, death, and dying are a part of life – for all of us. Influenced by many
factors, including but not limited to culture, religion/spirituality, personal history, and
circumstances surrounding the death, those experiences will vary from person to person. Are
there unique factors that influence how people of African descent grieve? How does the
parasitism of whiteness impact the grieving of Black People? Anticipatory grief, the loss of
a loved one- particularly from malicious acts of violence, disenfranchised grief,
generational trauma, and the lack of social support place people of African descent at risk
for continuous chronic grief reactions.
Furthermore, we often ignore grief and outsource care for the dying to medical
professionals, who sometimes view death as failure. But there is a deep historical and
spiritual tradition of sitting with and being transformed by grief and doing death
differently—of guiding the dying in a way that allows for an authentic reconnection to self,
and in many cases, a more peaceful death. In this workshop, you will name your losses,
explore your mortality, learn foundational principles of death midwifery, identify how
whiteness impacts Black grief, reimagine personal and communal healing and build your
confidence to journey with those at or near the end of life- especially those in
marginalized communities.

Abstract ID: 49

Abstract Type: Poster – Various Topics

## Needs for timely palliative care in older patients with non-manlignant diseases: a
multicentre qualitative study

Yu Fu1, Anne Mason2, Gordon Linklater3, Laura
Llop4; Ascensión Doñate-Martínez*4, Jorge Garcés4,
Henrique Silva5, Adriano Fernandes5, Sofia Reppou6,
Panagiotis Bamidis6, Soledad Giménez7, Iván Castro7,
Michalel I. Bennett8

1Population Health Sciences Institute, Newcastle University, UK, 2NHS
Highland Research, Development and Innovation Division, Centre for Health Sciences,
Inverness, UK, 3Highland Hospice, NHS Highland, Inverness, UK,
4Polibienestar Research Institute – University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain,
5Santa Casa da Misericórdia da Amadora, Lisbon, Portugal, 6Medical
Physics Laboratory, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece, 7Health
Research Institute La Fe, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic de La Fe, Valencia, Spain,
8 Academic Unit of Palliative Care, Leeds Institute of Health Sciences,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: ascension.donate@uv.es
Background: Nonmalignant diseases are the main cause of death for the elderly
population in many Western countries who are also at a high risk of developing
multimorbidity. However, the provision of palliative care for them remains inadequate
resulting in unmet needs in patients and carers.
Aims: To explore palliative care needs of patients and carers, and factors
affecting timely palliative care delivered by health professionals in routine practice.
Methods: A multicentre qualitative study was undertaken across England,
Scotland, Spain, Portugal and Greece in both disease-specific and specialist palliative care
services. Patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis, frailty, comorbidities and multimorbidity, carers and health professionals were
recruited. Data were collected using semi-structured interviews and analysed using framework
analysis. Themes were synthesised and generated using the constant comparison process.
Results: A total of 66 patients, 28 carers and 63 health professionals were
interviewed. Patients and carers expressed insufficient support, psychosocial consequences,
limited knowledge of palliative care, while health professionals described heterogeneity in
palliative care services, lack of reliable screening tools and needs assessment and
incoherent support for patients and carers. Needs for reassurance, rapid service access,
psychological care, financial support with enhanced communication skills and effective
referral pathways were perceived important for timely palliative care support.
Conclusion: Patients and carers have unmet needs for managing their
progressive conditions, psychosocial and financial impact, although models of palliative
care delivery vary largely. Timely but needs-based palliative approaches are needed with
reliable identification and needs assessment tools.

Abstract ID: 50

Abstract Type: Symposium

## Leaving no one behind: providing Palliative care in humanitarian settings

Kathryn Richardson*1,2, Megan Doherty2,3, Mhoira
Leng2,4

1Palliative Care Specialist, Medecins Sans Frontieres, 2Executive
Committee PallCHASE (Palliative Care in Humanitarian Aid Situations and Emergencies),
3Pediatric Palliative care specialist, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 4Head of Palliative Care, Makarere University, Kampala,
Uganda
*Correspondence should be addressed to: kathrynlrichardson@hotmail.com
Target Audience: Palliative care practitioners (doctors, nurses, psychologists, social
workers and other members of the palliative care multidisciplinary team) who are interested
in learning about and/or providing palliative care in humanitarian crises.
Learning Objectives:
To identify the role of palliative care and the specific palliative care needs of
individuals affected by humanitarian crises
To identify challenges and potential solutions to the provision of palliative care in
humanitarian crises
To describe examples of successful integration of palliative care into humanitarian
crises
PallCHASE Symposium Panel:
Joan Marston: South Africa/ Ukraine, Mhoira Leng: UK/Uganda, Megan Doherty:
Canada/Bangladesh, Kathryn Richardson: MSF South Sudan
Palliative care is essential in humanitarian crises, whether due to conflict, natural
disaster, epidemics or marginalised group, due to the large burden of human suffering and
high rates of mortality. However, the needs of individuals with serious or life-limiting
conditions are rarely considered when designing humanitarian health responses and access to
palliative care is rarely available. Yet palliative care has been successfully integrated
into the humanitarian response in some settings.
This symposium will include presentations from a panel of experts sharing their experiences
of integrating palliative care into the response to humanitarian crises, with an emphasis on
the palliative care needs of seriously ill individuals. The presentations will describe the
role of palliative care as well as barriers and potential solutions to palliative care
integration.
There will be an update from the role of palliative care networks (including PallCHASE) in
coordinating an international palliative care response to the unfolding crisis in Ukraine.
In addition, there will be needs identification surveys, educational and clinical palliative
care programs from humanitarian settings in Uganda, Bangladesh and South Sudan. We will
share lessons learned and opportunities to meet the current and future challenges in
humanitarian palliative care.
Time to be provided for questions and answers.

Abstract ID: 52

Abstract Type: Poster – Health Promotion

## Development of a self-management eHealth program to support and empower people with
advanced cancer and their family caregivers

Vincent Van Goethem*1,2,3, Sigrid Dierickx1,2,3, Orphé
Matthys1,2,3, Laurel Northouse4, Mitchell Silva5, Luc
Deliens1,2,3, Lore Lapeire1,6, Peter Hudson1,7, Aline
De Vleminck1,3, Joachim Cohen1,3 on behalf of DIAdIC**

1Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) & Ghent University, End-of-life Care
Research Group, Brussels, Belgium, 2Ghent University, Department of Public Health
and Primary Care, Ghent, Belgium, 3Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Department
of Family Medicine and Chronic Care, Brussels, Belgium, 4University of Michigan
School of Nursing, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 5Patient Centrics, Brussels, Belgium,
6Ghent University Hospital, Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent, Belgium,
7St Vincent’s Hospital and the Univeristy of Melbourne, Centre of Palliative
Care, Melbourne, Australia
*Correspondence should be addressed to: vincent.vangoethem@ugent.be
**‘Evaluation of Dyadic Psychosocial Interventions for People with Advanced Cancer and
their Informal Caregivers (DIAdIC): An international randomized controlled trial’ – ‘DIAdIC’
(EU grant agreement No 825722)
Background: Ehealth programs are a promising way to support people with
advanced cancer and their family caregivers. An intervention that has been proven effective
in improving quality of life in patients and family caregivers is the nurse-led face-to-face
FOCUS program, developed and tested in the USA. FOCUS was adapted to the health care context
of six European countries (FOCUS+) and translated to a web-based format (iFOCUS). We aim to
describe the development of iFOCUS and the challenges we encountered during this
process.
Methods: Development of iFOCUS encompassed seven steps: 1) defining the
concept, 2) development of mock-ups and program content, 3) gathering feedback from an
international consortium, 4) technological development of iFOCUS, 5) creating an iFOCUS
version for each of the six European countries, 6) preliminary testing through functional
and user testing and 7) implementing the final version in an international randomized
clinical trial (RCT).
Results: iFOCUS is a psycho-educational eHealth program for people with
advanced cancer and their family caregivers that is completed autonomously by the
patient-caregiver dyad together. The program consists of four sessions spread over 12 weeks
with three weeks between each session. Key characteristics of the program are
psycho-educational character, addressing the FOCUS components, varied pedagogic approach,
tailored, stimulating dyadic communication, complementary to regular care, and accessible.
During development various challenges arose which were handled pragmatically. User and
functional testing showed that the program functioned well and was acceptable to users.
Minor changes needed to be made to the content, tailoring and program flow.
Conclusion: Developing a self-managed eHealth program has many challenges.
Some pedagogic features are easier to incorporate in a face-to-face intervention due to the
fluid nature of conversations. The program is now being tested in a large-scale
international RCT.

Abstract ID: 53

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate communities research

## Researching Compassionate Communities from an interdisciplinary perspective:
Development of a research framework

Steven Vanderstichelen*1,2,3, Sarah Dury1,4, Sara De
Gieter1,5, Filip Van Droogenbroeck1,6, Deborah De
Moortel1,7, Lisa Van Hove1,8, Julie Rodeyns1,9, Nele
Aernouts1,10, Hanne Bakelants1,2,4, Joachim Cohen1,2,
Kenneth Chambaere1,3, Bram Spruyt1,6, Gabriel Zohar1,9,
Luc Deliens1,2,3, Liesbeth De Donder1,4

1Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Compassionate Communities Centre of Expertise
(COCO), Brussels, Belgium, 2Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), End-of-life Care
Research Group, Brussels, Belgium, 3Ghent University, End-of-Life Care Research
Group, Gent, Belgium, 4Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Belgian Ageing Studies,
Brussels, Belgium, 5Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Work & Organisational
Psychology, Brussels, Belgium, 6Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Tempus Omnia
Revelat, Brussels, Belgium, 7Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Interface
Demography, Brussels, Belgium, 8Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels
University Consultation Centre, Brussels, Belgium, 9Vrije Universiteit Brussel
(VUB), Brussels Research Centre on Innovation in Learning & Diversity, Brussels,
Belgium, 10Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Cosmopolis Centre for Urban
Research, Brussels, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: steven.vanderstichelen@vub.be
Background: Compassionate Communities (CCs) are places in which people
collaborate and leverage local resources, networks and institutions to improve the
circumstances, health and wellbeing of those facing serious illness, death, dying and loss.
Studying their development, implementation and evaluation requires interdisciplinary
research approaches, currently lacking. This paper aims to present CCs as an
interdisciplinary field of study and propose a corresponding research approach.
Methods: In 2020, 8 research groups from 4 faculties – including health
sciences, sociology, psychology, educational sciences and geography – formed the
Compassionate Communities Centre of Expertise (COCO) at the VUB University in Brussels,
Belgium. Interdisciplinary exchange spaces were created via bilateral and group discussions,
and collaborative seminars to develop a shared conceptual understanding of CCs with a
collaborative research framework.
Results: We developed minimal definitions for ‘compassion’, ‘community’ and
‘compassionate communities’ to provide common ground for all perspectives present in COCO.
The research framework emphasizes co-creation and includes partnering with Living Labs. At
present, three Living Labs have been developed: the Compassionate City of Bruges, the
Compassionate City of Herzele, and the Compassionate University (VUB). The resulting
research agenda encompasses 3 themes: 1) operationalizing & measuring compassion; 2) CC
transitions and sustainability; and 3) CC-building in different community types.
Conclusions: This project succeeded in establishing bridges between university
faculties and disciplines, and an interdisciplinary research framework for the study of
Compassionate Communities was developed.

Abstract ID: 54

Abstract Type: Symposium

## Lessons Learned during the COVID-19 and beyond Pandemic for Children Living with Rare
Diseases, their Siblings, and Families

Ulrika Kreicbergs1 (chair/speaker), Charlotte Handberg2,3
(speaker), Camilla Udo 1(speaker), Maureen
Lyon*4,5(speaker)

1Palliative Research Centre, Ersta Sköndal Bräcke University College, Stockholm,
Sweden, 2National Rehabilitation Center for Neuromuscular Diseases, Aarhus,
Denmark, 3Department of Public Health, Faculty of Health, Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark, 4Children’s National Hospital, Washington, District of Columbia,
United States, 5Department of Pediatrics, George Washington School of Medicine
and Health Sciences, Washington, District of Columbia, United States
*Correspondence should be addressed to: mlyon@childrensnatonal.org
Dr. Handberg will report on parents’ perspectives on the impact of COVID-19 on the
biopsychosocial health, daily activities, and quality of life among their children with
neuromuscular diseases (NMD). Understanding the prevalence of COVID-19 infection and its
impact, specific recommendations will be made for supporting vulnerable patients during a
pandemic, which may be transferable to other contexts, countries, and chronic illnesses.
Little is known about how families including a child with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)
have experienced life during the COVID-19 pandemic. Dr. Udo’s presentation will explore how
parents and grandparents of children with SMA feel the COVID-19 pandemic has affected their
lives, particularly as regards medication and rehabilitation of their child. Actions to
create compassionate communities will be recommended for when societies and health care
systems reopen.
Siblings of severely ill children with rare diseases are seldom seen or heard. Little is
known about their situation in the family and in the community. To support them we need to
understand their experiences. Interviews with siblings (aged 6 to 14 years) whose brother or
sister had been cared for at a children’s hospice were invited to participate. Dr.
Kreicbergs and colleagues used four different communication tools to ease the
interviews.
Dr. Lyon and key stakeholders adapted the Carer Support Needs Assessment Tool (CSNAT).
CSNAT (Paediatric) is a process for identifying and understanding the palliative care needs
of family caregivers and of their children living with a rare disease. Pilot results will be
presented from the CSNAT (Paediatric), administered during COVID-19. Lessons learned and
action plans generated by family caregivers to support themselves and their children will be
shared.

Abstract ID: 55

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Grief Literacy: How to Take it into Practice and Education

Lauren Breen1, Susan Cadell*2, Amy Chow3, Karima
Joy4, Daisuke Kawashima5, Phyllis Kosminsky6, Mary
Ellen Macdonald7, David Roth8

1Curtin School of Population Health, Curtin University, Perth, Australia,
2School of Social Work, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada,
3School of Social Work, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 4Dalla
Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 5School of
Psychology, Chukyo University, Nagoya, Japan, 6Fordham University School of
Social Services, New York, USA, 7Faculty of Dentistry, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 8Pütz-Roth Bestattungen und Trauerbegleitung oHG,
Bergisch Gladbach, Germany
*Correspondence should be addressed to: scadell@uwaterloo.ca
Background: We are a group of researchers and clinicians, who, at an
international meeting on death, dying and bereavement, developed the concept of grief
literacy: an individual’s capacity to access, process and use knowledge regarding the
experience of loss. Grief literacy is a fundamental component of societies that value
compassion and mutual support. While grief is universal, grief literacy will mean different
things to different communities. Broad acceptance and implementation of grief literacy will
depend on open communication that identifies the challenges and obstacles that must be
addressed to promote awareness and inspire action aimed at creating more compassionate
communities.
Purpose and Approach: Grief literacy belongs to everyone. The concept of grief
literacy will be further developed and deepened through this workshop.
Participants should come prepared with their own examples of grief literacy.
In this interactive workshop, we will
a) present our theoretical conceptualization of grief literacy as embedded in the
public health paradigm.
b) provide examples of how it has been used in practice and education.
c) explore with the participants the concept in relation to their local socio-cultural
specificity.
d) work together with the international audience to imagine how best this concept can
further enhance practice and education in multiple disciplines and fields.
Participants will:
a) understand the paradigm shift signaled by the inclusion of grief literacy in public
health palliative care.
b) apply the concept of grief literacy to their own practice and teaching contexts.
Application to PHPCI:
Grief literacy augments the concept of death literacy, thereby enhancing the compassionate
communities’ approach. This workshop will prepare participants to best implement grief
literacy in their classrooms and communities.

Abstract ID: 57

Abstract Type: Poster - Cancer

## Early referral to a palliative team improves end- of- life care among gynecological
cancer patients

Torbjorn Paulsen*1, Heidi Liland2, Tor Åge
Myklebust3, Kristina Lindemann4

1MD, PhD, senior consultant, Dep. Gyn. Cancer, Oslo University Hospital, Norway,
2RN, Dep. Gyn. Cancer, Oslo University Hospital, 3SC, Department of
Registration, Cancer Registry of Norway, Department of Research and Innovation, Møre and
Romsdal Hospital Trust, Ålesund, Norway, 4MD, PhD, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo; Dep. Gyn. Cancer, Oslo University
Hospital, Norway
*Correspondence should be addressed to: tpa@ous-hf.no
Objective: To assess palliative care involvement, chemotherapy use, and other
interventions 30 days before death among patients with gynaecological cancer, and to
identify factors associated with chemotherapy use.
Methods: Clinical data on end-of-life care were retrospectively extracted from
the medical records, a retrospective, population-based study.
All patients were primary treated at the Norwegian Radium Hospital. Place of death: 4
different hospitals (n = 48), 15 different nursing homes
(n = 87) and home (n = 15).
Results: All women with residence in Oslo, Norway who died of gynecological
cancer 2015-2017 (36 months; n = 163, median age 70.1 years at death, range
26-100.) were identified. Ovarial- (n = 100), uterine-
(n = 40), cervical- (n = 21), vulvacancer
(n = 2).
Twenty-one percent (n = 21) of ovarian cancer patients received systemic
chemotherapy 30 days before death compared to 10% (n = 4) of uterine cancer
patients. Patients that had been referred to palliative team within 60 days seems to have a
greater reduced risk of having systemic chemotherapy within 30 days before death OR 0.25
(95% CI 0.05–1.13) compared to referral within 30 days OR 0.68 (95% CI 0.16–2.83)).The most
common surgical interventions are ascites drainage (n = 24), pleural
drainage (n = 16), intraperitoneal mitoxantrone (n = 13),
gastric tube (n = 8) and pyelostomy (n = 8).
Conclusions: Early referral to palliative care seems crucial when we aim for
less chemotherapy at end-of-life. Most of the surgical interventions are symptom
relieving.

Abstract ID: 58

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Health Promoting Palliative Care

## How can a behavioral theory be used to gain insight into factors of health-promoting
behavior during serious illness?

Anne-Lore Scherrens*1,2, Benedicte Deforche2,3, Luc
Deliens1, Joachim Cohen**1, Kim Beernaert*1

1Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) & Ghent University, End-of-life Care
Research Group, Brussels, Belgium, 2Ghent University, Health Promotion Unit,
Ghent, Belgium, 3Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Unit of Movement and Nutrition
for Health and Performance Research Group, Brussels, Belgium.
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Anne-Lore.Scherrens@vub.be
**shared last authorship
Background: Behavioral theories are often used to better understand and change
health-promoting behaviors and develop evidence-based interventions. They can also be used
to improve palliative care and increase the role of people who are confronted with serious
illness. However, little is known about how to use behavioral theories to better understand
and change palliative care behaviors in people who are confronted with serious illness. This
paper wants to describe how behavioral theories can be used to gain insight into factors of
health-promoting behavior in seriously ill people, using a case example of starting a
conversation about palliative care with the physician for people with incurable cancer.
Methods: We chose a behavioral theory. We applied and adapted this theory by
performing 25 interviews with the target population. We operationalized the factors of this
newly developed behavioral model based on surveys assessing health behavior factors and
results of step 2. An expert group (n = 14) checked content validity. We
tested the survey cognitively (n = 8). We identified the most important
factors with a survey study (n = 80) and logistic regression analyses.
Results: We selected the Theory of Planned Behavior. This theory was
applicable to the behavior of starting a conversation about palliative care with the
physician, but needed extending (e.g. knowledge). The final survey that was filled out by
people with incurable cancer included 131 items on psychosocial and perceived social
environmental factors. The results of the survey showed that attitudinal factors were the
most important factors associated with starting a conversation about palliative care with
the physician or having the intention to do so.
Conclusion: This paper describes a method applied to a specific example,
offering guidance for researchers and practitioners interested in understanding and changing
a target behavior and its factors in seriously ill people and in improving patient
empowerment.

Abstract ID: 59

Abstract Type: Poster - Various Topics

## Recruitment and retention in palliative care trials: challenges and strategies

Anne van Driessche*1,2, Kim de Nooijer1,2, Vincent van
Goethem1,3, Orphé Matthys1,3, Kim Beernaert1,3

1End-of-life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) & Ghent
University, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Family Medicine and Chronic Care,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium, 3Department of Public Health
and Primary Care, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: anne.van.driessche@vub.be
In recent years, the number of trials evaluating effectiveness of multi-component
palliative care interventions for people with life-threatening illnesses and their families
has increased. One of the main challenges in conducting multi-component palliative care
trials, is successful participant recruitment and retention in a vulnerable population
already experiencing high levels of distress. These challenges may lead to delayed
availability of beneficial interventions, increased trial costs and time and inconclusive
trial results.
The aims of this symposium are: 1) to present current challenges in recruitment and
retention and strategies to overcome them based on three multi-component palliative care
trials conducted by the presenters; 2) to exchange experiences and reflect on potential
strategies to improve recruitment and retention in multi-component palliative care trials
together with the participants of this symposium.
The 3 multi-component palliative care trials are: 1) Frailty+: a timely short-term
specialized palliative care service intervention for older people with frailty and complex
care needs and their family in primary care, aimed at reducing their symptom burden
evaluated in a pilot randomised controlled trial (RCT). Recruitment period: February –
December 2020 (participant follow-up 2 months). 2) DIAdIC: two psychoeducational
interventions for people with advanced cancer and their family caregiver: FOCUS+ (a
nurse-led face-to-face intervention) and iFOCUS (a self-administered webtool), aimed at
improving patient-family caregiver dyads’ quality of life, evaluated in an RCT in 6 European
countries. Recruitment period: February 2021 – September 2022 (follow-up 6 months). 3) BOOST
pACP: a paediatric advance care planning (ACP) intervention for adolescents with cancer and
their parents aimed at improving parent-adolescent communication on ACP themes evaluated in
a multi-centre RCT. Recruitment period: February 2021 – February 2023 (follow-up 7
months).

Abstract ID: 61

Abstract Type: Symposium

## Social, Political, and Interpersonal Power and Access to Hastened Death
Speakers

Jane Lowers*1, Claudia Gamondi2,3, Victoria Ali2,4,
Janette Fish2,5

1Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA,
2Division of Health Research, Lancaster University, Lancaster UK,
3Palliative and Supportive Care Clinic, Istituto Oncologico della Svizzera
Italiana, Ticino, Switzerland, 4University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield UK,
5University of Suffolk, Ipswich UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: jane.lowers@emory.edu
Hastened death, including assisted suicide and euthanasia, where legal, is governed by laws
and policies that determine who can access medication, and medical treatment and support.
Yet the ability to hasten one’s death is further facilitated or constrained by layers of
informal power structures, including social norms and interpersonal and interprofessional
dynamics. These dynamics, often undiscussed, affect those seeking to hasten death, their
families and caregivers, and the clinical professionals from whom they seek care. In this
session we will explore the role of power in hastened death through research in three
countries and the implications for practice, policy, and education. Dr. Claudia Gamondi will
present results of research on Swiss family members’ experiences of patients pursuing
assisted suicide in Switzerland. Janette Fish will present results of a qualitative study of
UK families of individuals pursuing assisted suicide in Switzerland. Victoria Ali will
present results of a systematic review of clinician experiences of inquiries about hastened
death dependent on legal status. Dr. Jane Lowers will present findings on a study of
caregivers of US patients who hastened death by stopping eating and drinking.

Abstract ID: 62

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate cities

## What constitutes a caring community? – A qualitative study

Lisa Valerius*1, Angélique Herrler², Julia Strupp3, Frank
Schulz-Nieswandt4, Raymond Voltz3,5,6,7

1Faculty of Human Sciences and Faculty of Management, Economics and Social
Sciences, Graduate School GROW – Gerontological Research on Well-Being, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany, ²Faculty of Human Sciences and Faculty of Medicine, Graduate
School GROW – Gerontological Research on Well-being, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany, 3Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital, Department of Palliative
Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Faculty of Management,
Economics and Social Sciences, Institute of Sociology and Social Psychology (ISS),
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Faculty of Medicine and University
Hospital, Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Duesseldorf (CIO ABCD),
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 6Faculty of Medicine and University
Hospital, Clinical Trials Center Cologne (ZKS), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany,
7Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital, Center for Health Services
Research (ZVFK), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
*Correspondence should be addressed to: lisa.valerius@uni-koeln.de
Background: International studies have shown that competent health and social
care is a prerequisite for the best possible quality of life, especially at the end of life.
It is known that in addition to medical factors, socioeconomic and cultural determinants
have a significant influence on health and social care for terminally ill people and their
relatives. Health and social care institutions have an important role in promoting
compassionate care by raising awareness of death, dying and grief, initiating direct
services and strengthening professional and non-professional networks. The project “Caring
Community Cologne” seeks to create sustainable structures in an urban area in order to
establish a Caring Community within person-centered end-of-life care.
Methods: Two audio-recorded focus groups were conducted, with
n = 9 participants from multi-disciplinary community-based services in
the city of Cologne and members of the Caring Community Cologne (e.g. local government,
hospice and palliative services, actors from civil society). The recordings were transcribed
verbatim and analysed thematically following Clarke and Braun.
Results: Participants discussed the characteristics and difficulties of
implementing a Caring Community. The following most important factors were derived:
Support from municipal politics (public administration, health department, mayor)
necessary
Top-down-approach at the beginning of a project to build up basic structures, followed
by bottom-up-concepts for community and citizen engagement
Professional leadership and moderation
A high degree of interaction and networking between the actors themselves
Discussion: Shared values and trust in the common project can be seen as a
main prerequisite for initiating a caring community. All of the participants showed an
intrinsic motivation for the common goals. Participants discussed that missing components in
the local process such as a lack of citizen’s participation, transparency of internal and
financial structures and a lack of voluntary work hindered the project. In addition, it
became apparent that the role of healthcare should not dominate other structures in the
project. Based on these results, we currently plan to conduct in-depth expert interviews
with professionals who already have experience in building up and implementing
community-oriented networks to further explore the identified factors.

Abstract ID: 63

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Equity and Access

## How does poverty affect attitudes towards dying? Experiences of individuals and
professionals in UK low-income communities

Lorraine Hansford*1

1Wellcome Centre for Cultures and Environments of Health, University of Exeter,
Exeter, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: l.j.hansford@exeter.ac.uk
Background: Public health approaches to palliative care and ‘death awareness’
initiatives encourage individuals to prepare in advance for their care and circumstances at
end of life. Research shows that people living on a low-income are less likely to access
palliative care services and are increasingly likely to experience funeral poverty, however
little is known about how poverty affects attitudes towards dying.
Aims: This study examines attitudes towards talking about death and preparing
for end of life within low-income communities, and the ways in which experiences of poverty
at end of life and in bereavement shape attitudes towards dying.
Methods: Qualitative interviews were carried out with 14 bereaved individuals
with lived experience of poverty at end of life or in bereavement, and 15 professionals
supporting individuals in low-income communities (e.g., funeral directors, social workers,
advice workers, faith leaders). Interviews were conducted via phone/video call and data
include experiences of end of life and bereavement both before and during the pandemic.
Results: Data from the interviews showed experiences of poverty and
bereavement across the life course affected people’s attitudes towards preparing for death
and their own end of life care. Issues such as housing insecurity, immediate economic
concerns and fear of funeral costs affected people’s perceptions of choice and the relevance
or accessibility of planning in advance for care or arrangements after death.
Conclusion: An increased awareness amongst healthcare and other professionals
of what is important to patients and families on a low-income may help them to better
support them in preparing for end of life. A better understanding of the ways in which
structural inequalities impact on social and emotional, as well as practical, aspects of
dying can also help inform the development of inclusive public health approaches to
palliative care that include policy or system level changes as well as addressing individual
needs.

Abstract ID: 64

Abstract Type: Free communication - Arts and end of life

## Play elements in intergenerational arts activities to support engagement with
end-of-life issues – Studio DöBra

Max Kleijberg*1, Rebecca Hilton2, Beth Maina
Ahlberg3,4, Carol Tishelman5,6

1Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden, 2Research Centre, Stockholm University of the Arts, Stockholm,
Sweden, 3Skaraborg Institute for Research and Development, Skövde, Sweden,
4Department of Sociology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,
5Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Stockholm Health Care Services (SLSO), Region
Stockholm
*Correspondence should be addressed to: max.kleijberg@ki.se
Background: End-of-life (EoL) issues can be difficult to talk about and arts
activities have been found to offer alternative ways of engaging with them. However, little
is known about the mechanisms through which this occurs. In Studio DöBra, a Swedish
community-based intergenerational initiative, children (9 y/o) and older adults (most 80+)
engaged with EoL-issues through arts activities.
Aim: We aim to explore mechanisms in arts activities that support community
engagement with EoL-issues, based on Studio DöBra.
Method: Through participatory action research with community-partners, two
Studio DöBra iterations were developed. Each engaged 8 children and 8 older adults in a
series of five 2-hour workshops with various arts activities about EoL-issues. Data includes
participant observations and follow-up interviews with community-partners, children, and
older adults. Initial analysis conducted with community-partners indicated the importance of
play elements in arts activities. Continued analysis was abductive, iteratively moving
between play theory and data. We modified theory as we identified mechanisms in arts
activities supporting engagement with EoL-issues.
Results: We identified 4 mechanisms: 1) A “Studio DöBra magic circle” i.e.,
the spatial and temporal boundary separating the Studio DöBra workshops from “ordinary life”
that created space for intergenerational engagement with EoL-issues. 2) Partners made
efforts to balance restrictions and freedoms in topics and arts processes, to support
participants’ independent engagement with EoL-issues, while maintaining a sense of control
for themselves. 3) The definite and abstract nature of death was approached through a
combination of imagination and sharing personal experiences. 4) Collective arts processes
and products contributed to a sense of community which continued after Studio DöBra.
Conclusion: Findings can contribute to theory-building that can inform arts
activities supporting community engagement with EoL-issues.

Abstract ID: 65

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community engagement and development

## Investigating impact development in Studio DöBra, a community-based participatory
action research project to strengthen community engagement with end-of-life issues

Max Kleijberg*1, Rebecca Hilton2, Beth Maina
Ahlberg3,4, Carol Tishelman5,6

1Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden, 2Research Centre, Stockholm University of the Arts, Stockholm,
Sweden, 3Skaraborg Institute for Research and Development, Skövde, Sweden,
4Department of Sociology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden,
5Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Stockholm Health Care Services (SLSO), Region
Stockholm
*Correspondence should be addressed to: max.kleijberg@ki.se
Background: There is an increasing body of participatory action research (PAR)
using a health promotion approach to strengthen community engagement with end-of-life (EoL)
issues. However, the impact of such research and the way it develops is rarely investigated.
This may in part be due to the emergent and context-specific nature of PAR, which complicate
the understanding of impact development processes.
Aim: We investigate impact and the process of impact development in a
community-based PAR project, called Studio DöBra.
Method: Studio DöBra was a Swedish initiative to engage communities in
EoL-issues. It was developed in partnership with a range of community organizations and
engaged children (9 years old) and older adults (most 80+) with topics related to dying,
death and loss through arts activities. Qualitative data from interviews and meetings
spanning 4.5 years reflects perspectives of community- and academic partners. Through a
qualitative framework analysis based on this empirical data, we expand on Banks et al.’s
(2017) theory of “co-impact” in PAR, to develop a model of impact development
conceptualizing impact as both process and product.
Results: This model identifies three types of impact as product: Impact on
individual and group development, action-oriented impact, and strategy-oriented impact. The
model highlights impact as a process by illustrating ways in which the types of impact
evolve from one another, are related, and are affected by contextual influences. Based on
this model, we will also present the impact of Studio DöBra from the perspective of
partners.
Conclusion: Findings contribute to conceptualizations of impact in PAR,
particularly in the field of health promotion approaches to strengthen community engagement
with EoL-issues. Findings also contribute with a community perspective to the limited
literature investigating impact of community-based health promotion initiatives related to
EoL-issues.

Abstract ID: 68

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate cities

## Living and Dying in the City of Bern – Development and Implementation of the Bernese
Charta for a Commonly Supported End of Life

Sibylle J. Felber*1, Claudia Michel2, Evelyn
Hunziker3, Annette Berger4, Pascal Mösli5, Christian
Walti6, Kathrin Sommer7, Steffen Eychmüller1

1University Centre for Palliative Care, University Hospital Bern, Bern,
Switzerland, 2Bern University of Applied Sciences, Institute of Ageing, Bern,
Switzerland, 3Competence Centre Ageing, City of Bern, Bern, Switzerland,
4Coaching, meditation, death and bereavement care, self-employed practice,
Bern, Switzerland, 5Reformed Churches Bern-Jura-Solothurn, Specialist chaplaincy
for palliative care, Bern, Switzerland, 6Parish “Frieden” Bern, Bern,
Switzerland, 7palliative bern, Cantonal Section of the National Association for
Palliative Care, Bern, Switzerland
*Correspondence should be addressed to: sibylle.felber@extern.insel.ch
Background: End-of-life care is not only the state or healthcare
organizations’ responsibility but of the whole population. In the city of Bern, many
individuals, companies, cultural organizations, schools and religious or spiritual
institutions, share this vision. This project aimed to bring together these potential
partners for reaching optimal impact in the city’s population.
Methods: A personal initiative of a professor for palliative care at the
University of Bern together with the Mayor of the city of Bern in 2018 led to a fireplace
conversation with representatives of the city administration, local companies, university,
churches, schools and culture. This was followed by a series of public lectures on different
topics around the end of life, including a public debate hosting Prof. Allan Kellehaer. A
local coordinating group was built in order to elaborate a strategy how to launch the city
charter derived from the international model of compassionate cites.
Results: The Bern charter for mutual support at the end of life was finally
launched in November 2, 2020. Multiple public events were conducted including hearings,
workshops and film discussions. Populations’ response was overwhelming and clearly showed
the need to talk about end of life topics. Various activities have resulted: e.g. students
of the Pedagogical School of Bern conceptualized an interdisciplinary project week on the
topic of dying and death; a public website www.baerntreit.ch and a yearly public
event were established to raise awareness, drive coordination and information including
media coverage.
Conclusion: With its own Compassionate City Charter, the city of Bern has
established a solid basis for current and future projects. Many professionals and volunteers
are engaged in various activities; however, permanent effort is needed to keep the movement
running including media attention. The broad spectrum of target groups is a chance and a
challenge at the same time.

Abstract ID: 69

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Volunteers and compassionate neighbors

## Service evaluation of compassionate neighbours programme at St Clare Hospice

Amy Bramble*1, Sally Muylders1, Syed Qamar
Abbas1

1St Clare Hospice, Hastingwood, Essex, United Kingdom
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
Amy.bramble@stclarehospice.org.uk
Background: Compassionate communities as part of the public health approach to
end-of-life care (EoLC) offers the possibility of solving the inequity of the difference in
provision of care for those people with incurable cancer and those with non-cancer terminal
illnesses. Building networks of support involves across the whole spectrum of society,
including workplaces, educational institutions, churches and temples, neighbourhoods,
community centres and in health and social care organisations.
Compassionate Neighbours at St Clare Hospice is a volunteer-led project, working to help
tackle loneliness and social isolation amongst local people who are living with a
life-limiting illness, or who are experiencing frailty due to older age. Compassionate
Neighbours (CN) are matched with Community Members (CM-patients) to achieve the outcomes
which suit patients. This paper evaluates the usefulness of the programme.
Methods: A questionnaire survey was conducted with 10 CNs and 10 CMs.
Questions were asked about achieving following goals: Providing information about hospice’s
work to community, support to community to look after aging/isolated residents, achieving
goal of people feeling less alone towards the end of their life, informing CN/CM of choices
and services available in healthcare towards the end of life and providing CM a connection
with community.
Analysis and Results: 19/20 respondents were females and 19/20 were over 55
years of age. 11 lived in urban and 8 in rural areas. All 20 had been connected with
programme for over 6 months. Following responses were received:
17 – Programme informs about hospice’s work in community
18 – It provided support to community to look after aging/isolated residents
19 – It achieves goal of people feeling less alone towards the end of their life
14 – It informs CN/CM of choices and services available in healthcare towards the end
of life
15 – It provides recipient a connection with community
Conclusion: Most CN/CM are confident that programme achieves providing
information, supporting community and prevents isolation. However, there are minority who
still voiced concerns about these goals. Further research is required to explore community’s
expectation from this programme and training of CNs accordingly.

Abstract ID: 70

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Loss and grief

## Therapeutic outcome measure use in an online bereavement counselling service
(OBCS)

Bianca Neumann*1

1BSc, MRes, MBPsS, Head of Bereavement, Sue Ryder, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: bianca.neumann@suerydercare.org
Background: Prior to the coronavirus pandemic, there was controversy as to
whether online counselling services are as effective as therapy in a counselling room.
To evidence effectiveness and usefulness the bereavement care service standards recommend
for services to be set up with assessment and outcome measures.
Method: The OBCS therefore set up a pathway to implement these standards: 172
people were assessed using the Adult Attitude to Grief (AAG) scale (Machin, 2014) which
determines the presence of overwhelmed feelings and controlled functioning, and the
resilient capacity to balance these.
Results: The majority (85.4%) reported a decrease (an improvement) in their
score, although for some 7.6% the score remained the same before and after. For a small
number, 7.0%, the score increased. 69% of those who had reported suicidal ideation prior to
counselling responded ‘No’ after counselling.
People were also assessed using the Detection of Emotional Distress scale (DED). The
majority, (82.7%), reported a decrease in their score (improvements), for some the score
remained the same (7.9%) before and after. The score increased for 9.4%.
Conclusion: Findings suggest that the OBCS is an effective service for most
clients. To understand how grief impacts people in today’s society, help normalise grief and
perhaps challenge the existing focus on formal support, we need to explore the data further
to make assumptions about what increases client vulnerability, types of services and
community development are required and if the effects are lasting.

Abstract ID: 71

Abstract Type: Poster – Various Topics

## Patient safety in palliative care: improving system design for safe, responsive
medication management

Sarah Yardley*1,2, Sally-Anne Francis1, Matthew
Willis3, Amy Brown3, Lucy Bemand-Qureshi4, Ben
Bowers5, Antony Chuter6, Stuart Hellard3, Andrew
Carson-Stevens3

1Marie Curie Palliative Care Research Department, University College London,
London, UK, 2Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust, London, London,
UK, 3Division of Population Medicine, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, UK, 4Barking, Havering And Redbridge University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Essex, UK, 5University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK, 6Patient and
Public Involvement Collaborator, Hayward Heaths, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: sarah.yardley@ucl.ac.uk
Around 20% of serious palliative care safety incidents involve medication. WHO advocates
halving this in 2022. Avoidable harms occur if care is not appropriately individualised.
This symposium collates four papers to examine palliative medication management. Our
objective is to focus system design on improving safe, responsive medication management. We
will invite audience reflections and interactive discussion of implications for policy,
practice and future research.
Integrating sociocultural and safety theory: novel methodological framework
We share methodological advances in integrating sociocultural and safety theory,
applying the resulting framework to synthesise multi-voiced empirical data. This aids
understanding of human factors in system design, illuminating barriers to achieving
patients’, carers’ and healthcare professionals’ improvement priorities.
Patients’ and carers’ perspectives of palliative medication safety: scoping review
Joanna Briggs Institute methods scoped how patients and carers make sense of medication
management. Data were extracted from peer-reviewed and grey literature to understand
human factors. Thematic analysis identified what matters most for safety in prescribing,
supply, administration, desired/adverse effects, review and disposal.
Professional reporting and contributing factors: national incident data
Palliative medication-related incidents in the National Reporting and Learning System,
England and Wales were sampled for those resulting in severe harm/death and/or involving
continuous subcutaneous infusions. Mixed methods analysis explored contributory factors
and professional perceptions of incidents.
Experiences of community anticipatory medications: longitudinal qualitative
interviews
Patients’, carers’ and clinicians’ experiences of injectable anticipatory medications
at the end-of-life were investigated. Findings demonstrate the importance of a
multi-voiced approach to improve safe and timely medication management.

Abstract ID: 72

Abstract Type: Poster - Various Topics

## Getting palliative prescription medications right at home, in hospital & hospice:
Activity Theory analysis

Sally-Anne Francis1, Sarah Yardley*1,2, Bryony Dean
Franklin3,4, Margaret Ogden5, Karen Mattick6, Anu
Kajamaa7

1Marie Curie Palliative Care Research Department, University College London,
London, UK, 2Central & North West London NHS Foundation Trust, London,
London, 3University College London School of Pharmacy, London, UK,
4Pharmacy Department, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK,
5Patient and public involvement co-investigator, University College London,
London, UK, 6College of Medicine & Health, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK,
7Faculty of Education, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
*Correspondence should be addressed to: sarah.yardley@ucl.ac.uk
Background: The work of medication-related activities to achieve effective
symptom control is poorly understood. This study synthesises experiences of patients, carers
and professionals to map work in the multi-step processes underlying medication management:
decision-making/prescribing; monitoring/supply; use (administration);
deprescribing/disposal; transitions (home/hospital/hospice).
Methods: Joanna Briggs Institute scoping methods were used to identify
relevant literature for creating an initial model of intended processes in
prescribing/medication use across home, hospital and hospice. Direct observation of everyday
practice, conducting informal conversations around the acts of prescribing and medication
use, was undertaken in each setting prior to purposive sampling of patients, carers and
professionals for qualitative semi-structured interviews. Data capture was through
fieldnotes, audio-recording/transcribing, and pictorial representations. Drawing on Activity
Theory, to understand what happens, who does what, how, when and where, an analysis of
multiple perspectives was mapped to the initial model of intended processes, expanding it
into a practice-based model.
Results: The resulting theoretically-informed, empirically-evidenced model
reveals hot (debated) and cold (overlooked) spots; both need system innovation to improve
care. Scrutinising prescribing and medication use processes by applying our model may reduce
the need for unanticipated care provision and decrease patient/carer burdens. We are also
using the model to create supportive resources for professionals, patients and families.
Conclusion: Better understanding of processes experienced, as distinct from
intended, is a valuable method to identify targets for system change, and new forms of
practice. Understanding the effort of work activities required in the effective use of
prescription medications, and when disruptions occur, is crucial to designing, testing and
implementing improvements.

Abstract ID: 73

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Loss and grief

## In-hospital bereavement services as an act of care and a challenge: An integrative
review

Charlotte Boven*1, Let Dillen2, Lieve Van den
Block3,4, Ruth Piers1, Nele Van Den Noortgate1,
Liesbeth Van Humbeeck1

1Department of Geriatrics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,
2Department of Geriatrics and Palliative Care Unit, Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium, 3End-of-life care research group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
(VUB) & Ghent University, Campus Jette, Brussels, Belgium & Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4Department of Family Medicine and Chronic Care, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: charlotte.boven@uzgent.be
Background: In Western countries, people most often die within hospitals.
Hence, healthcare providers are often confronted with dying persons and their bereaved
relatives. The aim is to investigate current in-hospital bereavement care (operational
definition, implementation, relatives’ satisfaction, and barriers or facilitators) and the
extent of responsibility hospitals carry in offering this.
Methods: An integrative review was conducted by searching four electronic
databases (PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, CINAHL), from January 2011 to December 2020,
resulting in 47 articles. Different study designs were included and results were reported in
accordance with the theoretical framework of Whittemore and Knafl (2005). The quality of all
included studies was assessed by using the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool.
Results: Only four articles defined bereavement care: two as services offered
solely post loss and the other two as services offered both pre and post loss. Although
different bereavement care services were delivered surrounding the time of death, the
follow-up of bereaved relatives was less routinely offered. Relatives appreciated all
bereavement services, which were rather informally and ad-hoc provided to them. Healthcare
providers perceived bereavement care as important, but the provision was challenged by
numerous factors (such as insufficient education and time).
Conclusion: Current in-hospital bereavement care can be seen as an act of care
that is provided ad-hoc, resulting from the good-will of individual staff members. A tiered
or stepped approach based on needs is preferred, as it allocates funds towards
individuals-at-risk. Effective partnerships between hospitals and the community can be a
sustainable and cost-effective strategy.

Abstract ID: 74

Abstract Type: Poster – Various Topics

## Reclaiming relationships as a legitimate tool for systems change: A Change Laboratory
approach to palliative care

Sarah Yardley*1,2, Paddy Stone1, Andrew
Carson-Stevens3

1Marie Curie Palliative Care Research Department, University College London,
London, UK, 2Central & North West London NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK,
3Division of Population Medicine, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: sarah.yardley@ucl.ac.uk
Background: In the UK, Palliative Care models require consultative,
collaborative working between specialist/generalist healthcare professionals (across
community and acute hospital services). Patients experience multiple transitions, boundaries
and interfaces between locations and providers. We present our experience of Change
Laboratory (CL) methods to create a:
framework for socioculturally-mediated improvement initiatives
multivoiced understanding of the value of relationships in system change
Methods: Our study was co-designed with 11 patients/carers. CL is a formative
intervention based on Cultural-Historical-Activity-Theory. Analysis is directed to how what
people think/feel relates to what they do. Monthly workshops (Jan-Jul 2022) with
patients/carers and professionals are exploring prompts (mirror data) derived from
anonymised interviews and acute hospital/community observations (n = 148).
Creative quality improvement activities help participants question system tensions/gaps,
analyse challenges, model new ideas and consider transferability into practice.
Audio-recording for transcription, researcher fieldnotes/reflexive notes and task artefacts
are fed forward to later sessions and subject to qualitative analysis.
Results: The CL method helps move from problems to ideas for future practice.
We will present full results with emphasis on expansive learning (creation of new
knowledge/practices) as people shared expertise and experience. We are using our analysis to
develop a framework for system improvement that integrates: 1. ‘relational reach’ (bridging
work to link people across systems and hold complex situations) and 2. ‘relational glue’
(support constructed between people, mediated by trust, empowerment and ability judge
customised, flexible responses are needed).
Conclusion: Our work can be used to design systems that encourage sustainable
replication of relationships. This could reduce inequities by creating systems that
facilitate relationship-based care.

Abstract ID: 75

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Loss and grief

## Bereaved relatives’ experiences with and expectations of hospital based bereavement
care: a qualitative study

Liesbeth Van Humbeeck1, Charlotte Boven*1, Elien
Storms2, Let Dillen3

1Department of Geriatrics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,
2Oncology Center, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,
3Department of Geriatrics and Palliative Care Unit, Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: charlotte.boven@uzgent.be
Objectives: In Western countries, people most often die within hospitals.
Hence, healthcare providers (HCPs) are often confronted with the care for bereaved
relatives. Due to a lack of literature on in-hospital bereavement care, this study aimed to
explore relatives’ needs and experiences regarding in-hospital bereavement care offered by
HCPs.
Methods: 16 semi-structured interviews with adult family members bereaved
after in-hospital death. Transcripts were analyzed using thematic analysis (Braun &
Clarke, 2019).
Results: Participants did not perceive bereavement care as restricted to the
post loss phase, but also communicated various antemortem needs, which constituted a
founding base for continued interactions with HCPs. The pre-loss contacts with in-hospital
health care providers formed the point of departure for renewed contact post-loss.
Participants preferred HCPs who did not excessively interfered or patronized but were rather
present on the background. After the loss, a minority of participants reached out to HCP
themselves, but did not expect continuity of support from hospital staff. Nonetheless,
several barriers and facilitators were experienced when relatives wanted to contact HCP post
loss.
Conclusion and clinical implications: These findings illustrate the importance
of understanding hospital based bereavement care as services that can be offered both pre
and post loss. However, hospitals are not the sole provider and can benefit from
collaborations with existing community-based initiatives. As such, hospitals may be better
placed to fulfill antemortem needs and screen family members for bereavement-related
challenges so they can identify, target and refer groups-at-risk towards adequate support
(tiered or stepped model).

Abstract ID: 76 (& 244)

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Settings of dying – The possibilities and limits of ‘designing’ at the end of
life

Julia Rehsmann*1,2, Eva Soom Ammann1,2, Corina
Caduff1,3, Tina Braun1,3,4, Noëmi Lehmann7, Gaudenz
Metzger1,5,6, Francis Müller1,5, Bitten
Stetter1,5

1Settings of Dying Research Group, Bern University of Applied Sciences &
Zurich University of the Arts, 2Department of Health Professions, Bern University
of Applied Sciences, 3Bern Academy of the Arts (HKB), 4University of
Bern, 5Department Design, Zurich University of the Arts, 6University
of Zurich, 7Centre for Palliative Care, City Hospital Zurich
*Correspondence should be addressed to: julia.rehsmann@bfh.ch

Iris Beuls*1, Sabet Van Steenbergen2,3, An-Sofie
Smetcoren3,4, Ann Petermans1, Jan Vanrie1

1Research group ArcK, Faculty of Architecture and Arts, Hasselt University,
Hasselt, Belgium, 2End-of-Life Care Research group, Ghent University, Gent &
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 3Compassionate Communities Centre
of Expertise (COCO), Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 4Department
of Educational Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: iris.beuls@uhasselt.be
Based on our ongoing research project “Settings of Dying” (sterbesettings.ch/en), in this
workshop, we aim to take a close look at the understanding and practice of
“gestalten/designing” in end-of-life care settings (e. g. palliative care in hospitals or
hospices). We approach “gestalten/designing” from an interdisciplinary perspective that
includes social anthropology, nursing, literary studies, communication design, product
design, philosophy, sociology of religion, and performative arts to explore the
complexities, nuances, and contingencies of contemporary dying in Western European societies
and beyond.
Conducting our research in Switzerland, a country that places a high value on individual
responsibility, autonomy, and freedom of choice, allows for reflections on the possibilities
and limits of “gestalten/designing”, of who is (co)designing for whom and with whom, and the
role of caring and compassionate communities at the end of life.
In our research project, we look at a variety of settings to understand how practices,
motives, and materialities shape the end of life: from hospitals to hospices, from
autobiographical literature to digital spaces. Which images are used to illustrate dying or
palliative care? And how could we contribute to the democratization of end-of-life care with
the design of new images or products? Which potentials and challenges does palliative care,
with its community-focused and family-centered approach, offer for the highly economized and
fragmented healthcare system it is situated in? How does digitalization influence
contemporary experiences of dying? And how do current literary accounts contribute to
broadening our perspective, and vocabulary, of dying today?
Inspired by an interactive workshop format, we plan to have a mix of short presentations of
individual research projects, demonstrations of design objects, and readings followed by a
moderated discussion centered around the workshop’s theme.

Abstract ID: 77

Abstract Type: Poster – COVID

## Elderly Covid -19 patients in nursing home cared by young doctors together with
Palliative Care teams. A model beyond pandemic?

Matteo Moroni*1, Matias Eduardo Diaz Crescitelli2, Cristina
Pedroni2, Mattia Bianco2, Jenny Capuccini1, Luca
Ghirotto2

1Struttura Semplice Dipartimentale Cure Palliative, Ravenna, 2Azienda
USL - IRCCS di Reggio Emilia
*Correspondence should be addressed to: matteo.moroni@auslromagna.it
Background: The Special Units of Continuity of care (USCA in Italian) are one
of the effective strategies to fight against the Covid-19 pandemic and to avoid the risk of
the downfall of the National Health System: they are medical teams dedicated to the care and
follow up of Covid-19 elderly patients who lived in long-term care facilities, to give
relief to symptoms and related outcomes, assuring a proper follow-up or appropriate
end-of-life care.
Method: The main aim of this workshop is to share an experience of the
effective collaboration between the Palliative Care Unit of Ravenna and the “USCA” in the
management, care and support of patients suffering from Covid-19. Since they have a higher
risk of dying or having critical issues, this collaboration included a palliative care
approach for informing, supporting, and training doctors serving within USCA and
experiencing, for the very first time, end-of-life care needs.
Results: We will take advantage, together with presentation of this
experience, from presenting the results of a phenomenological qualitative study conducted
with doctors working in USCA and nursing homes during the pandemic.
Conclusion: We shall illustrate a narration of collaboration and comprehensive
service whose primary outcome was to fill the potential gaps among actual needs,
availability to the “right care in the right moment,” through the implementation of a
palliative approach model that could help patients, families, and professionals not only in
the dramatic scenario of the pandemic.

Abstract ID: 81

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Volunteers and compassionate neighbors

## Compassionate neighbours at hospices: where are we? A survey of selected service
managers

Sally Muylders*1, Amy Bramble1, Syed Qamar
Abbas1

1St Clare Hospice, Hastingwood, Essex, United Kingdom
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
sally.muylders@stclarehospice.org.uk
Background: In the last decade, there has been an evolution of organisations
that help construct Community-Based Palliative Care programmes like Compassionate
neighbours. However, there is variation in delivery methods of these programmes.
Compassionate Neighbours at St Clare Hospice is a volunteer-led project, working to help
tackle loneliness and social isolation amongst local people who are living with a
life-limiting illness, or who are experiencing frailty due to older age. Compassionate
Neighbours (CN) are matched with patients to achieve the outcomes which suit patients. While
we continue to develop our service, we conducted a survey to explore models on CN service
from 7 different services.
Methods: A telephonic structured survey was conducted with 8 responsible
personal of CN programmes. Questions were asked about:
Hospice’s relationship with community
Awareness of service known by healthcare professionals and by community
Most important achievements of service
If service to be launched, what would you do differently?
Analysis and Results: 5/8 respondents were females and all 7 services had
different titles for their lead. Services had been run for 3 – 7 years (mean 4 years) in
London or surrounding counties.
All 8 respondents felt that it had improved relationship with community. At a score of 0 –
5, mean score was 3 for awareness among professionals and 2 for awareness in community.
There were multiple themes about achievements including breaking through isolation, working
partnerships, thriving in pandemic and raising profile of psych-social support. Among new
things to do, themes included robust planning, exploring local needs and collecting data
first. Moving forward, themes included renaming the service, change from outputs to outcomes
and regular evaluation. Detailed themes to be presented at conference.
Conclusion: CN projects vary according to local needs. Despite a growing level
of satisfaction among managers, there was understanding that there could be other paths
taken to improve or restart service. Developing an individually tailored package of care
appears to be able to meet specific needs.

Abstract ID: 82

Abstract Type: Poster - COVID

## Variation in palliative care service response and association with Covid-19 mortality
rates: an ecological study in UK regions

Javiera Leniz*1, Mevhibe Hocaoglu1, Anna Bone1,
Harry Watson1, Rachel Chambers1, Adejoke Oluyase1, Lorna
Fraser2, Irene J Higginson1, Katherine E
Sleeman1

1King’s College London, Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing, Midwifery &
Palliative Care, Cicely Saunders Institute for Palliative Care, Policy & Rehabilitation,
2Martin House Research Centre, Department of Health Sciences, University of
York, York, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: javiera.martelli@kcl.ac.uk
Background: The Covid-19 pandemic has caused a huge impact on palliative care
services. Results from a nationwide survey of palliative care services in the UK (CovPall
survey) show services experienced an increase in their workload and were forced to implement
changes to cope with these challenges. We aimed to examine the relationship between
mortality during the first wave of the Covid-19 pandemic and regional variation in
palliative care service response.
Methods: Ecological study using mortality data from England, Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland, linked with results from CovPall survey. Age and sex standardised
mortality rates for Covid-19 between 1st March and 31st July 2020, and the proportion of
hospice and palliative care services reporting being ‘more busy’ than before the Covid-19
pandemic were calculated at Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS) level 1.
A Pearson correlation was calculated between the standardised covid mortality rates and the
proportion of services being ‘more busy’. Results were stratified by service setting and
funding.
Results: Of 263 UK survey responses, 50.20% of services reported being ‘more
busy’ during the first wave of Covid-19 Pandemic. London was the region with a higher
proportion of services referring to being ‘more busy’ than before the pandemic (70.73%) and
also with the highest standardised covid mortality rate of (SMR) 14.88 per 10000. Regions
with higher Covid mortality rates tended to be more likely to have a higher proportion of
services referring to being busier in that period. This trend was more evident for services
providing care in the community and was statistically significant for services with more
than 25% of their funding coming from the National Health Service (β 0.54, p-value
0.049).
Conclusions: The funding model for hospice and pall care services may
influence their ability to respond to sudden increases in demand. More research is needed to
understand to what extent community palliative care services were more affected than
hospital-based services by the pandemic in terms of workload.

Abstract ID: 83

Abstract Type: Poster - Family caregivers

## Conversations and care at end-of-life for persons with dementia: Family care partners
share their perspectives

Kristen Abbott-Anderson*1

1PhD, RN, CNE, Minnesota State University Mankato, USA
*Correspondence should be addressed to: kristen.abbott-anderson@mnsu.edu
Background: End of life care planning for individuals living with Alzheimer’s
disease or a related dementia (ADRD) is lacking.
Purpose: The purpose of this study was to explore the end of life experience
for persons living with Alzheimer’s disease or related dementia (ADRD) and who died in the
past 12 months; specifically the care received and conversations around end of life as
perceived by a family or close other caregiver.
Methods: A quantitative survey and qualitative interview guide was developed
based on findings from the literature. Participants were recruited through community
outreach, grief groups, and social media. Participants were invited if they experienced the
death of a close loved one within the previous 12-months and whose loved one was diagnosed
with ADRD. N = 8 individuals, who identified as a close caregiver of such a loved one,
agreed to participate, completed the survey via Qualtrics, and participated in an
interview.
Results: Findings will be reported including quantitative findings, and themes
encompassing the kinds of end of life care desired and received as well as experiences with
end-of-life care planning prior to the loved-one’s death.
Conclusions: Findings from this study will inform end-of-life care and
planning for individuals living with ADRD.

Abstract ID: 85

Abstract Type: Free Communication - COVID-19

## Fear of death and coping strategies of healthcare professionals during the COVID-19
pandemic

Luis Felipe Calle-Cruz*1, José Manuel Sevillano-Armenta2,
Carmen Jódar Casanova1,3, Leonardo Ortega Olmo4, Silvia Feijoo
Fernández4, José Luis Estrada Caro5, Luis Gabriel
Luque-Romero6

1PhD, MD. Family Doctor. Castilleja de la Cuesta Primary Care Centre, Distrito
Aljarafe-Sevilla, Spain, 2PhD, MD. Degree in Psychology and Computer Engineering.
Specialized in statistical and data analysis. Computer science teacher in secondary school,
secondary, 3MD, Family Doctor Technical Advisor of the National Health Service of
Andalucía, Spain, 4Fourth Year Family Medicine Resident Mairena del Aljarafe,
Distrito Aljarafe-Sevilla, Spain, 5Fourth Year Family Medicine Resident,
Bormujos, Distrito Aljarafe-Sevilla, Spain, 6PhD, MD Coordinator Research Manager
District Aljarafe-Sevilla, Spain
*Correspondence should be addressed to: luisfelipecallecruz@gmail.com
Background: The death of a patient is a traumatic event for health care
professionals (HCP) that triggers feelings of sadness, guilt and anxiety. A pandemic context
characterised by high rates of death and extremely increased demands to the Health System
(HS) should affect the coping abilities and perceived fear of death of the HCP. In this
research we profile the coping strategies and fear of death of HCP in Andalusia during the
emergence of the third wave of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Aim: This study aims to depict the coping with death abilities and fear of
death perception in different levels of the HCS.
Methods: This research took place during the so-called 3rd wave of the
COVID-19 pandemic in Spain. HCP from different healthcare levels (HCL) in Andalusia (south
of Spain) self-respond online and anonymously to the Collet-Lester (Coping with death scale)
and Bugen (Fear of death) questionnaires.
Results: 382 questionnaire answers from HCP were analysed. Majority of
respondents were women (69.1%), under 30 y.o. (20.4%), married (73%), religious (48.3%),
with more than 20 years of experience (45.5%), most had experience with dying patients
(95.5%), lost a loved one (45.8%) and experienced the serious illness of a close relative
(45.5%). Distribution of HCP was 57.9% Primary vs. 41.4% Secondary HCL.
Moderate perception of fear of death was observed, being lowest when it had to do with
their own death (mean = 2.950; SD = 0.899) and highest related to their own death process
(mean = 3.646; SD = 0.736). With respect to the coping strategies, the HCP showed also a
low-moderate perception (mean = 140.008; SD = 22.641) of their abilities and resources
dealing with the dying. There were no differences in such values attending to the health
care level (p>0.005).
Conclusion: Likely due to the increased stress to the HS during the pandemic,
HCPs present a moderate-high degree of fear of death and acknowledge having a moderate-low
level of competency in caring for people at the end of life.

Abstract ID: 88

Abstract Type: Poster - Literacy & Education

## A Systematic Scoping Review on Moral Distress in Undergraduate Medical Students

Ruth Si Man Wong*1,2, Rui Song Ryan, Ong1,2, Ryan Choon Hoe
Chee1,2, Chrystie Wan Ning Quek1,2, Neha Burla1,2,
Caitlin Yuen Ling Loh1,2, Yu An Wong1,2, Amanda Kay-Lyn
Chok1,2, Andrea York Tiang Teo1,2, Aiswarya Panda1,2,
Sarah Wye Kit Chan1,2, Grace Shen Shen1,2, Ning Teoh1,2,
Min Chiam3 MSc Medical Humanities, Annelissa Chew Chin Mien4 Msc
(Info & Lit), Lalit Kumar Radha Krishna1-3,5-8

1Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
2Division of Supportive and Palliative Care, National Cancer Centre Singapore,
Singapore, 3Division of Cancer Education, National Cancer Centre Singapore,
Singapore, 4Medical library, National University of Singapore libraries,
Singapore, 5Duke-NUS Medical School, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
6Palliative Care Institute Liverpool, Academic Palliative & End of Life
Care Centre, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom, Cancer Research Centre, University of
Liverpool, United Kingdom, 7Centre of Biomedical Ethics, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, 8PalC, The Palliative Care Centre for Excellence in
Research and Education, Singapore
*Correspondence should be addressed to: e0477863@u.nus.edu
Background: Current concepts of Moral Distress (MD) highlight the complex yet
personalised concept amongst healthcare professionals. Yet, medical students can also be
victims of MD. Amidst a dearth of data suggesting that MD stems from conflicts between deep
beliefs, principles, values, prevailing roles, expectations and responsibilities, a
systematic scoping review (SSR) is proposed to evaluate what is currently known about MD and
how it arises through the Ring Theory of Personhood (RtoP). The RtoP encapsulates the
intricate relationships of personhood while factoring in situational, environmental and/or
relational sources of conflict. Data obtained from multiple settings and various research
methodologies would enhance understanding and guide the provision of better support for
medical students in tackling MD by identifying the various sources of tension in medical
students.
Methods: An SSR adopts the Systematic Evidenced Based Approach (SEBA) to map
prevailing accounts of MD in medical students. To enhance the transparency and
reproducibility of this process, concurrent and independent use of tabulated summaries,
thematic analysis and directed content analysis (Split Approach) is adopted.
Results: 28,070 abstracts were identified from eight databases, 314 articles
were reviewed, and 19 articles were included. The Split Approach identified four domains
including definition of MD, sources of MD using RtoP, recognition of MD and
interventions.
Conclusion: This SSR suggests current concepts of MD have extended beyond
Jameton’s definition of MD and that disharmony and/or dyssynchrony between each ring of RtoP
requires a personalised and longitudinal approach to accurately evaluate MD in medical
students. Through the use of RtoP which can evaluate MD holistically, further research into
the design of a RtoP based tool can be used to assess MD and its long-term impacts. The
active role of medical schools in resolving MD in medical students remains imperative and
requires a multi-faceted framework to target key causes. We are hopeful that MD in medical
students can be better managed through the provision of personalized, appropriate, and
holistic support to medical students.

Abstract ID: 90

Abstract Type: Poster – COVID

## Opportunities and challenges to family carers end of life care research in the COVID
pandemic: A researcher’s reflections

Ahmed Sharaf*1,2, Katharine Whittingham1, Claire
Diver1, Philip Clissett3

1School of Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, UK, 2Faculty of
Nursing, University of Alexandria, Egypt, 3 Institute of Health and Allied
Professions, Nottingham Trent University, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Ahmed.Sharaf@nottingham.ac.uk
End of life care research provides significant input and direction for improving end of
life care services for patients and their family carers. However, various challenges could
be experienced regarding participants access and ethical concerns that appear while
designing and conducting the study. Careful planning and adaptation to the emerging
challenges should support the successful attainment of the recruitment targets while
maintaining ethical standards. The COVID pandemic has significantly impacted accessing and
maintaining contact with potential research participants. This paper reports on challenges
and opportunities experienced as a novice PhD researcher during the global pandemic. The
qualitative study explored experiences of family carers of people with cancer receiving
home-based-end of life care. By working iteratively and innovatively strategies were
implemented to overcome this unexpected dilemma. Getting the research sites involved in the
study during the pandemic was a massive challenge due to the redeployment of medical
research staff to support COVID containing efforts. However, keeping regular contact with
participating sites while being open to new sites helped to revive the study activities.
Finding ways to nationalise the study were thought helpful such as using the National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) support and online recruitment that extended the
recruitment limits. Conducting research remotely was a valuable opportunity that aligned
with the “Work from home” strategy to contain the pandemic. It saved travel time and allowed
greater flexibility for family carers to participate in the study. However, it involved
various ethical issues regarding consenting and maintaining participants’ confidentiality
and emotional safety. However, engaging the participants and giving them control over their
involvement were significant facilitators for participant retention in the study.
Flexibility and resilience while conducting research is important to overcome unprecedented
circumstances. The strategies used in the current study were successful in recruiting a
sample size sufficient to achieve qualitative data saturation. This may provide insight and
guidance for other researchers in similar situations.

Abstract ID: 91

Abstract Type: Symposium

## Empowering family carers to support people requiring palliative care

Peter Hudson*1,3, Clare Gardiner2, Aline De
Vleminck3, Sigrid Dierickx3

1Centre for Palliative Care, St Vincent’s and The University of Melbourne,
Australia, 2Health Sciences School, The University of Sheffield, United Kingdom,
3End-of-life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) & Ghent
University, Brussels, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: phudson@unimelb.edu.au
Background: Palliative care aims to enhance the quality of life of people
living with serious and life-limiting illness and their family carers. However, despite
policy, clinical and research evidence underpinning the importance of a family approach to
palliative care challenges have impeded optimal support. Furthermore, much of the scientific
focus has tended to target patients’ needs with less attention given to family carers.
Purpose: Provide a summary of the status of the international evidence
regarding family carer support and an overview of select initiatives focussed on carer
empowerment.
Method: A symposium facilitated by the Chair and Co-chair of the management
committee of the European Association for Palliative Care’s Reference group on family
carers
(https://www.eapcnet.eu/eapc-groups/reference/family-carers/) which will
include presentations on:
(1) Brief overview of status of evidence regarding carer support and the role of the
EAPC family carer reference group (Peter Hudson, Australia)
(2) Economic impacts for family carers : End of life caregiving and paid employment
(Clare Gardiner, England)
(3) Empowering family carers via the support of and collaborations with health
professionals (Aline De Vleminck, Belgium)
(4) Family carers’ support needs throughout and after the euthanasia procedure (Sigrid
Dierickx, Belgium)
Outcomes: Participants will be informed about contemporary international
evidence regarding the status of support for family carers of people requiring palliative
care. They will also be provided with examples of initiatives that promote carer wellbeing
as well as resources that target family carer empowerment. There will be dedicated time
allocated to audience discussion so that further insights and strategies for carer support
can be shared.

Abstract ID: 92

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community ACP

## The cultural adaptation of the GoWish cards for use in Flanders, Belgium: a game to
identify and discuss end-of-life preferences

Charlèss Dupont*1, Tinne Smets1, Fanny Monnet1,
Malin Eneslätt2,3, Carol Tishelman2,4, Lieve Van den
Block1

1VUB-UGhent End-of-life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB),
Brussel, Belgium, 2Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Department of Health, Education and
Technology, Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden, 4Center for health
care economics, informatics and health care research (CHIS). Stockholm Health Care Services
(SLSO), Region Stockholm, Stockholm, Sweden
*Correspondence should be addressed to: charless.dupont@vub.be
Background: Games like the GoWish cards, from the US, have been found useful
to support people in reflecting about their end-of-life preferences. Because card games like
GoWish are culturally sensitive, we aimed to perform a systematic cultural adaptation of the
cards for use in Flanders, Belgium involving multiple stakeholders.
Methods: We used an iterative cultural adaptation process with repeated
discussions with various community organizations and representatives of minority and
religious groups. Next, the cards were evaluated in relation to: linguistic equivalence to
original version, applicability, comprehensibility, and relevance per card. Based on the
evaluation for each item the content validity index (I-CVI) was calculated with >0,78 as
minimum required score. The translated version was tested with potential users. Their
feedback and items with a I-CVI of <0,78 were used for final adjustments.
Results: After translation, the organizations and representatives of
minorities and religions made cultural adaptations to nine cards (e.g. “accomplishments” was
changed to “memories” since this was deemed more appropriate in our culture). Because of the
legal context in Belgium, two cards were added: “a self-chosen end of life” and “being able
to record my choices”. The modified version was reviewed by 12 healthcare workers. 28/38
cards had an I-CVI score >0.78 on all four items. Potential users (n = 33) felt that the
cards supported conversations about end-of-life preferences. Based on the ten cards with a
I-CVI <0.78 and feedback from potential users, the wording of four cards was
reformulated.
Conclusion: Using a systematic process of cultural adaptation involving
multiple stakeholders, we were able to identify detailed adjustments needed to achieve
cultural adaptations appropriate for use of the cards in Flanders. The strength of the
adaptation process lies in the multiple perspectives using different methods throughout the
process.

Abstract ID: 93

Abstract Type: Poster – Various Topics

## Home-based palliative care and re-hospitalizations for palliative care patients

Audrone Rackauskiene1,2, Natalja Fatkulina2, Marius
Ciurlionis*1,2,3

1Centro Poliklinika, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Faculty of Medicine,
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Baltic palliative care association,
Vilnius, Lithuania
*Correspondence should be addressed to: marius.ciurlionis@mf.vu.lt
Background: Palliative care recipients are more likely to be hospitalized if
they do not receive recommended care at home or provided care is not sufficient. Therefore,
an overall goal of home-based care for persons with life-threatening diagnoses is to enable
End of life support, symptomatic treatment, and risk-prediction - without necessary hospital
visits or stationary care. For that reason, It is hugely important to look at a patient’s
diagnosis to understand better particular diseases that correlate with hospitalization
rates.
Methods: Hospitalization levels of persons (N = 115) receiving home-based
palliative care were tracked using an official home care count database. The research
explored the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) among palliative care recipients
at home and the most common ICD’s of hospitalized patients. The results were grouped by
certain ICD’s and hospitalization intensity rates. There were reported 43 cases of Homecare
recipients referred to hospital health care services.
Results: Thirty-eight unique cases, including three persons, were referred two
times and one with three referrals. Research revealed that the dominant group (N = 16) had
worsened conditions caused by malignant neoplasms (C00-C97), while the second dominant group
(N = 6) had a disease related to the circulatory system (I00-I99), followed by the third
group (N = 4) of the digestive system disease (K00-K93). Two persons were hospitalized due
to bacterial infections.
Conclusion: It is notable that 33,0 % of all patients receiving palliative
services at their home had to be hospitalized at least one time during last year. The
prevalent factor of hospital referral was worsened condition for cancer patients 37,2 %,
patients suffering from heart and circulatory system 13,9 % and digestive system 9,3 %
diseases. All together, these three groups represent 60 % of all hospitalizations. Further
analysis should identify if increased care measures could prevent patients from
hospitalization.

Abstract ID: 95

Abstract Type: Poster – Health Promotion

## A framework for developing co-designed integrated service model of palliative care for
people living with severe mental illness

Marianne Tinkler*1, Kevin Brazil1, Tracey
McConnell1, Joanne Reid1

1Medical Biology Centre, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Queens University
Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: mtinkler01@qub.ac.uk
Background: Although close to one billion people are living with a mental
health disorder globally, it is one of the most neglected areas in Public Health. People
with severe mental illness have greater mortality risk than the general population and
experience health care inequalities throughout life. There is currently a dearth of evidence
in relation to understanding the palliative care needs of people with severe mental illness
and how future care delivery can be designed to both recognise and respond to those needs.
Historically this has been overlooked in the service model development strategies
internationally. This is reflective of a “loud silence”, and neglect, when it comes to
severe mental illness and death and dying.
Methods: We have developed a co-design framework that includes six phases. An
expert reference group will be established in Phase 1, to inform all stages. Phase 2 a
systematic literature review to synthesise current evidence in relation to palliative care
service provision for people with severe mental illness. In Phase 3, consultation with both,
patients who have a severe mental illness and in receipt of palliative care and bereaved
caregivers of people who have died 6–18 months previously with a diagnosis of severe mental
illness across two recruitment sites in the United Kingdom. Consultation with both mental
health and palliative care multidisciplinary staff in Phase 4. Phase 5 will involve the
co-design of a service model of integrated palliative care for persons living with severe
mental illness. Phase 6 will develop service planning recommendations for this client
group
Results: Guidelines for developing a co-designed service model of integrated
palliative care will be presented, including steps for enhancing collaboration with key
stakeholders within the expert reference group.
Conclusion: This framework will significantly address health inequalities for
people with severe mental illness via a co-designed approach drawing on the experiences of
people with severe mental illness, their bereaved caregivers and health care professionals.
An integrated service model is imperative to address the inequity in palliative care
provision for people living with severe mental illness, and an important step in promoting
inclusion and equality of palliative care provision that is proportionate to the rest of the
world’s population.

Abstract ID: 97

Abstract Type: Poster – COVID

## Experiencing and making sense of illness in an inpatient specialist palliative care
unit during a pandemic: an interview study

Monisha Kabir*1,2, Shirley H. Bush1,3,4,5, Agnes
Grudniewicz2

1Bruyère Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada, 2Telfer School of
Management, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada, 3Department of Medicine,
Division of Palliative Care, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada, 4Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada, 5Bruyère Continuing Care, Ottawa,
Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: mkabir@bruyere.org
Background: In the context of life-threatening illness, sense-making can be
described as a process of existential and experiential learning that patients and informal
caregivers (ICGs) undergo to cope with an altered life situation. To date, there are no
previous studies that have examined patient and ICG sense-making in the inpatient specialist
palliative care (SPC) setting. Our aim was to contribute to this gap and investigate the
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic using interviews.
Methods: Adult, English-speaking patients and ICGs (non-bereaved and bereaved)
participated in virtual semi-structured interviews on an inpatient SPC unit in Ottawa,
Canada. Recruitment was limited by the pandemic. Themes were identified using inductive
thematic analysis.
Results: Three patients (mean age 60.3 years) and four ICGs (mean age 65.5
years) were interviewed. Three overarching themes were identified: i) the journey of dealing
with life-threatening illness, ii) impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on experiences of
illness and care, and iii) attempts to cope and find peace. Patients and ICGs perceived
receiving high-quality care, but reported divergent experiences of person-centred care in
their illness journeys. Pandemic-related visitation restrictions and isolation periods were
described as distressing. Coping with the illness and end-of-life journey was a complex part
of the sense-making process and was facilitated by a lack of fear of death, support from
family members, and religious beliefs. Obstacles to coping and sense-making included family
conflict and feeling overwhelmed.
Conclusion: Given that inpatient SPC settings involve a significant change in
environment and provide care for a limited time, it is important to understand how patients
and ICGs experience and make sense of illness and care in such contexts. These challenges
call for interprofessional team members to understand and act appropriately in providing
care and addressing patient and ICG needs.

Abstract ID: 98

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community engagement and development

## An evaluation of asset-based community development (ABCD) in a Scottish Hospice

Susan High*1, and Cormac Russell2

1Strathcarron Hospice, Denny, Scotland, 2Nurture Development
*Correspondence should be addressed to: susan.high1@nh.scot
Background: Traditionally, Hospices have found challenges when engaging with
communities due to fear and taboo associated with death. Professionalisation of death has
led to communities losing confidence in their ability to support each other to live and die
well.
In 2019, a Scottish Hospice became a Nurture Development Learning Site with the aim of
deepening understanding of ABCD, and applying the principles and practices to three distinct
communities.
A participatory internal evaluation of the difference this has made both within the
organisation and in the communities where this approach has been tested was carried out
Methods: A mixed methods approach was used. This included: Developmental
Evaluation; Realist Evaluation and Most Significant Change (MSC) technique, in fluid
combination. Data was collected from 18 ABCD surveys, six written interview responses, seven
key people interviews and two team workshops.
Results: Shift was noted at the level of the organisation and communities;
Organisational level:
from predominantly medical model to a balance of medical and social models
from doing things to or for people to doing things with people or supporting them to do
by themselves
from identifying needs to identifying what matters most to the person
Community level:
from focus on health problems to focus on well being
from reliance on professionals to discovery of community strength and capacity
from power held by professionals to power held by individuals and communities
Conclusions: Coming to understand the irreplaceable role that communities play
in supporting End of Life Care marks a coming of age for the Hospice.
ABCD principles and practice have provided a framework for the hospice to deepen its
connections with the local community whilst defining what it can and should contribute as an
institution.
By discovering the strengths and resources which exist in abundance in communities the
hospice has been able to connect and mobilise these resources to support communities to be
places where people who are ageing dying and grieving can life meaningful and valuable lives
right to the end.

Abstract ID: 99

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Developing compassionate cities and communities: Impacts of a top-down
initiation

Bert Quintiens*1 (chair), Émilie Lessard2 (speaker), Alison
Bunce3 (speaker)

1End-of Life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) and Ghent
University, Brussels, Belgium, 2Centre de recherche du CHUM, Montreal, Quebec H2X
0A9, Canada, 3Ardgowan Hospice, United Kingdom
*Correspondence should be addressed to: bert.quintiens@vub.be
Background: Compassionate cities and communities aim to increase capacity
around serious illness, death, dying and bereavement through a series of actions aimed at
early intervention and prevention on different sectors in society. When initiating such
initiative top down, one needs to look for and find motivated people willing to develop the
compassionate initiative. This often starts with the recruitment of stakeholders or other
partners and appointing a project lead. The partners’/stakeholders’ reasons for
participating are diverse. They can be recruited through their organisation and then their
participation is usually part of their functioning within these organisations. Developing a
compassionate city/community is a slow process which aims for cultural and societal changes.
Sustainability is key to keep it going on the long run.
Objective: The objective of this workshop will be to collect hands-on
experience from compassionate city/community developers. To learn from and exchange
bilateral experiences and use this to inspire the development of the Flemish compassionate
cities.
- What assets/strategies are essential in the top-down initiation of a compassionate
city/community?
- How do you keep stakeholders/partners that are involved motivated throughout the
project?
- How do you plan for sustainability? If the compassionate city/community incorporates
a research component, how do you plan for the time after the research component has
ended?
Speakers: Three speakers share personal experiences about developing a
compassionate city/community with a focus on the objectives above:
- Bert Quintiens (Compassionate Bruges)
- Alison Bunce (Compassionate Inverclyde)
- Émilie Lessard + colleague (Compassionate Montreal)
Workshop format: 3 compassionate city/community developers share their
experiences in developing compassionate cities/communities. Each speaker talks for about
10minutes. International experts will be invited to attend the workshop and interactively
share.

Abstract ID: 100

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Health Promoting Palliative Care

## Understanding early intervention strategies using the ‘New Essentials’ framework:
turning theory into practice

John Rosenberg*1,2

1University of the Sunshine Coast, Australia, 2Public Health
Palliative Care International
*Correspondence should be addressed to: jrosenbe@usc.edu.au
Early intervention is a key approach to preventing harm from the known health and social
impacts of dying, death, grief and caregiving. It is made up of conscious, planned and
deliberate actions. Using the ‘New Essentials’ framework enables public health practitioners
to target interventions to the person receiving care, their caregivers and social networks;
communities; civic societies; and health and social services. In this presentation, this
framework will be applied to explore early intervention strategies, demonstrate how the
Ottawa Charter’s five action areas for health promotion are addressed through its use, and
provide a rigorous approach to public health practice. Attendees will have the opportunity
to identify specific early interventions to apply to their design of Compassionate
Communities.

Abstract ID: 101

Abstract Type: Poster – ACP & End of Life communication

## Idiolectic Conversation and Symptom Management in Palliative Care Patients

Susanne Tanner1, Marcelo Caballero*2

1Complementary therapy craniosacral biodynamic, 2Palliative Care
Department, Biel Hospital Centre
*Correspondence should be addressed to: marcelo.caballero@szb-chb.ch
Background: Palliative care contexts require special communication skills on
the part of the care team. In the scientific literature, various communication strategies
are discussed, which, however, show considerable weaknesses in practice. The shortcomings of
traditional methods can be remedied with the help of idiolectic conversation. In
“Idiolectics - Eigensprache-orientierte Gesprächsführung und Palliativmedizin”, it is
described how this technique can be used in palliative care.
Objective: The intention of this pilot project is to demonstrate how
idiolectic conversation can be used to activate the psychological and physical resources of
palliative care patients, using their own language, as well as to alleviate symptoms,
support their decision-making and improve their quality of life.
Method: The effect of idiolectic conversation (intervention), is
experimentally investigated in the symptom management of inpatients in palliative care,
through the instrument Edmonton Symptom Assessment System - ESAS (pre- and post-measurement)
idiolectically. In this pilot project, pain, dyspnoea and nausea are initially considered as
targets. In order to check for possible positive bias, a standardised, individual interview
with the idiolectic interview guide will also be conducted with 10% of the patients.
Results: With idiolectic conversation and mindful, respectful interaction with
the patient, a possibility opens up for him to better deal with and deal with his often
hopeless situation. This also applies to conversations with relatives. With this pilot
project, we want to demonstrate that the activation of one’s own psychological and physical
resources can happen through Idiolectic Conversation Guidance, thereby alleviating the
symptoms of palliative care patients, supporting their decision-making and improving their
quality of life.
Conclusion: With positive results, this communication methodology can lead to
the care of palliative care patients as well as activation of their own potential, own
resources and thus alleviation of psychological and mental symptoms of the patients. This
also serves to support their decisions and improve their quality of life.

Abstract ID: 102

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Equity and Access

## Housing as a determinant of dying well: Insights from bereaved individuals and
professionals in UK low-income communities

Lorraine Hansford*1

1Wellcome Centre for Cultures and Environments of Health, University of Exeter,
Exeter, UK.
*Correspondence should be addressed to: l.j.hansford@exeter.ac.uk
Background: Housing status is one of the key social determinants of health,
affecting wellbeing across the life course. However, beyond a recognition that quality of
housing quality is linked to place of death, little is known about the ways in which housing
quality and security impacts social, emotional, and practical aspects of dying and
bereavement.
Method: Qualitative interviews were carried out with 14 bereaved individuals
with lived experience of poverty at end of life or in bereavement, and 15 professionals
supporting individuals in low-income communities (e.g., funeral directors, social workers,
advice workers, faith leaders). Interviews were conducted via phone/video call and data
include experiences of end of life and bereavement both before and during the pandemic.
Transcripts were examined using thematic analysis.
Results: Housing emerged as an important factor affecting people’s
experiences, with seven of the 14 bereaved individuals and all except one of the
professionals discussing housing-related issues. Participants described ways in which
unsuitable housing and housing insecurity impacted practical aspects of dying such as place
of death, and also affected emotional and social wellbeing at end of life. Housing-related
issues affected both patients and their families, though families found it difficult to air
these concerns when their relative was dying. In some examples professionals taking on an
advocacy role were able to support families to address the issues.
Conclusion: The data provides evidence of the nuanced ways in which housing
issues impact experiences at end of life. A greater awareness of their potential impact
could help professionals across sectors, including healthcare practitioners and housing
providers, to better support patients and address these issues at an earlier and therefore
more effective stage. The data also suggests that housing should be recognised as an
important element within public health approaches to palliative care.

Abstract ID: 103

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Equity and Access

## Cross Country Comparison of Expert Assessments of the Quality of Death and Dying
2021

Eric Finkelstein1, Afsan Bhadelia2, Cynthia Goh3,
Drishti Baid4, Ratna Singh5, Sushma Bhatnagar6, Stephen
Connor*7

1Lien Centre for Palliative Care, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore and Duke
University Global Health Institute, Durham NC, 2Department of Global Health and
Population, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA;
3Department of Palliative Medicine, National Cancer Centre Singapore,
4Sol Price School of Public Policy, University of Southern California, USA,
5Lien Centre for Palliative Care, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore,
6Institute Rotary Cancer Hospital, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India, 7Worldwide Hospice Palliative Care Alliance, London UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: sconnor@thewhpca.org
Background: Few efforts have attempted to quantify how well countries deliver
end-of-life (EOL) care. The objective of this study was to score, grade, and rank countries
(and Hong Kong and Taiwan) on the quality of EOL care based on assessments from country
experts using a novel preference-based scoring algorithm.
Methods: We fielded a survey to country experts around the world, asking them
to assess the performance of their country on 13 key indicators of EOL care. Results were
combined with preference weights from caregiver-proxies of recently deceased patients to
generate a preference-weighted summary score. The scores were then converted to grades (from
A−F) and a ranking was created for all included countries.
Results: The final sample included responses from 181 experts representing 81
countries with 2 or more experts reporting. The 6 countries who received the highest
assessment scores and a grade of A were United Kingdom, Ireland, Taiwan, Australia, Republic
of Korea, and Costa Rica. Only Costa Rica (upper middle) is not a high-income country. Not
until Uganda (ranked 31st) does a low-income country appear on the ranking. Based on the
assessment scores, twenty-one countries received a failing grade, with only two − Czech
Republic (66th), and Portugal (75th) − being high income countries.
Conclusion: This study provides an example of how a preference-based scoring
algorithm and input from key stakeholders can be used to assess EOL health system
performance. Results highlight the large disparities in assessments of the quality of EOL
care across countries, and especially between the highest income countries and others.

Abstract ID: 105

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Equity and Access

## Winners and losers in palliative care service delivery: Time for a public health
approach to palliative and end of life care

Samar Aoun*1,2,3, Robyn Richmond2, Leanne Jiang2,
Bruce Rumbold3

1University of Western Australia, 2Perron Institute, 3La
Trobe University
*Correspondence should be addressed to: samar.aoun@perron.uwa.edu.au
Background: Consumer experience of palliative care has been inconsistently and
selectively investigated.
Methods: People in Western Australia who have experienced a life limiting
illness in the past five years were recruited via social media and care organisations (2020)
and invited to complete a cross sectional consumer survey on their experiences of the care
they received.
Results: 353 bereaved carers, current carers and patients responded. The
winners, those who received the best quality end-of-life care, were those who were aware of
palliative care as an end-of-life care (EOLC) option, qualified for admission to and were
able to access a specialist palliative care program, and with mainly a cancer diagnosis. The
losers, those who received end-of-life care that was adequate rather than best practice,
were those who were unaware of palliative care as an EOLC option or did not qualify for or
were unable to access specialist palliative care and had mainly a non-cancer diagnosis. Both
groups were well supported throughout their illness by family and a wider social network.
However, their family carers were not adequately supported by health services during
caregiving and bereavement.
Conclusions: A public health approach to palliative and end of life care is
proposed to integrate tertiary, primary and community services through active consumer
engagement in the design and delivery of care. Therefore, suggested strategies may also have
relevance in many other international settings.

Funding

Research funded by WA Health.

Abstract ID: 106

Abstract Type: Free Communication: Volunteers and compassionate neighbors

## Impact of Compassionate Connectors program in Western Australia: Feedback from
families, volunteer connectors and services

Samar Aoun*1,2,3, Robyn Richmond2, Leanne Jiang2,
Bruce Rumbold3

1University of Western Australia, 2Perron Institute, 3La
Trobe University
*Correspondence should be addressed to: samar.aoun@perron.uwa.edu.au
Background: The Compassionate Connectors pilot program is a partnership
between the South West Compassionate Communities Network in Western Australia and the Health
Service. It is about a compassionate community model of care where community volunteers
provide practical and social support to people with advance life limiting
illnesses/palliative care needs.
Aims: To identify the impact of the program on access to formal services;
community links; social activity; social isolation and coping with daily activities. It also
elicited the perceived benefits and challenges as experienced by patients and/or family
carers, volunteer connectors and referring service providers
Methods: Qualitative evaluation of the impact involved semi-structured
recorded phone interviews with the three target groups following a 12-week intervention.
Content analysis was used.
Results: Twelve connectors worked with 50 families for two years. Without
exception, families reported positive feedback about their experiences with the largest
impacts in increasing community links, increasing social activity, and reducing social
isolation. The connectors felt the experience was personally rewarding for them to be able
to make a difference and see the improvement in people’s quality of life. Service providers
reported on their increased capacity to offer additional services where formal services were
not available, particularly in remote/rural areas. They appreciated that connectors went
over and beyond what was expected of this role.
Conclusions: This pilot program has demonstrated a successful partnership
between formal and informal networks to foster a compassionate community approach to care.
The program has been adopted into the practice of the health service as business as usual,
with interest for the program to be replicated in several communities.

Abstract ID: 107

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community engagement and development

## Democratizing palliative care using a community-based compassionate palliative care
model, COMPASS Ghana

Yakubu Salifu*1

1International Observatory on End of Life Care (IOELC), Division of Health
Research, Faculty of Health and Medicine, Lancaster University, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: y.salifu@lancaster.ac.uk
The practice of family caregivers providing care for their loved ones with palliative care
needs at home, unsupported by health staff, is common in most resource-poor settings. This
practice has implications for the quality of care provided, caregiver stress, the dignity of
the patients and, care outcomes as the caregivers use trial and error and bear the entire
cost of care.
Despite these challenges, the care provided within the community is the most pragmatic, at
least in the short and medium-term, as there are a lack of or inadequate in-patient
palliative care units for managing the care compared to most Westernised contexts. The use
of context-specific, socio-culturally sensitive approaches, local resources, and expertise
offer hope in dealing with the problem.
Compassionate Palliative Services (COMPASS Ghana), a two-arm charity registered in the UK
and Ghana, seeks to fill this service gap by enabling access to compassionate palliative and
end of life care in partnership with the community leveraging on the social support. Using a
compassionate community approach and the unique socio-cultural African context, COMPASS
Ghana revolves around patients’ and caregivers’ active involvement and participation in care
provision. COMPASS Ghana thus offers the most democratic model to deliver palliative and of
end of life care.
COMPASS Ghana has had solid community and stakeholder engagements and collaboration.
In-country needs assessment visits done. The UK arm is focused on fundraising, education,
research, advocacy, clinical secondment and fiduciary governance. Ghana arm, the operational
arm, will deliver clinical support, training, education, advocacy, technical reach and
operational coordination.
COMPASS Ghana’s public health palliative care strategy is ‘democratic’, ‘empowering’, and
‘context-specific’ and brings palliative care to people’s doorstep. The approach contributes
to WHO’s recommendation of integrating palliative care as part of universal health
coverage.

Abstract ID: 112

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Volunteers and compassionate neighbors

## Volunteer befrienders supporting people at end of life and their carers at home within
a compassionate communities’ approach

Manjula Patel*1

1University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: manjulapatel@nhs.net
Objective: Present research findings to extend the knowledge of volunteer
befrienders within a compassionate communities’ approach.
Compassionate communities as a public health approach to palliative and end of life care,
is being adopted by palliative care providers. Although, volunteers have always been active
within the palliative care settings, there is limited evidence of the role of volunteer
befrienders as part of compassionate communities. This original empirical research study
explores and extends the understanding of volunteer befrienders as part of compassionate
communities’ approaches in the UK. A qualitative case-study design across three different
research sites providing palliative care services, two are hospices and one is a community
organisation. The main data collection methods include semi-structured interviews and focus
groups exploring the perspective of: people living with a life limiting condition at end
life (primary participants), their family members, and members of the palliative care
services. The formal provision of volunteer befrienders was developed as part of a
compassionate communities’ approach towards the end of life in all three sites. The
boundaries of the role varied at each of the sites and the volunteer befrienders experienced
the boundaries differently, dependent on the circumstances of the people they supported. The
befriender role was fluid as they negotiated the different situation they encountered in
their volunteering. It was a unique role that occupied the intermediate sphere of care
within the home setting. The data has highlighted an emotional aspect to the role, where
volunteer befrienders had to be alert and responsive to the different emotions of the people
they were supporting. The literature on emotional labour focuses on professional carers in
end-of-life care but there is a lack of literature relating emotional labour in volunteers.
It could be argued here that befrienders in end-of-life care may also experience emotional
labour as part of their role. The volunteer befrienders formed part of the inner circles of
care of people at end of life and their household. This research found the extended role of
volunteer befrienders as part of the formal health care provision in the home to be a key
attribute of a compassionate communities’ approach.

Abstract ID: 113

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate communities research

## A compassionate community is a dementia-inclusive community: creating connections using
Appreciative Inquiry methods

Wendy Gain*1, John Rosenberg2,3

1Independent Consultant, Australia, 2School of Nursing, Midwifery and
Paramedicine, University of the Sunshine Coast, Australia, 3President, Public
Health Palliative Care International
*Correspondence should be addressed to: wendy@wendygain.com
Dementia is a leading cause of death in Australia and its diagnosis brings great fear and
distress for many people and their families. Yet it is the connections within communities
that can enable the people living with dementia, their families and carers, to remain at
home for as long as possible, including until death. Communities where people living with
dementia are supported to live with meaning, purpose and value are dementia-inclusive
communities, founded in compassion.
A Compassionate Communities approach was used to build a dementia-inclusive community in
the Redlands Coast district near Brisbane, Australia. Previous attempts to create a tangible
plan had not succeeded. A group of community members, people living with dementia and their
carers, community service providers, local government representatives, funeral directors and
aged care providers gathered to identify ways to build a compassionate, dementia-inclusive
community. Using Appreciative Inquiry methods, a workshop was held to engage in meaningful
storytelling to listen and be heard, identify key themes and create a vision statement for
their community.
This process enabled the community itself to articulate their collective intention to
educate themselves about dementia; engage young people, local shops and businesses to become
‘dementia friends’; support the use of companion animals; increase social awareness and
acceptance of dementia; promote dignity and respect; and recognise people living with
dementia and their carers as valued members of the Redlands Coast community.
It was very clear in this process that a compassionate community is a dementia-inclusive
community. This presentation explains the use of Appreciative Inquiry methods to explore a
Compassionate Communities approach to creating dementia-inclusive communities.

Abstract ID: 114

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community ACP

## Development and evaluation of a public course in order to empower lay people in the
process of advance care planning

Sibylle J. Felber*1, Barbara Affolter1,3, Claudia
Michel2, Steffen Eychmüller1

1University Center for Palliative Care, University Hospital Bern, Bern,
Switzerland, 2Bern University of Applied Sciences, Social Work, Bern,
Switzerland, 3Hospital of Emmental, Burgdorf, Switzerland
*Correspondence should be addressed to: sibylle.felber@extern.insel.ch
Background: According to the 2017 Swiss Palliative Care Population Survey, the
majority of respondents reflect on their wishes concerning their own end of life. However,
they express support needs how to proceed towards high quality advance directives and
further discussion with health professionals. This project aimed to establish a course on
empowerment for older people and caregivers in the process of advance care planning
(ACP).
Methods: A literature search and discussions with experts in palliative care
(PC) and intensive medicine (IM) compiled the course concept basis. A focus group and
telephone interviews with representatives of the target group were conducted to review the
proposed content. Duplication of pre-existing offers was avoided by gathering
representatives from organizations who already offer ACP consultations in a second focus
group. Two pilot courses containing two lectures and a workshop were conducted at two sites
in the canton of Bern (CH).
Results: 15 respectively 14 participants took part in the course (mean age 67
resp. 70 years, ranging from 47 to 81 years). Most of them attended as a healthy person with
a personal interest, as relative or caregiver and all described their previous expectations
as being met. The majority reported to have learnt about the potential benefits of ACP, to
feel empowered to discuss their own wishes and to plan for critical situations. Participants
especially appreciated in-depth information on ACP, discussion of concrete case studies and
the exchange among participants. Challenges were identified regarding care network building
at home or defining goals with regard to one’s own quality of life.
Conclusion: All participants considered a preparatory course with basic
information, specific examples and materials concerning future care planning including
advance directives as beneficial. The awareness of participants regarding potential benefits
but also limitations of anticipatory care planning could be increased.

Abstract ID: 115

Abstract Type: Workshop

## ‘It takes a village’: Exploring potentials and limitations in applying the death system
concept in public health palliative care

Carol Tishelman*1,2 (co-chair), Kerrie Noonan3 (co-chair),
Lena Kroik4, Malin Eneslätt1,5,6 (facilitator), Max
Kleijberg7 (facilitator) and the DöBra Program

1Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Stockholm Health Care Services (SLSO), Stockholms
county council (SLL), Stockholm, Sweden, 3Western Sydney University and Death
Literacy Institute, Australiaso, 4Centre for Rural Medicine, Storuman, Sweden,
5Division of Nursing and Medical Technology, Department of Health, Education
and Technology, Luleå Technical University, Luleå, Sweden, 6Department of Health
Care Sciences, Marie Cederschiöld University College, Stockholm, Sweden,
7Division of Nursing, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society,
Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden
*Correspondence should be addressed to: carol.tishelman@ki.se
Background and Workshop Aim: Robert Kastenbaum, a U.S-based psychologist,
elucidated the concept of ‘death systems’ in 1977, but it has rarely been utilized in
research and practice conducted at the intercept of public health and palliative care
(PHPC). In this workshop, we aim to present an overview of the death system concept, and
with participants, critically examine its potential utility for researchers and
practitioners working in this field. We particularly focus on the death system concept’s
potential and limitations in contributing to understanding and evaluating “compassionate
communities”.
The Death System Concept: Kastenbaum focused on how our encounters with death
are systematically related to the societies in which they occur and thus to basic ways of
life. He argued that consideration of death systems allows us to be attentive to
interconnections and relationships, with respect given to how cultural and societal norms,
expectations, traditions, and symbols affect even individual experiences. Kastenbaum’s death
system is composed of functions, ordered along a time trajectory from warnings and
prediction through social consolidation after death, and each function consists of
components of importance, i.e. people, place, time, symbols and objects.
Workshop Approach: In this workshop, we provide a short overview of the death
system concept as described by Kastenbaum, before briefly exemplifying its’ relationship to
empirical work in Australia and in the Swedish DöBra research program. This introduction is
intended to stimulate critical exploration with workshop participants about transferability,
relevance, and limitations of the death system concept in PHPC initiatives in different
settings using varying approaches. Learning objectives of this knowledge exchange include
participants’ consideration of the death system concept’s benefits and limitations in:
exploring impact of different PHPC initiatives, supporting EoL-related2 cross-cultural
understandings, and helping address levers for cultural and social change.

Abstract ID: 117

Abstract Type: Poster - Community

## A workplace compassionate community approach to support bereaved staff in the two
national public health organisations in England

Julia Verne*1, Nicola Bowtell1, A. Brewer1, L.
Deacon1, S. Groom1, J. Robson1, A.
Thackeray1

1OHID in Department for Health and Social Care, National End of Life Care
Intelligence Network, London, United Kingdom
*Correspondence should be addressed to: julia.verne@dhsc.gov.uk
Background/aims: The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted bereavement
experience for everyone. Public Health restrictions impacted on visiting the dying,
funerals, family support and face to face bereavement services. Staff in Public Health
England and the National Test and Trace Service have been working relentlessly on COVID-19
many transferred from other functions and others keeping essential work going. Enforced home
working enhanced isolation. COVID-19 pressure plus bereavement was taking its toll on
colleagues with little access to support and all faced re-organisation of their
employers.
Methods: A small group of bereaved staff and others with expertise in
bereavement including the National Lead for Palliative and End of Life Care, established
Virtual Bereavement Cafes run by staff for staff across the 2 national public health
organisations. MS Teams (video teleconferencing, chat, signposting to resources) provided a
safe, mutually supportive space for staff to meet virtually. Cafés run fortnightly,
facilitated with mental health first aiders present. Ground rules emphasised respect,
confidentiality, the validity of all types of grief and all deaths whether pre or during the
pandemic. Chat and comforting emojis were used to offer support. Post café support was
provided via email and/or a call. Daily Cafés on specific topics were run in Daily Grief
Awareness week.
Results: Attendance varies 14 to 34 with new staff at each. The level of
complicated grief is very high. Topics emerged from shared experiences including:
anticipatory, complicated, cumulative, disenfranchised grief and coping with Christmas.
Thematic synthesis of discussions and chat identified isolation, distress from limited
funeral attendance, presence at death, inability to travel abroad, work pressure and lack of
workplace understanding. Colleagues also wanted tips to support others.
Conclusions: Virtual Workplace Bereavement Cafés provide key emotional support
during the pandemic. Improvements identified for implementation include: technical
enhancements; debrief sessions for facilitators to support their wellbeing; themed sessions
publicised in advance, including practical topics; increased signposting to resources. The
Cafés will now implement the learning and respond to feedback.

Abstract ID: 118

Abstract Type: Symposium

## Navigation interventions to support patients with serious or advanced illness and their
family: opportunities and challenges

Lieve Van den Block1,2, Barbara Pesut3, Wendy
Duggleby4, Bregje Onwuteaka-Philipsen5, Catherine
Walshe6, Rose Miranda*1,2

1Vrije Universiteit Brussel & Ghent University, End-of-Life Care Research
Group, Brussels, Belgium, 2Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Department of Family
Medicine and Chronic Care, Brussels, Belgium, 3School of Nursing, University of
British Columbia Okanagan, Kelowna, Canada, 4Faculty of Nursing, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, 5Department of Public and Occupational
Health, Amsterdam Public Health research institute, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 6International Observatory on End of Life
Care, Division of Health Research, Lancaster University, Bailrigg, Lancaster, United
Kingdom
*Correspondence should be addressed to: rose.miranda@vub.be
Offering high-quality palliative care to a growing number of people with serious or
advanced illness and their family living in the community is a pressing public health
concern. These people transition from a serious illness toward end of life. Hence, they
often experience a myriad of symptoms and 22needs encompassing physical, psychosocial and
spiritual domains, for which palliative care has been developed. Further, they experience
practical challenges in accessing public health and palliative care services, as well as in
their daily lives as a consequence of their disease trajectory, such as going to a
supermarket or calling for a doctor’s appointment. We need a sustainable strategy to meet
their growing demand for high-quality health and social care. Navigation interventions using
specially-trained lay navigators hold promise to meet this demand.
This symposium brings light to exciting insight on navigation interventions in palliative
care and discusses our way forward. Together with experts from Canada, the Netherlands,
Belgium and the United Kingdom, we will present: 1) the implementation and evaluation of an
innovative public health palliative care intervention “Nav-CARE”, which is a volunteer-led
navigation intervention for older people with advanced chronic illness and their family
living at home in Canada; 2) the brief history of cancer navigation programs and the need
for navigation in supportive, palliative and survivorship care in Europe; 3) the development
of a logic model that underpins a navigation intervention for older people with cancer in
Europe; and 4) the evaluation of navigation interventions as a supplementary palliative care
support service and the need for appropriate outcome measures. Finally, we will discuss
opportunities and challenges for implementing navigation interventions in palliative care in
different healthcare systems, as well as for evaluating navigation interventions in a
palliative care context using different research designs.

Abstract ID: 119

Abstract Type: Poster - COVID

## Learning lessons from COVID-19 experience for palliative care for people with dementia
in England

Julia Verne*1, Emma Hodges2, Katie Dowden2, Michael
Jackson2

1OHID in Department for Health and Social Care, National End of Life Care
Intelligence Network, London, United Kingdom, 2OHID in Department for Health and
Social Care, National Dementia Intelligence Network, London, United Kingdom
*Correspondence should be addressed to: julia.verne@dhsc.gov.uk
Background: The death toll in older adults, especially those who lived in care
homes was horrifically high in England during the COVID-19 pandemic in the 1st Wave (W1) -
April 2020, with a lower peak in the 2nd Wave (W2) – December 2020/January 2021, before
vaccinating as priority the elderly and care homes residents. People with Dementia and
Alzheimer’s (D&A)) were among the most vulnerable to dying in W1 and W2 - not only from
COVID-19.
Aims: To analyse mortality in people with (D&A) during the COVID-19 pandemic from
COVID-19 and other causes. To identify priorities for Palliative and End of Life Care
(P&EOLC) for people with D&A in pandemics.
Methods: Mortality data in England for people with D&A as underlying cause
(UC) or contributory cause (CC) on death registrations were selected from January 2019 to
May 2021. The UC of death for people with D&A identified as a CC to their death were
identified. Deaths (numbers, UC, place of death were compared between 2019 and 2020 and
specifically for these years for the months of W1 and W2.
Results: There was a statistically significant 5.3% increase in deaths for
people with D&A as UC in 2020 (67,872) compared with 2019 (64,468). However, a more
dramatic and significant 69% increase in deaths with D&A as CC in 2020 vs 2019 (44,624
vs. 26,445). The W1 and W2 peaks for D&A deaths were highly significant but different in
nature. In W1 (April 2020) the dominance of care homes as a place of death increased to 79%
of all deaths in people with D&A UC (8,435) vs. 64% (3,435) April 2019. Also, in W1
there was ~400% increase in D&A CC deaths (10,682 vs.2,146 April 2019) and 325% and 569%
increases in hospital and care home deaths. In W1 COVID-19 (7,496 deaths) was the main (70%)
UC for people dying with D&A as CC, with increases in Circulatory Disease +44%, Cancer
+31%, Parkinson’s +117% and respiratory disease (COPD) + 69.3%. W2 saw a 19% reduction in
D&A UC deaths but +139% as CC with COVID-19 main UC.
Conclusions: People with D&A are extremely vulnerable to risk of death
from highly infectious and high fatality respiratory infections especially if living in a
care-home. The speed and magnitude of surge in deaths highlights the critical need for
Advance Care Plans/Power of Attorney for people with D&A and especially training of care
home staff in P&EOLC and preparation for all to experience death under strict quarantine
rules.

Abstract ID: 120

Abstract Type: Poster – ACP & End of Life communication

## General practitioners’ evaluations of optimal timing to initiate ACP for patients with
cancer, organ failure or multimorbidity

Willemijn Tros*1, Jenny van der Steen1,2, Janine
Liefers3, Reinier Akkermans2,3, Henk Schers2, Mattijs
Numans1, Petra van Peet1, Stef Groenewoud3

1Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Department of Primary and Community Care, Radboud
university medical center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands, 3Radboud institute for
Health Sciences, Scientific Center for Quality of Healthcare, Radboud university medical
center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
*Correspondence should be addressed to: w.tros@lumc.nl
Background: Optimizing the timing to initiate advance care planning (ACP) is
difficult, especially for patients with non-malignant disease in community settings. We aim
to identify the optimal moment and reasons to initiate ACP in different illness
trajectories.
Design and methods: In this health records survey study we presented health
records to 83 GPs with request to indicate and substantiate what they considered the optimal
timing for ACP within two years before death. We performed quantitative and qualitative
analyses.
Setting and patients: From a regional primary care registration database in
the Netherlands, we selected and anonymized 90 health records of patients who died with
cancer, organ failure or multimorbidity.
Results: According to the GPs, the optimal timing to initiate ACP was 228 days
before death (median; interquartile range 392). This moment was closer to death for cancer
(87.5 days before death, IQR 302) than for organ failure (266 days before death, IQR 401)
and multimorbidity (290 days before death, IQR 389) (p < 0.001). The most frequently
mentioned reason to initiate ACP for cancer was ‘receiving a diagnosis’ (21.5%), for organ
failure it was ‘after a period of illness’ (14.7%), and for multimorbidity it was ‘age’ and
‘patients’ expressed wishes or reflections’ (both 12.0%).
Conclusion: The optimal timing for and reasons to initiate ACP differ for
patients with cancer and other illnesses, and they also differ between GPs. This suggests
that ‘the’ optimal timing for ACP should be seen as a ‘window of opportunity’ for the
different disease trajectories.

Abstract ID: 121

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Why is it so hard to become equal partners? Understanding how a Partnership Development
framework can shape partnership success

John Rosenberg*1,2 (chair), Wendy Gain3 (speaker)

1School of Nursing, Midwifery and Paramedicine, University of the Sunshine
Coast, Australia, 2Public Health Palliative Care International,
3Independent Consultant, Bungendore, Australia
*Correspondence should be addressed to: jrosenbe@usc.edu.au
Objectives: The language of equal partners is fundamental to public health
palliative care, yet so many partnerships flounder. In this workshop, two skilled
facilitators will introduce participants to understanding the key concepts of partnership,
the relevance of partnership principles, the partnership cycle, and the partnership
continuum. Participants will apply the Partnership Development framework to their practice
of Public Health Palliative Care.
Interactivity: This workshop is fully interactive with a maximum of 20
participants, who will work individually, and in small and large groups.
Learning Outcomes: Upon completion of the Workshop, participants will have a
greater understanding of partnership and how it applies to their current and future
collaborations.
Application to PHPC: Despite the language of being ‘equal partners’ as a key
concept in Public Health Palliative Care, partnership development skills are required to
build partnerships that evidence the principles of diversity, equity, openness, mutual
benefit and courage. With a sound, evidence-based framework, becoming successful equal
partners in Public Health Palliative Care practice is achievable.

Abstract ID: 124

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Using visual methods in end of life research

Naomi Richards*1, Sam Quinn1, Margaret
Mitchell1,2

1End of Life Studies Group, University of Glasgow, UK, 2Freelance
professional photographer, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: naomi.richards@glasgow.ac.uk
This interactive workshop will explore the role that visual methods can play in end of life
research as well as in engaging the public with aspects of death, dying and end of life
care. The objective is to expose participants to thought-provoking imagery and to encourage
them to consider both the potential as well as the challenges of using/creating visual
images in research. The workshop will be grounded in our experiences running a ‘live’
research project – Dying in the Margins – in which we are deploying participatory visual
methods with those experiencing poverty and deprivation in Scotland. The workshop will start
with a brief examination of some celebrated visual works and what they reveal about various
‘visual tropes’ as well as noted public responses to them. We will also explore the small
body of work that currently exists using visual methods in end of life research. The
remainder of the workshop will be spent exploring the potential of these methods, as well as
the challenges, both in terms of their practical, technological and ethical usage in the
field, and the various sensitivities about how the images are presented to audiences and
interpreted by them. We will introduce and debate key themes around representation,
evocation and control. Experiences of generating and showing images created specifically by
and with participants who are experiencing structural marginalisation will be discussed and
key learnings from Dying in the Margins drawn out. Workshop attendees will be put into
smaller groups at various points during the workshop and asked to discuss and respond to
selected images, as well as to imagine their own (through verbal or written description,
sketching, or bringing pictures along with them). Margaret Mitchell, a professional portrait
and documentary photographer who is part of the Dying in the Margins research team, will be
attending remotely to give her perspective on her aesthetic choices, how she enables
participation, the feedback received, and how to deal with the loss of control which comes
with showing sensitive images publicly. Finally, space will be given over to a discussion of
the power of images to raise public awareness and to agitate for change and for social
justice.

Abstract ID: 125

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate cities

## Ciudades que Cuidan - Cities that Care

Joan Berenguer1, Dolors Rodríguez1, Francesc de
Rillo*1

1Cities that Care research group of the Mémora Foundation
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
francesc.rillo@fundacionmemora.org
The ‘White Paper on Cities that Care’: towards a new paradigm of care
This proposal, prepared by the Mémora Foundation (FM) with the support of the Spanish
Federation of Municipalities and Provinces, aims to contribute to the progress towards a
caring society that, far from individualism, thinks about collective benefit. Local
governments, cities, and municipalities, as agents closest to the citizen, are the main
drivers of care and attention to vulnerable people. To provide them with a roadmap for care,
the White Paper on Cities that Care has been presented.
The compendium prepared during the pandemic, between March 2020 and December 2021, collects
the reflections of more than 100 experts. These, grouped into 22 specialties, reflected
their ideas and experience on care to guide local policies “towards a new paradigm in which
care occupies a central place”. As stated in its introduction, the white paper aims to
facilitate “a multidisciplinary proposal to move towards a caring society that abandons
individualism and thinks about collective benefit”, insisting that all people “at one time
or another in our lives, we can be dependent and require care”.
Three phases: reflection, debate and sharing This initiative, which aims to move towards a
“new urban model” that addresses the challenges of the future, consisted of three
phases.
The first is dedicated to reflection on the main themes that are interrelated with care;
from the management of the growing problem of loneliness suffered by many older people, to
feminism. But also going through areas such as health, aging or ecology and the environment.
“At one point or another in our lives, we may be dependent and require care,” the experts
note in this book.
The second phase was a cycle of round table debates, in Webinar format, with the
participation of 104 experts and a total registration in the 22 sessions of more than 10,000
citizens, where the fundamental points of the reflections were specified to facilitate their
applicability. In this way, they wanted to offer tools so that cities can develop effective
ways to implement their local care policies.
The I Conference of Cities that Care was the event that closed the Forum on December 13,
2021. It was attended by people of recognized prestige in the field of care and social care,
such as Victoria Camps, philosopher who gave the inaugural conference, and other experts in
the fields of aging, health, volunteering, and feminism. In conclusion, the white paper of
Cities that Care was presented.

Abstract ID: 126

Abstract Type: Poster – Paediatric Palliative Care

## A 12-month international, observational study of palliative care in childhood cancer
patients

Soham Bandyopadhyay*1, Noel Peter1, Kokila
Lakhoo2

1The Global Health Research Group on Children’s Non-Communicable Diseases
(Global Children’s NCDs), Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Oxford,
UK, 2Global Children’s NCDs Collaborative
* Correspondence should be addressed to: soham.bandyopadhyay@yahoo.co.uk
Background: It is unclear if the COVID-19 pandemic has increased the
proportion of children with cancer progressing to palliative care. In this study, we aimed
1) to establish the proportion of children with cancer started on palliative care, and 2) to
determine the factors associated with progressing to palliative care.
Methods: Prospective cohort study with data from 109 institutions in 41
countries. Data was collected for all children under the age of 18 years who were newly
diagnosed with or undergoing active treatment for acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, Non-Hodgkin
lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma, retinoblastoma, Wilms tumour, glioma, osteosarcoma, Ewing
sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, medulloblastoma and neuroblastoma. Demographics, oncological
diagnosis, clinical course, and cancer therapy data were collected. Statistical tests
included χ2, and univariate and multivariable logistic regression.
Results: 2075 patients were included. 238 patients (11.5%) were started on
palliative care. 232 of these patients originally had treatment plans made at the initial
multi-disciplinary team (MDT) meeting: 206 (14.6%) of 1413 participants in low-and-middle
income countries and 26 (3.9%) of 662 participants in high income counties (χ2 = 51.502,
p < 0.001). Multivariable analysis revealed several factors associated with starting
palliative care, including low-income (OR 27.13 [95% CI 12.7–58.6]; p< 0.001),
lower-middle income (OR 3.29 [95% CI 2.10–5.17]; p< 0.001), and upper-middle income (OR
4.82 [95% CI 3.09–7.51]; p< 0.001) country status, age, male sex, American Society of
Anaesthesiologists grade, radiotherapy within 30 days of the MDT, and tumour type. Other
treatment types, changes to treatment due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and SARS-CoV-2 infection
status were not associated with starting palliative care.
Conclusion: The COVID-19 pandemic has not directly increased the number of
children with cancer starting palliative treatment. However, urgent attention needs to be
given to the fact that children in lower-income countries are more likely to be started on
palliative care.

Abstract ID: 127

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate communities research

## Patient and Public Involvement (PPI) in palliative care research: experiences of the
Mesothelioma UK Research Centre

Clare Gardiner*1, Angela Tod1, Steph Ejegi-Memeh1,
Sarah Hargreaves1, Virginia Sherborne1

1Mesothelioma UK Research Centre, Health Sciences School, The University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: c.gardiner@sheffield.ac.uk
Introduction: Patient and Public Involvement (PPI) refers to the involvement
of patients, public and lay people in the design, conduct and dissemination of research. PPI
is a fundamental component of palliative care research internationally but has been reported
as complex, difficult and less advanced compared to PPI in other areas of health care
research. In 2020 the Mesothelioma UK Research Centre in Sheffield, UK established a PPI
panel for mesothelioma, a terminal cancer. The aim of this study was to explore the
challenges and successes of PPI in palliative care and mesothelioma.
Method: Over a 12 month period data were collated on the number of projects
supported by the PPI panel and the different types of support that were provided. Informal
feedback from panel members and academics over 12 months was also used to develop a
narrative account of key successes and challenges.
Results: Over one year the PPI panel contributed to eleven research projects
and funding applications. The role of the PPI panel included consultative activities
(reviewing funding applications, advising on research questions and methods, advising on
dissemination) and collaborative involvement (membership of steering committees, supporting
recruitment, developing recommendations). Collectively the PPI panel have improved
connections and partnerships between academics and the public, improved the design and
conduct of research in mesothelioma, empowered patients and carers to influence research,
and contributed to a culture which supports active patient involvement in research.
Challenges have included remote involvement due to COVID-19 and managing discussion around
sensitive issues related to palliative care and end of life.
Conclusion: PPI contributions to research have expanded over recent years. The
experiences of the Mesothelioma UK Research Centre support evidence which suggests that
public involvement can make positive contributions to research.

Abstract ID: 130

Abstract Type: Free Communication - COVID-19

## The importance of emotional support for relatives before and during the COVID-19
pandemic: a quantitative study among relatives

S.C. Renckens*1,2, H.R.W. Pasman1,2, H.T. Klop1,2,
C. du Perron1, L. Van Zuylen2,3, M. Steegers2,4, B.L. ten
Tusscher 5, F.C.H. Abbink 6, W. de Ruijter 7, M.M.C. van
Mol8,9, L.C.M. Vloet9,10, B.D.
Onwuteaka-Philipsen1,2

1Amsterdam UMC, location VU Medical Center, Department of Public and
Occupational Health, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Expertise Center for Palliative
Care Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3Amsterdam UMC, location VU
Medical Center, Department of Medical Oncology, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
4Amsterdam UMC, location VU Medical Center, Department of Anaesthesiology,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 5Amsterdam UMC, location VU Medical Center,
Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 6Amsterdam
UMC, University of Amsterdam, Department of Paediatrics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
7Noordwest Ziekenhuisgroep, Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Alkmaar, The
Netherlands, 8Erasmus MC, Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands, 9Foundation Family and patient Centered Intensive Care (FCIC),
Alkmaar, The Netherlands, 10HAN University of Applied Sciences, Research
Department of Emergency and critical Care, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
*Correspondence should be addressed to: s.renckens@amsterdamumc.nl
Background: Intensive care unit (ICU) admission can have long-term effects on
patients and relatives, including anxiety, depression and posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD). In relatives this is collectively called post intensive care syndrome-family
(PICS-F). The uncertainties and visitation restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic might
have affected PICS-F.
Aim: Examine the prevalence of PICS-F symptoms in patients’ relatives in six
Dutch ICUs, differences before and during the COVID-19 pandemic, and associations with
offering emotional support.
Methods: A written survey among relatives of ICU patients: 1) with mechanical
ventilation pre-COVID-19 (t0: 1-12-2019 – 31-1-2020), 2) with COVID-19 during the first wave
and 3) second wave (t1: 15-3-2020 – 15-5-2020 & t2: 1-10-2020 – 31-12-2020), including
the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) and the PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5).
Descriptive statistics were used to determine the prevalence of anxiety, depression (HADS
subscales ⩾8) and PTSD symptoms (PCL-5 ⩾33) and logistic regression analyses to examine
associations of t0, t1 and t2, and offering emotional support with PICS-F symptoms.
Results: 328 relatives responded: 95 of t0 (response 62%), 130 of t1 (70%) and
103 of t2 (57%). Of all relatives, 21% experienced anxiety, 19% depression and 9% PTSD
symptoms. After adjusting for amongst others the visitation policy, no significant
differences were found for PICS-F symptoms between t0, t1 and t2 (p>0.05). Overall the
prevalence of PICS-F symptoms was significantly lower in relatives who were offered
emotional support compared to those who were not (OR anxiety 0.53; OR depression 0.35; OR
PTSD 0.40).
Conclusion: During COVID-19 the prevalence of PICS-F symptoms did not change
significantly, but offering emotional support was associated with an overall lower
prevalence of PICS-F symptoms. This suggests that efforts to provide emotional support for
relatives of ICU patients are vital, even outside a pandemic.

Abstract ID: 132

Abstract Type: Poster - Euthanasia & MAID

## Untold Stories; Accompanying someone who used medical assistance in dying at the end of
life

Kathy Kortes-Miller*1,2, Keri-Lyn Durant1

1Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, ON, CA, 2Centre for Education and
Research on Aging and Health
*Correspondence should be addressed to: kkortesm@lakeheadu.ca
Canada’s federal legislation on medical assistance in dying (MAiD) was enacted on June 17,
2016. To date, little is known about the experiences and beliefs of people who have
comprised informal care networks – family and/or friends – who have supported someone
throughout the process. The purpose of this research project was to better understand the
experiences of family and friends that accompany someone throughout their dying process
involving MAiD in the province of Ontario.
This workshop will share findings from 27 interviews that were conducted across Ontario
Canada, highlighting the value of participant voices for ongoing healthcare and
policy-making practices. The research findings shared will provide insight into the
experiences of Ontarians who have accompanied someone who used MAiD at the end of their
life. Little attention has been afforded to the social consequences of the aftermath of a
medically hastened death experienced by those in the informal support network of the person
who has died. Issues relating to access and support will be shared which will encourage
participants to reflect on their own role in a compassionate community supporting people
after death using MAiD.
The second phase of the study realized eight participants’ digital storytelling efforts,
curated with members of the research team and developed from the initial interviews. Digital
storytelling affords often untold stories the opportunity to be created and disseminated,
resulting in transformational experiences for storyteller, viewer and, in this case,
research team. During this instructional component of our workshop, both process as well as
several products of our study will be explored.
Participants in this interactive workshop will have the opportunity to
1) Learn from stories exploring the study participants’ experiences of accompanying
someone throughout a medically assisted death to appreciate the voices of those directly
affected;
2) Be introduced/further familiarised with the use of digital storytelling in
qualitative healthcare research as it gains momentum as a method/methodology, and
3) Bear witness to several digital stories created during this study that highlight
patient and circle-of-care focused approaches to end of life.

Abstract ID: 133

Abstract Type: Free Communication - COVID-19

## Saying goodbye in the age of physical distancing

Kathy Kortes-Miller*1,2, Susan Cadell3, Kevin
Bezanson4

1Lakehead University Thunder Bay, ON, Canada, 2Centre for Education
and Research on Aging and Health, 3University of Waterloo, ON, Canada,
4Thunder Bay Regional Health Sciences Centre, ON, Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: kkortesm@lakeheadu.ca
Background: The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a profound impact on
people’s experience of dying, death, grief and loss. The act of saying goodbye to a person
who is dying often begins while a person is dying, before a funeral. COVID-19 has rendered
caring, grief and connecting with loved ones at the end of life even more challenging than
usual. In these unprecedented and challenging times, it is essential that we learn from our
experiences and facilitate creative ways to maintain connections in life and in death.
Dedicated COVID-19 research is needed to better understand the physical and emotional toll
the virus places on families, carers and patients during this difficult period of
restrictions and social distancing.
Methods: The purpose of this qualitative research project was to examine the
experience of family and informal support networks (friends) who accompanied someone
throughout their dying process during the COVID pandemic in in two different geographical
regions in the province of Ontario, Canada. Individual semi-structured interviews were
conducted with adult family and informal support networks (friends) who experienced the
death of someone close to them during the COVID pandemic.
Results: This presentation will share findings from interviews which were
conducted during the pandemic which will serve to:
deepen our understanding of the unique experiences of family members and friends who
supported a someone who died during the pandemic
increase knowledge about the questions, concerns, and expectations that family and
friends have of the healthcare system and social support networks during the
pandemic
to develop greater insight into the grief rituals, ceremonies and practices people in
Northwestern Ontario and the Waterloo region are using during this period of physical
distancing
Conclusion: In these unprecedented and challenging times, it is essential that
we learn from our experiences and facilitate creative ways to maintain connections in life
and in death.

Abstract ID: 134

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Various Topics

## The underused potential of social workers in palliative care in Flanders: A
mixed-methods study

Brent Taels*1, Kirsten Hermans1, Chantal Van
Audenhove1,2; Joachim Cohen3, Koen Hermans1,4, Anja De
Clercq1,4

1LUCAS - Centre for Care Research and Consultancy, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,
2Academic Center for General Practice, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium,
3End-of-life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) & Ghent
University, Brussels, Belgium, 4CESO – Centre for Sociological Research, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: brent.taels@kuleuven.be
Background: Social workers can have a strong role in professional palliative
care, for example, in the detection of social determinants during the end-of-life phase.
Furthermore, social workers can be key players in public health palliative care by building
bridges between clients, relatives, professionals and the broader community. Nevertheless,
social workers are often insufficiently involved in palliative care due to an ambiguous role
definition, a lack of specific training and the emphasis on medical aspects.
Aims: This study explores the attitudes of social workers in Flanders towards
the performance of palliative care tasks as well as the frequency and competency with which
they perform these tasks. Furthermore, it examines the extent to which they feel valued by
other professionals.
Methods: A mixed-methods study was conducted. Social workers from five
organisations filled out survey questionnaires: hospitals; nursing homes; neighborhood
health clinics; home care, and health insurance services. The results were discussed during
focus groups. Quantitative data were analysed by using bivariate analysis and non-parametric
significance testing. Qualitative data were thematically analysed by using the Framework
Method.
Results: 499 and 24 social workers participated in the survey and focus groups
respectively. Respondents have positive attitudes towards palliative care tasks. Yet, for
more than 50 % of tasks in the survey, a significant number of social workers indicate a
higher score for variables measuring competence in the performance of tasks than variables
measuring the frequency with which they perform them. Furthermore, our data shows that
respondent social workers do not always feel valued by other professionals.
Conclusions: Our study suggests that making better use of existing social work
potential as well as clarifying its added value may be a useful strategy for the adequate
involvement of social workers in Flemish palliative care.

Abstract ID: 135

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Culture, philosophy and spirituality

## What does it mean to be ‘compassionate’? From the perspectives of a Japanese
philosopher

Hirobumi Takenouchi*1

1Organization for Designing Future Society, Shizuoka University, Shizuoka,
Japan
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
takenouchi.hirobumi@shizuoka.ac.jp
Background: Translating Allan Kellehear’s Compassionate Cities, Public Health
and End-of-life Care into Japanese, I have searched for an appropriate Japanese word for
‘compassion’, that led me to the following questions. What does it mean to be
‘compassionate’? What role does ‘compassion’ play in contemporary society?
Methods: I traced some genealogies of the idea ‘compassion’ in the West and
the East, guided by the works of Joseph Campbell, Joan Halifax, Martha Nussbaum, Marcus
Borg, and others. I launched into literature research in the fields of mythology,
anthropology, religious studies, sociology and philosophy. In parallel, I reflected the
dialogical practices of hosting alternative death cafes such as ‘cafe mortal’ and ‘cafe
waiting for the wind’ in Japan, in pursuit of the interrelation between ‘dialogue’ and
‘compassion’.
Results: The word ‘compassion’ derives from two Latin root words: ‘cum’
meaning ‘together’ and ‘patior’ meaning ‘suffer’. This suggests sharing with another’s
suffering: to be patient in another’s suffering, to bear and support suffering.
As a feeling, compassion is located in a certain part of the body, namely in the loins,
both in Judeo Christian and Indian Buddhist traditions. It is the feeling of somebody else
in a visceral way, at a level somewhere below the level of the head. In Hebrew context, the
word usually translated as ‘compassion’ is the plural of a noun that in its singular form
means ‘womb’.
‘Compassion’ is central to Buddhist teaching. Sanskrit word for it is composed of two
words: ‘maitrī’ meaning ‘friendly interest in others’ and ‘Karuṇā’ meaning ‘compassion’. The
bodhisattva represents the principle of compassion in this tradition.
‘Compassion’ feels for another, while ‘empathy’ feels into another. Whereas ‘empathy’
merges with, includes or identify with another’s experiences, ‘compassion’ is based on the
self-awareness of Not-knowing. To understand another, one has to wait in silence, listen and
question, ‘What do you suffer from?’’.
Conclusion: Compassionate people turn toward the truth of suffering with the
wish to relieve that suffering. As the human response aroused by suffering of others,
‘compassion’ is essential to a liberal society that Nussbaum aspires to. This is a society
of citizens who recognize the needy and vulnerable character of human beings.

Abstract ID: 136

Abstract Type: Poster - COVID

## Not Just A Visitor; Caregiving experiences in Long Term Care during COVID-19

Kathy Kortes-Miller*1,2, Arne Stinchcombe3, Kim
Wilson4

1Lakehead University Thunder Bay ON, Canada, 2Centre for Education
and Research on Aging and Health, Thunder Bay, 3University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON,
Canada, 4University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: kkortesm@lakeheadu.ca
Background: At the onset of the pandemic, a friend shared how she was denied
access to her mom who was dying in a long-term care (LTC) home. She literally scaled a wall
with a ladder that she then climbed to look into her mother’s room. This story and the
others emerging out of long-term care are heartbreaking. Members of our community have been
denied the opportunity to hold the hands of those they care for as they die, due to pandemic
restrictions. Essential caregivers play a critical and irreplaceable role. They are
#NotJustAVisitor. The purpose of this research project was to examine the experience of
essential caregivers of Ontario residents in LTC during the COVID-19 pandemic. This project
captured stories that will provide us with insight about the questions, concerns, and
expectations essential caregivers have of LTC and the larger the health system.
Methods: Phase one – we conducted an electronic survey completed by family
members caring for residents of LTC during the first year of the pandemic.
Phase two: Twenty-five individual semi-structured interviews were conducted from
participants who completed the survey in Phase one.
Findings: This presentation will share findings from the survey and interviews
which were conducted during the pandemic which will serve to illustrate the experiences of
family caregivers of Ontario residents in LTC during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Conclusion: While health and safety must continue to be paramount as we fight
COVID-19, promoting a more compassionate, inclusive visitation protocol that embraces the
essential role of family caregivers is imperative. We at a critical turning point where it
is essential that we learn lessons that can improve the care, conditions, and outcomes of
our most vulnerable Canadians living in LTC. Our research team is working to develop
recommendations informed by people who have been impacted by caregiving, isolation, grief
and loss during COVID that will directly address identified knowledge, system and policy
gaps.

Abstract ID: 138

Abstract Type: Poster - Euthanasia & MAID

## Information and support regarding euthanasia: a qualitative study on the needs of
nursing home residents in the Netherlands

Marjolein Rikmenspoel*3, Guy Widdershoven1, Bregje
Onwuteaka-Philipsen2, Roeline. Pasman2, Fijgje de
Boer1

1Dep. of Ethics, Law and Humanities, Amsterdam Public Health research institute,
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, the Netherlands, 2Dep. of Public and
Occupational health, Expertise Center for Palliative care, Amsterdam Public Health research
institute, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, the Netherlands,
3Amsterdam Public Health research institute, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
*Correspondence should be addressed to: m.rikmenspoel@amsterdamumc.nl
Background: In the public debate about euthanasia in the Netherlands, the
voice of nursing home residents is neither heard nor expressed, so their perspectives and
needs are largely unknown.
Objectives: We aimed to gain insight in the needs of competent nursing home
residents suffering from physical conditions. We investigated the need for information and
support concerning euthanasia in the context of end-of-life decision making.
Methods: This qualitative study, inspired by the Grounded Theory Approach, is
based on in-depth interviews with 15 nursing home residents, who have mentioned euthanasia
to their nursing home physician. The participants’ age range is between 30 and 90 years.
Interviews were conducted from March 2019 until December 2021. Data analysis followed the
steps of open and axial coding focusing on the needs of respondents for information and
support.
Results: Regarding the need for information we found three categories: current
knowledge, resources for information, and information concerning the views of the medical
practitioner and the institutional policy regarding euthanasia. Regarding the need for
support we found four categories: assistance in making a difficult decision, practical
support, emotional support, and spiritual support.
Conclusion: Respondents for the most part expressed having no present need for
information concerning euthanasia in general. Regarding resources for information, most
respondents turn for questions first to their medical practitioner. The right to die-society
in the Netherlands NVVE is also an important source of information. Respondents did often
express a need for information on the views of their physician regarding their willingness
to actually perform euthanasia and for the policy of the nursing home. As for the need for
support, the study showed that requesting euthanasia in the future is regarded as a
difficult decision which will require assistance. Next to practical support, respondents
need emotional and spiritual support.

Abstract ID: 139

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community engagement and development

## Maison Mourance: qualitative study of the vision, organisation and challenges of a
community-led end-of-life facility in Brussel

Sabet Van Steenbergen*1, An-Sofie Smetcoren², Kenneth
Chambaere1

1End-of-Life Care Research group, Ghent University & Vrije Universiteit
Brussel (VUB), 2Belgian Ageing Studies, Department of Educational Sciences, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel (VUB)
*Correspondence should be addressed to: sabet.vansteenbergen@ugent.be
Background: ‘Care and living in community’ (CALICO) is an innovative project
that aims to develop a new model of community-led care, integrated in a co-housing context
in Brussels, Belgium. Within this larger project, Maison Mourance was founded as a
community-based initiative for palliative and end-of-life care. It makes a specific
connection with birth and mobilizes capacity in the community. This study aims to provide
understanding of Maison Mourance in terms of vision at the start of the initiative,
organization, roles of various stakeholders and future challenges.
Methods: To answer the research objectives a qualitative study was performed
consisting of 1 in-depth interview with the project managers of Maison Mourance, 9 in-depth
interviews with residents of CALICO and 1 focus group with the steering group of Maison
Mourance.
Results: Maison Mourance originated from an idea of one founder and culminated
into the broader organisation Pass-Ages. Maison Mourance is a nonhierarchical cooperation in
which each member is assigned different tasks and roles. It wants to offer a warm and homely
environment to people at the end of life and their families. Attention is given to the
connection with birth, the central role of the patient and breaking taboos about dying and
death. Embedding care in the neighborhood, complementing the existing range of palliative
care in the area and creating a network of solidarity were mentioned as added value. Future
challenges are financing the project, expanding and keeping the network of volunteers
motivated, formulating concrete objectives, designing an evaluation plan and selecting
evaluation tools.
Conclusion: Maison Mourance is a promising initiative in terms of
community-led palliative care. In the creation process of Maison Mourance, several
challenges and threats were identified. It will be important to monitor future developments
in terms of goal attainment and with an impact on sustainability of the initiative.

Abstract ID: 140

Abstract Type: Poster – ACP & End of Life communication

## Information meetings on end-of-life care organised by GPs and other organisations; do
they differ in audience and results?

Annicka van der Plas*1, Roosmarijne Kox1, Tessa
Bergman1, Roeline Pasman1, Bregje
Onwuteaka-Philipsen1

1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam
*Correspondence should be addressed to: burger@amsterdamumc.nl
Background: A way to inform older people about end-of-life care, is to
organise information meetings by a general practitioner (GP) inviting their own patients, or
by another organisation targeting the general population. We looked at differences between
attendees of meetings organised by GPs or by another organization in: 1) motivation for
attending the meeting; 2) Advance Care Planning (ACP) experience before the meeting; 3)
plans to engage in ACP after the meeting; 4) trust in physicians to provide good care at the
end of life after the meeting.
Methods: A pre-post evaluation study using written questionnaires filled in at
the start (T0) and at the end of the meeting (T1). We report on 26 meetings (9 by GP, 17
other) attended by 308 persons.
Results: Attendees of GP meetings were older (75 vs 70 years) and had
different reasons for attending than attendees of other meetings: more often ‘thinking about
the end of life’ (46% vs 33%), and less often other reasons (such as getting information as
a carer’ or ‘to prepare myself’) (17% vs 9%). There were no differences between the
attendees of the two types of meetings regarding ACP experience beforehand. Attendees of GP
meetings more often indicated they intent to discuss their preferences with their GP after
the meeting (81% vs 69%), compared to attendees of other meetings. Finally, attendees of GP
meetings more frequently had very much trust in physicians providing good end-of-life care
than attendees of other meetings (39% vs 24%). When corrected for age, all these differences
disappeared.
Conclusion: Meetings organised by other organisations attract a younger crowd.
Meetings organised by GPs may result in more ACP behaviour after the meeting because they
attract people who are more ‘ready to engage with the GP’, while meetings organised by other
organisations may result in earlier awareness and provision of information about end-of-life
care.

Abstract ID: 141

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Various Topics

## From living well with dementia to dying well with dementia: Paradoxes and problems in
current approaches to end-of-life care

Joseph Sawyer*1, Elizabeth Sampson1, Paul
Higgs2

1Marie Curie Palliative Care Research Department, UCL Division of Psychiatry,
London, UK, 2UCL Division of Psychiatry, faculty of Brain Sciences, London,
UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: joseph.sawyer@ucl.ac.uk
This paper explores current theoretical frameworks that support people, communities and
health systems in transitioning from living well, to dying well with dementia. As health and
social care services expand to meet growing end-of-life care needs of people with dementia
there is a need to think about how the dying process is understood in relation to the life
course and how such a framework could work alongside existing approaches to dementia care.
The paper argues an approach that embraces the value death holds is vital in shaping a
response to care that can meet both the needs and complexity faced by people with dementia.
In laying out a complex and often paradoxical terrain, we map Western societies changing
approach to death and dying including palliative care and the notion of a good death. By
setting out the unique end-of-life challenges faced by people affected by dementia, we
discuss the use and relevance of this position as well as the theoretical, ethical and
philosophical constructs that have been used to deliver it. We point out that palliative
care services are evolving from a service led model to a collective social model where dying
is considered a relational and spiritual process supported by collaborative partnerships. We
interrogate such an approach, paying particular attention to the role of social
relationships in building a community’s capacity to deliver dementia specific end-of-life
care. We conclude by calling for a reimagining of the dying process in dementia as a
distinct phase within the lived experience of those with the condition. This requires its
own unique theoretical framework supported by an ethic that enables us to see the person
dying of dementia as one of intrinsic value.

Abstract ID: 142

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Policy and Vision

## Processes underpinning care homes’ ability to provide palliative care during COVID-19,
and policy recommendations (CovPall_CH)

Katherine E Sleeman*1, Sophia Ostler1, Andy
Bradshaw1, Lori Bourke1, Izabele Batkovskyte1, Clare
Ellis-Smith1, Anna Bone 1, Claire Goodman 2, Stephen
Barclay3, Irene J Higginson1, India Tunnard1, Margaret
Ogden1, Catherine Evans1,4

1King’s College London, Cicely Saunders Institute, Department of Palliative
Care, Policy & Rehabilitation, London, UK, 2Centre for Research in Public
health and Community Care (CRIPACC), School of Health and Social Work, University of
Hertfordshire, Hatfeld, UK, 3University of Cambridge Department of Public Health
and Primary Care, Cambridge, UK, 4Sussex Community NHS Foundation Trust,
Brighton, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: katherine.sleeman@kcl.ac.uk
Background: The number of people dying in care homes is projected to increase
with population ageing. The COVID-19 pandemic was a stress test for provision of palliative
and end-of-life care (PEoLC) in care homes.
Aims: To explore barriers and facilitators to providing high quality PEoLC in
care homes during COVID-19, and make policy recommendations.
Methods: Mixed methods study comprising 1) online survey of UK care home
senior staff, identified through care sector networks. The survey was developed from a rapid
literature review and included structured and free-text items. 2) Qualitative interviews
with individual care home staff, conducted virtually (sampled from the survey). Findings
integrated and analysed thematically.
Results: 107 survey responses (57 (53%) with onsite nursing care) and 27
qualitative interviews were included. Three themes were identified. Theme 1: Relational
care. COVID-19 disrupted the ability of care home staff to develop and maintain
relationships with residents and their families, impairing PEoLC. Theme 2: Pillars of
relational care. Essential components required for care homes to maintain relational care
during COVID-19 were (i) integration with primary, secondary, community and specialist
palliative care services; (ii) digital inclusion; and (iii) workforce support and
empowerment. The extent of these components varied across services. Theme 3: (Dis)parity of
esteem. The pillars on which relational care is built require strong societal and economic
foundations. Care home staff felt their efforts and expertise were often unrecognised and
undervalued by the government, media, public, and wider health care system.
Conclusion: Recommendations for policy include ensuring emotional and
practical support for care home staff, workforce development including education and
training, ensuring access to PEoLC advice and support, digital inclusivity, and improved
recognition of care home expertise.

Abstract ID: 143

Abstract Type: Poster – Cancer

## Patient and Caregiver-reported Acceptability of an “Automatic” Supportive and
Palliative Care Referral for Advanced Lung Cancer

Jessica Simon1, Seema King1,2, Sadia Ahmed1, Lisa
Shirt*2, Vanessa Slobogian2,Chandra Vig2, Desiree
Hao1, Lisa Barbera1, Elizabeth Kurien 1, Maria
Santana1, Aliyah Pabani1, Patricia Biondo 1, Aynharan
Sinnarajah3,4

1University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 2Alberta Health Services
Calgary Zone, Calgary, AB, Canada, 3Queens University, Kingston, ON, Canada,
4Lakeridge Health, Oshawa, ON, Canada
* Correspondence should be addressed to:
lisa.shirt@albertahealthservices.ca
Background: To determine patient-reported acceptability of a phone call from a
supportive and palliative care (SPC) nurse offering consultation, automatically after first
oncologist appointment for newly diagnosed stage IV non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Methods: This study tested a patient-provider co-designed, automatic referral
pathway in a tertiary cancer centre. Two SPC specialist nurses screened out-patient clinic
lists weekly and called all eligible patients offering a home consultation. Eligibility:
>18 years, newly diagnosed/suspected Stage IV NSCLC and had first medical/radiation
oncologist visit. Patients could have a cancer therapy plan pending, confirmed, or have no
further care planned at the cancer centre. Patients/caregivers were surveyed about the
acceptability (5-point Likert scale) of consult call, using Sekhon’s Framework of
Acceptability domains.
Results: In interim analysis, of 63 patients/caregivers contacted and offered
SPC consultation, 79% accepted the consult. Of 55 patients/caregivers that agreed to be
contacted for the research call: 3 did not recall call, 2 did not consent, 13 were not
reached. Of 37 respondents 94.6% rated overall acceptability of the call offering SPC
consultation somewhat/completely acceptable. Of 27 patients/caregivers that completed the
survey: 30% caregivers, 67% female, 52% ⩽65 years, 30% ⩽high school education, 58% (n=19)
<$60,000 household income, 85% spoke only English/French, and 74% Caucasian. 93% were
comfortable with the call and understood why they received it; 86% thought the call was a
valuable; 74% thought the call helped them; 96% thought the call didn’t take much
physical/emotional effort; 56% learned about SPC from the call and 100% were not concerned
the nurse had access to their contact/health information and were confident in their ability
to participate (ask questions/make decisions).
Conclusions: Nearly all patients/caregivers found the SPC call offering
consultation to be acceptable. Routine calls offering SPC consultation may be an acceptable
and timely alternative to awaiting conventional referral by oncologists.”

Competing interests

Dr Sinnarajah reports payments for clinical, leadership and research work from Lakeridge
Health, Queen’s University and Alberta Health Services. He also leads or is part of research
teams that have received grants from Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Health Canada,
Canadian Cancer Society, Canadian Foundation for Healthcare Improvement, Applied Research in
Cancer Control, Alberta Innovates Health Solutions, Mach-Gaensslen Foundation, University of
Calgary, The College of Family Physicians of Canada, Choosing Wisely Alberta, Alberta Cancer
Foundation and Alberta Health Services.

Abstract ID: 144

Abstract Type: Poster - Literacy & Education

## Development and Testing of the Palliative Care related Knowledge, Attitudes &
Confidence in Home Health Care Questionnaires

Jingjing Shang*1, Ashley M. Chastain1, Margaret V.
McDonald2, Komal P. Murali1, Jung A. Kang1, Lori
King2

1Columbia University, School of Nursing, 2Visiting Nurse Services of
New York
*Correspondence should be addressed to: js4032@columbia.edu
Background: Palliative care provides patient- and family-centered care to
individuals with serious illness. Home health care (HHC) utilization is increasing in both
the U.S. and Europe due to an aging population and patients with multiple chronic
conditions, leading to a great need for palliative care in HHC. However, it is unclear if
HHC clinicians are prepared to provide such care and how palliative care is perceived by HHC
patients and their informal caregivers. Currently, there are no HHC setting-specific survey
instruments to measure palliative care-related knowledge, attitudes, and confidence
(PC-KAC). This study aimed to develop and test PC-KAC in HHC questionnaires for use with HHC
clinicians, patients, and caregivers.
Methods: Guided by the 2018 National Consensus Project Clinical Practice
Guidelines for Quality Palliative Care (NCP guidelines), we developed two PC-KAC in HHC
questionnaires: 1) for clinicians, and 2) for patients/informal caregivers. We conducted a
comprehensive literature review, identified existing survey instruments measuring PC-KAC,
and adapted scales/questions to the HHC setting. Experts in palliative care and HHC and
cognitive interviews with HHC clinicians, patients and informal caregivers helped refine the
questionnaires.
Results: Our PC-KAC questionnaires are organized by 3 main sections:
knowledge, attitudes and confidence; each section contains items relating to the NCP
guidelines eight domains of practice. There are core questions, as well as clinician
role-specific (for nurses, therapists, social workers) and caregiver-specific items.
Questions about demographics, and preferred communication methods, information sources and
location of palliative care services are asked at the end. Pilot testing will be conducted
with 30 clinicians and 30 patients/informal caregivers from a large, urban HHC agency to
assess validity and reliability.
Conclusion: Our PC-KAC in HHC questionnaires are the first HHC
setting-specific survey instruments to measure PC-KAC among U.S. HHC clinicians, patients,
and informal caregivers. While the questionnaires were developed and tested in the U.S.,
they can be adapted for different culture and countries. Study results will help inform
clinical practice to ensure provision of high-quality palliative care.

Abstract ID: 146

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate cities

## Implementing Compassionate Communities Programs to all regions in Thailand: Experience
and lesson learn

Ekkapop Sittiwantana*1,2, Wanna Jarusomboon1

1Compassionate Communities Research and Development Institution Foundation,
Thailand,fe 2Mahidol University, Thailand (Ph.D. student.)
*Correspondence should be addressed to: ekk814@gmail.com
Since 2017, Thai civil society leaders in Promoting Death dying and Palliative Awareness
(Peaceful Death group), got to know the Compassionate Cities (CoCi) and Compassionate
Communities (CoCo) idea in the APHC2017 conference. CoCo concept had been implemented in
Thailand. The process components include 1. Collecting examples about CoCo practices that
already exist in Thai society 2. Organizing the CoCo annual academic conference 3. Finding
and approaching potential CoCo networks and leaders create CoCo activities in their settings
4. Knowledge managing 5. Training 6. Production of CoCo learning materials. The main sponsor
to CoCo programs comes from the Thai Health Promotion Foundation approximately USD 600,000
over the past 4 years.
Till now, more than 20 network partners in all regions in Thailand have participated in the
CoCo areas/ issues. More than 300 CoCo Facilitators have participated in the training and
continue to expand their knowledge, skills, and attitudes that contribute to healthy living
and peaceful dying environment in their communities. Over 10,000 people were benefit from
the programs through online and onsite activities. The program also produced more than 5
local research works. At present, the community kindly expands the work to become a
foundation to settle down on ideas.
Important factors in the community work process are various learning tools for discussing
death conversations, living will and ACP document writing, mental health support groups to
caregivers and healthcare personnel. The CoCo toolkits facilitate CoCo activities by CoCo
Facilitators into their community easier. The CoCo core team also tries to offer CoCo models
to local community authorities who are interested in caring for the aging society. However,
the response from the local and national governments is not much at present.
There are still implementation gaps such as academic production. building collaboration
with academic and policy leaders. We believe that the aging society and the need for
palliative care situation in Thailand will pressure the public and private sectors looking
for expanding CoCo implementation. Until then, CoCo networks would still create working
methods and experience prepare collaboration to all partners to build CoCo into all
communities in Thailand.

Abstract ID: 147

Abstract Type: Poster - ACP & End of Life communication

## Talking about death to advanced cancer patients: not if, but how

Maria Fidelis Manalo*1, Semra Ozdemir2,3, Eric A.
Finkelstein2,3, Irene Teo2,3,4

1Supportive Oncology & Palliative Care, Augusto P. Sarmiento Cancer
Institute, The Medical City, Philippines, 2Lien Centre for Palliative Care,
Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 3Programme for Health Services & Systems
Research, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, 4Department of Psychosocial
Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore
*Correspondence should be addressed to: lizamanalomd@gmail.com
Purpose: To determine the knowledge, preferences, and predictors of prognostic
information among advanced cancer patients.
Patients and Methods: Participants included 195 stage 4 cancer patients in a
private tertiary hospital. Patients were informed by their doctor they had advanced cancer
less than 6 months to a year of recruitment. Patients completed a validated structured
APPROACH questionnaire.
Results: Majority (84%) responded that their doctor always explained things in
the way they could understand and always gave them as much information as they wanted about
their treatments, including potential benefits and side effects. A good number (69.5%)
answered that their doctors always encouraged them to ask all the cancer related questions
they had. Most of them (78%) always felt that that they were as much involved in decisions
about their care as they wanted. Less than half (40.5%) considered themselves very informed
regarding how their illness will change over time. Regarding their current treatments,
majority (74.5%) think these will help them live longer while most (63%) think these will
cure them. Considering their current health condition and treatment plan, almost half (49%)
think they are likely to live for more than 10 years. Majority of the participants (67%) did
not have anxiety. More participants were suffering from depression, with 34% having
borderline abnormal and 26% having higher HADS depression scores. More than half would like
to know how long they are likely to live under various treatment options, with 32.5%
preferring to know in general terms and 24% wanting to know in specific terms. Patients with
higher HADS depression scores were almost three times (95% C.I. 1.05-7.04) more likely to
want to know how long they are likely to live under various treatment options (P = .039).
More than half (61.5%) would you like to be at home during the last days of their life.
Conclusion: Almost half of the advanced cancer patients have misperceptions
about prognosis. Since these patients, especially those with depression, would like to know
how long they are likely to live under various treatment options, doctors should not
hesitate to talk about death so they can actively participate in decision-making and express
their preferences about end of life care.

Abstract ID: 148

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Culture, philosophy and spirituality

## “Bayanihan:” The cultural practice that turns health care workers & ordinary
Filipinos into heroes during the pandemic

Maria Fidelis Manalo*1,2

1Supportive Oncology & Palliative Care, Augusto P. Sarmiento Cancer
Institute, The Medical City, Philippines, 2Supportive and Palliative Care,
Department of Community and Family Medicine, Far Eastern University-Nicanor Reyes Medical
Foundation, Philippines
*Correspondence should be addressed to: lizamanalomd@gmail.com
In the Philippines, the “Bayanihan” spirit is one of communal unity and cooperation to help
fellow countrymen in times of need. Bayanihan is a Filipino word derived from “bayan”
meaning community or nation. Bayanihan is also derived from “bayani,” meaning a hero, and
bayanihan literally means “being heroes” to the community. Among the first casualties of
COVID-19 were a number of doctors who heroically risked their lives for their patients.
Inspired by the Bayanihan spirit, hospitals, private sector, and government units rose to
the challenge of the pandemic. The Medical City hospital came up with: a two-in-one hospital
system to make it a safe place for all, comfort-focused care pathway for COVID patients,
COVID home care program, and teleconsultation services. During the lockdown, doctors and
nurses were provided free transportation services, food, and PPEs by generous donors.
Private schools allowed their premises to be used as quarantine facilities. The Bayanihan
spirit was also in the ordinary Filipinos whose children made thank you cards for healthcare
workers to lift their spirits and in those who started community pantries and food
distribution for the poor.
While many critically-ill COVID patients succumbed to the disease, they received the best
care possible, pain was controlled with palliative care, and someone was with them when they
died. While graveside services were limited to 5 to 10 people, online Novenas to pray for
the souls of the dead became common practice among families and friends. For COVID patients
who recovered, their discharge was accompanied with claps and balloons from doctors and
nurses who share their joy at their new lease on life. For non-COVID patients, they felt
safe enough, due to the two-in-one hospital system of The Medical City, to continue their
treatment.
Bayanihan inspires Filipinos. We believe that together we can survive and thrive. We always
bounced back from the heaviest typhoons, floods, volcanic eruptions, and earthquakes. We
keep our smiles. That’s because we know that when we need help, our fellow Filipinos will
unite to help us. Indeed, while the COVID pandemic continue its devastating effects, it has
made heroes of health care workers and ordinary Filipinos.

Abstract ID: 150

Abstract Type: Free communication - Arts and end of life

## No Barriers Here – A Creative Approach to Advance Care Planning Conversations with
Communities often underserved in Healthcare

Jed Jerwood*1,2, Gemma Allen1, Claire
Towns1

1Mary Stevens Hospice, Stourbridge, West Midlands, United Kingdom,
2Institute of Clinical Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United
Kingdom
*Correspondence should be addressed to: j.jerwood@nhs.net
Background: No Barriers Here was co-produced with a group of adults with
learning disabilities, an Art Psychotherapist and a hospice in 2020 during the first wave of
the covid-19 pandemic. It uses arts-based approaches to explore and enhance advance care
planning conversations with people and communities who experience systematic differences and
inequalities accessing healthcare services, particularly in palliative and end of life
care.
This award-winning approach has since been developed further and used with communities who
may be excluded by identity, culture, ethnicity or race.
Methods: A co-production group was established with members of Black, Asian
and minority ethnic communities, hospice staff (Palliative Care Inclusion and Community
Partnerships Lead, clinical and community engagement staff) and an Art Psychotherapist. The
co-production group worked together to further develop the original No Barriers Here methods
to explore if the model could be successfully used with other groups often underserved by
healthcare services. Three rounds of workshops were held in community settings, using
arts-based approaches. A thematic analysis of the artefacts and objects created was
undertaken, and interviews were held with participants.
Results: The emerging results and early findings will be presented for the
first time at PHPCI 2022. Emerging themes include:
The importance of building trust and community engagement
The impact of co-production on engagement
The need for a flexible approach and importance of listening
The role of less verbal approaches and a focus on relationships
Conclusion: This project seeks to improve engagement with people and
communities who are often marginalised and underserved in palliative and end of life care,
and across health care more widely. It adopts the principles of public health palliative
care and community engagement. Co-production methods and principles were adopted
throughout.
No Barriers Here shapes rich and valuable dialogue within communities and is an effective
tool in engaging in early conversations at a community level.

Abstract ID: 151

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate cities

## Differences in urban and rural approach to build Compassionate Cities: Swiss
examples

Claudia Michel*1, Sibylle Felber2, Barbara
Affolter2,3, Evelyn Hunziker4, Steffen
Eychmüller2

1Bern University of Applied Sciences, Institute on Ageing, Bern, Switzerland,
2University Center for Palliative Care, University Hospital Bern, Bern,
Switzerland, 3Hospital of Emmental, Burgdorf, Switzerland, 4Competence
Center Ageing, City of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
*Correspondence should be addressed to: claudia.michel@bfh.ch
Background: Most people in Switzerland would like to spend the end of their
lives at home, but this is only possible for a few of them. Compassionate Cities as
understood by Public Health Palliative Care International, advocate for a new culture in
which dying, death and grieving are not located in specialised institutions, but remain a
part of public life. These cities are crucial allies for democratising Palliative Care.
Methods: The city of Bern and a regional association of rural communities in
the Swiss mountain region decided to participate in a project on Compassionate Cities in
2020. Approaches differed: while a network of preexisting organisations and institutions
(ranging from city office for elderly affairs to palliative care services) was quickly
formed in the city, most of these organisations were missing in the rural community. There,
first steps were undertaken by an organisation for the elderly and the municipal
administration.
Results: The city network directly began implementing the Compassionate City
by organising public events, developing and publishing a charter, and creating volunteer
groups. Meanwhile, the rural network first had to familiarise itself with the topics of end
of life and palliative care. These had to be integrated into the local policy on ageing to
guide the development of a Compassionate City.
Conclusions: In both urban and rural areas, Compassionate Cities need to be
fully embedded in partnerships between health facilities and local social care and community
structures. In rural areas, the degree of organisation of palliative care is often lower
than in urban areas. However, this is not necessarily a disadvantage for the rural
periphery. The actors delivering services for the elderly population can be central partners
for Compassionate Cities in rural, as well as in urban areas. However, the prerequisite is
that ageing policy takes on an integrating function, and is not limited to infrastructure
planning.

Abstract ID: 152

Abstract Type: Poster - Community

## Supporting compassionate communities in dying, death & bereavement by providing
space for orgs to gather, discuss & learn

Helen MacGregor*1, Margaret Muir1

1Community Engagement, Caring Services Scotland, Marie Curie
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
helen.macgregor@mariecurie.org.uk
Background: Check-in and Chat sessions were created in response to a post
lock-down, online survey (Nov 2020) sent to community organisations across two Scottish
localities. The Marie Curie survey received 74 responses and evidenced a request to create a
regular, local session offering support, signposting, information and resources relating to
end of life care and planning as well as more information on end of life services available
locally.
Purpose: To equip staff, volunteers and service users of local community
organisations with tools, knowledge and connections to help build compassionate communities
at a grassroots level.
Methods: Using local experts and Marie Curie’s Community Engagement Officers a
calendar of online sessions has been brought to the communities covering subjects such as
‘Grief in the Workplace’, ‘What to Say?’’, ‘Caring for the Carers’, ‘Finances and Support
for Carers’.
Sessions offer a relaxed, safe space to build local relationships, find out about services
and learn skills, all helping improve conversations around dying, death and bereavement.
Results: In 2021 nine online sessions were facilitated. An average of 15
people registered, 10 attended, and 157 expressed an interest, demonstrating a need for
learning opportunities around dying, death and bereavement locally with organisations whose
main purpose is not palliative and end of life care.
Conclusion: Breaking down barriers to conversations about dying, death and
bereavement can happen everywhere. The Check-in and Chat sessions are helping to equip a
wide range of professionals from many backgrounds to have more confidence in thinking /
talking /planning / connecting/ taking action in relation to these subjects, reducing any
discomfort. Sessions are to continue in 2022, aiming to support at least a further 40 people
in the year ahead.

Abstract ID: 153

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Various Topics

## Live well, die well (iLIVE): Cohort and interview study protocol of an international
research programme

Melanie Joshi*1, Simon Allan2, Miša Bakan3, Pilar
Barnestein-Fonseca4,5, Michael Berger6, Mark Boughey7,
John Ellershaw8, Steffen Eychmüller9, Claudia Fischer6,
Carl Johan Fürst10,11, Gabriel Goldraij12, Christel Hedman
10,11, Marilyn Ho8, Hana Kodba-Cˇeh3, Ida J.
Korfage13, Urška Lunder3, Maria L. Martín-Roselló4,5,
Silvina Montilla14,15, Beth Morris8, Maria E.C.
Schelin10,11 Katrin R. Sigurdardottir16,17, Valgerdur
Sigurdardottir18, Judit Simon6, Julia Strupp1, Vilma A.
Tripodoro14,15, Verónica I. Veloso14,15, Berivan
Yildiz13, Sofia C. Zambrano19, Raymond Voltz1,20-22,
Agnes van der Heide13, on Behalf of the iLIVE Project

1University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital, Department
of Palliative Medicine, Germany, 2Arohanui Hospice, Palmerston North, New
Zealand.3University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases Golnik, Golnik,
Slovenia.4CUDECA Institute for Training and Research in Palliative Care, CUDECA
Hospice Foundation, Málaga, Spain, 5Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de
Málaga-IBIMA Group CA15: Palliative Care, Málaga, Spain, 6Department of Health
Economics, Center for Public Health, Medical University of Vienna, Austria,
7Department of Palliative Care, St Vincent’s Hospital Melbourne, Australia,
8Palliative Care Unit, Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences,
University of Liverpool, UK, 9University Center for Palliative Care, Inselspital
University Hospital Bern, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 10The Institute
for Palliative care at Lund University and Region Skåne, 11Division of Oncology
and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, 12Hospital
Privado Universitario de Córdoba, Argentina, 13Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, Netherlands, 14Institute Pallium Latinoamérica, Argentina,
15Institute of Medical Research A. Lanari, University of Buenos Aires,
Argentina, 16Regional Centre of Excellence for Palliative Care, Western Norway,
Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 17Department of Anaesthesia and
Surgical Services, Specialist Palliative Care Team, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
Norway, 18Palliative Care Unit, Landspitali-National University Hospital,
Reykjavik, Iceland, 19Institute for Social and Preventive Medicine, University of
Bern, 20University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital,
Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Dusseldorf (CIO ABCD), Germany,
21University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital, Clinical
Trials Center (ZKS), Germany, 22University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and
University Hospital, Center for Health Services Research, Germany (ZVFK)
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Melanie.Joshi@uk-koeln.de
Background: Patients with serious illness may face a number of physical and
psychosocial challenges in their last months of life. As part of this process, patients may
need to constantly manage expectations, concerns and preferences regarding complex
decision-making processes in end-of-life-care. Changes resulting from a deterioration in
health status can also lead to shifting expectations, concerns and preferences as well as
different cultural contexts may result in different expectations, concerns and preferences
regarding end-of-life topics. The view on health, life, and death as such is a matter that
is highly dependent on the patient’s culture and is of utmost importance for those providing
end-of-life-care. The international EU funded iLIVE project is aiming at providing better
understanding of current experiences of dying.
Methods: In an international ongoing cohort study, patient recruitment is
being conducted in Argentina, Germany, Iceland, New Zealand, Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and United Kingdom. Participants (those identified with an
‘estimated’ prognosis of < 6 months) are surveyed with validated tools assessing domains
of quality of life and resource use, symptom burden, well-being and concerns. Data is being
collected upon patients’ inclusion, one month after inclusion, and, if applicable, in the
last days of life and 90 days post-bereavement with an identified key-relative. Qualitative
interviews with five patients/family members/ health care professionals in 10 countries will
provide an in-depth understanding of experiences, expectations and preferences.
Results: We expect to provide insight into similarities and differences in
patient’s and relatives’ expectations, concerns and preferences regarding the last months of
life as well as healthcare worker’s experiences with care for dying patients.
Conclusion: Data and analysis from the iLIVE project will contribute to the
improvement of care for the dying and enable normalizing death and dying, whilst also giving
evidence on how well relatives felt supported at the end of the patient’s lives. Data will
also be used to begin the development of cultural frameworks that may serve to optimize
patient care in the last months of life.

Abstract ID: 154

Abstract Type: Workshop

## A design approach to transdisciplinary end-of-life care challenges

Max Kleijberg*‡1, Marieke Sonneveld‡2

1Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden, 2Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering, Department of Human
Centered Design, Delft University of technology, Delft, The Netherlands
*Correspondence should be addressed to: max.kleijberg@ki.se
‡Max Kleijberg and Marieke Sonneveld will both facilitate the workshop.
Background and objective: Dying, death, loss, and care are experiences that
are profoundly impactful and transcend disciplinary boundaries. The field of health
promoting palliative care aims to improve end-of-life (EoL) related experiences by
connecting formal and informal EoL-care, striving towards health equity at the EoL for
marginalized groups, and increasing death literacy among the general population. To this
end, various disciplines need to integrate in collaborative development processes, which
requires transdisciplinary creativity. Design addresses complex issues through creative
transdisciplinary collaboration, developing products and services, improving experiences,
and changing perspectives. Designers have developed tools and processes to facilitate
transdisciplinarity in various contexts and have begun to apply these to address EoL-issues.
The objective of this workshop is to explore the potential of a design approach to
transdisciplinary collaboration in the context of health promoting palliative care.
Workshop content and learning outcomes: Based on our own experiences as
designers and researchers working with health promotion and palliative care, we will discuss
some of the possibilities and challenges of working “designerly” in this field. In smaller
groups, we will then apply design tools and processes to explore creative ways of addressing
complex EoL-related issues. These design processes and tools include e.g., design thinking,
co-creation, user journeys, and rapid prototyping to create design interventions.
Participants will have a hands-on introduction to the “language” of design and gain
experience in re-framing the transdisciplinary challenges they may encounter in their own
practice and research. Learning outcomes for workshop participants include an increased
understanding of the potential of design and working designerly in the field of health
promoting palliative care.

Abstract ID: 155

Abstract Type: Poster - Education

## Knowing, being proficient, and being in palliative care starts in education, but does
it?

Danny Vereecke*1, Céline Baele1,2, Veerle
Coupez1

1Howest University College of Applied Sciences, Bachelor Nursing, Bruges,
Belgium, 2Department of Work, Organisation and Society, Faculty of Psychology and
Educational Sciences, Ghent University (Universiteit Gent), Ghent, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: danny.vereecke@howest.be
Background: The Palliative Debate revealed that the Flemish society demands
appropriate and timely palliative care (PC). One of the resulting ambitions is the
improvement of training in PC for healthcare providers. The goal of the project EduPal
Vlaanderen is to map the presence of PC themes and the acquisition of PC competencies in
Flemish nursing programmes from the perspective of the teachers, students and the work
field. The results should lead to an action plan to accomplish change and improvement and to
give PC a full place alongside other care topics in the Flemish nursing curricula.
Methods: To determine the extent to which basic competencies in PC are
embedded in the programmes, a curriculum analysis was carried out in 10 of the 11 Flemish
university colleges. With online surveys, the last year students as well as the professional
field were asked how they experienced the PC education and competencies.
Results: The curriculum analysis revealed a number of remarkable facts. With
the exception of ‘general medicine and medical specialisms’, PC is hardly dealt with in the
six other European health care domains and usually PC is discussed as a separate topic
rather than an integrated part of a broader care subject. It is also striking that the time
spent on PC topics during the 4-year nursing programmes varies greatly: from 2h to 31h for
the compulsory courses. Moreover, PC is provided mostly in a fragmentary way and in none of
the analysed programmes, PC is dealt with during all of the 8 semesters. Another point of
attention is that in most programmes, PC is represented by a single lecturer and other
lecturers seem to be hesitant and difficult to convince to address the topic in their
classes.
Conclusion: With the student and working field surveys still being processed,
this project is in full development. From the curriculum analysis, it appears that there is
room for optimization of the education in PC: the current approach is not sustainable and
impeding the development of a PC attitude required in each care setting. In the
presentation, an integrated view of the 3 perspectives will be presented and working points
will be specified for nursing programmes to improve the knowledge, skills and attitudes of
graduating nurses to provide quality basic PC.

Abstract ID: 156

Abstract Type: Poster – Euthanasia & MAID

## Relatives of cancer patients’ experiences regarding the interaction with healthcare
providers during a euthanasia process

Charlotte Boven*1, Let Dillen2, Lieve Van den
Block3,4, Ruth Piers1, Nele Van Den Noortgate1,
Liesbeth Van Humbeeck1

1Department of Geriatrics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,
2Department of Geriatrics and Palliative Care Unit, Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium, 3End-of-life care research group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
(VUB) & Ghent University, Campus Jette, Brussels, Belgium & Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4Department of Family Medicine and Chronic Care, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: charlotte.boven@uzgent.be
Background: Recent studies underscore the importance of a patient/healthcare
provider/family triad in euthanasia care. As such, our aim was to explore how family
experiences the interaction with healthcare providers (HCPs) during a euthanasia
trajectory.
Methods: 22 semi-structured interviews with family members of cancer patients.
Transcripts were analyzed using the Constructivist Grounded Theory approach.
Results: The moment participants are informed about the euthanasia request of
their loved one, they become part of the journey towards the euthanasia execution. During
this period participants place their loved one’s needs central, while their own needs are
put aside. At first, most relatives are not immediately on board with the request and try to
find peace with it whether or not with the help of HCPs. During this process they can move
from understanding why the patient requests euthanasia to comprehending the request, so they
can give him/her permission to let go. Being part of this process is described as a
‘rollercoaster of emotions’, where the mixed feeling of relief and sadness is commonly
experienced.
Conclusion: Participants find it important to be involved in the euthanasia
process as early as possible. However, they describe this as an intense and uncertain
period. They appreciate being guided through this process with the help of HCPs before the
loss but most of them have little or no expectations regarding follow-up contact. These
insights emphasize the importance of family-centered care in the context of euthanasia and
can substantiate existing clinical guidelines.

Abstract ID: 157

Abstract Type: Poster - Euthanasia & MAID

## Healthcare providers’ experiences regarding the interaction with family during a
euthanasia process: A qualitative study

Charlotte Boven*1, Liesbeth Van Humbeeck1, Aurelie
Lust2, Hannah Van Kesteren2, Lieve Van den Block3,4,
Ruth Piers1, Nele Van Den Noortgate1, and Let
Dillen5

1Department of Geriatrics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,
2Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium,
3End-of-life care research group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) & Ghent
University, Campus Jette, Brussels, Belgium & Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium,
4Department of Family Medicine and Chronic Care, Vrije Universiteit Brussel
(VUB), Brussels, Belgium, 5Department of Geriatrics and Palliative Care Unit,
Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: charlotte.boven@uzgent.be
Background: In 2019 a total of 2655 people died in Belgium due to euthanasia,
of which 62.5% had cancer. Recent studies underscore the importance of a patient/healthcare
provider/family triad in euthanasia care. As such, our aim was to explore how healthcare
providers (HCPs) experience the interaction with family of cancer patients in euthanasia
care.
Methods: 45 semi-structured interviews with Flemish HCPs (15 physicians, 17
nurses and 13 psychologists), working in hospitals and/or homecare. Transcripts were
analyzed using the Constructivist Grounded Theory approach.
Results: Participants had diverse experiences regarding the interaction with
family, which can be visualized as a continuum ranging from negative to positive. The
achieved degree of serenity is the main contributor in determining their position on the
aforementioned continuum. To create this serene atmosphere, HCPs take actions underpinned by
two attitudes (wariness and meticulousness), which are guided by different considerations.
These considerations are subjected to a learning process (of trial-and-error) and can be
categorized into three groups: 1) ideas about a good death and its perceived importance, 2)
having the situation well under control and 3) self-reassurance.
Conclusion: In Belgium, relatives do not have a legal mandate in the
decision-making process of euthanasia. Nonetheless, the interviews and previous literature
show that HCPs acknowledge relatives as important actors within euthanasia care as they want
to ensure that family can cope with the loss. These insights may shape family-centered care
in the context of euthanasia and can substantiate existing clinical guidelines for HCPs.

Abstract ID: 158

Abstract Type: Free Communication - COVID-19

## Massive shift in proportion of cancer patients dying at home instead of hospital in
England during COVID-19 Pandemic

Julia Verne*1, Andy Pring1, Reza Indrakusuma1,
Natalie FriendDuPreez1, Ana Soriano1, Sophie Finnegan1,
Nicola Bowtell1

1OHID in Department for Health and Social Care, National End of Life Care
Intelligence Network, London, United Kingdom
*Correspondence should be addressed to: julia.verne@dhsc.gov.uk
Background: Enabling patient choice in place of death has been a key element
in Cancer and Palliative Care Policy in England since 2008. Most patients would choose home.
In 8 years (2011-19) the increase in proportion of cancer patients dying at home was small
(28.9 to 31.1%) and hospital remained the most common place of death. In 2020, despite ~
100,000 extra deaths from COVID-19, the number who died from cancer was almost unchanged
(138,026, 2020 vs.137,851, 2019). In 2020, the number and proportion of deaths at home from
all causes increased 155,815 (27.4%) from120,467 deaths (24.3%) in 2019.
Aims: To investigate the impact of the first year of COVID-19 on place of
death for cancer patients in England.
Methods: National Mortality data used to identify cancer deaths (underlying
cause) and place of death in England in 2019 (baseline) and 2020 (first year of COVID-19).
Comparisons were made by: 20 top cancer types, age group and Local Health Administration
(LHA).
Results: Of all deaths at home, the proportion from cancer increased 36.5%
(2020) vs. 35.5% (2019). A significantly greater number (14,112) and % of people died from
cancer at home 41% (2020) vs. 31% (2019) e.g. Lung cancer +2,554. In contrast hospital
deaths from cancer reduced 35% (2019) to 29% (2020), Care Homes 15% to 13%, Hospice 15% to
8%. Death at home increased for all 20 cancer types (12/20 by >10%) range 5.8% to 12.9%.
For all cancers except haematological (3/20), deaths at home exceeded deaths in hospital and
for 11/17 types for the first time ever. % people dying at home increased for all ages by
~10% to: <75 years (42%), 75-84 (43%), >85 to (37.2%). Home deaths from cancer
increased in all106 LHAs in England: interquartile ranges 28.8-34.1% (2019) to 38.7-44.2%
(max 51.8%) (2020).
Conclusions: In England, the COVID-19 pandemic caused a massive increase in
the proportion of cancer patients (+10%) dying in their own homes – more than 8 years of
strategy had achieved (+2.2%). It is not clear how much of this change was forced decisions
(hospitals full of COVID-19, Hospice beds reduced) or personal choice influenced by severe
visiting restrictions in institutions. The quality of care provided is not known. If choice
played a significant role, and the current increase is sustained, community palliative care
resource must be increased to support more cancer patients to die at home.

Abstract ID: 159

Abstract Type: Poster - Loss & grief

## Walking the walk in connection: Experiences of healthcare providers with bereavement
care in oncology

Let Dillen1, Charlotte Boven*2, Marjolein
Schepens3, Nele Van Den Noortgate2, Liesbeth Van
Humbeeck2

1Department of Geriatrics and Palliative Care Unit, Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Geriatrics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium, 3Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: charlotte.boven@uzgent.be
Background: In 2020 cancer remained the leading cause of death worldwide,
accounting for almost 10 million losses. Hence, healthcare providers (HCP) are often
confronted with the care for bereaved relatives. Knowledge about bereavement care offered to
relatives of oncology patients is however scarce. This study aimed to explore how HCP
working in hospitals or palliative home care services experience the provision of
bereavement care.
Methods: Seven online focus groups with in total 32 Flemish HCP who are
working in palliative home care services or a hospitals. The transcripts were analyzed using
thematic analysis.
Results: Bereavement care is considered as walking the walk with patients and
relatives. Ideally this starts at diagnosis of a life limiting disease, as this enables HCP
to build relationships and to be there at everyone’s time and space. Bereavement care is a
delicate balancing between connecting as a person and supporting as a skilled HCP.
Conditions that would help HCPs with this balancing act are education, intervision,
organisational mandate, shared vision, teamwork, and trustworthy referral addresses:
conditions that are not always met.
Conclusion: HCP experience bereavement care as a meaningful but complex act of
care in a context of uncertainty. HCP would benefit from having clear and realistic clinical
and organisational guidelines, which can support their role and responsibility regarding
offering these services. In addition, future research should explore relatives’ expectations
regarding bereavement care, as this would aid HCP to tailor their support.

Abstract ID: 160

Abstract Type: Poster - Equity and Access

## Improving equity of palliative care provision within advanced heart failure via a
realist synthesis: PalliatHeartSynthesis

Clare Howie1, Joanne Reid1, John Burden2, Claire
Duddy3, Loreena Hill1, Bob Jones2, Bob
Ruane2, Geoff Wong3, Tracey McConnell*1,4

1School of Nursing and Midwifery, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, UK,
2Patient and Public Involvement Group, British Heart Foundation, London, UK,
3Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK, 4Marie Curie Hospice, Belfast, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
tracey.mcconnell@mariecurie.org.uk
Background: Heart failure (HF) is a major public health issue, affecting over
26 million people globally and expected to increase significantly with ageing populations.
There is substantial evidence on the benefits of integrating palliative care (PC) in HF
management for improving patient and carers health and wellbeing, and cost savings for
healthcare systems. However, inequity of PC provision for HF patients is an ongoing problem
with poor implementation globally. The aim of this study is to identify what works, for whom
and in what circumstances when integrating PC and HF in order to improve equity of
palliative care provision for patients with HF.
Method: This project used realist synthesis methodology, as this is the best
approach to synthesise the evidence for complex health care interventions depending on
context and people involved. We used Pawson’s five iterative steps for realist synthesis. We
have recruited an international stakeholder group comprised of content experts, healthcare
professionals in HF and PC delivery, and patients with HF who have advised throughout the
study on what works, for whom, in what contexts to inform recommendations for integrated PC
and HF services.
Results: 1768 texts have been identified through literature searching with
1088 articles included for full-text screening. We will report on why inequity in
implementing PC into HF management exists and what we can do about it. At the time of
presentation results will be completed and we will present our findings.
Conclusions: The evidence for integration of PC into management of patients
with HF can no longer be ignored in a civilized society, where we are measured by how we
treat the most vulnerable, and have a civic duty to provide the most up to date healthcare
from cradle to grave. This research uses innovative methods to provide practical
recommendations for policy and practice to improve provision of PC for diverse and
historically excluded populations such as patients with HF.

Abstract ID: 161

Abstract Type: Free Communication - COVID-19

## Palliative care should be part of a public health pandemic response – insights from
transferring the National End of Life Care I

Julia Verne*1, Reza Indrakusuma1, Natalie
FriendDuPreez1, Sophie Finnegan1, Ana Soriano1, Nicola
Bowtell1, Andy Pring1

1OHID in Department for Health and Social Care, National End of Life Care
Intelligence Network, London, United Kingdom
* Correspondence should be addressed to: julia.verne@dhsc.gov.uk
Background: Palliative and End of Life Care (P&EOLC) services normally
have a relatively fast turnover of patients, however, the monthly/yearly numbers in any
setting/geography is relatively predictable. The National End of Life Care Intelligence
Network (NEoLCIN) in England evaluates and explores many aspect of Palliative Care need,
provision and equity issues and trends (over years). In the COVID-19 pandemic, the NEoLCIN
transferred to work on real time surveillance of COVID-19 as the only team with expertise in
the social care sector in Public Health England.
Aims: To describe the temporal and geographical variation changes in need for
PEoLC services during the COVID-19 pandemic in impact on need in different settings.
Methods: Mortality data for England, January 2019 to July 2021was analysed by
calendar month, place of death, and geographically for 106 Local Health Administrations
(LHAs). Comparisons were made for 2020 and 2021 with reference to 2019. For 2021 the data
January to July was compared to these months in 2019. The variations across LHAs were
described using interquartile range (IQR).
Results: In 2020 deaths increased by 15% (73,459) vs. 2019 and 10% (29,652)
more in 2021(January to July) vs. 2019. 2020 saw increases in deaths of: 29% (35,342) at
home, 21% (23,281) in care homes, 7% (15,970) in hospital but -12% (3,470) in hospice. April
2020 (peak of first wave) showed the greatest change by month: of: 194% (17,732) care home,
86% (8,428) home, 84% (15,629) hospital, but -6% (150) in hospice. Across 106 LHAs in 2020
the IQR variation in increase in deaths was: care home (14% - 29%), home (23% - 34%),
hospital (2% - 13%), hospice (-23% to -4%), In April 2020 across 106 CCGs the IQR variation
in increase in deaths was: care home (137% - 275%), home (58% - 105%), hospital (46% to
96%), hospice (-27% to +17%).
Conclusions: These results emphasise the importance of joint working in a
pandemic between the public health response and P&EOLC epidemiologists to use data to
mobilise expert P&EOLC support to organisations and geographies with greatest need.
Rapid P&EOLC redeployment is key with new ways of working to rapidly amplify response:
provide expert advice (phone/video), prescribing, drug distribution to support/train
non-specialists to support the dying.

Abstract ID: 171

Abstract Type: Poster - ACP & End of Life communication

## Developing an advance care planning website for dementia: Integrating a user-centred
approach and patient and public involvement

Fanny Monnet*1, Lara Pivodic1, Charlèss Dupont1,
Tinne Smets1, Aline De Vleminck1, Chantal Van Audenhove2,
Lieve Van den Block1

1Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) and Ghent University, End-of-life Care
Research Group, Brussels, Belgium, 2LUCAS Center for Care Research and
Consultancy, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: fanny.monnet@vub.be
Background: Alzheimer Europe and other organisations advocate for the
involvement of people with dementia and their families in health-related research to ensure
the relevance of findings for them. Patient and public involvement (PPI) can achieve this.
We describe how we used PPI in combination with a user-centred approach, which focuses on
end-users’ needs, to develop an advance care planning (ACP) website designed for and with
people with dementia and their family carers.
Methods: We formed a PPI group composed of people with dementia (n = 2),
family carers (n = 2), and other stakeholders working on dementia or palliative care
(n = 4). After a meeting to discuss the website’s concept, its content was developed
iteratively, and 4 prototypes were presented to the PPI group, each continually adjusted
according to the feedback received. In parallel, we conducted user-testing with 9 people
with dementia and 17 family carers using the think-aloud method and a usability survey for
each prototype.
Results: Outcomes of user-testing and PPI contributed substantially to the
design of the ACP website, including an interactive tool and videos. Feedback on the
prototypes identified content that was either missing or too difficult and technological
issues, thereby ensuring the website’s user-friendliness and relevance. Due to limited
access to our target population, recruitment was challenging. Despite additional strategies,
only 9 people with dementia participated in user-testing out of the 18 targeted.
Conclusion: Working with people with dementia and family carers through
user-testing and PPI produced an ACP website that is seen as user-friendly and relevant by
end-users, and that can be further evaluated for feasibility. PPI input alongside
user-centred research enabled us to obtain relevant, insightful, and valuable feedback that
informed the ACP website development. Our experience also revealed potential recruitment
difficulties which should be considered in future studies.

Abstract ID: 173

Abstract Type: Poster - ACP & End of Life communication

## Mirror methodology: using marketing codes for better talking about end-of-life

Caroline Tête*1, Giovanna Marsico1

1Centre national des soins palliatifs et de la fin de vie
*Correspondence should be addressed to: c.tete@lafocss.org
A mirror methodology is a group made up of a representative panel of people to deepen the
understanding of field perceptions and to test hypothetical solutions, reinforce them,
adjust them before finalizing them. Mirror methodology has shown its effectiveness in
industry. The French National Center for Palliative and End-of-Life Care (Centre national
des soins palliatifs et de la fin de vie, France - CNSPFV) stepped out of its comfort zone
by borrowing this working method from the field of marketing. It therefore created a mirror
group of users of the health system in order to establish a link between the French experts
who work within structures related to the end of life and the entire French population. This
abstract describes the methodology and the first experiences of it.
The mirror methodology is not a working group but a meeting and exchange space for the
whole community (local and national administrations, hospitals, private structures, experts,
citizens, etc.). Thus, its purpose is not to produce documents but to test and make known
those that exist, in particular those produced by the CNSPFV and which relate know-how,
experiences or interesting innovation. They can also point out to the bodies concerned, if
necessary, gaps in doctrine that should be filled. Experience shows that the presence of a
mirror group provides a relevant and substantiated analysis of the language elements of
communication. It also allows either to reinforce working hypotheses, or to develop
approaches in order to better get French citizens to adhere to what is put in place to
ensure them a quality end of life.

Abstract ID: 174

Abstract Type: Poster – Organisation of PC

## How is end-of-life care organised around the world?

Agathe Cant-Diot*1, François Cousin1

1Centre national des soins palliatifs et de la fin de vie
*Correspondence should be addressed to: agathe.cantdiot@orange.fr
Context: International studies have highlighted a very heterogeneous level of
development of palliative care (PC) between countries around the world. This unique panorama
deepens this question from an essentially qualitative angle to understand how end-of-life
care and the palliative approach are organized around the globe, particularly in countries
characterized by middle or low income and a level of weak development.
Method: A literature synthesis has been carried out with data collected in
April 2021 from the MEDLINE/PubMed, and Palli@Doc databases and with institutional
information and reports. Data have been used to identify major operating models of PC shared
by certain regions of the world. Where appropriate, innovative, or specific initiatives,
which deviate from Western habits, have been more precisely detailed.
Results: Three major groups of countries have been identified, within which
the palliative approach adopted seems relatively homogeneous. In the “charitable” model,
predominant in South Asia and Africa, PC is practiced within and by the community and mainly
financed by donations. In the hospital-centred model, observed in East Asia and in several
Latin American countries, PC is specialized and practiced mainly in the hospital settings.
In the mixed home-hospital model, identified in certain Central and South American
countries, care is initiated in the primary sector and the objective is to ensure a
continuum between the different levels of care. The development of PC is also influenced
locally by plural and intertwined factors such as history, culture, religion, demographic
characteristics, or epidemiological changes in each country.
Conclusion: This international panorama presents the main currents of
palliative practice existing in the world. It analyzes how countries, despite the
difficulties, work to develop a PC services adapted to the needs of their population, to
sociocultural requirements and to the challenges of tomorrow.

Abstract ID: 175

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Leading cultural change in health care: practice-based evidence

Ruth Raes*1

1Project coach Compassionate Bruges, End-of-Life Care Research Group VUB &
UGent, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: ruth.raes@vub.be
Background: Management literature provides bookshelves full of theory on how
to lead change projects. Leading and facilitating change projects however in such complex
systems as those we encounter when implementing compassionate cities, ask for more than just
a theory. In the cities of Bruges and Herzele, we try to capture the elements that make the
difference in achieving cultural change around caring, dying and grieving. As for the
stakeholders, we consider the perspectives of the community as well as service providers,
since we observe differences in and even conflicts between perspectives.
Objective: The workshop aims to present and discuss a hands-on model from a
practice based evidence point of view. We present frameworks, values and beliefs the
facilitator/project teams used to start the Compassionate Cities project in Belgium. We
share observations of where these frameworks stay upright or seem to fail. We discuss the
why’s we observed as well as alternative strategies we developed to cope with obstacles. We
present a first model in which we try to capture the key elements of leading change in
complex systems, levers on handling interdependence between those elements. We invite
participants to check their experience against ours and each other’s, using a world café
format based. By thoroughly debating experiences, will evaluate to which extent our model is
coherent and applicable in other Compassionate Cities. We conclude with a plenary exchange
and wrap-up on the objectives of the workshop.
Learning outcome: At the end of the workshop, participants will have obtained
increased awareness of looking at Compassionate Cities from a complexity point of view;
increased awareness of the underlying processes of cultural change; increased awareness of
the key elements a leader/facilitator can steer upon to create the best possible context in
which cultural change can take place; new inspiration through input of fellow participants
on how to further implement the change process they themselves are in.
Application to public health palliative care: The workshop is aimed at sharing
and providing guidance for those who want to introduce cultural change in public
(palliative) health care as a policy maker, leader or facilitator.

Abstract ID: 176

Abstract Type: Workshop

## “Let’s Talk About It” Compassionate Ottawa (CO) presents three resources for community
engagement and empowerment in compassionate community work

Jim Nininger1, Mary Lou Kelley*2,3

1.Co-Founder and Board member, Compassionate Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada,
2Compassionate Ottawa Volunteer, Ottawa, Canada, 3Professor
Emeritus, School of Social Work, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: mlkelley@lakeheadu.ca
Compassionate Ottawa is a community organization that aims to change the way we think about
dying, death, loss and grief and to build the capacity of the people of Ottawa to care for
one another during times of crisis and stress. Strategies include community empowerment,
community-engaged education and participatory action research.
The objective of this workshop is to introduce and demonstrate use of three
innovative resources created to stimulate compassionate community development.
The resources include:
1) An 8-minute video (English /closed captions in French) on the development of
Compassionate Ottawa, created to be used as a catalyst for community leaders to develop
their own compassionate community initiatives. The video is accompanied by a Discussion
Guide and detailed Handbook of Compassionate Ottawa’s development, along with lessons
learned.
2) Seven digital stories made by volunteers with personal experience, on the theme of
giving and getting help in later life. Digital storytelling is a creative process where
individuals design 3 to 5-minute videos that pair audio recordings of personal
narratives with visuals and music. Stories in both English and French are accompanied by
a Discussion Guide. Stories are viewed and discussed in small groups to stimulate
conversation and personal refection.
3) A book chat Discussion Guide and Facilitator Guide for the book “Talking About Death
Won’t Kill You” by Dr. Kathy Kortes-Miller. Book chats involve individuals who
independently read a book and then meet as a group to discuss the major themes and
personal impact.

Learning Outcomes:

Participants will learn how the resources were developed and used in online sessions
during the pandemic.
Participants will experience how the collaborative and collective discussion within the
group fosters critical, reflective inquiry and creates change in participants’
knowledge, attitudes and behaviour.
Evaluation data from pilot tests will be presented to demonstrate their impact on
viewers.

Application to PHPC:

Participants will discuss how the resources can be used to support compassionate
community development.

Abstract ID: 177

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Equity and Access

## Access to palliative care in the UK for people experiencing homelessness due to
immigration issues

Briony Hudson*1,2,3, Elizabeth Dzeng4,5, Angela
Burnett6, Caroline Shulman2,3

1Marie Curie, 2Marie Curie Palliative Care Research Department,
Division of Psychiatry, UCL, 3Pathway, 4University of California, San
Francisco (UCSF), 5Cicely Saunders Institute, King’s College London,
6Independent advisor
*Correspondence should be addressed to: briony.hudson@mariecurie.org.uk
Background: In the UK, there are a growing number of non-UK nationals with
immigration issues (failed asylum seekers, undocumented migrants, visa overstayers, some EU
nationals). They are often not entitled to benefits including subsistence or housing
support. Some are also not entitled to free secondary healthcare. This can result in
destitution and homelessness, particularly if people become ill and unable to work. This
research explores access to palliative care for people experiencing homelessness (PEH) who
are destitute as a result these issues
Methods: This project has 3 parts 1) hospice staff survey, 2) focus groups
with inclusion health staff and other experts 3) interviews with PEH with unsettled
immigration status and poor health. This presentation will focus on parts 2 & 3.
Qualitative data were analysed using thematic analysis.
Results: The complexities of entitlement to NHS care and to accommodation and
subsidence from local authorities were explored. Hospital clinicians were not always clear
about their role in decision making around the right to receive NHS treatment when people
were unable to pay. This knowledge is vital for effective patient advocacy. This advocacy
could be difficult, time consuming and emotionally draining. These challenges were
compounded by understaffed, overstretched teams that did not always have the necessary
specialist knowledge. For people with unsettled immigration status who were sick, fear
played a role in late presentations and the use of false identities.
Conclusions: well resourced, specialist teams, working in collaboration with a
range of different professionals are key to effective support and advocacy for PEH with poor
health and unsettled immigration status. Greater awareness of people’s rights and better
access to legal advice is needed in health and social care services, as well as recognition
of the emotional toll on staff while trying to provide support for this group towards the
end of their lives.

Abstract ID: 178

Abstract Type: Poster – Community

## Exploring the support needs of the British Muslim Community with palliative care needs
– a collaborative qualitative project

Briony Hudson*1,2, Gemma Clarke1,3, Nuriye Kupeli2,
Noura Rizk1, Mansur Safdar4, Shuja Shafi4

1Marie Curie, 2Marie Curie Palliative Care Research Department,
Division of Psychiatry, UCL, 3University of Leeds, 4Muslim Council of
Britain
*Correspondence should be addressed to: briony.hudson@mariecurie.org.uk
Background: The COVID-19 pandemic revealed and exacerbated many long-standing
inequalities. The highest age-standardised mortality rates of COVID-19 deaths were within
ethnic groups that make up the largest proportions of the British Muslim community. Little
research exists exploring the particular experiences of British Muslims with palliative care
needs, and their caregivers during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Methods: This work a collaboration between Marie Curie and the Muslim Council
of Britain (MCB). Together we developed a topic guide to explore experiences during the
pandemic. Peer researchers (members of the British Muslim community) were recruited by the
MCB and trained by Marie Curie on research and qualitative interviewing. The peer
researchers then conducted telephone interviews with British Muslims with palliative care
needs, and their informal caregivers. Participants were recruited through MCB, and snowball
sampling. Thematic coding of the transcripts was undertaken by members of the Marie Curie
research team. Themes were discussed and developed into recommendations in collaboration
with the MCB.
Results: Peer researchers conducted 11 interviews, 10 in English and one in
Urdu. Interviews included four participants with palliative care needs and seven informal
caregivers (age range 35-80). Diagnoses included heart failure, dementia, frailty and
multiple sclerosis. Themes related to physical and mental impacts of the pandemic, access to
healthcare and the pivotal role families played in supporting people. The role of technology
and faith groups were also explored.
Conclusions: Structural recommendations, as well as recommendations for
organisations, communities and individuals were co-produced. The recommendations centre on
providing culturally aware and appropriate support in a variety of formats and champion the
inclusion of the voices from a diverse range of backgrounds in the development of government
and organisational policies and practices.

Abstract ID: 180

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Loss and grief

## Formalising peer mentoring relationships between bereaved parents in the hospital and
hospice sector

Leigh Donovan*1,2, Taki Langlasse1, Heather
Rapkins1, and Amy Larsen3,4,5

1Hummingbird House Children’s Hospice, Queensland, Australia,
2Collaboraide, Queensland, Australia, 3Children’s Health Queensland
Hospital and Health Service, Queensland, Australia, 4Ladybird Care Foundation,
Queensland, Australia, 5Children’s Hospital Foundation, Queensland, Australia
*Correspondence should be addressed to: leigh@collaboraide.com
Background: Contemporary approaches to care of the bereaved encourage a
compassionate approach within the community. Such an approach, that sources strength from
community networks, also seeks to normalise the experience of suffering, death and dying.
Often the most solace can take place in relationship with a bereaved peer. In the words of
Joanne Cacciatore ‘when we look into the eyes of another, someone who has known suffering,
without a word we know that they know, and there is something painfully restorative in that
mutual recognition’. This presentation shares development and activation of two peer mentor
programs for bereaved parents based in Queensland, Australia; one based within the state’s
tertiary children’s hospital, the other in Queensland’s only children’s hospice.
Methods: Co-design methodology, a partnership between bereaved parents and
program leads, informed creation of the CHQ Bereavement Service Peer Mentor Program (PMP)
and Hummingbird House Companion Program. Each service sort to activate connections between
bereaved peers throughout Queensland, with the program hub based in the state’s capital,
Brisbane. Training of Peer Mentors sort to build knowledge and confidence to enable support
of bereaved parents in their early grief experience.
Results: The CHQ Bereavement Service Pilot PMP has trained 15 Peer Mentors
with 13 newly bereaved parents now accessing peer support. Evaluation will be complete by
May 2022. The Hummingbird House Pilot Companion Program launches in February 2022 with six
bereaved parents participating in training. Evaluation will take place in August 2022.
Conclusion: Bereaved parents often describe immense loneliness and isolation
following the death of their child. Peer mentoring relationships create a space for shared
understanding, normalising of grief and ‘mutual recognition’ beyond what can be gained from
non-bereaved friends or professional relationships. Such an approach also encourages a
sustainable approach to service delivery.

Abstract ID: 181

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate cities

## Building Compassionate Communities: An Integrated Approach to Raising Awareness of
Palliative Care and Advance Care Planning

Konrad Fassbender*1,3, Mary-Ann Shantz1, Michelle
Goonasakera1, Abisola Omoniyi1, Martin LaBrie2

1Covenant Health Palliative Institute, Edmonton, Canada, 2University
of Calgary, Calgary, Canada, 3University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: konrad.fassbender@ualberta.ca
Background: Compassionate communities represents an innovative public health.
Since the World Health Organization’s Ottawa Charter in 1986 and Allan Kellehear’s seminal
publication in 2005, this initiative has been widely implemented around the globe. Emerging
reviews reflect diverse strategies and a lack of consensus on best practices regarding
development and evaluation. This project outlines an integrated strategy across a regional
(province or state) reflecting a broad range of stakeholder organizations.
Method: A three phase stakeholder strategy has been used to identify,
understand and engage individuals and organizations with an interest in palliative care and
advance care planning. A systematic review and environmental scan of educational tools was
conducted. A representative public panel will support five working groups. Robust
communications and marketing plans will inform the development of creative content to
promote the uptake of these tools. Overlapping networks of government partners, hospice and
palliative care societies, libraries and professional organizations are attending an action
planning workshop to coordinate activities.
Results: To date we approached 9 government ministries and 800 community
organizations. A nominal group technique was applied to 42 government initiatives and has
resulted in the development of three projects representing the first three of eight
responding Ministries: Seniors and Housing, Municipal Affairs and the Public Service. A
total of 52 individuals and organizations participated in a targeted e-blast media campaign
and in-depth survey. Palliative and Hopsice Societies, libraries and legal associations
represent the early adopters of this integrated and comprehensive approach.
Conclusions: An integrated and comprehensive approach to implementation of
Compassionate Communities on a province-wide scale provides insight into early successes and
encouragement for further development.

Abstract ID: 182

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Culture, philosophy and spirituality

## What do research studies identify as spiritual and religious interventions at the
end-of-life? Findings from a Cochrane review

Bella Vivat*1, Peter Speck1,2, Louise Jones1,
Inayah Uddin1, Nicola White1, Gudrun Rohde1,3,4,
Catherine White1, Bridget Candy1, Adrian Tookman5,
Michael King6

1Marie Curie Palliative Care Research Department, Division of Psychiatry, UCL,
London, UK, 2Cicely Saunders Institute of Palliative Care, Policy and
Rehabilitation, King’s College London, London, UK, 3Faculty of Health and Sport
Sciences & Department of Clinical Research, University of Agder, Kristiansand, Norway,
4Sorlandet Hospital, Kristiansand, Norway, 5Marie Curie Hampstead
Hospice, London, UK, 6Division of Psychiatry, UCL, London, UK. In memoriam
*Correspondence should be addressed to: b.vivat@ucl.ac.uk
Background: Studies show that addressing the spiritual and/or religious needs
of people approaching the end-of-life may benefit both their spiritual wellbeing, and also
their wider wellbeing. A 2012 Cochrane review of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of
spiritual and religious interventions for adults with terminal illness identified 3868
citations, but just five RCTS, all in the USA and of varied quality. We updated this for
2011-21.
Methods: We systematically searched six databases for RCTs of spiritual or
religious interventions with adults with terminal illness between Nov 2011 and Dec 2021. We
included interventions conducted as a sole study focus or as elements of wider studies. Our
primary outcomes were spiritual or psychological wellbeing, quality of life, coping, and
death distress or quality of death/dying.
Two review authors independently screened citations, agreed full texts for retrieval,
assessed these for inclusion, discussed differences, and agreed a final set. Data extraction
is currently underway, and a detailed evaluation of study findings will follow.
Results: We identified 2551 potentially relevant citations, retrieved 94
texts, and included 38, a far larger number and proportion than the first review (38/2551 vs
5/3868).
Included studies were internationally diverse, from Europe, the Americas, Africa, and the
East, and varied widely in definition and design. Some were components of a general
palliative care intervention, others explored dignity therapy, group or individual
psychotherapy, or other therapies. Nurses, physicians, psychologists or chaplains delivered
the interventions, as individual professionals or collectively. Our review will be complete
in spring 2022, with full details of all studies.
Conclusion: More RCTs are being conducted in this area, with a wide diversity
and little consistency in definitions of spiritual and religious interventions. Greater
similarity of approach and design would enable better comparisons between studies.

Abstract ID: 186

Abstract Type: Symposium

## Community development around serious illness, dying and loss: Stories and perspectives
from three countries

Louise D’Eer*1, Libby Sallnow2, Mary Lou
Kelley3

1Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium, 2St Christopher’s Hospice and
UCL Marie Curie Palliative Care Department, UK, 3Professor Emeritus, School of
Social Work, Lakehead University, Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: louise.clara.deer@vub.be
Objective: Compassionate communities aim to increase people’s capacity in
serious illness, death and loss, and are often based on an asset-based community development
approach involving various stakeholders, such as civic society . In this symposium we offer
three different perspectives from three countries on the process of compassionate community
development.
From a micro-level, Louise D’Eer provides insight in developing a neighbourhood civic
engagement initiative around serious illness, dying and loss in Sint-Kruis (BE).
Important elements include: the motivation of the people participating, and the
contextual and structural facilitators and barriers in the development process.
From a meso-level, Libby Sallnow presents the Social Capital Model, based on
researching the Compassionate Neighbours initiative in London (UK). This model
illustrates the reciprocal nature of partnerships in community development, resulting in
social capital for all involved parties.
From a macro-level, Mary Lou Kelley shares the ‘Developing a Compassionate Community
Model’, which is based on Canadian research (CA) and observing compassionate community
initiatives around the world. It is a conceptual model that provides guidance in
community development, and explains the change process that communities go through to
increase whole community capacity around serious illness, dying and loss.
The three presenters will end the symposium with a shared summary of critical success
factors in compassionate community development. They will also discuss the applicability and
transferability of these success factors to other communities, inviting perspectives and
experiences from the audience.

Abstract ID: 188

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community ACP

## Stakeholder Perspectives for Improving Palliative Care and Advance Care Planning in the
Community

Tyler Hamil*1, Jingjie Xiao1, Konrad
Fassbender1,2

1Covenant Health Palliative Institute, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada,
2University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Tyler.Hamil@covenanthealth.ca
Background: Stakeholder engagement is imperative in developing Compassionate
Communities initiatives. By adapting a state-of-science stakeholder analysis framework, we
developed a comprehensive strategy to identify, understand, and engage stakeholders. This
analysis was conducted on the premise that the community organizations operate as
intermediaries for sharing knowledge more broadly and promoting better access to palliative
care and advance care planning (ACP).
Methods: Structured searches of public databases, nonprofit inventories and
supplementary online sources were used to identify stakeholders in Alberta, who were invited
to participate in an online survey. Literature review resulted in eight domains being
included in the survey: knowledge, interest, position, leadership, resources, power,
alliances, and social innovation. Likert scales were used to measure respondents’ overall
perceptions of the nine domains and open-ended questions were examined using content
analysis.
Results: Fifty-two participants responded to the survey (response rate 50.5%).
34 respondents represented their organizations while 18 as individuals. At organizational
level, stakeholders’ knowledge about compassionate communities scored lower than that of
palliative care and ACP. Likert scale ratings showed that participants were interested in
leading initiatives, sharing resources, joining others, enhancing inclusion, and changing
existing perception. In contrast, organizations’ self-perceived influence in raising public
awareness of palliative care and ACP within their own communities received one of the lowest
ratings. When asked to list ideas that would help establish a compassionate community, four
themes emerged: awareness, education, resources and networks.
Conclusion: Stakeholders across societal sectors genuinely had an interest in
informing public initiatives. Recommendations derived from the survey will inform the
development of effective engagement strategies for Albertans.

Funding

Government of Alberta, Canada

Abstract ID: 189

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community ACP

## Utilizing a life journey and multi-sectoral approach to promote advance care
planning

Michelle Goonasekera*1, Mary-Ann Shantz1, Tyler
Hamil1, Hussain Ahmed1, Konrad Fassbender1,2

1Covenant Health Palliative Institute, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada,
2University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
michelle.goonasekera@covenanthealth.ca
Background: While advance care planning (ACP) policy implementation in the
healthcare sector has had a moderate impact, we postulate greater uptake if a life journey
and multi-sectoral approach is taken to embed ACP into the social fabric. Within an
individual’s life journey there exists milestone events and routine touchpoints (e.g.,
driver’s license, first home, retirement) that serve as opportunities for advance care
planning messaging. To build capacity for ACP in the life journey for a diverse public, a
multi-sectoral approach is taken to engage and educate institutes and organizations in a
community.
Methods: We have engaged the provincial government, legal, financial,
libraries, and cultural and faith organizations through information sessions and surveys to
gauge interest and capacity to champion ACP within their respective sectors. A public forum
will be held in March 2022 to coordinate collaboration and provide an opportunity for
community stakeholders and organizations to co-create an action plan to promote and educate
ACP for the public.
Results: There is a need for ACP education, navigation and resource support
within the community. We are building a toolkit for stakeholders and organizations which
will include comprehensive knowledge about ACP, region specific resources and navigation,
and creative content for implementation. Working groups will be convened to inform
community-based strategies and methods to disseminate ACP to the greater public. An emphasis
is placed on reaching groups that have been historically neglected from public health
initiatives such as homeless populations and cultural and faith groups so that all members
of a community are equipped to complete ACP.
Conclusion: Utilizing a life journey and multi-sectoral approach provides the
framework for an action plan to promote, disseminate resources, and provide early navigation
on ACP to a diverse public beyond the healthcare system.

Funding

Government of Alberta, Canada

Abstract ID: 191

Abstract Type: Free communication - Arts and end of life

## The Amfora conversation: providing language near the end of life

Michèle Morel*1, Hilde Ingels1

1Amfora vzw (non-profit organisation)
*Correspondence should be addressed to: michele.morel@amfora.be
An innovative best practice empowering patients.
A jug with two ears – an amphora – is a storage place for precious things: oil, grain or
wine. The amphora is also the symbol of the purpose of the Amfora conversation: capturing
someone’s precious story, store it carefully and pass it on to the loved ones as a tangible
memory.
People approaching the end of their life often feel the need to express their feelings and
thoughts. While much attention goes to conversations about care (advance care planning) and
about the course of someone’s life (life stories), far fewer initiatives exist that focus on
the essential question: what does it do to you to be incurably ill?
The Amfora concept is innovative because it is based on the journalistic interview method.
The interviewer (a caregiver, volunteer, . . .) asks specific questions about the person’s
fears, regrets, faith and hopes with respect to their illness, their lived life and the
approaching end. This method implies there is no patient-caregiver relationship and there is
no dialogue. The interviewer listens and captures the essence of the person beyond the
chronic condition, in his fragility and strength. For most people the Amfora conversation
has a deep liberating effect.
The Amfora practice contributes to wellbeing and quality of life on three levels: the ill
person is being and feeling heard during the conversation; the conversation opens doors to
other meaningful conversations with loved ones and also caregivers, thereby increasing job
satisfaction; and the conversation supports the grieving process of relatives since it
results in an artistically crafted booklet, a forever memory.
The underlying aim of the Amfora concept is to help creating connection near the threshold
between life and death, and beyond. It can be considered as an example of how to implement
the fourth pillar of palliative care, empowering patients to have their
spiritual/existential needs fulfilled. The practice has proven to be of great significance
to all those involved.
In order to disseminate the practice, Dutch speaking professionals and volunteers from
hospitals, palliative care networks, facilities for people with disabilities and elderly
care can participate in a four-day training on how to conduct an end-of-life interview and
translate it into a written story. This is how Amfora expertise in the workplace becomes
anchored in (Belgian) healthcare.

Abstract ID: 192

Abstract Type: Poster - Cancer

## A Controlled Clinical Trial of the effects of Meditation on patient’s Perceptions of
their Quality of Life in an Acute Hospital

Tara McDonnell*1, Grace Kennedy1,2, David
Murphy1,2, Eileen Mannion1,2, Dympna Waldron1,2

1Galway University Hospital, 2Department of Palliative Care Medicine,
Galway University Hospital
*Correspondence should be addressed to: taramcdonnell96@gmail.com
Introduction: Meditation has not been widely studied in the acute hospital
setting. The overall purpose of meditation is to improve the quality of the patient’s
experience of living with advanced incurable disease, recognizing that this may also be a
unique way of offering both spiritual and psychological support.
Several studies have highlighted the beneficial impact that meditation can have on the
lives of those living with cancer diagnoses. A study conducted by Zhang MF et al showed that
mindfulness-based interventions such as art therapy, effectively helped to alleviate anxiety
& depression among patients with malignancy.
A meta-analysis & systematic review by Xunlin NG et al which examined 29 studies
exploring the topic of the effectiveness of mindfulness-based interventions among cancer
patients and survivors, showed that patients receiving mindfulness-based interventions
reported significantly lower anxiety, depressive symptoms, fatigue, & stress, along with
greater quality of life (QOL), than patients in the control group.
A study performed in Harold’s Cross Hospice in Dublin on ‘The evaluation of the effects of
touch therapies on patients’ perceptions of their quality of life in palliative care
settings’ is a major source of inspiration for this clinical study, & the methodology is
very closely aligned too. Our proposed study is essentially a replica of the Touch Therapies
Controlled Clinical Trial done in Our Lady’s Hospice two decades ago. In this study, the
intervention group had a significant reduction in anxiety levels & significant
improvement in overall ‘Hospital Anxiety & Depression scores’. There was a greater shift
in cue nomination by the post intervention group in SEIQoL-DW which may indicate that
patients receiving ‘touch therapy’ adapt faster than those who are not receiving it. While
all patients found the experience ‘relaxing’ on ‘critical incidence’ analysis, how this was
interpreted by different patients was very individual to them, i.e. for one person ‘touch
therapy’ was ‘revitalizing’ and for another it was ‘sleep inducing’. One patient identified
that it may have ‘triggered the calm’ and for another it was a ‘safe’ and ‘caring’
experience. These comments support the other findings in the study in relation to reduced
anxiety levels & positively affecting patient’s perceptions of their QoL.
Aims: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of meditation on
patient’s perceptions of their Quality of Life (QoL) in an acute hospital setting. The
assumption is that patients receiving ‘meditation’ will have a higher perceived QoL and a
greater degree of adaptation in their ‘living with’ and ‘dying from’ their disease, than
patients who do not receive ‘meditation’. In short, the fundamental aims of our study are
hence as follows:
To assess change in QoL in patients receiving mindfulness and compare with a group of
patients not receiving mindfulness.
To assess the dynamism of QoL in both groups and analyse differences between
groups.
To assess the level of anxiety and mood in both groups, analyse change over time and
compare differences.
To help establish mindfulness as an integral part of a palliative care service.
Methodology: A controlled clinical trial methodology is proposed. 60
consecutive patients admitted to the oncology ward in GUH will be randomly allocated to
either a control or treatment group. Control group being those receiving normal specialist
and active group will also receive a twice weekly session of meditation. Schedule for the
Evaluation of Quality of Life-Direct Weighting (SEIQoL-DW), Symptom Bother (SB), Symptom
Bother interference with QoL (SBIQoL), Hospital Anxiety Depression (HADS), and in the
‘active’ group ‘Critical Incident technique’ information will be gathered from the patients,
their words, to describe the effects of the ‘meditation’. SEIQoL-DW, SB, SBIQoL, elicits;
cues/areas that matter to the patient’s QoL; level of functioning for each cue; the relative
importance of each cue; symptoms nominated or the severity, interference, frequency,
‘bother’ of symptoms. Response Shift of SEIQoL-DW and HADS will also be assessed, i.e. how
patient’s ‘memory’ affects outcome measures.
Findings & Results: Clinical trial application has been submitted to
Ethics Committee for review.
Results of the study to date: the learning and development of skills surrounding how to
compose a patient information leaflet and patient consent form, as well as how to perform
risk assessment for clinical research trials.
Conclusion: This study hopes to demonstrate that the intervention of
meditation, has positive benefits for the person with advanced disease and positively
affects QoL versus patients who have standard acute hospital care.

Abstract ID: 193

Abstract Type: Poster - Euthanasia & MAID

## The Canadian Medical Assistance in Dying (MAiD) Curriculum Development Project

Gord Gubitz MD FRCPC*1, Madeline Li MD PhD 2, Stefanie Green
MDCM CCFP3, Sarah Stevens BScN RN MN3, Seline Thevasahayam
BA3

1Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Canada 2Department of Psychiatry, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada
3Canadian Association of MAiD Assessors and Providers. Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: ggubitz@dal.ca
Medical Assistance in Dying (MAiD) was legalized in Canada in 2016, ensuring the right of
every adult Canadian with incurable disease to access a medically assisted death if specific
criteria are met. Since then, over 20,000 Canadians have used MAiD to end their suffering,
the overwhelming majority by intravenous medications administered by a clinician.
Reflecting democratization of health care, MAiD came into practice after a change in
federal legislation derived from case law rather than through changes in health care. As a
result, clinicians who initially came forward to support patients requesting MAiD did so
without the benefit of MAiD-related education and training. Clinicians adopted a ‘see one -
do one - teach one’ approach; local and regional ‘best practices’ evolved at different
rates. The Canadian Association of MAiD Assessors and Providers (CAMAP) was created to help
support clinicians providing MAiD-related care. A national standardized approach to training
on best practices to ensure MAiD is provided appropriately is lacking.
In 2021, CAMAP was approached by Canadian parliamentarians to create a national educational
MAiD curriculum. The Canadian MAiD Curriculum Development Project (CMCDP) is CAMAP’s
response to this request. Federal funding was received from Health Canada.
The CMCDP is overseen by a Core Committee comprised of MAiD content experts from across
Canada. This Committee reports to CAMAP and to a National Steering Committee comprised of
stakeholders to ensure equity and diversity in the curriculum content. Each Core member
chairs a diverse Working Group tasked with developing an educational module for one of eight
topics: Foundations, Initial Clinical Conversations, Assessments, Provisions, Capacity and
Vulnerability, Complex Scenarios, Mental Health, and Clinician Resilience.
The curriculum will be developed with synchronous and asynchronous on-line learning
formats, available in French and English, and can be delivered through in-person workshops.
A rigorous implementation and research-focused evaluation process involving a variety of
end-user groups from across Canada is planned. The final curriculum will be approved by our
national medical and nursing colleges and will be promoted and sustained by CAMAP with
ongoing support from our National Steering Committee.

Abstract ID: 194

Abstract Type: Poster - Cancer

## Cultural and religious beliefs and traditions affecting attending the clinic for cancer
and palliative care in Uganda. Findings

Anne Merriman1, Germans Natuhwera*1, Eve
Namisango2

1Hospice Africa Kampala, Uganda, 2African Palliative Care
Association
*Correspondence should be addressed to: ngermans16@gmail.com or
gnatuhwera@hospice-africa.org
Aim: To examine cultural beliefs and traditions affecting access for cancer
care and palliative care in Uganda.
Methods: This was a cross-sectional mixed-methods pilot survey (n=30)
conducted between September and November 2020 in three regions i.e. central, western, and
southwestern Uganda. Purposive sampling was used. 10 participants comprised of five cancer
patients and five key informants (KIs) i.e. spiritual and traditional leaders were recruited
from each region. Structured face-to-face interviews were used.
Results: Quantitative findings found participants attributed the cause of
cancer to; infection and catching from others (66.7%), witchcraft (46.7%), Heredity/genetics
(30.0%), and offending/punishment from God (23.3%). Commonly used forms of medical advice
and treatment for cancer were; spiritual (80%), traditional herbal (76.7%), modern (76.7%),
and traditional (23.3%). Barriers to cancer care access were; cost and advice from others
(family, friends, health workers etc.) each at 93.3% and distant healthcare services
(53.3%).
Findings from qualitative interviews yielded two broad themes; (1) socioeconomic
constraints and (2) cultural barriers
Discussion: Beliefs and traditions as a subset of culture are very varied and
complex in nature. They vary from person, place and time. They directly impact and people’s
values, norms, cultural practices, religiosity and spirituality. Hence, they greatly
influence their healthcare seeking behaviors and choices for cancer and palliative care.
Poor knowledge about cancer, poverty, accessibility challenges and strong cultural beliefs
are commonest barriers to cancer care access.
Conclusion: Findings underline the significant existing knowledge gap about
cancer and its treatment. There is need for; (1) Multi-stakeholder approaches to address
this gap i.e. reduce barriers to care access, (2) Education to demystify myths and false
beliefs, (3) Adoption of culturally appropriate and affordable care

Abstract ID: 195

Abstract Type: Poster - ACP & End of Life communication

## To make and execute decisions throughout life - a model to facilitate
self-determination in residential care

Ramona Schenell*1,2, Anneli Ozanne1,3, Susann
Strang1, Ingela Henoch1

1University of Gothenburg, the Sahlgrenska Academy, Institute of Health and Care
Sciences, Box 457, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden, 2The City of Gothenburg, Health
Care Unit, Centrum City District Committee, Skånegatan 9A, 41140 Gothenburg, Sweden,
3Department of Neurology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 41346 Gothenburg,
Sweden
*Correspondence to: ramona.schenell@aldrevardomsorg.goteborg.se
Background: To make and execute one’s own decisions is self-evident to most
adults but for older persons in residential care self-determination can be limited by
dependency and routine based care. This abstract presents the fourth study in a project that
aimed to develop a model to facilitate self-determination for persons in palliative phase in
residential care.
Methods: The findings from the three previous studies together with strategies
found in a literature search, and a theoretical framework of person-centered care and
relational autonomy constituted the foundation for the model developed in the present study.
A participatory research design using appreciative inquiry in focus group discussions with
staff, residents, and care managers was used to develop the model. The research process and
the model were audited by two expert groups: a scientific reference group and a
dementia-specialist reference group. The model was thus developed by combining practical and
theoretical knowledge in cooperation between end users, experts, and researchers.
Results: The result is the model ‘To make and execute decisions throughout
life’ that speaks with the older persons voice addressing the staff of the residential care
facility. The model has a core message: ‘In my way, at my pace, with the help of you’ which
is reinforced by the seven categories ‘See me as a competent person’, ‘Show me professional
consideration’, ‘Meet me in a trustful relationship’, ‘Give me opportunity to a meaningful
and safe day’, ‘Support me in being independent’, ‘Let me have power over my own life’, and
‘Help me to plan my end-of-life care’.
Conclusion: The core message ‘In my way, at my pace, with the help of you’ is
a clear reflection of the theoretical framework of person-centered care and relational
autonomy as it renders the importance of acknowledging both the abilities and the uniqueness
of the person, as well as the need for professional assistance. The model can inspire staff
to see their own contribution to the residents’ self-determination and help them to find
ways to facilitate it despite obstacles such as cognitive and physical impairment and staff
shortage. The model is currently being tested in a residential care facility in Sweden.

Abstract ID: 196

Abstract Type: Poster - Cancer

## Lived experiences of health professional cancer patients and survivors. A
phenomenological evidence

Germans Natuhwera*1, Peter Ellis2, Wilson Acuda3,
Liz Namukwaya4

1 Hospice Africa Kampala Uganda, 2 Canterbury Christ Church
University, UK, 3 Institute of Hospice and Palliative Care in Africa, Kampala,
Uganda, 4Makerere Palliative Care Unit, Kampala, Uganda
*Correspondence to: ngermans16@gmail.com or
gnatuhwera@hospice-africa.org
Objective: The study sought to; (1) examine healthcare professionals’ (HCPs)
lived experiences of cancer and (2) generate evidence to inform policy and clinical practice
for cancer care
Methods: This was a qualitative phenomenological study conducted on HCPs who
are ill with, and or survived cancer in Uganda. The study was approved by Hospice Africa
Uganda Research Ethical Committee (HAUREC) protocol number HAUREC-079-20. Purposive sampling
was used to recruit eligible participants. A demographic form and an open-ended topic guide
were used to collect. Face-to-face and telephone interviews were conducted in English,
audio-recorded and data saturation was reached. Colaizzi’s framework of thematic analysis
was used.
Findings: Eight HCPs cancer patients from medical, allied health, and nursing
backgrounds participated in the study. Their mean age was 56 years with age range of 29-85
years. Five were female and three were male. Four broad themes emerged from the interviews;
(1) pre-diagnosis and receiving bad news experience, (2) impact of cancer on the HCPs, (3)
healthcare system and treatment experiences, and (4) the gaps and what needs to be done.
Conclusions: Many HCPs are increasingly receiving a diagnosis of cancer.
Becoming ill with cancer is a challenging experience for the professional. It is associated
with remarkable disruptions and suffering in nearly all domains of their quality of life
i.e. their professional identity and work, social, emotional, physical and economic. Like
lay cancer patients, HCPs cancer patients as well experience practical challenges in
accessing cancer care. The study showed that health workers are not well prepared to handle
their colleagues (HCPs) who become cancer patients. Policy makers and other stakeholders
need to work towards improving cancer care services for both the HCPs who are patients of
cancer, and also the general cancer patients.

Abstract ID: 201

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Equity and Access

## Equity-oriented care and Structural Vulnerability- the ABCs of its application to our
work in Public Health Palliative Care

Holly Prince1, Kathy Kortes-Miller2, Kelli
Stajduhar3, Denise Marshall*4

1Centre for Research and Aging in Health (CERAH), Lakehead University,
ThunderBay Ontario Canada, 2Centre for Research and Agingi in Health (CERAH)
Lakehead University, ThunderBay Ontario, Canada, 3School of Nursing and Institute
of Aging and lifelong Health, University of Victoria, British Columbia, Canada,
4Division of Palliative Care, Department of Family Medicine, McMaster University,
Hamilton Ontario, Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: marshald@mcmaster.ca
Many people and communities face significant, enduring structural and systemic barriers
that severely affect access to health and social care, create health disparities and impinge
on people’s quality of life. Framing hospice, palliative care and EOL care around equity and
social justice issues are absolutely fundamental to the PHPC approach, yet many of us have
only partial familiarity with current terminology and concepts. In this highly interactive
workshop we first help participants gauge their own familiarity with contemporary concepts
related to equity, diversity, and inclusivity and then help them situate these within
palliative /EOL care and PHPC. We provide 3 examples from the Canadian experience of
communities of people who benefit greatly when key dimensions of equity-oriented approaches
to care are considered and use these examples to facilitate awareness and learning for
participants. We conclude with a group discussion that consolidates overarching themes to
provide direction for broad, enduring and global application. The overall objective of the
workshop is to prepare participants to readily mobilize on Equity Diversity and Inclusion
issues in their own Public Health Palliative Care work.

Abstract ID: 202

Abstract Type: Poster – Family caregivers

## Cultural adaptation and validation of Sinhala version of Modified Caregiver Strain
Index

Udayangani Ramadasa1, Shehan Silva*2, Suraj
Perera3, Uditha Udumulla1, Saman Kumara Dissanayaka1,
Sarita Perera2, Sarath Lekamwasam4

1Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Sabaragamuwa University of Sri
Lanka, 2Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Sri
Jayewardenepura, 3National Cancer Control Programme, 4Department of
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ruhuna
*Correspondence should be addressed to: dshehans@sjp.ac.lk
Background: Caring for a family member in need of palliative care casts a huge
impact on caregivers. The assessment of caregiver burden is an integral component of
long-term care planning of older adults with chronic diseases and malignancies. Studies
regarding the prevalence and patterns of caregiver burden in Sri Lanka is lacking. This
study presents the results of validation of the Sinhala version of the Modified Caregiver
Strain Index (S-MCSI).
Methods: The MCSI was translated from English to Sinhala by two translators,
blinded to each other. The two translations were combined and translated back to the
original language by two separate translators. After verifying the content validity,
unambiguity and clarity of items in a focussed group discussion, the pre-final version was
tested among 192 volunteers selected from National Cancer Institute, Colombo South Teaching
Hospital, and Teaching Hospital Ratnapura. Data were analysed for internal consistency and
item-total correlations. Factor analysis was done using Varimax rotation with Kaiser
normalization. A Scree plot was also made to determine the number of factors.
Results: The mean (SD) age of subjects was 61.4 years (12.6). The total S-MCSI
score ranged from 0 (3 subjects) to 26 (2 subjects). The overall Cronbach’s alpha was 0.80
while item-total correlations varied from 0.34 to 0.62 (except the item 12 ‘caregiving is a
financial strain’, which had 0.11 correlation) indicating high measurement reliability and
internal consistency. Factor analysis showed three-factor structure explaining 57% of
variation. Factor 1 included items 1, 2, 3, 8, 9 and 10 while Factor 2 consisted items 4,5,6
and 7. Factor 3 included items 12 and 13.
Conclusions: The S-MCSI is a reliable and a valid tool to be used in assessing
caregiver strain. The poor performance of item 12 can be attributed to the cultural
sensitivity in Sri Lanka where the financial strain imparted by caregiving is not considered
to be a socially acceptable norm.

Abstract ID: 203

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Equity and Access

## Improving Equity of Access to End of Life Care - An Appreciative Enquiry Study

Advaith Gummaraju*1, Caitríona Callan1, Bee
Wee1,2

1Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 2University of
Oxford
*Correspondence should be addressed to: advaith@doctors.org.uk
Introduction: Socioeconomic status, ethnic origin, diagnostic group, age, and
geographic location among a multitude of sociodemographic factors can affect an individual’s
access to End-of-life care. Actively identifying successful initiatives to reduce health
inequalities in end-of-life care facilitates knowledge-sharing and scaling of interventions
across regions.
Methods: An appreciative inquiry approach was used to solicit, via NHS England
communication channels, case studies of interventions to improve access to end-of-life care
in under-served groups. Factors contributing to each initiative’s success and aspects of
each initiative’s design that could be applied to different contexts, were identified
through qualitative framework analysis.
Results: 14 case studies were shared from across England. These described
interventions such as 24/7 telemedicine services; community link nurses; specialist
end-of-life social prescribing; and community engagement events. Initiatives were aimed at
increasing access in a range of under-represented groups depending on local priorities.
Joint working, between levels of care and across private, public, and civil society
organisations was identified as a key marker of success.
Recommendations: Providers of end-of-life care should maintain equitable
access as a core principle when planning new initiatives or evaluating existing services.
Collecting and sharing data on existing interventions and their outcomes can help scale and
spread initiatives to improve access. Agreement on a core set of data for this purpose would
enable more effective research, evaluation, and transferability of good practice.

Abstract ID: 204

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Family caregiving

## Easy Language Empowers all Carers to Engage in Decision-Making

Frank Spichiger*1,2, Philip Larkin3,2, Andrea Koppitz
1

1University of Applied Science an Arts Western Switzerland, School of Health
Fribourg, 2University of Lausanne, Institute of Higher Education and Research in
Healthcare – IUFRS, 3CHUV, Lausanne University Hospital
*Correspondence should be addressed to: frank.spichiger@hefr.ch
Background: Worldwide up to 20% of the population has reading difficulties.
Easy language is a further development of plain language texts. It enhances text
accessibility and readability for people with and without reading problems than plain and
standard language. Recently, there were developments in the field and increasing usages of
plain and easy language in self-management leaflets. The linguistic accessibility of patient
assessment instruments, however, is mostly lacking. Despite the increasing clinical and
research need for patient- and proxy reported outcomes.
To empower as many nursing home frontline staff and family members as possible with our
program, we provide an accessible clinical instrument. Our presentation illustrates easy
language use with the Swiss Integrated Palliative Outcome Scale for People with Dementia
(IPOS-Dem).
Method: We adhered to a six-step process to adapt IPOS-Dem for the Swiss
context. Easy language for German-language regions has standardized guidance. Our team,
therefore, reworked the scale to adhere to word difficulty, word selection and sentence
length guidance. Easy language specialists supported this forward translation step.
Results: Text can be presented on a spectrum of comprehensibility levels: Easy
language is most accessible to an elaborate level with languages for special purposes.
However, there are drawbacks to delivering (or asking) information like this. The
distinctive reductionist presentation of easy language texts may have a repulsive effect on
people without reading difficulties, shifting the issue from accessibility to acceptability.
However, cognitive interviews and our clinical partners in the IPOS-Dem project confirmed
the relevance and importance of accessible, easy-to-use instruments for clinical
practice.
Discussion: The Instrument was adapted beyond plain language to allow proxy
assessment for people with advanced dementia. A particular highlight is the downstream
empowerment of family members to participate in decision making. However, further
psychometric testing of the adapted IPOS-Dem is indicated and underway.

Abstract ID: 205

Abstract Type: Poster - Health Promotion

## Loneliness at end of life: A public health approach to promoting the health and
wellbeing of terminally ill patients and their carers

Jeffrey R. Hanna*1, Tracey McConnell1,2, Craig
Harrison2, Kasia Patynowska2, Anne Finucane2, Briony
Hudson2, Angela McCullagh3, Sharon Paradine3, Joanne
Reid1

1School of Nursing and Midwifery, Queen’s University Belfast, 2Marie
Curie, 3Marie Curie Research Voices
*Correspondence should be addressed to: jhanna501@qub.ac.uk
Background: Loneliness is a public health issue impacting on a person’s health
and wellbeing which can lead to increased reliance on health and social care services.
Evidence suggests feelings of loneliness are heightened for people impacted by terminal
illness. This study aimed to identify solutions to loneliness among terminally ill patients
and their carers.
Methods: An explanatory multi-method study comprising of an online survey
(n = 68, response rate 30%) and three online focus groups (n = 15) with palliative and end
of life care health and social care practitioners. Data were analysed using descriptive
statistics and thematic analysis.
Results: Findings will be discussed under one of the project’s key themes: (1)
The loneliness antidote: Befriending and companionship services. Social and emotional
connectedness was highlighted as key to alleviating experiences of loneliness for people
with a terminal illness and their carers. Peer-support groups and services such as
rehabilitation programs and complementary therapies were highlighted as necessary for
providing respite and psychosocial support for people with a terminal illness and their
carers. Key aspects of these services included meeting others experiencing similar
situations and providing companionship for those lacking social networks during the end of
life period.
Conclusion: There is a need for policy drivers for commissioning and promotion
of befriending, peer support and companionship services across communities. These services
need to be co-produced with people impacted by terminal illness to ensure they meet the
needs of those experiencing loneliness within this population.

Abstract ID: 206

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Using a health promotion approach in palliative care research

Luc Deliens1 (chair), Anne-Lore Scherrens*1,2 (Speaker),
Marjolein Matthys1,2 (Speaker), Malin Eneslätt3 (Speaker)

1Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) & Ghent University, End-of-life Care
Research Group, Brussels, Belgium, 2Ghent University, Health Promotion Unit,
Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics
(LIME), Karolinska Institutet
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Anne-lore.scherrens@vub.be
Background: Growing evidence shows that using a health promotion approach in
palliative care can also have a positive impact on health outcomes in patients, their
families and communities. A health promotion approach focuses on factors such as
empowerment, attitude and self-efficacy that stimulate health and wellbeing and on enabling
individuals to have control of these factors and to make healthy choices even when
confronted with life-threatening illness.
Objectives: To improve knowledge and skills to use a health promotion approach
in palliative care research by 1) sharing experiences (challenges; facilitators, barriers)
with the use of a health promotion approach in palliative care research and providing
inspiring practices and 2) discussing the (potential) impact for people confronted with
serious illness, communities, health care services and policy. This workshop will also
schedule time for any questions or other ideas related to using a health promotion approach
in palliative care research.
Workshop format: The speakers will shortly (10’) and interactively present
their work and experience with using a health promotion approach in palliative care
research. Following these presentations, ideas for using a health promotion approach in
future palliative care research will be discussed. For example: how to apply principles and
practices of health promotion; how to co-create and design studies with the target group and
other potential end-users in palliative care research? These discussions will be held in
small groups i.e. one group will include both people having experience and having no
experience. Afterwards, time will be scheduled for presenting the ideas back to the
group.

Abstract ID: 208

Abstract Type: Poster – COVID

## Experiences among Swedish patients in specialized palliative home care and their
significant others during the Covid-19 pandemic

Stina Nyblom*1,2, Inger Benkel1,2, Linnéa Carling2,
Elisabet Löfdahl2, Ulla Molander1,2, Joakim
Öhlén2,3

1Institute of Medicine, University of Gothenburg, Sweden,
2Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Palliative Centre, Gothenburg, Sweden,
3Institute of Health and Care Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Sweden
*Correspondence should be addressed to: stina.nyblom@vgregion.se
Background: Several Covid-related issues have so far been investigated. The
threat from the pandemic for patients with progressive life-limiting illness and their
significant others has not been studied.
There has been no formal lock-down in Sweden, but restrictions have been proposed and
recommended, building on high confidence in the official authorities and personal
responsibility. Our purpose was to explore experiences and consequences of the ongoing
Covid-19 pandemic for patients in specialized palliative home care and their significant
others.
Method: The study has a qualitative design based on interviews with patients
and their significant others. The interviews were recorded, transcribed verbatim and
analysed descriptively.
Findings: In total, 36 interviews were performed (of which 22 with patients).
The findings disclose increased isolation and fewer social encounters due to the pandemic.
The impact on personal life was described as ranging from very moderate to a torture-like
experience. Some interviewees related the isolation more to decreased strength and
functional decline due to the underlying condition than to the pandemic. Generally, the
patients received necessary support in daily life thanks to efforts by their significant
others and several creative solutions. However, the joy and support of meeting family and
friends in real life were sorely lacking.
Anxiety and fear of being infected with Covid-19 were voiced. The significant others
described frustration over not being able to provide the usual support. Both patients and
significant others reported having received sufficient, and often crucial, support from the
palliative care service during the pandemic.
Conclusion: The covid-19 pandemic affected patients and significant others in
a range from moderate to torture like. They often found creative solutions to manage their
everyday life. The goal of palliative care to provide appropriate support has generally been
maintained during the pandemic.

Abstract ID: 209

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Death literacy and knowledge of death
systems

## The Lancet Commission on the Value of Death: Bringing death back into life

Dr Libby Sallnow*1

1Lead author, Lancet Commission on the Value of Death; St Christopher’s Hospice,
UK; End of life care research group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Belgium; Marie Curie
Palliative Care Research Group, UCL, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: libby.sallnow@nhs.net
The proposition of the Lancet Commission on the Value of Death is that our relationship
with death and dying has become unbalanced and we advocate a rebalancing. Death and dying
have become unbalanced as they moved from the context of family, community, culture and
relationships to sit within the health care system. Healthcare has a role to play in the
care of the dying, but interventions at end of life are often excessive, and exclude other
contributions, increasing suffering and consuming resources that cannot be used to meet
other needs.
Yet at the same the relationship with death and dying in low- and middle-income countries
is unbalanced with the rich receiving excessive care, while the poor, the majority, receive
little or no attention or relief of suffering and have no access to opioids, as the Lancet
Commission on Global Access to Palliative Care and Pain Relief showed. Excessive treatment
for the rich and inadequate or absent care for the poor is a paradox and a failing of global
health and solidarity.
The Commission recognises that rebalancing death and dying will depend on changes across
“death systems,” the many inter-related social, cultural, economic, religious and political
factors that determine how death, dying, and bereavement are understood, experienced and
managed.
The report intends to inspire a collective vision for the future. The recommendations
outline the next steps for policy makers, health and social care systems, civil society and
communities to take. This oral presentation will review the key components of the Commission
report and discuss the recommendation and implications for practice and research.

Abstract ID: 211

Abstract Type: Poster - ACP & End of Life communication

## Development and evaluation of an in-hospital service to inform people about end of life
rights: the SCEGLIERE service

De Panfilis Ludovica1, Perin Marta*1,2, on behalf of the
SCEGLIERE research group

1Bioethics Unit, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy,
2PhD Program in Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Modena and
Reggio Emilia, Modena Italy
*Correspondence should be addressed to: marta.perin@ausl.re.it
Background: In 2018, the Italian law n.219 on informed consent and Advance
Directives (AD) entered into force. Despite a positive attitude towards the Law’s issues, a
lack of information among citizen and health care professionals (HPs) hinders ADs’ use in
the country. The percentage of AD deposited is around 0,7%.
Methods: At the Local Health Authority of Reggio Emilia (Italy) a
multidisciplinary service, labelled SEGLIERE (=choice), has been established to a) inform
people on the rights guaranteed by Law n. 219, and to b) help people writing their AD. The
implementation project comprehends several activities, from development to its
evaluation.
Results: Firstly, we developed informative material on the Law n.219 and the
service’s characteristics with communication and health care literacy experts. Then, we
organized the service, identifying appropriate locations, recruiting and training
consultants, and defining procedures. 6 HPs working within the local health care facility (1
palliative care physician, 2 ethicists, 1 counsellor, 1 medical physician, 1 nurse) were
recruited and auto-trained with 10 hours in role plays.
The service entered into force on May 4, 2021. The nurse is responsible for the first
interaction with users, explaining the service’s aim, collecting users’ needs, and
organizing meetings with 2 consultants.
The service received 18 requests: 14 appointments (but 1 cancellation) and 4 only telephone
information.
To disseminate the service, we provided a training course targeting local HPs, to educate
them on Law 219 and AD’s meaning. Between May 2021 and January 2022, 10 hours of training
were provided, and 278 local HPs participated.
Conclusion: Our preliminary data show a significant interest from both
citizens and HPs towards the service, but further activities are needed to increase its
knowledge and accessibility. Moreover, the service will be qualitatively and quantitatively
evaluated to understand the impact on clinical practice.

Abstract ID: 213

Abstract Type: Poster - Equity and Access

## Developing the competence of palliative care – project, multidisciplinary cooperation
in long distance region

Terhi Kukkonen*1, Minna Hökkä 2

1Project manager, Developing the competence of palliative care -project, Kajaani
University of Applied Sciences, Kajaani, Finland, 2Head of School (School of
Health and Social Services), Kajaani University of Applied Sciences, Kajaani, Finland
*Correspondence should be addressed to: terhi.kukkonen@kamk.fi
Background: The need for palliative care increases as the population ages.
Everyone has right to appropriate palliative care regardless of the place of residence. A
report by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, recognizes regional differences in
access to care and a lack of nursing competence in Finland.
Developing the competence of palliative care -project is conducted in cooperation between
Kajaani University of Applied Sciences and Kai¬nuu So¬cial Wel¬fa¬re and Health Ca¬re Joint
Aut¬ho¬ri¬ty. The aim is to describe and develop regional model for palliative care
provision. In addition, to ensure palliative care competence of the social and health care
staff in private and public sector, teaching staff and the third sector actors.
Methods: A survey on the competence needs of palliative care was launched.
Workshops for private and public sector professionals was held. A palliative care network
was initiated for public and private sector professionals in the region.
Results: Based on the results of the survey, a vocational palliative care
training was implemented. Remote implementation of the palliative care training made it
possible to participate from region’s distant areas. Assessment of the training submitted
valuable information from competence needs in area. The nursing curriculum is developed
based on results so education will be in line with the demands of working life.
Participants in the workshops was from home care, sheltered housing for older people and
the disabled, emergency care and hospital at home. As a result, development goals of
end-of-life home care were identified. Development of operating models continues with
multidisciplinary actors in the spring -22.
The network of palliative care professional’s supports flexible transfer of information,
which improves the safety and quality of care.
Conclusion: The evaluation of the project is carried out based on the
evaluation data of the participants. Further development takes place in a multidisciplinary
collaboration with the inclusion of patients and near ones. The palliative care competence
of working life representatives and educators will be strengthened. The project promotes
access to equal and consistent palliative care for patients and their near ones in the
Kainuu area.

Abstract ID: 215

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Take a crash course in using the Death Literacy Index

Kerrie Noonan*1, Barbara Gale2, John Rosenberg3,
Wendy Gain4

1Death Literacy Institute, Australia; Adjunct Researcher, Western Sydney
University; Public Health Palliative Care International, 2MBE, Independent
Consultant, Visiting Senior Fellow in End-of-Life Care, University of Suffolk UK,
3Senior Lecturer, University of the Sunshine Coast, Australia; President,
Public Health Palliative Care International, 4Independent Consultant,
Australia
*Correspondence should be addressed to: kerrie@deathliteracy.institute
Objectives: Death Literacy is defined as the knowledge and skills that people
need to gain access to, understand, and make informed choices about end-of-life care
options, and equip them to take action to support each other as they face death and grief.
The Death Literacy Index (DLI) is a validated instrument that measures this capacity in
groups of people in many settings, including communities and workplaces. Internationally,
the DLI is used to start conversations and is applied in research and evaluation.
Participants will be introduced to the DLI; practice its use; work in small groups to
understand death literacy in different settings; and use creative ideas to co-design
strategies for increasing death literacy where they live and work.
Interactivity: This experiential workshop provides an interactive space for
participants to practice using the DLI from various perspectives, whether community members,
practitioners or policy makers. It is suited to people new to the DLI as well as those with
some experience of its use. A maximum of 28 participants is set. All four facilitators have
substantial knowledge of, and experience in the DLI, and are skilled enablers of engaging
and interactive workshops.
Learning Outcomes: Upon completion of this workshop, participants will have a
greater understanding of the DLI and its application, relevant to themselves, their
communities or professional settings. Participants will be leave with ideas they have
created on how to improve Death Literacy using this asset-based approach.
Application to PHPCI: People and communities with high levels of death
literacy have context-specific knowledge about death systems and the ability to put that
knowledge into practice. Compassionate Communities initiatives are an example of social
interventions developed to enhance Death Literacy in line with Public Health approaches to
dying, death and grief.

Abstract ID: 216

Abstract Type: Poster - Family caregiving

## Concerns of the patients’ relatives about Breaking Bad News to patients – An experience
in a tertiary cancer centre in NE India

Kabindra Bhagabati*1

1Department of Palliative Medicine, Dr B Borooah Cancer Institute, Guwahati,
India
*Correspondence should be addressed to: kbhagabati@yahoo.co.uk
Background: In India, we have strong family ties. Every member of a family is
important in decision making for the family. Whenever one of the family member gets ill, all
other members come to know about the diagnosis first and they decide whether they want to
divulge the truth to the patient or not. In most cases, the family members decide to hide it
from the patient. According to medical ethics, patient has the right to know about his
disease and the status and our study is to find out the concerns of the family members about
disclosing the diagnosis and disease status to patient.
Materials and Methods: The study was conducted in a tertiary cancer centre in
North East India. Patients in the age group of 18 to 60 years, having cancer diagnosis but
without any metabolic disease were selected. They were selected randomly during their first
visit to the palliative care unit and relatives were informed about the study. Eligible and
consenting relatives in the age group of 18 to 60 years were asked to answer a set of
questions in the line of SPICE questionnaire.
Results: A total of 19 patients’ relatives were interviewed. 13 out of 19
(68.4%) patients wanted to know the diagnosis. But 9 out of 19 relatives (47.4%) did not
want to disclose the diagnosis. 10 out of 19 relatives (52.6%) wanted to disclose it citing
various reasons like – patient has the right to know (20%), patient is capable enough to
decide about the future (10%), better to give the right information rather than false hope
(20%), patient has to undergo all the treatments by himself (30%) etc. Relatives do not want
to disclose because – patient will psychologically break down (44.4%), may break hope and
willpower (22.2%), may be harmful for the patient and the whole family (22.2%), patient want
to live longer and do not want to discourage (33.3%) etc.
Conclusions: Several concerns expressed by relatives in disclosing the
diagnosis to patients. It is important to talk to the relatives first to break the
collusion. It is essential to tell the truth to the patient to maintain a good doctor and
patient relationships.

Abstract ID: 217

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Policy and Vision

## A Public Health hazard: if in jurisdictions permitting assisted dying (AD) palliative
care (PC) rejects AD, all end of life care may suffer

Marie-José H.E Gijsberts*1,2, Jan Bernheim1

1End-of-life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) & Ghent
University, Brussels, Belgium, 2End-of-life Care Research Group, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel (VUB)
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Marie-Jose.Gijsberts@vub.be
Background: For International PC organisations, euthanasia and/or assisted
suicide (EAS) are “incompatible with the very foundations of PC”. Yet, 300 million people
worldwide now live in EAS-permissive jurisdictions and in many others EAS is on the societal
agenda. In current or future EAS-permissive environments, PC organisations have three
options: 1) keep excluding EAS from PC, 2) as in the Netherlands, leave involvement in EAS
to individual caregivers who may act themselves or call in the Expertisecentrum Euthanasie,
or 3) as in Belgium, embed EAS in PC.
Aim: To explore the public health issues raised by the controversial PC/EAS
relationship.
Methods: Reviewing 1) the essentialist (epistemological, historical,
doctrinal, conceptual, ethical) arguments to exclude EAS from PC. 2) the factual PC/EAS
relationship in EAS-permissive jurisdictions.
Results: 1) Intellectually, several essentialist objections to PC accepting
EAS are problematic. 2) Empirically, in Flanders (Belgium), EAS occurs three times more
after a PC pathway than after non-specialised end-of-life (EOL) care. Together with in
Oregon and Washington, over 70% of EAS are preceded by professional PC. In the Netherlands,
there are no precise epidemiological data, but studies report that PC is usually associated
with EAS cases.
Conclusions: 1) EAS seamlessly following conventional PC serves the continuity
of care and the primacy of patient values. 2) Pragmatically, if in future EAS-permissive
jurisdictions PC excludes EAS, EAS will be practiced only by caregivers who are likely less
professionally competent for EOL care. Adverse consequences: 1) patients with EAS request
may be nudged to shun professional PC and may thus not receive optimal EOL care and 2) EAS
will likely be less practiced in a PC spirit of ‘total care’. Thus, the quality of all EOL
care is likely to decline. 3) Further research is needed to explore if and how palliative
care provision is affected by an E-Pas request.

Abstract ID: 218

Abstract Type: Poster – ACP & End of Life communication

## Support from health care professionals in empowering family carers to discuss Advance
Care Planning: A population-based survey

Isabel Vandenbogaerde*1,2, Chantal Van Audenhove3, Peter
Hudson4, Luc Deliens1,2, Joachim Cohen1, Aline De
Vleminck1

1End-of-Life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) &
Universiteit Gent, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Public Health and Primary
Care, Universiteit Gent, Gent, Belgium, 3LUCAS Center for Care Research and
Consultancy, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Centre for Palliative Care, St
Vincent’s Hospital Melbourne and University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Isabel.vandenbogaerde@vub.be
Background: Family carers have a prominent role in end-of-life care for
seriously ill persons. However, most of the Advance Care Planning (ACP) literature is
focused on the role of health care professionals (HCPs).
Aim: To investigate what proportion of bereaved FCs has discussed ACP with
their relative and to examine what proportion of these FCs received support from HCPs for
these conversations, what type of support they did receive and whether they perceived the
support as sufficient.
Method: Population-based cross-sectional survey of bereaved FCs of persons
with a serious chronic illness (N=3000). The survey asked whether FCs had ACP conversations
with their seriously ill relative in three months before bereavement, if and how they were
supported by HCPs for these conversations and if they evaluated the support as
sufficient.
Results: The response rate was 54.9%. The proportion of FCs that engaged in an
ACP conversation with their relative was 46.9%. Of these FCs, 21.9% indicated they were not
supported by any HCP to do ACP conversations. If supported by an HCP it was most often by a
general practitioner (66.6%) and by doing the ACP conversation together (53.8%). The support
was less often by explaining how FC could engage in ACP conversations themselves (17.9%) or
by referring the FC to useful sources on ACP conversations (9.4%). For 57.4% of the FCs, the
support received by the HCP was deemed sufficient.
Conclusion: Our study provides a population-based estimate of the proportion
of FCs that has ACP conversations with their seriously ill relatives. Our results indicate
that HCPs supported FCs by performing the ACP conversation together. Empowering support by
HCPs for FCs to perform ACP conversations themselves is rare. More insight in what FCs need
in conducting these ACP conversations outside the clinical contacts is necessary.

Abstract ID: 219

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Death literacy and knowledge of death
systems

## Public Attitudes and Preparedness Toward Death: A Thematic Analysis

Jacquelyn Tan*1, Ying Chern Yeoh*1, Helen
Poole*1

1Liverpool John Moores University, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: jacquelyntan.my@gmail.com
Background: Death is unpredictable but certain. Due to the Covid-19 pandemic,
mortality becomes salient. Public anxiety towards death has been aroused internationally.
But the death topic has not been widely discussed. The tendency to reduce anxiety is to
understand death and preparation for death as it promotes a dignified death with
self-control and own preference. In England, the public reported being comfortable in
discussing this topic but they have not been translated into any specific conversations
about their mortality and death planning.
Objective: To explore the attitudes of healthy middle-aged adults toward death
and death preparation of own mortality.
Design: A qualitative interview employing vignette and semi-structured
questions.
Methods: Seven British citizens aged 25-44 years were recruited. Each online
interview lasted for about 45 minutes, was audio-taped, transcribed and analysed using
Thematic Analysis.
Results: Six overarching themes were identified. The respondents presented
affective-cognitive ambivalence towards death. They showed complex emotions toward their
mortality and negative perceptions toward dying despite being comfortable talking about
death in general. The negative reactions were influenced by their expectations and dying
preferences. Nevertheless, the respondents gain insights on the awakened life upon
reflection on death. Moreover, they tried to overcome death by adopting fantasy thoughts of
changing and mechanisms that signified immortality. On the other hand, the importance and
advantages of death preparation, such as an assurance of a dignified death and a sense of
relief were acknowledged by the respondents. However, the preparation engagement remains low
due to readiness factors.
Conclusion: The current study indicated that healthy middle-aged adults had
attitudinal ambivalence towards death and death preparation. Implications on death
education, death literacy framework and positivity of death in health context were
discussed.

Abstract ID: 220

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Culture, philosophy and spirituality

## Compassion and hope: Bridging public health and hospice care

Erik Olsman*1, Marie-José H.E. Gijsberts2

1Chaplain and ethicist, associate professor Protestant Theological University,
Groningen and Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Palliative care physician, visiting
professor End of Life Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel and Ghent University,
Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: h.j.olsman@pthu.nl
Hospice care has always aimed to overcome boundaries, for instance between care provided at
home and care provided at an institution, or between care provided by volunteers and care
provided by professionals. In this presentation, the two presenters - an palliative care
physician and a chaplain; both scientists as well - make clear, based on their own studies
and those of others, that compassion and hope have always been part of this ‘bridging’
function, in person centred hospice care as well as a public health approach of palliative
care. They will describe the ‘relational ethics of hope,’ in which patients, their loved
ones and health care professionals balance empowerment (hope) and compassion (struggle).
They will present how compassionate communities can be(come) communities of hope, and how
these communities bridge care provided at home, at a hospice, at an institute et cetera.
They will also show how hope and compassion, which are central in spiritual care in
palliative care, are excellent ways of providing spiritual care as a multidisciplinary team,
including volunteers

Abstract ID: 221

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Death literacy and knowledge of death
systems

## Factors influencing death literacy in a Swedish sample

Therese Johansson*1; Carol Tishelman2,3; Lars E.
Eriksson1,4,5; Joachim Cohen6‡ & Ida
Goliath1,7‡

1Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet,
Sweden, 2Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Karolinska
Institutet, Sweden, 3Stockholm Health Care Services, Region Stockholm, Sweden,
4School of Health Sciences, City, University of London, United Kingdom,
5Medical Unit Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge,
Sweden, 6End-of-Life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel and Ghent
University, Brussels, Belgium, 7Stockholm Gerontology Research Center, Stockholm,
Sweden
*Correspondence should be addressed to therese.johansson@ki.se
‡Shared last authorship
Background: Community capacity for end of life (EOL) issues has recently been
conceptualized as death literacy (DL), encompassing a set of knowledge and skills needed to
engage in EOL-related situations. This study aimed to explore how sociodemographic, health,
and experience-based factors are associated with DL, as measured by the Swedish-language
Death Literacy Index (DLI-S).
Methods: Cross-sectional data were collected online from a quota sample
(n = 503), aged 18-86 (x̄ = 49.95, SD = 17.92), recruited from an existing national survey
panel. Bivariate correlations between predictors and DL were analyzed using linear
regression. From a causal diagram a 3-step hierarchical regression model was created.
Results: Overall, the regression model explained 34.8% of the variance in DL,
F(16, 486)=16.22, p<.001. In step 1, three factors accounted for 9% of the variance:
being widowed (b = 1.87, p<.001), older age (b = 0.02, p = .006), and having a religious
belief (b = 0.64, p = .004). Adding professional care background in Step 2 contributed to an
additional 16% of variance, as having worked in health care (b = 1.18, p<.001) was a
strong predictor of DL. Inserting experience-based factors in step 3 explained another 9.9%
of the variance, as experience of EOL care provision (b = 0.77, p = .002), grief support
provision (b = 0.96, p<.001), and supporting someone with life-threatening illness
(b = 0.75, p<.001) all significantly predicted DL. In this presentation we will address
potential causal pathways between factors and DL.
Conclusion: This study is, to our knowledge, the first to examine and model
individual, relative, and collective influence of different factors on DL. Our findings
confirm the original DLI developers proposed model in the Swedish context. Though the key
role of EOL experiences for DL was highlighted, the moderate degree of overall variance
explained suggests that further research is needed to better understand how preparedness for
EOL care can be strengthened in the community.

Abstract ID: 222

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Participatory workshop on the Death Literacy Index: Examination and reflection about
its cross-cultural relevance and viability

Therese Johansson*1 (speaker/facilitator), Steven
Vanderstichelen2,3,4 (facilitator), Carol Tishelman5,6 (chair),
Kerrie Noonan7,8 (speaker), Rosemary Leonard7, Åsa
Olsson1 (facilitator); Lars E. Eriksson1,9,10, Ida
Goliath1,11‡, Joachim Cohen2‡

1Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet,
Sweden,2End-of-life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) &
Ghent University, Brussels, Belgium,3Department of Public Health and Primary
Care, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 4Compassionate Communities Centre of
Expertise (COCO), Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 5Department of
Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden,
6Stockholm Health Care Services, Region Stockholm, Sweden,7School of
Social Sciences & Psychology, Western Sydney University, Sydney,
Australia,8Death Literacy Institute, Australia,9School of Health
Sciences, City, University of London, United Kingdom,10Medical Unit Infectious
Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Sweden,11Stockholm
Gerontology Research Center, Stockholm, Sweden
*Correspondence should be addressed to: therese.johansson@ki.se
‡Shared last authorship
There is growing global interest in public health approaches in palliative care (PHPC) that
promote individual and community capacity-building for end of life (EOL) care, dying, death,
and loss. Such EOL capacity can be conceptualized as death literacy, a multi-dimensional
construct that the Australian Death Literacy Index (DLI) measures on a group-level. As such,
a DLI version that is both relevant and comparable across languages and countries can be
useful to evaluate PHPC initiatives and assess EOL preparedness.
In this workshop, we aim to stimulate discussion about both potentials and challenges in
translating and adapting the DLI related to e.g. linguistic, cultural and health care system
differences, and how these might affect the viability of the instrument in different
contexts. No prior familiarity with death literacy or the DLI is needed.
We will briefly present the DLI and share examples of experiences from translation,
adaptation, and validation processes in an international study, conducted in Sweden,
Belgium, and the Netherlands. The workshop continues with small interactive group
discussions, progressing into a general discussion facilitated and documented by members of
the workshop team. This workshop is expected to generate suggestions for optimizing the DLI
for future national and international research. Workshop insights will be summarized and
shared with all participants after the conference.
This workshop builds on principles of knowledge exchange, enabling mutual learning for all
participants. Expected learning outcomes are:
Linguistic, cultural, socio-political, organizational, and other contextual differences
to consider in relation to DLI adaptation and translation, and how these might affect
the relevance of the DLI overall or specific items
Suggestions for revising the DLI to make it more cross-culturally viable, while
recognizing the need for context-specificity
Pros and cons of attempting to develop generic vs country-specific versions of the
DLI

Abstract ID: 223

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community ACP

## Dissemination, Use and Impact of a Community-based Advance Care Planning Intervention:
Ripple Effects of the Swedish DöBra cards

Malin Eneslätt*1,2,3, Gert Helgesson1, Carol
Tishelman1,4

1Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Health, Educatiion and Technology,
Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden, 3Department of Health Care
Sciences, Marie Cederschiöld University College, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Stockholm
Health Care Services (SLSO), Stockholm county council (SLL), Stockholm, Sweden
*Correspondence should be addressed to: malin.eneslatt@ki.se
Background: There is growing interest in community-based advance care planning
(ACP) interventions, but few studies investigate the societal impact of such initiatives. A
Swedish adaptation of the GoWish cards, the DöBra cards, were used as a tool in the SweACP
participatory action research project with older people in the community, without imminent
End-of-Life (EoL) care needs. Due to popular demand, the DöBra cards were later made
available to the general public as a social innovation.
Aim: To explore how the publicly available DöBra cards have been disseminated
and used without researchers’ engagement, to provide a basis for understanding their impact
in a wider community setting.
Methods: Using a Ripple Effects Mapping approach, we followed three chains of
dissemination of the DöBra cards originating from a patient organization, a national
interest organization for older people, and a health care organization. Data were collected
through interviews with 20 participants and analyzed with directed content analysis.
Results: A variety of strategies for use were noted, as the DöBra cards were
adapted to fit needs in different personal, professional, and organizational settings. The
cards were found to act as both a means to raise awareness about EoL issues in different
contexts, as well as an end in themselves, e.g. by facilitating ACP conversations for people
with serious disease. However, in some instances, resistance to use or promotion of the
DöBra cards was also described. Impact included personal development as well as strengthened
personal and professional relationships, with potential to affect EoL care provision.
Conclusions: The primarily positive perspectives and broad dissemination of
the DöBra cards in a variety of contexts beyond those controlled by researchers, has led to
capacity building in dealing with EoL issues in the community, as the topic of dying and
death has been brought to agendas in new contexts.

Abstract ID: 224

Abstract Type: Free Communication: Loss and grief

## Guideline-based end-of life and BEreavement Support for families in cancer CARE (BEST
CARE): An implementation research study

Qendresa Thaqi*1,2, Anja Lorch3, David Blum4, Simon
Peng-Keller5, Rahel Naef1,2

1Institute for Implementation Science in Health Care, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Zurich, Switzerland, 2Center of Clinical Nursing Science,
University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland, 3Comprehensive Cancer Care Centre,
University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland, 4Competence Centre for Palliative Care,
University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Switzerland, 5Professorship of
Spiritual Care, Faculty of Theology, University of Zurich, Switzerland
*Correspondence should be addressed to: qendresa.thaqi@uzh.ch
Background: Terminal cancer and the subsequent loss of a close other is a
stressful, incisive experience that significantly impacts family members’ physical and
mental health. However, best practice recommendations for family engagement (FE) and support
during end-of-life (EoL) and in bereavement are often not consistently adopted in cancer
care across acute and community-based settings in Switzerland.
Aim: This implementation research study investigates the current adoption and
contextual determinants of EoL and bereavement support to families of cancer patients.
Methods: An online survey using RedCap© is currently underway in 4 acute and 3
community-based cancer care services, with a target sample size of 200 cancer care
professionals. Study endpoints include the level of adoption of guideline-based engagement
and support practices, and contextual determinants at the individual (i.e., knowledge,
skills, attitudes, role understanding) and the organizational level (i.e., financial
incentive, resources, leadership culture, barriers). Linear regression analyses will be
conducted to determine the influence of contextual determinants on adoption of best practice
recommendations.
Results: Findings will be presented according to the cancer care setting and
type of professional group. Findings on the current adoption level and most influential
individual and organizational determinants will portray areas for future improvement and
implementation activities.
Conclusion: The BEST CARE study will contribute knowledge on barriers to and
extent of adoption of EoL and bereavement support to families of patients with cancer, which
is needed to improve evidence-based health service delivery. Investigating the care context
and factors that determine uptake of FE and support enables to develop implementation
strategies of family-focused care at the EoL and in bereavement that are tailored to the
identified barriers and enablers in each service context in a participatory manner.

Abstract ID: 226

Abstract Type: Symposium

## Strategies to create awareness and engage the public in preparing for the end of life.
Examples from the Netherlands

H. Roeline Pasman*1 (chair), Natasja J.H. Raijmaker2 (chair),
Larissa Exalto3 (speaker), Gudule Boland4 (speaker), Rob
Bruntink5 (speaker), Annicka van der Plas1 (speaker)

1Department of Public and Occupational Health, Amsterdam Public Health research
institute, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
2Netherlands Comprehensive Cancer Organisation, Utrecht, the Netherlands &
Netherlands Association for Palliative Care (PZNL), Utrecht, the Netherlands,
3Netherlands Association for Palliative Care (PZNL), Utrecht, the Netherlands,
4Pharos, Dutch Centre of Expertise on Health Disparities,
5Jounalist/author palliative care and co-owner Bureau MORBidee
*Correspondence should be addressed to: hrw.pasman@amsterdamumc.nl
Public knowledge about end-of-life care is suboptimal. From a representative Dutch older
adult panel, a quarter stated that they had never heard of the term palliative care or only
knew this term, but not what it entails. Moreover, about a quarter stated ‘don’t know’ on
statements about palliative care, such as “palliative care is only for people that have a
few weeks to live” and “palliative care is for patients with cancer only”. For people with
lower education these percentages were higher. Knowledge about palliative care, what choices
there are, and what care is available is important to create awareness and stimulate people
to prepare for their end of life. This symposium aims to present strategies for creating
public awareness about the end of life. It will consist of 4 presentations followed by
discussion.
1) A Public awareness campaign: The website Overpalliatievezorg.nl wants to guide
people on what palliative care is and how it can contribute to their quality of life.
Several marketing and communication strategies are used with the aim that patients and
their relatives find the information they need.
2) Discussing palliative care in plain language: Pharos will present their
communication training for healthcare professionals, films to promote talking about
end-of-life care (in four languages) and plain language patient leaflets to explain
aspects of palliative care to people with limited health literacy.
3) Tools for public awareness about the end of life: Bureau MORBidee will present their
experience with social media campaigns (‘Let’s talk about death’), beer mats,
conversation starters, card games, a mobile Before I Die Wall (chalk board), Death Cafes
and a yearly Mortality Day (first day of autumn).
4) Information meetings about the end of life: Amsterdam UMC will present a toolkit for
healthcare professionals to organise meetings for their patients/the general public, and
how these meetings influence readiness to start preparing for their end of life.

Abstract ID: 227

Abstract Type: Poster - Paediatric Palliative Care

## Beyond bricks and mortar: enabling equity of access to paediatric hospice care for
Queensland children and families

Leigh Donovan*1,2, Elham Day1, Kelly Oldham1, Peter
Westoby1,3,4, Mathew Francis Paul Toon1

1Hummingbird House Children’s Hospice, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia,
2Collaboraide, Minjerribah, Queensland, Australia, 3Deakin
University, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Melbourne, Victoria,
4Community Praxis Co-operative, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
*Correspondence should be addressed to: leigh@collaboraide.com
Background: Hummingbird House (HH), Queensland’s only children’s hospice,
based in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, offers care to children with a life limiting
condition (LLC) and their families in the form of short break stays, emergency respite, end
of life, post death and bereavement care. From the outset, HH had a vision for state-wide
care, now at 5 years old, with the hospice building/service established, there is capacity
to explore what resourcing and embedding a state-wide model of care could look like. A new
vision statement affirms this ambition Every family in Queensland is connected to a
community that knows how to care for them in life, death and bereavement. Work is now
underway on a Regional Development Strategy (RDS) aligned with a Compassionate Communities
(CC) and public health model of palliative care (PC) paradigm. This ‘out of the box’
abstract presents an emerging RDS and invites dialogue from conference delegates around how
these models, more common in adult PC, can be translated into the paediatric context.
Methods: Data to support development of the RDS was collated through 1. A
Rapid Literature Review, 2. A desktop service mapping exercise, 3. Community consultation
with Australian and international colleagues.
Results: There is a growing body of evidence that supports the extension of
adult hospice care beyond ‘bricks and mortar’ into regional communities. Link centres,
community connectors, community development outreach workers are some examples. However,
there is a paucity of data and/or service frameworks within the paediatric hospice sector
that adopts a similar approach to care.
Conclusion: This presentation is a ‘call to action’ exploring how public
health and CC approaches to palliative care can translate into the paediatric hospice
sector. The authors pose a question to delegates: How can an intergenerational public health
and CC approach enable equity of access to hospice care for children and families currently
isolated by geography?

Abstract ID: 228

Abstract Type: Symposium

## Making serious illness, death, dying and loss ‘part of life’ in educational
institutions

Sarah Dury*1 (chair), Sally Paul2 (speaker), Marieke
Groot3 (speaker), Veerle Coupez4, Greetje Desnerck4
(speaker), Hanne Bakelants5 (speaker)

1Compassionate Communities Center of expertise; Educational Sciences, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel (VUB), 2University of Strathclyde, 3University
College Rotterdam, 4University College West-Vlaanderen (Howest),
5End-of-life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB)
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Sarah.dury@vub.be
Compassionate Communities have been put forward as a new model for community-based
palliative care to positively impact the health and wellbeing of those experiencing the
challenges of serious illness, death, dying, and loss. The literature indicates that
especially educational institutions might play an important role in integrating experiences
of serious illness, death, dying and loss in local communities. Educational institutions are
at the same time learning environments, intergenerational hubs, employers, and formative
actors that can create safe spaces, where these topics are not taboo topics, but can be
discussed.
This symposium wants to explore the role of educational institutions in fostering
compassion and brings together different educational institutions that are at various stages
of developing compassionate initiatives within an educational context. The symposium will
share experiences about the development process, the challenges and successes and promote
further advances.
Sally Paul will start by discussing the role of education communities in public health
palliative care. Drawing on her research with school communities she will present a
conceptual model for compassionate schools and how this links with public health palliative
care education. Marieke Groot follows with their specific living lab in the Netherlands and
focuses on the methods, current situation and first results of the route towards a
Compassionate University College. Veerle Coupez en Greetje Desnerck explain how an informal
group of ‘believers’ of Howest (UAS Flanders) developed a Compassionate school. They give an
insight in the learning network with the VUB and the services of student support. Hanne
Bakelants closes the symposium with her research on the development of a Compassionate
University in Belgium – Vrije Universiteit Brussel. The goal is to understand how different
stakeholders build a shared understanding of the aims and objectives of the Compassionate
University and how community members experience the development process.

Abstract ID: 229

Abstract Type: Poster - Family caregivers

## Experiences of parenthood when a parent has been diagnosed with ALS

Nina Malmström1, Joakim Öhlén1,2,3, Stefan
Nilsson1,2, Birgitta Jakobsson Larsson4, Ingela Nygren5
and Anneli Ozanne*1,6

1Institute of Health and Care sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Centre for Person-Centred Care, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Palliative Centre at the Sahlgrenska University
Hospital Region Västra Götaland, Gothenburg, Sweden,4Department of Public Health
and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 5Department of Medical
Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden,
6Department of Neurology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden
*Correspondence should be addressed to: anneli.ozanne@gu.se
Background: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neuromuscular progressive
disease that attacks the nerve cells in the brain and the spinal cord that control movements
of the muscles. This leads to muscle wasting and paralysis of, among other things,
extremities, speech, swallowing and breathing muscles. The average survival is 2-5 years
from the first symptoms. The disease means that the person increasingly needs help, and the
family is often involved in that support. Research focusing on the parent perspective based
on the experiences of both the ill and the healthy parent is limited. Therefore, the aim of
this study is to explore the meanings of parenthood when one of the parents has been
diagnosed with ALS.
Methods: Parents who have been diagnosed with ALS and their partner, or former
partner, with whom they have children in common were interviewed separately. To date, 13
interviews with ill parents and 12 interviews with healthy parents have been conducted. 13
participants were women, and 12 were men. The interviews lasted about an hour, were audio
recorded and transcribed. Phenomenological hermeneutic approach to the analysis is
ongoing.
Results: The preliminary results show that both the ill and the healthy
parents are very worried about the children’s situation. They are aware that the children
take a great responsibility, and they are afraid that it prevents the children from living
their own lives and spending time with friends as they otherwise would have done. They
related about difficulties to talk to each other in the family, which create a culture of
silence and the parents sometimes “protect” the children by excluding them from knowledge
and support from the healthcare.
Conclusion: The results will lead to an increased knowledge of both the ill
and the healthy parents’ situation. It will provide information that will be clinically
useful in conversations with the whole family as well as in future supportive actions aimed
at this target group.

Abstract ID: 230

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community engagement and development

## Designing human-centred palliative environments

Iris Beuls*1, Ann Petermans1, Jan Vanrie1

1Research group ArcK, Faculty of Architecture and Arts, Hasselt University,
Hasselt, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: iris.beuls@uhasselt.be
Background: The palliative environment (PE) can influence various users’
experiences of palliative care. Hence, architects could incorporate human-centred
recommendations into their designs of PE to support such users (i.e., patient, family,
caregiver, volunteer) in multiple dimensions of their wellbeing (i.e., physical, emotional,
social, and spiritual). However, the impact of research in this field on architectural
practices seems little so far. Architects seem to be hampered in using evidence-based
knowledge to design PE because the research is usually considered difficult to access,
rarely targeted at architects, and challenging to integrate into design. In such cases,
architects usually use their intuitive knowledge. However, since PE are generally not
commonplace buildings, a possible discrepancy between architectural practice and users’
needs and wishes can occur. To increase the impact in practice, it is necessary to consider
which and how ‘spatial aspects’ affect users’ experiences and wellbeing with(in) PE.
Method: A scoping review on users’ experiences and wellbeing with(in) PE was
performed to define spatial aspects; but, from an architectural perspective, some aspects
were still missing. Performing fieldwork as a volunteer in two PE enabled data collection
through qualitative methods (i.e., participant observation, case study analysis, and
photo-elicitation interviews).
Results/conclusion: Users’ experiences in PE can differ quite extensively, yet
research in this field rarely takes a multi-user perspective. In our project, we explore the
impact and interconnections of spatial aspects on users’ experiences and wellbeing in PE
while integrating multiple users’ voices. Knowledge of these various users’ experiences was
linked to spatial aspects and then categorised into five main themes. These results provide
insights, ideas, and support for (re)designing and researching human-centred palliative
environments.

Abstract ID: 231

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Arts and end of life

## Imaginative Communication Across the Borders of Death. End-of-Life Narratives in
Palliative and Bereavement Care

Zoë Ghyselinck*1,2,3

1Department of Literary Studies, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium,
2Faculty of Arts, Catholic University of Leuven, Campus Kortrijk (KULAK),
Kortrijk, Belgium, 3German Studies Institute, Literary Studies, University of
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany
*Correspondence should be addressed to: zoe.ghyselinck@ugent.be
Background: In 2021, dying mother Lara Switten left a book with stories and
pictures to her children. Lara’s so-called end-of-life (EOL) narrative, created with the
support of biographer Ine Nijs, attests to a growing trend of storytelling practices in
Western-European palliative EOL care that prompt us to rethink the modified ways in which
the dying anticipate death. More and more people facing severe illness are supported by
caregivers and external biographers (e.g., Amfora, Flanders; Passeurs de mots, France) to
review their lives and to pass down these stories to loved ones. Research has emphasized the
therapeutic benefits of narrative life-review for the dying, relatives, and caregivers in
EOL stages. Little is known about the implications of EOL narratives for the bereaved.
Methods: Previewing my literary-sociological study on EOL narratives as
textual results of these cultural practices, I address this challenge from the perspective
of literary studies and assume an imaginary communicative loop, in which the dying and the
bereaved are engaged as authors-narrators and readers-recipients. By comparing Lara’s EOL
narrative with Ley’s fictional ‘For when I’m gone’ (2020), I argue that literary techniques,
such as imaginative narration, structure the ways in which the dying want to be remembered
and how they anticipate a future of which they will no longer be part. I hypothesize that
the dying and the bereaved not only attribute meaning to EOL narratives in terms of a
continuation of parental and intimate roles in absentia. EOL narratives likewise elicit
disrupting experiences and intergenerational incomprehension.
Conclusion: Insights into how literary techniques and narrative scripts modify
the communicational character of EOL narratives will enhance our understanding of how these
texts help the bereaved imagine the deceased and how their relationship could have looked
like, and will lead to evidence-based guidance for those involved in narrative practices in
EOL care.

Abstract ID: 232

Abstract Type: Poster – COVID

## Impact of Covid Pandemic on ambulatory palliative care

Stavroula Myrto Trianti*1,2, Lukas Sossala2, Ina
Schmitzer1,2

1General practice (Praxis am Röhrweg), in Torgau, Saxony, Germany,
2Ambulatory palliative care setting (LE Leipziger Palliativgesellschaft),
Leipzig, Saony, Germany
*Correspondence should be addressed to: myrtotrianti@yahoo.gr
Background: The COVID-19 pandemic has a dramatic impact on the whole continuum
of patient care. Respective data from the palliative care setting are scarce. Our aim was to
compare diagnosis profile, stage of disease at admission and outcome in an ambulatory
palliative care setting before and during the pandemic.
Methods: We studied a cohort of consecutive patients admitted to an ambulatory
palliative care provider in Saxony, Germany, during a 21-month time period before the
pandemic, between March 2018 and November 2019, with a cohort of consecutive patients
admitted in a comparable 21-month time interval during the ongoing pandemic, between March
2020 and November 2021. We compared number of admissions, diagnosis profile
(oncologic/non-oncologic main diagnosis), time under palliative care and place of death.
Results: The number of admitted patients was similar during the two periods:
in total, 1,335 patients were admitted during the pre-pandemic interval compared with 1,345
patients in the pandemic. The diagnosis profile did not differ: pre-pandemic, 1,096 patients
(82.1%) had malignancy as main diagnosis compared with 1,117 (83.0%) during the pandemic
(p = 0.52). Time remaining under palliative care was somewhat longer during the pandemic:
pre-pandemic, 722 patients (53.7%) up to 28 days and 623 (46.3%) more than 29 days compared
with 688 patients (49.9%) and 691 (50.1%) during the pandemic, respectively (p = 0.048).
There was a statistically significant difference in place on death: 246 patients (18.2%)
died in a nursing home in the pre-pandemic cohort compared with 205 (15.0%) during the
pandemic.
Conclusions: Malignancies were the main diagnosis in patients admitted in
palliative care in the large majority both before and during the pandemic. The percentage of
patients exceeding 4 weeks in palliative care was higher during the pandemic while the
number of patients dying in a nursing home facility decreased. Despite statistical
significance, differences were moderate.

Abstract ID: 233

Abstract Type: Free Communication: Family caregiving

## Being a child of a parent diagnosed with ALS - from the child’s perspective

Nina Malmström*1, Stefan Nilsson1,2, Joakim
Öhlén1,2,3, Birgitta Jakobsson Larsson4, Ingela
Nygren5, Anneli Ozanne1,6

1Institute of Health and Care sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Centre for Person-Centred Care, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Palliative Centre at the Sahlgrenska University
Hospital Region Västra Götaland, Gothenburg, Sweden, 4Department of Public Health
and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 5Department of Medical
Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden,
6Department of Neurology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden
*Correspondence should be addressed to: nina.malmstrom@gu.se
Background: Support can be both challenging and needed for children when a
parent is ill with a life limiting condition. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a
neuromuscular progressive disease that attacks the motor nerve cells in the brain and the
spinal cord that control movements of the muscles, which leads to muscle wasting and
paralysis. The average survival is 2-5 years from the first symptoms. The ill person
increasingly needs help and the children may be involved in that support, while they witness
how their parent deteriorates and eventually dies. Research focusing on children is limited,
in particular from a first person perspective; voices of the children themselves. Therefore,
the aim of this study is to explore the meanings of living as a child with a parent who has
been diagnosed with ALS.
Methods: To date, 10 individual interviews of children between the ages of 13
and 25, who fully or partially live together with the ill parent, have been conducted. The
interviews lasted about an hour, were audio recorded and transcribed. Phenomenological
hermeneutic approach to the analysis is ongoing.
Results: The preliminary results show that the children are in a very
vulnerable situation, especially if the parent has a severe bodily disability and personal
assistance or other healthcare professionals working at home. The children take great
responsibility in both supporting practically at home and helping the ill parent. At the
same time, they experience that their own lives are limited. Witnessing how the parent
becomes increasingly deteriorating create feelings of fear and there is a great uncertainty
about the future. The children try to protect their parents by avoiding talking about their
own emotions and how the disease context affects themselves.
Conclusion: The results will lead to an increased knowledge of the children’s
situation, which is of great importance for future supportive action aimed at this target
group to promote or maintain their health.

Abstract ID: 235

Abstract Type: Poster - ACP & End of Life communication

## Advance Care Planning in Italian palliative care networks: a grounded theory
study

Valentina Vignola1,2, Gabriele Bedini3, Nicoletta
Crosignani1,2, Luca Ghirotto4, Marta Perin*5,6

1Palliative Care Unit, Azienda USL di Piacenza, Piacenza, Italy,
2Hospice ‘La casa di Iris’, Piacenza, Italy, 3Hospice ‘Casa Madonna
dell’Uliveto’, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 4Qualitative Research Unit, Azienda
USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 5Bioethics Unit, Azienda
USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 6PhD Program in Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy
*Correspondence should be addressed to: marta.perin@ausl.re.it
Background: The Italian law n. 219/2017 on informed consent and advance
directives regulates also Advance care Planning (ACP) (Article 5). Despite the great
acknowledgment of the law, several difficulties persist among palliative health care
professionals (HPs) in ACP implementation. This study aims to understand if and how
palliative HPs involve their patients in the decision-making process.
Methods: We adopted the Grounded Theory method, following a constructivist
approach. We conducted semi-structured interviews with an initial sample unit of palliative
care specialists, their patients, and caregivers. Participants were recruited from two local
palliative networks working in the Emilia Romagna region (Italy).
Provisional Results: So far, we have performed 19 interviews. Participants
were 13 palliative care specialists, 4 patients, and 2 caregivers. We identified 14 initial
conceptual categories organized into a provisional conceptual model through open and first
focused coding, describing ACP as mainly an informative process among specialists and
patients/caregivers. Involving patients was within a trust relationship between physicians
and patients, making them feel they had an ‘inevitable choice.’ Sharing values with patients
and their relatives facilitated physicians to discuss crucial choices with them, mainly the
end-of-life ones. In contrast, patients’ lack of awareness, impaired cognitive capacity, and
conflicting value perspectives complicated or, at times, hindered ACP. Further investigation
is needed to understand how physicians, patients, and caregivers deal with contradictory
situations and its implication for ACP.
Conclusion: The study is currently ongoing. Our results shall represent the
basis for developing local guidelines to support HPs in implementing ACP. The final results
will be presented at the congress.

Abstract ID: 242

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Equity and Access

## Homeless Outreach and Palliative Care Education (HOPE) Pilot Service

Gemma Allen*1

1The Mary Stevens Hospice, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
claire.towns@marystevenshospice.co.uk
Background: Prior to the Covid 19 pandemic some shared learning had taken
place between Mary Stevens Hospice their local hostel and members of the police force
following a series of events surrounding the death of a homeless man. This was an event that
was shared at PHPCI 2019. Following receipt of successful funding the HOPE 2-year pilot
programme commenced in January 2022.
The programme adopts a 3 tiered approach which will incorporate education, an outreach
service and the award winning No Barriers Here, which uses an arts based approach to advance
care planning.
Method: The initial tier of the project is the development of an
eight-education session rolling programme to be delivered twice yearly. The aim of the
education is to facilitate the development of third sector staffs’ knowledge, enabling them
to identify, and support people who are experiencing homelessness, with advanced ill health,
and may be experiencing palliative and end of life care needs.
The second tier is the development of an outreach hub where people who are experiencing
homelessness or structural vulnerability will have timely access to palliative care
including bereavement support. It also includes support for third sector staff supporting
this vulnerable population in signposting to the appropriate services.
This outreach work is being developed in partnership with the local Integrated Health Care
Trust.
The last tier of the project will focus on increasing the number of people experiencing
homelessness who are given the opportunity to make informed choices and decisions about
their future care.
Results: It is hoped that the results from this project will inform the
development of pathways into hospice services; will encourage the development of a community
of practice within the locality and will facilitate a palliative care and homeless
network.
The early findings will be available late 2022.
Conclusion: This project seeks to improve access to palliative care by
populations who are experiencing homelessness through education and outreach support.

Abstract ID: 243

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Family caregiving

## Informal care in times of COVID-19: Lived experiences of informal carers in
Belgium

Pieter Vanreybrouck*1, Naomi De Bruyne1, Benedicte De
Koker2, Nico De Witte2

1Steunpunt Mantelzorg VZW, 2Hogeschool Gent, 360° Zorg en
Welzijn.
*Correspondence should be addressed to: pieter.vanreybrouck@i-mens.be
Informal carers often remain invisible to policy makers, professional caregivers, and the
academic world. However, in Europe 80 percent of long-term care is provided by informal
carers. When the COVID-19 epidemic took hold of the world, they were therefore
disproportionally affected by the restrictions and consequences of COVID-19. HOGENT and
Steunpunt Mantelzorg conducted research on the experiences of informal carers in Belgium
during this period, to acquire more data, to formulate recommendations for policymakers, and
to provide adequate support to informal carers as an organisation.
In this workshop we go over the most important research results and our policy
recommendations. We bring forward the lived experiences of informal cares through
testimonies, in which they explain the consequences of COVID-19 and informal care on their
lives. Furthermore, we explain what we have done with the policy recommendations as an
organisation that supports informal carers, and what the current needs and challenges are of
Belgian carers. Participants of the workshop will be offered insight in some of the
methodologies and activities that our organisation uses to inform and empower informal
carers.

Abstract ID: 245

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate cities

## Development and Implementation of Compassionate Communities in Japan: approaches
initiated by a home hospice clinic

So Nishimura*1,2, Satoko Teramachi1,2, Namiko
Omagari1,2, Yasuyoshi Ninosaka1,2

1Ninosaka clinic, Fukuoka, Japan, 2International Hospice and Homecare
Institute, Fukuoka, Japan
*Correspondence should be addressed to: nishimura.s.1103@gmail.com
Despite the huge potential needs for improvement of end of life (EoL) care, the awareness
of the needs and the capacity to provide good EoL care in the community are insufficient.
Rapid population aging in Japan has been widening this gap, which could result in
deterioration of the quality of EoL care. Therefore, we have been developing approaches to
empower the community for the provision of better EoL care through our GP practice including
home hospice care.
Since the establishment of our clinic 25 years ago, we have been striving to provide more
than medicine itself, thinking what we can do for every life in the community to achieve
better quality of our EoL care. Our effort includes; giving lectures at schools and local
community centers to raise awareness about better EoL care; organizing bereaved member
groups to facilitate peer support care; establishment of home hospice volunteer group,
providing education for the applicants and working with them after they registered. Along
with over a thousand of EoL care, our efforts gradually have been spreading into the
community. Quite a few bereaved members who has experienced home hospice care with us are
now playing an important role providing compassionate EoL care as volunteer members.
Besides, trained volunteer members have launched new volunteer groups in each of their
living area and working with their communities. In this way, our community-based home
hospice care has been building capacity of the community to embrace life with compassionate
EoL care.
In this presentation, we will share how we have developed and implemented our sustainable
compassionate communities in Fukuoka, Japan.

Abstract ID: 248

Abstract Type: Poster - Health Promotion

## Promoting the health and wellbeing of family caregivers providing end-of-life care –
the role of community Healthcare Assistant

Katarzyna Patynowska*1, Tracey McConnell1,2, Felicity
Hasson3

1Marie Curie, UK, 2School of Nursing and Midwifery, Queen’s
University Belfast, UK, 3Ulster University, Institute of Nursing and Health
Sciences, School of Nursing, Jordanstown, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
kasia.patynowska@mariecurie.org.uk
Background: Healthcare Assistants (HCAs) are recognized as providing the
majority of patient care and often are the closest point of contact for patients and family
caregivers across the disease trajectory, including end of life. Their contribution to
minimizing the impact of illness, promotion of health and helping family caregivers’
function at home has the potential to be invaluable. However, little is known about their
role and preparation during this time. As part of a larger investigation into HCA lone
working, this paper examines the role of the HCAs in public health promotion to family
caregivers at the end of life.
Methods: An exploratory study comprising semi-structured interviews with Marie
Curie lone working Health Care Assistants providing palliative care in the community, mostly
during the out-of-hours period. Data were analysed using thematic analysis.
Results: Findings indicate that HCAs play a pivotal role in promoting health
by encouraging, educating and empowering family caregivers to make positive choices for
themselves in relation to health and wellbeing, whilst they adapt to and accept dying. A
vital part of the HCA role was providing emotional support to family caregivers, and a safe
environment in which caregivers could disclosure their experiences of burden and
anticipatory grief, helping them to prepare and plan for their future. The HCAs presence and
readiness to engage in difficult conversations, provided a platform for caregivers to share
their fears, and vital opportunities for HCAs to assess caregiver needs and signpost them to
relevant services and community resources.
Conclusion: While further research is required to explore the impact of HCAs’
role on the family caregivers’ quality of life and capacity to cope, this research suggests
the role has potential for providing meaningful public health interventions. HCAs have a
unique opportunity to promote self-care and engagement in healthy behaviours to reduce the
emotional and physical impact of the family caregivers’ role.

Abstract ID: 250

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Equity and Access

## Research and action to support care for serious illness in inner city settings

Kelli Stajduhar*1,2, Ashley Mollison1, Kara
Whitlock1, Annie Do3, Piotr Burek4, Robyn
Kyle5

1Institute on Aging & Lifelong Health, University of Victoria, Victoria,
Canada, 2School of Nursing, University of Victoria, Victoria, Canada,
3Victoria Hospice, Victoria, Canada, 4Vancouver Island Drug Checking
Project, Victoria, Canada, 5Palliative Outreach Resource Team, Victoria,
Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: kis@uvic.ca
Background: Drug poisoning, discrimination, racism, and health inequities
contribute to early and preventable deaths in inner city settings. Serious illnesses, such
as cancer and organ failure, are exacerbated by barriers to health and social care. People
who work in inner city settings often become caregivers for people experiencing serious
illness, but are unrecognized and unsupported in this work.
Methods: Over a 2-year period, interviews, observational field notes, and
participatory action cycles (18 meetings) were conducted with a group of 15 health care,
housing, shelter, outreach, and peer workers. In addition, iterative action cycles resulted
in 12 community-based interventions to demonstrate impact. Data were recorded, transcribed,
subjected to thematic analysis, then synthesized into a toolkit.
Results: A toolkit was created in partnership with inner city workers to
improve the support they receive during and after caring for people with serious illness.
Rather than asking workers to do more within their existing role, this toolkit reorients the
work they are already doing as a valuable contribution to the care of people with serious
illness. Comprised of seven chapters and supplemental resources, the toolkit offers
information on how to identify and obtain supports for people with serious illness, what to
expect as people’s health declines, natural prompts for end-of-life conversations and
decision-making, and individual and collective responses to grief and loss. The toolkit is
offered in electronic, printable, and verbal formats; accompanied by videos, handouts, and
presentations, which will be made available to conference attendees.
Conclusion: Expanding civic and social responsibility for death, dying, and
grieving necessitates research and action with people typically excluded from public health
and other health and social systems. Rather than ‘imparting’ professionalized knowledge in
inner city settings, this project builds on existing strengths, knowledge and experiences of
people doing this work.

Abstract ID: 251

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Compassionate Workplaces: a workshop exploring how workplaces can become compassionate
communities

Deborah De Moortel*1,2, Sara De Gieter1,3, Steven
Vanderstichelen1,4

1Compassionate Communities Centre of Expertise (COCO), Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Interface Demography, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Brussels, Belgium, 3Work & Organisational Psychology, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 4End-of-Life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Deborah.de.moortel@vub.be
Compassionate communities intend to create more aware networks around the persons
experiencing death, dying and loss. A compassionate workplace is a specific form of a
compassionate community that tries to build a network for workers experiencing death, dying
and loss. Very often working partners, children, or parents take care of family members with
serious illnesses at the end of their life, and are forced to juggle work and care
responsibilities. The combination of care responsibilities, experiences of loss and
bereavement and the difficult exercise of balancing work and family roles can lead to
stress, and even absenteeism. A compassionate workplace hopes to accommodate the needs of
these workers by (1) decreasing the stigma around bereavement and loss at the workplace
(e.g., by providing a specific room for bereavement); (2) building networks of support in
the workplace (e.g., reorganizing the work tasks, getting help and support from co-workers);
and (3) enhancing the capacities for dealing with death, dying and loss of family caregivers
who are working (e.g., accommodating to the personal needs of the worker-care taker). Yet,
compassionate workplaces are a relatively new concept, so how to create them in practice is
underexplored. This workshop intends to explore the concept of compassionate workplaces from
an international end-user perspective by gathering expert opinions from community members,
employers, employees, researchers, etc. We first present what is currently known about
compassionate workplaces, offering examples from research and practice. Subsequently, we
will hold several 20 minute brainstorm discussions (groups of max 5 participants) on each of
the following topics:
Mourning at work (e.g., What can a compassionate workplace do for decreasing the stigma
around death, dying, and loss?);
Accommodating worker-care takers (e.g., What workplace practices can protect the health
and well-being of these workers?)
Compassionate workplaces for precarious and other vulnerable workers (e.g., Do
practices of compassionate workplaces reach all workers?)
Each group will have a facilitator to take notes and summarize for the group in a final
plenary discussion. Proceedings from the workshop will be shared with all participants to
keep the debate going past the conference.

Abstract ID: 252

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Family caregiving

## Expanding the circle for who can care: Challenging nuclear family dominance in care,
dying, and bereavement

Ashley Mollison*1,2

1Institute on Aging & Lifelong Health, University of Victoria, Victoria,
Canada, 2Social Dimensions of Health Program, University of Victoria, Victoria,
Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: mollison@uvic.ca
Background: Demographic trends toward smaller family sizes, greater distances
between family members, and families that deviate from the nuclear structure are changing
how care is received and provided in the West. People with serious illness are increasingly
reliant on those beyond biological and legal relations. Yet, normative assumptions about
family and caregiving embedded in legislation and policy continue to locate, prioritize, and
privilege the nuclear family as the site of care. The nuclear family ideal has implications
for Public Health Palliative Care (PHPC) movements seeking to democratize care, dying, and
grieving.
Methods: Drawing from interdisciplinary fields (e.g., family gerontology,
sociology, health equity, palliative and end-of-life care), practice examples from personal
experiences, and community-based research, this presentation interrogates dominant notions
of family and caregiving, unpacking their relevance for PHPC movements.
Findings: Canadian research with people experiencing social and structural
inequities offers insights into challenges and opportunities for PHPC movements. Despite
efforts to expand civic responsibility for death and dying, ideology and social organization
continue to shape who is cared about, who does the caring, and how. By showing the value of
care for serious illness outside the nuclear family (e.g., workplaces, schools, churches),
PHPC movements have the potential to make explicit non-normative conceptualizations of
family and caregiving. These efforts can improve the experiences of both people who are
dying and their ‘chosen’ caregivers and create more equitable care by broadening the circle
of who can care and grieve.
Conclusion: PHPC movements can challenge assumptions built into notions of
family and caregiving to improve experiences of people with serious illness and their
supporters – both inside and outside the health care system.

Abstract ID: 253

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Health Promoting Palliative Care

## Palliative Care Awareness Week 2021 - A Collaborative Approach to a public information
campaign

Yvonne McCahill*1, Karen Charnley1

1All Ireland Institute of Hospice and Palliative Care
*Correspondence should be addressed to: ymccahill@aiihpc.org
Background: All Ireland Institute of Hospice and Palliative Care (AIIHPC) held
its eighth annual Palliative Care Week Awareness campaign in September 2021, themed:
“Palliative Care: It’s more than you think.” Established in 2014, the campaign aims to
increase awareness and understanding, and challenge public perceptions of palliative care,
through a collaborative approach.
Methods: As facilitator of Palliative Care Week, AIIHPC collaborated on and
supported events and activities planned by its partners and key stakeholders in the
palliative care and wider health sector for Palliative Care Week.
A Palliative Care Week Reference Group with 85 members was established with 26 AIIHPC
partner organisations, Voices4Care Members (AIIHPC’s voluntary panel of people with
palliative care needs, carers and interested citizens who work with the Institute to improve
palliative care) and other key stakeholders. The Group was a key channel for communication
and awareness raising of the campaign, allowing for wider engagement with member
networks.
Results: Early and ongoing engagement led to a wide range of collaborative
activities:
12 palliative care personal experience videos, with stories from both people with
palliative care needs and professionals
1500 members of the public were surveyed to assess public perceptions of palliative
care, in both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, which informed key
messaging.
8495 new public information leaflets were distributed.
18 online events, with 2, 500 delegates attending, a 25% increase on 2020.
95 items of media coverage across national, regional and online media outlets.
11 million- overall reach of the 2021 campaign (traditional/digital/social media)
Conclusion: The impact of the 2021 Palliative Care Week campaign demonstrated
early connections and collaboration with partners are key for best results. Partners, and
their networks were supported by AIIHPC to promote palliative care including hosting events,
participate in media opportunities and highlight their organisations work in the area.
Engaging early with people with palliative care needs secured personal stories which are
essential to raising awareness of benefits of palliative care for people living with
palliative care needs.

Abstract ID: 254

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Loss and grief

## Equipping people to be Grief Kind

Bianca Neumann*1

1Sue Ryder, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: bianca.neumann@suerydercare.org
It can be hard to know what to say or do that might help someone living with grief. Sue
Ryder created a national movement of grief-kindness to give people confidence to support
grieving people. Aoun et al (2018,2020) found that people most frequently got more effective
and helpful support from family and friends, not professionals, but they feel ill-equipped
and unprepared.
Bereavement projects reaching more than local communities are very rare.
This national project meets Ambition 6 in the Ambitions for Palliative and End of Life Care
2021-2026 in particular:
‘Each community is prepared to help: I live in a community where everybody recognises that
we all have a role to play in supporting each other in times of crisis and loss. People are
ready, willing and confident to have conversations about living and dying well and to
support each other in emotional and practical ways.’ A public health approach to bereavement
needs to be in the public domain, getting to people’s usual living environments, outside of
healthcare settings.
The project started with an email journey people could sign up for, covering grief topics
and providing practical tips as well as psycho education. This was followed by a series of
celebrity podcasts on sharing how others supported them well, and less so, through grief.
Sue Ryder designed modern sympathy cards and tips on what to write in them enabling and
equipping people to continue conversations with the grieving person. Buses also advertised
for this cause. Publications achieved national and regional coverage with a total reach of
30 million people and, to date, 50000 have ordered the free cards. More activities and
products are planned to equip more people to be Grief Kind.

Abstract ID: 256

Abstract Type: Poster - ACP & End of Life communication

## Role of end-of-life care planning in knowledge of partner’s preferences for end-of-life
aspects

Sarah Vilpert*1, Clément Meier1,2, Ralf J. Jox3,4,
Gian Domenico Borasio5, Jürgen Maurer1

1Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 2Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 3Palliative and Supportive Care Service, Chair in Geriatric
Palliative Care, Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 4Institute of Humanities in Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital
and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Palliative and Supportive
Care Service, Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland
*Correspondence should be addressed to: sarah.vilpert@unil.ch
Background: Surrogate medical decision-making at the end of life is common and
the patient’s partner is often the person who must make these critical decisions. The
challenge of surrogate medical decision-making is to make decisions that best fit the
patient’s wishes. End-of-life (EOL) discussions and care planning should contribute to make
the healthcare proxy’s decision more compliant with patient’s wishes. This study
investigates subjective and objective knowledge of partner’s preferences for the end of
life, as well as the contribution of partner’s EOL care planning to this knowledge in a
nationally representative sample of older adult (58+) couples living in Switzerland
(N=625).
Methods: Subjective knowledge is based on self-rated awareness of partner’s
EOL preferences. Objective knowledge is assessed by measuring how accurately respondents
predict their partner’s preferences for ten EOL care aspects and three medical treatments.
The contribution of EOL discussion and care planning to subjective and objective knowledge
of partner’s preferences for the end of life is examined using regression models.
Results: The vast majority of respondents thought they knew their partner’s
wishes for end of life. The proportion of wrong predictions of partner’s preferences for the
ten EOL care aspects varied between 7.5% and 46.1%, and for the three medical treatments
between 18% and 42.9%. Respondents whose partner discussed their EOL preferences with them,
completed an advance directive and designated them as a healthcare proxy were more likely to
think they knew their partner’s wishes for the end of life in general and for medical
treatments. Furthermore, respondents who reported knowing their partner’s preferences for
the end of life were more likely to score higher in correct predictions of partner’s
preferences for EOL care aspects and treatments. Finally, respondents whose partner
completed an advance directive and designated them as a healthcare proxy were more likely to
score higher on accurate predictions of partner’s preferences for EOL treatments.
Conclusion: Being a couple is not enough to assess one’s partner’s EOL
preferences correctly. Communication about EOL wishes among the couple and individual EOL
care planning should be encouraged, as they improve the level of subjective and objective
knowledge of partners’ EOL preferences.

Abstract ID: 257

Abstract Type: Symposium

## Challenges of research about peer support in palliative care

Erica Witkamp1,2 (chair), Kate Lorig3 (chair), Catherine
Walshe 4(speaker), Nancy Luu*1 (speaker), Judith
Rietjens1(speaker)

1Department of Public Health, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
the Netherlands, 2Research Center Innovations in Care and School of Health Care
Studies, Rotterdam University of Applied Sciences, Rotterdam, Netherlands,
3Self-Management Resource Center, Aptos, United States, 4International
Observatory on End of Life Care, Division of Health Research, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, United Kingdom
*Correspondence should be addressed to: k.luu@erasmusmc.nl
Background: Many people in the community deal with a life threatening illness,
either themselves or of beloved ones. Support from peers, who have experiential knowledge of
and experience with the consequences of living with such a disease, may have unexploited and
mutually beneficial potential. Research on peer support in palliative care is in its infancy
and challenging due to vulnerability of peers and participants, and non-classic roles and
responsibilities. Moreover, traditional research methodologies may not fully comply with the
complexity of peer support.
Objective of the symposium: To share experiences about the potential and the
challenges of conducting research about peer support in palliative care. We will obtain a
broad perspective covering individual and group peer support, face-to-face as well as
online, cancer as well as dementia, and research experiences from different countries (US,
UK, NL).
Content: The symposium will be chaired by Prof. Erica Witkamp (NL) (Care for
Family Caregiving) and Prof. Kate Lorig (US) (Patient education, Peer support and
Self-management).
Presentation 1: Prof. Catherine Walshe (UK): will present the methodological challenges
of the PACT feasibility randomized controlled trial exploring individual in-person peer
mentoring for people with advanced cancer, focusing on equipoise, recruitment and
outcome measurement.
Presentation 2: Ms. Nancy Luu (NL) will discuss the mixed methods SMART-study that
evaluates the digital peer led, peer support group program for patients and relatives
living with advanced cancer, focusing on self-referral recruitment, collaboration with
peer-facilitators, and results of the conversations analyses.
Presentation 3: Dr. Judith Rietjens (NL) will discuss novel strategies to study peer
support, elaborating on recent experiences studying self-management strategies of
persons with dementia through a novel combination of citizen science of book clubs,
text-mining of dementia ego documents, and design thinking.

Abstract ID: 258

Abstract Type: Poster - Literacy & Education

## Perceptions and knowledge of end-of-life medical situations among older adults in
Switzerland

Clément Meier*1,2, Sarah Vilpert1, Gian Domenico
Borasio5, Jürgen Maurer1, Ralf J. Jox3,4

1Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 2Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 3Palliative and Supportive Care Service, Chair in Geriatric
Palliative Care, Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 4Institute of Humanities in Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital
and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Palliative and Supportive
Care Service, Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland
*Correspondence should be addressed to: clement.meier@unil.ch
Background: Perceptions and knowledge regarding end-of-life health and
healthcare can influence individuals’ advance care planning, such as the completion and
content of advance directives. We aim to assess older adults’ perceptions of medical
end-of-life situations in Switzerland along with their accuracy and corresponding
associations with sociodemographic characteristics.
Methods: A nationally representative sample of adults aged 58 years and older
who participated in wave 8 (2019/20) of the Swiss part of the Survey of Health, Ageing, and
Retirement in Europe. Subjective likelihood of 11 end-of-life situations on a four-point
scale (very unlikely (0-25%), rather unlikely (26-50%), rather likely (51-75%), very likely
(76-100%)).
Results: Older adults’ perceptions of end-of-life medical situations in
Switzerland were rather heterogeneous and often inaccurate. Study subjects overestimated the
success of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, the utility of a fourth cancer chemotherapy, as
well as a hospital admission for pneumonia and artificial nutrition and hydration in the
context of imminent death but underestimated the general effectiveness of pain management in
this situation. Less than 28% of older adults correctly assessed the likelihood of dying in
a nursing home, hospital or at home, respectively. Inaccurate views were more frequent in
men (p < 0.01) and individuals with financial difficulties (p < 0.05), while adults
aged 75+ (p < 0.01) and respondents from the German-speaking part of Switzerland
(p < 0.01) had more accurate perceptions.
Conclusions: The wide variation and low accuracy of end-of-life perceptions
suggest considerable scope for communication interventions about the reality of end-of-life
health and healthcare in Switzerland.

Abstract ID: 259

Abstract Type: Poster - Community

## Charters are not enough: supporting volunteering at the volunteer level

Steven Vanderstichelen*1,2 (chair), Ros Scott1,3, Leena
Pelttari1,4, Catherine Renard1, (faciliator) 5,
Catherine Walshe1,6 (facilitator)

1EAPC Task Force on Volunteering in Hospice and Palliative Care, EAPC,
2Compassionate Communities Centre of Expertise (COCO), Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 3School of Education and Social Work, University of
Dundee, Dundee, UK, 4Hospice Austria, Vienna, Austria, 5Société
Française d’Accompagnement et de Soins Palliatifs (SFAP), France, 6International
Observatory on End of Life Care, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: steven.vanderstichelen@vub.be
Volunteers are a vital part of hospice and palliative care in many countries. They often
find themselves at the interface between health services and communities, between formal and
informal care provision, and are uniquely able to traverse these spaces to meaningfully
contribute to quality of life and care for people faced with serious illness, death, dying
and loss. In 2017, the EAPC Task Force on Volunteering launched the EAPC Madrid Charter to
advocate for increased support for volunteering in hospice and palliative care. The Charter
was widely shared and signed and was considered valuable for policy negotiation in the
support for volunteering in the long term. However, volunteers coordinators found that it
lacked value as a practical tool for immediate change at the volunteer organization level in
how volunteering is supported and valued. The aim for this workshop is to develop
preliminary ideas for tools and resources that volunteers and volunteer coordinators can use
to effect change in the support of volunteering in the short term. (E.g., coordination,
training, representation in the organization.) These tools are intended to complement the
charter’s predominant policy-level applicability. The workshop will start with a short
presentation on the EAPC Madrid Charter and its evaluation, highlighting the need for tools
for immediate action to improve practical and organizational support for volunteering at the
organizational level. Participants will then be divided into smaller groups of 6-8
participants. Moderators will take notes. Participants will be invited to share good
practices, existing tools and to think about what resources and tools they miss when trying
to improve support, training and conditions for volunteers in hospice & palliative care.
Moderators will summarize for each group. Proceedings from the workshop will be shared with
participants after the conference, plans will be drafted to continue the conversation beyond
the conference.

Abstract ID: 261

Abstract Type: Poster – Various Topics

## Fostering empathy and compassion through art observation

Julie Rodeyns*1, Free De Backer1

1Department of Educational Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels,
Belgium.
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Julie.Rodeyns@vub.be
Visual Thinking Strategies is a museum activity that invites a group of participants to
(under the guidance of a certified facilitator) enter into a discussion with a visual art
work. Designed in order to promote the aesthetic development of participants, scientific
research has shown that regular participation in VTS-sessions also promotes, among others,
compassionate listening, comfort with ambiguity and tolerance for other views among
participants. For these reasons, the method is increasingly used to promote compassion in
school or workplace environments and among health care students and professionals (medical
students, doctors, nurses, social workers, therapists,. . .).
This hands-on workshop will invite the workshop participants to participate in a 30 min.
Visual Thinking Strategies session, that, afterwards, will be discussed and analysed
together. We will dissect the method, discuss some of its important pillars (such as the key
mechanisms used by the facilitator and the selection of the artwork) and uncover the factors
that contribute to fostering empathy and compassion.

Abstract ID: 262

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Building dementia-inclusive communities through arts and culture: the case of the
Academy of Bruges

Els Robaey1, Annelore Boone1,2, Julie
Rodeyns*3,4

1Academie Brugge DKO, 2Department of Special Needs Education, Ghent
University, 3Through Art We Care, 4Vrije Universiteit Brussel
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Julie.Rodeyns@vub.be
Art and culture can play an important role in improving the life quality of people who are
ill and/or ageing and of their informal caregivers. In the framework of the transnational
project ‘Dementia in Cultural Mediation’ (DCUM), partners from Belgium, Denmark, Spain and
the Netherlands jointly created a hands-on toolbox, aimed to inspire and empower local and
regional communities and art, cultural or health organisations to develop artistic/cultural
activities in order to create more dementia-inclusive communities. The project drew on the
rich experience of different professionals working in healthcare and cultural institutions
such as libraries, art museums or civil society organisations and was continuously reviewed
by a European reference group consisting of highly experienced experts in the field of
dementia, research and the arts and representatives of the end-user group (people with
dementia and their informal caregivers).
This hands-on workshop will introduce the participants to one of the best practices
involved in the DCUM project. The Academy of Bruges organises weekly art classes for people
with dementia, embedded in the regular program of the art school. During these classes, all
visual media are explored (painting, drawing, printing, ink, charcoal, mixed media,. . .).
The organizers will share their methodologies and give useful tips on how to work
artistically with persons with dementia. Testimonials from persons with dementia will
provide an insight into how they experience and value these art classes.
DCUM was realised with support from the European Commission.
More info: https://dementiainculturalmediation.eu/.

Abstract ID: 263

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Death literacy and knowledge of death
systems

## End-of-life health literacy: a validation study of a new instrument, the End-of-life
Health Literacy Scale (EOL-HLS)

Clément Meier*1,2, Sarah Vilpert1, Gian Domenico
Borasio3, Ralf J. Jox4,5, Jürgen Maurer1

1Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 2Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 3Palliative and Supportive Care Service, Lausanne University
Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Palliative and
Supportive Care Service, Chair in Geriatric Palliative Care, Lausanne University Hospital
and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Institute of Humanities in
Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
*Correspondence should be addressed to: clement.meier@unil.ch
Background: Measuring health literacy allows to assess individuals’
competencies to deal with health issues; it influences how individuals perceive their health
problems, communicate with health care professionals, or make medical decisions. The end of
life is commonly characterized by one or several diseases, the use of healthcare services
and requires individuals to make complex medical decisions. Although the end of life
concerns everyone, the level of competencies of individuals to get through this stage of
life has been little explored. This study aims to fill this gap by validating a new
instrument, the End-of-life Health Literacy Scale (EOL-HLS), assessing the level of
competencies to deal with end-of-life medical situations in a representative sample of older
adults aged 58+ living in Switzerland.
Method: We use data from the Swiss wave 8 (2019/2020) of the Survey of Health,
Ageing and Retirement in Europe. Based on the seminal work of Nutbeam (2000), end-of-life
health literacy skills are measured using a series of questions on the difficulty in
understanding medical interventions, finding information, communicating, deciding in
advance, and choosing end-of-life care options. In addition, we also compare the
distributions in sub-groups of the population from the EOL-HLS and the European Health
Literacy Survey questionnaire (HLS-EU-Q16).
Results: We used explanatory and confirmatory factor analysis to determine the
factor structure of our instrument. Preliminary results confirmed the suitability for
performing factor analysis (KMO = 0.924, Bartlett’s test of sphericity statistically
significant), a three-factor model was established and showed good fit properties
(CFI = 0.964, TLI = 0.958, RMSEA = 0.047, SRMR = 0.067). Results also indicated good
reliability with a Cronbach alpha’s for the instrument of 0.93. The associations found
between individuals’ sociodemographic characteristics and the HLS-EU-Q16 were also present
in our instrument, but the EOL-HLS was more sensitive to others sub-population groups.
Conclusions: The EOL-HLS is a reliable and valid instrument to be used in the
Swiss population. It may be helpful in testing, e.g. the hypothesis that individuals with a
low end-of-life health literacy are at risk of being disadvantaged in their quest for
goal-concordant care at the end of life.

Abstract ID: 265

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Looking forward: a workshop exploring the priorities for public health palliative care
research in the coming decade

Steven Vanderstichelen (chair)*1-4, Sonja McIlfatrick 4-5
(facilitator), Carol Tishelman (facilitator) 4,6, Luc Deliens (facilitator)
1-4, Joachim Cohen (facilitator) 1,2,4, on behalf of the EAPC
Reference Group on Public Health & Palliative Care (Prof. Luc Deliens (BE), prof.
Joachim Cohen (BE), dr. Steven Vanderstichelen (BE), prof. Samar Aoun (AUS), Dr.
Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau (FR), prof. Allan Kellehear (UK), prof. McIlfatrick (NI), prof.
John Rosenberg (AUS), dr. Libby Sallnow (UK), and prof. Agnes van der Heide (NL))

1Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Compassionate Communities Centre of Expertise
(COCO), Brussels, Belgium, 2Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), End-of-life Care
Research Group, Brussels, Belgium, 3Ghent University, End-of-Life Care Research
Group, Ghent, Belgium, 4EAPC Reference Group on Public Health and Palliative
Care, EAPC, 5Ulster University, School of Nursing, UK, 6Karolinska
Institutet, DöBra Research Programme, Sweden
*Correspondence should be addressed to: steven.vanderstichelen@vub.be
Present-day interest in public health perspectives in palliative care research have
resulted in the emergence of a diverse range of research approaches. However, there is
currently no consensus on a common research agenda for Public Health Palliative Care
research. Through this open workshop, the European Association for Palliative Care (EAPC)
Reference Group on Public Health and Palliative Care invites experts in public health
palliative care from various backgrounds and parts of the world to together explore ideas
about the most pressing research priorities for PHPC. The workshop fits within an ongoing
Delphi study approved by the EAPC board.
During the workshop, we will briefly present the ongoing Delphi study conducted by the
reference group and summarise findings from an earlier open meeting held to identify
preliminary priority research themes and topics. Dividing participants into smaller groups
of 8-15 people, two sets of group discussions will be held. A first round of discussions
will invite participants to reflect critically on the presented findings, focusing on
identifying gaps and adding new insights to the previous findings. A second round of
discussions will ask each group to focus on a single theme and try to formulate broad, but
concrete research questions to be addressed in future studies. Each group will have a
facilitator to take notes and to report back to the rest of the participants. Notes will be
collected after the workshop, synthesised and shared after the congress. Insights gained
during this workshop will ultimately contribute to an EAPC white paper. Expected learning
outcomes of this workshop include:
(1) insights into the most pressing research topics for PHPC in the next decade,
according to researchers, practitioners and community developers worldwide;
(2) a stronger understanding of the current gaps in PHPC research; and
(3) a first view of what a common research agenda for PHPC research may look like.

Abstract ID: 267

Abstract Type: Poster - COVID

## The relation between distress and feeling appreciated when providing end-of-life care
during the COVID-19 pandemic (CO-LIVE)

Masha S. Zee*1, Bregje D. Onwuteaka-Philipsen1, Agnes van der
Heide2, Ida J. Korfage 2, F. Erica Witkamp2,3, Anne
Goossensen4, Liza G.G. van Lent5, and H. Roeline W.
Pasman1

1Department of Public and Occupational health, Amsterdam UMC, VU University,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of Public Health, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Research Center Innovations in Care,
Rotterdam University of Applied Sciences, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 4University
of Humanistic Studies, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 5Department of Medical Oncology,
Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
*Correspondence should be addressed to: m.zee@amsterdamumc.nl
Background: The COVID-19 pandemic impacted end-of-life care and healthcare
professionals (HCPs) providing this care. The appreciation of HCPs, as shown by society in
the beginning of the pandemic, seemed to decline gradually, which could influence the
well-being of HCPs.
Aim: To examine distress in HCPs who provided end-of-life care during the
COVID-19 pandemic and the association with feeling appreciated and understood.
Methods: An online survey in Sept. 2021 among HCPs who provided end-of-life
care during the COVID-19 pandemic. The 9-item Well Being Index (WBI) was used to assess
distress in HCPs. We dichotomized the WBI score as <2 versus >=2, which is associated
with a serious degree of distress and risk of adverse consequences. Items about whether
respondents felt appreciated as a HCP and felt understood were also included. Descriptives
and logistic regression analysis were used to describe the association between WBI scores of
<=2 and feeling appreciated and understood, corrected for gender, age, work setting and
occupation.
Results: 125 HCPs (65% nurses, 15% physicians, 20% other) from different
settings (16% community, 13% nursing home, 22% hospital, 24% hospice, 26% other) responded
(88% women; mean age 52 years). Of all respondents, 34% had a WBI score of >=2, 14% did
not feel appreciated and 42% did not feel understood. Not feeling appreciated and not
feeling understood were significantly associated with a WBI score of >=2 (OR 4.12 and
9.21, respectively).
Conclusion: A substantial proportion of HCPs who provided end-of-life care
during the COVID-19 pandemic experienced high levels of distress, which is related to not
feeling appreciated and to not feeling understood. Since previous studies found that high
WBI scores are related to a higher risk of burnout and intention to leave one’s current
position, it is important to minimize distress in HCPs. Greater appreciation from employers
and society may be helpful in this regard.

Abstract ID: 270

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Equity and Access

## Reflecting on roles, responsibilities, and choices when providing palliative care in
socially disadvantaged areas

Maddy French*1, Thomas Keegan2, Nancy
Preston1

1International Observatory on End of Life Care, Division of Health Research,
Lancaster University, UK, 2Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: m.french4@lancaster.ac.uk
Background: Living in a socially disadvantaged area is often associated with
poorer outcomes at the end of life. Understanding the views and attitudes of palliative and
end-of-life care professionals working in socially disadvantaged areas could help identify
practices that facilitate more equitable care.
Methods: Qualitative semi-structured interviews were conducted with 42
healthcare professionals providing generalist and specialist palliative care in three
different regions of North West England. Data were analysed using thematic analysis and
cross-case analysis techniques.
Results: Participants differed in their views on their role and responsibility
in responding to unfair social differences at the end of life, which sometimes impacted the
type of care provided in socially disadvantaged areas. When confronted with experiences of
death and dying that challenged professional palliative care goals, some participants drew
on patient choice narratives to try to rationalise differences in dying.
Conclusion: The findings reveal a tension between a desire to promote
individual agency and a need to recognise the structural causes of inequities at the end of
life. Greater reflection on this tension may help palliative care professionals facilitate
more authentic choices, using language that acknowledges the socioeconomic context in which
people make decisions at the end of life.

Abstract ID: 271

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Compassionate communities in Colombia, Argentina, and Switzerland. How to assess their
effectiveness? An interactive workshop

Valentina González-Jaramillo*1 (speaker), Alicia Krikorian2
(speaker), Vilma Tripodoro3 (speaker), Magui Jorge4, Andri
Christen-Ceballos Rosero1, Maria Clara Velez2, Debora
Lema4, Tatiana Noguera2, Elena D’Urbano4, Sofia
Zambrano1,5, Steffen Eychmüller1 (chair)

1University Center for Palliative Care, Inselspital University Hospital Bern,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 2Group of Pain and Palliative Care, School
of Health Sciences, Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana, Medellín, Colombia,
3Institute of Medical Research Alfredo Lanari, University of Buenos Aires,
4Instituto Pallium Latinoamérica, 5Institute of Social and
Preventive Medicine (ISPM), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
valentina.gonzalezjaramillo@insel.ch
Background: The compassionate communities’ (CC) movement seeks to normalize
conversations about death and dying and to empower members of the communities to support
each other. Despite their contribution to wellbeing, there are no tools or evaluation models
that measure their effectiveness nor their impact on society, or on the well-being of
patients, caregivers, and healthcare professionals. Agreement on a common core outcomes set
(COS) for evaluating CC programs will allow comparability of different CC initiatives around
the world. Additionally, a COS will help community leaders and researchers to recommend
politicians and administrators to actively engage in the development of CC and to fund local
strategies through proven effective examples from other communities.
Aims: This interactive workshop will encourage participants to engage in the
definition of a first and preliminary COS for developing compassionate communities. Based on
a protocol, which received a seed partnership funding in early 2022, the workshop will start
by presenting the CC programs of three particularly different cities: Medellin, Buenos
Aires, and Bern. Using mind mapping to capture ideas and visualize and adapt findings,
workshop participants will next be guided to reflect on examples from their own contexts and
to consider questions such as: Which are commonly agreed goals in my community?, can we
define measurable outcomes applicable across these different contexts?, which could be the
process to capture, create and gather potential outcomes that reflect various perspectives
from the communities?
Through open discussion, this workshop will be an open and inclusive first step of
elaborating an international COS for CC. Following the methodology for COS development, as
proposed by the Core Outcome Measures in Effectiveness Trial (COMET) initiative,
participants may even agree at the end to build an international COS group for further
exchange and collaboration under the umbrella of the PHPCI conference.

Abstract ID: 272

Abstract Type: Poster – COVID

## Hospice care - where do we go now?

Barbara Gale*1

1MBE, Independent Consultant, Visiting Senior Fellow in End-of-Life Care,
University of Suffolk, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: gale.barbara@gmail.com
Background: Dame Cicely Saunders started the modern hospice movement in 1967.
A movement of social change to improve the care for the dying and those closest to them.
Nearly 60 years on, hospices now face challenges of growing demand, decreasing resources and
balancing medical and public health approaches to dying, death and grief. The Covid pandemic
has exacerbated these challenges for hospices who have become partners in the healthcare
system.
Dr Barbara Gale has over 40 years experience of working in hospice and palliative care with
the last 14 years as a hospice CEO. Barbara led the development of an Equip Provide Strive
hospice strategy founded on public health and asset based approaches, which was presented at
the last conference.
Presentation: Barbara will reflect on the challenges of implementing such a
strategy during a pandemic - for staff, volunteers, Trustees, potential funders, local
stakeholders and for herself as a leader. The presentation will conclude with a range of
options and questions about how hospices can lead the way in embracing public health
approaches which improve death literacy in the population and ensure the delivery of
specialist services for those who require it.
Outcomes: Participants will hear a personal reflection from Barbara Gale on
the challenges of leading an organisation through change and will be challenged to consider
the beliefs which are helping and hindering the progress of hospice care as an integral part
of a part of a public health approach to dying, death and grief.
Application to PHPCI: Hospice have been seen as the experts in dying, death
and grief for many years. Many hospices are also now embracing Compassionate Communities and
Community Development approaches to widen their reach into local communities, where services
are hard to reach. However, the presentation reflects on why public health approaches to
death and grief are still not always incorporated into local and national policies and
strategies.

Abstract ID: 274

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate cities

## A Compassionate City Charter in the USA embracing belonging, loss, and
resiliency

Diane Witt*1,3, Mary Ann Boe2,3, Kristen
Abbott-Anderson1,3, Kelly Krumwiede1,3

1Minnesota State University Mankato School of Nursing, Mankato, Minnesota,
United States, 2NicBluCares, Mankato, Minnesota United States, 3Kato
Towns Compassionate Charter Research Team
*Correspondence should be addressed to: diane.witt@mnsu.edu
Background: When contemplating the creation of a Compassionate City in the
United States one must take into consideration that America has a death-denying culture as
well as high levels of loneliness and social isolation. Recognizing the need to move
upstream of the end of life to be successful in United states, we intentionally shifted from
PHPCI’s priority of death, dying, caregiving, and bereavement to a focus on belonging, loss,
and resiliency.
Methods: Utilizing Community Based Collaborative Action Research methodology,
focus groups were held with leaders from fifteen sectors of the community. Only seven of
those sectors were able to move forward with sector member focus groups due to the COVID
pandemic.
The group facilitator initiated a discussion about what it means to belong and then invited
participants to share their stories around loss; what was helpful and what might have been
helpful had it been available.
The focus group transcripts were analyzed for patterns, themes, and best practices. These
were shared with the sector leaders who were then charged with determining the “best
practice” that they would adopt as a policy to support the members of their sector and
include in the Kato Towns Compassionate Charter.
Results: Through the focus group process, actionable items were created to
promote and normalize compassionate conversations around belonging, loss, and resiliency to
provide more support and care for one another during life’s difficult times including death,
dying, caregiving, and bereavement. These best practices initiated the Kato Towns
Compassionate Charter.
Conclusion: The Kato Towns Compassionate Charter with civic celebration and
media has catalyzed our work as a Compassionate Community. All organizations, neighborhoods,
and business in Kato Towns are invited to participate. The process is simply a matter of
gathering in conversation circles, sharing stories around loss and resiliency, and joining
the Charter with their own best practice.

Abstract ID: 275

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Loss and grief

## When death is all around: A rapid review of grief and bereavement experiences of social
and community service workers

Kara Whitlock*1, Kelli Stajduhar1,2, Astrid Carolina Posada
López3, Mauricio Arias Rojas3, Zahra Premji4, Ashley
Mollison1

1Institute on Aging and Lifelong Health, University of Victoria, Victoria,
Canada, 2School of Nursing, University of Victoria, Victoria, Canada,
3Facultad de Enfermería, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia,
4Advanced Research Services, University of Victoria Libraries, University of
Victoria, Victoria, Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: kdwhitlo@uvic.ca
Background: People experiencing structural vulnerabilities (e.g., poverty,
homelessness, racialization, disability) face barriers to accessing health and end-of-life
(EOL) care. They often receive informal support from social and community service workers in
harm reduction, shelter and housing, and outreach roles. Although these workers fill
systemic gaps in serious illness and EOL care they typically feel unsupported in doing so.
To understand this growing public health palliative care (PHPC) concern, our rapid review
collected and synthesized literature on work-related experiences of grief and bereavement
among these workers.
Methods: We systematically searched six electronic databases (APA PsycINFO,
CIHAHL, MEDLINE, Sociological Abstracts, Social Work Abstracts, Web of Science) to identify
literature that captures the intersection of work-related grief and bereavement experiences
with the stated occupational and supported population criteria. Citations and full-text
articles were screened, and data abstraction was conducted by two independent reviewers in
accordance with Cochrane Rapid Reviews Methods Group (2020) guidance.
Results: Our rapid review found a dearth of literature on the grief and
bereavement experiences of social and community service workers. Instead, distress in this
worker group is framed as an issue of individualized mental health such as vicarious trauma,
compassion fatigue, or burnout. Without the recognition of the collective impact of social
inequities this caregiving work will remain unsupported, unrecognized, and distressing. This
review illustrates the need for community-led, informal, grief and bereavement supports.
Conclusions: Our results are a first step to understanding how social and
community service workers in these environments experience grief and bereavement and to
conceptualizing more effective support interventions. Responding to workers’ grief and
bereavement needs outside of institutional and traditional EOL settings is a growing PHPC
concern and a pressing matter of health and care equity.

Abstract ID: 278

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Death literacy and knowledge of death
systems

## “What does the public know about palliative care?”: a population-based survey in two
urban and two semi-urban cities

Marjolein Matthys1,2, Naomi Dhollander*1,3, Leen Van
Brussel4, Kim Beernaert1,2, Benedicte Deforche2,5,
Joachim Cohen1,3, Luc Deliens1,2, Kenneth
Chambaere1,2

1End-of-Life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) & Ghent
University, 2Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Ghent University,
3Department of Medicine & Chronic Care, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
4Brussels Discourse Theory Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
5Movement and Nutrition for Health and Performance Research Group, Department of
Movement and Sport Sciences, Faculty of Physical Education and Physical Therapy, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel
*Correspondence should be addressed to: naomi.dhollander@ugent.be
Background: Palliative care has evolved rapidly and a public health approach
towards palliative care is of growing interest. Community engagement in palliative care has
shown signs of promise. A necessary prerequisite for this is that the public knows what
palliative care entails and what it can achieve. The aim of this study was to investigate
the public knowledge about palliative care and to identify key predictors of knowledge.
Methods: A cross-sectional survey among 4400 citizens in two urban and two
semi-urban cities in Flanders, Belgium measured knowledge of palliative care using the
Palliative Care Knowledge Scale (PaCKS). Data regarding demographic characteristics, and
familiarity and experience with palliative care, serious illness, suffering, death and loss
were also collected.
Results: Response was obtained for 2008 (45,6%) citizens. The mean score on
the PaCKS was 7,93 (SD 3,39; range 0-13). 82,2% of the respondents answered correctly that
palliative care is not specifically for people with cancer and 85% knew that palliative care
is not only for older adults. Common gaps in knowledge related to palliative care being not
only for the last 6 months of life (44% correct), that stress can be addressed by palliative
care (35,6% correct), and that palliative care can improve the ability to participate in
daily life (32,2% correct). Demographic variables (i.e. age, educational background) and
familiarity and experience showed to be significantly positively correlated with the level
of knowledge (p<0,05).
Conclusion: The findings suggest that gaps and misconceptions around
palliative care persist among the general public. Demographic characteristics and exposure
to palliative care, death, suffering and loss should be kept in mind in the development and
targeting of effective strategies to address these gaps in knowledge. Such strategies will
be instrumental in increasing public engagement around issues of serious illness, suffering,
death and loss.

Abstract ID: 280

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Policy and Vision

## Strategies for implementation of a palliative approach: a scoping review

Joakim Öhlén1,2,3, Susanna Böling*1, Hanan Hamdan
Alshehri1,4, Margareta Brännström5, Ingela Henoch1, Eva
Hessman6, Stefan Nilsson1,2 & Anneli
Ozanne1,7

1Institute of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Centre for Person-Centred Care, Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Palliative Centre at the
Sahlgrenska University Hospital Region Västra Götaland, Gothenburg, Sweden,
4Medical-Surgical department of Nursing College, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 5Department of Nursing, Umeå University,
Skellefteå, Sweden, 6Biomedical Library, Gothenburg University Library,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 7Department of Neurology,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden
*Correspondence should be addressed to: susanna.boling@gu.se
Background: The palliative care discourse today emphasises integration of
palliative care in non-specialised palliative care services, across populations and
settings, throughout the palliative care continuum. Therefore, there is a need to identify
and build upon published research in the palliative knowledge translation field, to learn
from and enhance further development. The aim of this study was to map strategies for
knowledge translation of a palliative approach to care into non-specialized palliative care
services for adult patients.
Methods: A scoping review was performed, searching six databases for original
research published between 2010 and 2019. The search strategy was developed to identify the
Population: adult patients in need of health care, the Concept: knowledge translation
strategies of a palliative approach, and the Contexts: non-specialised palliative care
services. Language was restricted to English. Following the screening process, data was
extracted and categorized according to research characteristics, palliative care continuum
focus, sources of evidence, and knowledge translation strategy.
Results: 183 articles met the inclusion criteria. Among the studies, most
common areas of focus were cancer contexts, hospitals, countries with high human development
index (HDI), while early palliative care was only represented in a minority of articles. The
majority included healthcare professionals as participants. A variety of knowledge
translation strategies were used, of which none proved to be outstanding. Essential
components of the research designs were to a large extent unspecified.
Conclusion: This review confirms that previous suggestions to apply knowledge
from implementation science to enhance palliative care in the non-specialised palliative
care field have been practiced to some extent. Further use of knowledge translation theories
can enhance the field. To strengthen a public health perspective, studies should focus on
other contexts than hospitals (e.g. primary care), and move further up the palliative care
continuum towards early palliative care. Furthermore, research outside countries with high
HDI is of great significance. Careful reporting of research design, contexts, and mechanisms
at work can enhance this field.

Abstract ID: 281

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Various Topics

## “Humanae: human transformation towards caregiving”. A project to promote compassionate
care education in a school of health science

Alicia Krikorian*1, Claudia Villegas1, Maria Camila
Guzmán2, Hellen Castañeda1, Carlos Sampedro3

1School of Health Sciences, Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana (Medellin,
Colombia), 2Faculty of Psychology, Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana (Medellin,
Colombia), 3Faculty of Philosophy, Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana (Medellin,
Colombia)
*Correspondence should be addressed to: alicia.krikorian@upb.edu.co
Background: Historically, education regarding aspects such as empathy,
communication, therapeutic relationships, teamwork and self-care, has been part of a hidden
curriculum in medicine and nursing programs. In recent years, due to a crisis in the human
dimension of healthcare and increased burnout in healthcare staff, there has been global
tendency to develop integrated and cross-curricular educational agendas in healthcare
programs related to the humanizing and compassionate dimensions of care.
Aims: To describe curricular contents, educational practices, attitudes and
knowledge of teachers and students regarding compassionate care at a school of health
sciences in Colombia.
Methods: a descriptive, observational and mixed quantitative-qualitative study
is being conducted. First, a description and analysis of the curricular contents of the
medicine and nursing programs is currently being done. Then, a survey to identify
educational practices and contents regarding compassionate care education (including themes
such as compassion, caregiving, empathy, communication, therapeutic relationship, teamwork,
selfcare) in medicine and nursing will be administered. Teachers (n = 524),
current students (group leaders and student-monitors n = 96), and formal
students (enrolled in postgraduate programs at the school of health sciences
n = 64) of both programs will be invited to complete the survey. Finally,
focus groups including teachers and current and formal students of the programs will be
conducted for an in-depth exploration of educational contents and practices, attitudes, and
knowledge towards compassionate care at the school of health sciences. Data will be analyzed
using a mixed-methods approach.
Impact: This study will help identify specific issues and facts related to
compassionate care education at the school of health sciences, which will constitute a
baseline towards the development of a cross-curricular, integrated, and visible education
strategy in compassionate care. As a result of this effort, a second phase of the Humanae
project will be conducted to optimize educational strategies towards compassionate care
using a collaborative work approach including, teachers, current and formal students and
directives.

Abstract ID: 283

Abstract Type: Free Communication – Various Topics

## Dying in the Margins: Creating Co-Produced Images with People Experiencing Financial
Hardship at the End of Life

Sam Quinn*1, Naomi Richards1, Margaret
Mitchell2

1End of Life Studies Group, University of Glasgow, UK, 2Professional
freelance photographer, Glasgow, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: sam.quinn@glasgow.ac.uk
Background: Photography has been used as a medium for exploring the lived
experiences of marginalised groups in social research for decades, however, visual research
methods are rarely used in the context of end-of-life research. Contemporary images
representing end of life experiences lack diversity and are generally not taken by the
person who is themselves dying. The UK based Dying in the Margins project aimed to use
participatory visual methods to enable people at the end of life who were also experiencing
poverty and deprivation to produce images which they felt represented something of their
experiences of living out their dying at home whilst struggling to make ends meet.
Methods: The Dying in the Margins project was guided by participatory and
appreciative methodologies. The following visual methods were specifically chosen because
they have a track record of fostering participation among disenfranchised groups:
photo-voice; digital storytelling; and professional photography strongly guided by
participatory practice.
Results/ conclusion: We present a selection of images from the project which
we subjected to a robust visual analysis. On the one hand, images can be seen as simply
being illustrative of social problems. Our images could be used to illustrate some of the
financial hardships our participants were navigating e.g. high heating and electricity
bills, high transport costs, accessibility issues. On the other hand, images can be seen to
have a more evocative, interpretative function in telling a multi-faceted and complex story
of someone’s life in the context of that life coming to an end. In this project, we were
focused on creating evocative visual narratives which supported people’s agency, portraying
their struggles and their idiosyncrasies to engender respect, empathy and discussion.

Abstract ID: 284

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate cities

## Compassionate network: social transformation towards caregiving”. Report of a
compassionate community in Medellín, Colombia

Alicia Krikorian*1, Maria Clara Vélez1, Francy
López2, Juan Felipe Cañaveral3, Hellen Castañeda2,
Diana Restrepo2, Luz Estella Torres1, Juan Camilo
Arboleda3, Tatiana Giraldo3

1Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana (Medellin, Colombia),
2Faculty of Nursing, Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana (Medellin, Colombia),
3Faculty of Psychology, Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana (Medellin,
Colombia)
*Correspondence should be addressed to: alicia.krikorian@upb.edu.co
Background: Compassionate communities (CC) have developed all over the world
and today they constitute a public health strategy in palliative care. However, each CC
differs in its strategies, target population, goals and achievements. Describing
experiences, activities, approaches and accomplishments is useful to share insights, further
develop other CC’s and establish compassionate networks.
Aims: To describe activities and achievements of a compassionate community
program in Medellín, Colombia.
Methods: The Compassionate network of Medellín, Colombia has been continuously
working to promote compassionate care in the general audience and, particularly towards
highly dependent people and their caregivers. The program has 4 lines of work: 1. Promoting
of a compassionate care culture in society; 2. Training in compassionate care for
caregivers; 3. Contributing to the development of caregivers’ networks; and 4. Articulating
efforts of individuals and organizations in Medellin towards caregiving and caregivers. An
interdisciplinary team of professors and students at a university work together to conduct
the activities and further develop this compassionate network.
Results: 74 organizations in Medellin and surrounding territories are part of
the compassionate network, including hospital and healthcare facilities, nursing homes,
patient associations, non-governmental organizations, governmental organizations,
universities. Monthly meetings to articulate efforts and develop caregiving tools are
conducted. Informal alliances between governmental and non-governmental organizations have
promoted the development of caregiver networks in different neighbors. Permanent educational
and sensitization activities and courses are conducted, including aspects such as
compassion, compassionate care, caregiving abilities, self-care strategies, development of
caregiving networks, etc. Specific achievements in each line of work and beneficiaries of
the activities conducted in each line will be presented. Particularly, a description of
experiences during the Covid-19 pandemic will be presented.
Conclusions: The compassionate network in Medellin, Colombia has had a
permanent and positive impact on caregiving practices in the city, particularly in
challenging times for the society.

Abstract ID: 285

Abstract Type: Poster - Equity and Access

## Equity, diversity and inclusion in palliative and end of life care practice and
research: personal reflections

Jamilla Akhter Hussain*1

1Bradford Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, UK
*Correspondence should be addressed to: jamilla.hussain@bthft.nhs.uk
A public health approach to palliative care aims to centre on communities and views
community as equal partners in health promotion at the end of life. There is increasing
recognition by policy makers in countries such as the UK of the benefit of this approach to
address health and social inequalities. This has resulted in services being keen to ‘engage
with’ communities and a greater focus on equity-based palliative care research.
During this presentation, the author will reflect on her experience as a woman who comes
from a materially deprived and racially minoritised background who works within palliative
care clinical practice and research in the UK. Using an intersectional lens, she aims to
describe her personal experience of belonging to a so called ‘disadvantaged community’ in
need of ‘engagement’ and trying to work towards better diversity, inclusion and equity in
palliative care practice and research.
She will reflect on why before the pandemic she did not feel she belonged in palliative
care or academia due to the lack of diversity and inclusion, systemic bias and imposter
syndrome. She will discuss the profound impact of COVID-19 and George Floyd’s death on
compelling her to understand more about public health and health inequalities–something
poorly addressed or role-modelled during medical school and postgraduate training.
She will talk about why she chose to stay in academia, despite not belonging–why inequity
is more than a subject of interest. But also why, two years on, she has felt physically,
mentally and emotionally exhausted working in this space, how this manifest and why this
occurs to those from minoritised communities advocating for equity.
She will also explore the positives of working with true allies (and what this looks and
feels like), the benefits of bringing a disparate community of minoritised individuals
together and the liberation and vulnerability that comes with bringing your whole self to
your work when you have worked hard to get people to look past your past.
The author will explore what diversity, inclusion and equity mean in reality for community
members, especially those with multiple intersecting marginalised identities.

Abstract ID: 286

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Compassionate Communities Sustainability Guide – Strengthening the initiative’s
planning phases to achieve sustainable community-led impact

Bonnie Tompkins*1, Aliya Mamdeen1, Jonathan
Faulkner1, Leorah Granholm1, Laura Ndoria1

1Pallium Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: btompkins@pallium.ca
Pallium Canada believes Palliative Care is everyone’s business, including the community. To
engage the community, Pallium is mobilizing the Compassionate Community movement by creating
resources that support those leading the work. The newest resource – Compassionate Community
Sustainability Guide, builds on the Compassionate Communities Startup Toolkit’s impact. The
Compassionate Community (CC) movement has seen substantial growth in Canada since 2015;
however, there is a documented struggle to move beyond the startup stage. Social change
research highlights the need for initiatives to incorporate sustainable practices, which
increase the likelihood of progressing to the scale and spread stage and achieving
sustainable impact in their community.
This session will cover the guide, a collection of established best practices and tools for
community-led development, which acts as an easy-to-use road map. The key topic areas
covered in the guide include leadership, program planning, funding, language, trust,
community engagement, and partnerships.
During this workshop, participants will learn the following:
Stages of development for social change movements like CCs
Best practices used in sustainable community-led initiatives and the tools to engage
with these best practices
The essential best practices to incorporate right away and tools to support the
work
How to efficiently use the guide for years to come
The ideal participant for this workshop understands the CC movement and has already had
community conversations. During the workshop, participants will engage with key tools to
support incorporating the essential best practices.
Participants can take this knowledge and the guide back to their community and engage with
the content in a manner that makes sense for their initiative. The Compassionate Community
Sustainability Guide is designed to continue catalyzing the engagement of communities and
cities in public health palliative care.
Pallium Canada would like to acknowledge that Health Canada funded the Compassionate
Communities Sustainability Guide. The presenter of this workshop is an employee of Pallium
Canada and co-authored this resource.

Abstract ID: 287

Abstract Type: Poster – Equity and Access

## Barriers and challenges to provide palliative care in developing countries - Case of
Albania

Rudina Rama*1,2, Marinela Sota2, Fatmir Prifti1,
Ali Xhixha1, Anila Selmani1, Liliana Sorra1

1Ryder Albania Association, 2University of Tirana
*Correspondence should be addressed to: rudina.rama@unitir.edu.al;
rudinarama13@gmail.com
Background: Palliative Care (PC) service cannot meet the high demand in
country level. The diversification of the services is very limited, out-patient oriented and
don’t reflect the holistic approach to address different needs of patients. In country there
is no pain control unit in the public hospitals and PC is not yet a distinct specialty or
sub-specialty in the medical field and is not integrated into the public health care system.
The study aims to explore the barriers and challenges for the provision of palliative care
in the health care system in Albania.
Methodology: To achieve the objectives of the study there were used the
qualitative data collection method, through desk review documents and 24 interviews with key
informants.
Results: Albania has made distinctive efforts to produce legislation,
regulations and strategies for PC; there is an identified need to revise the standards and
protocols of PC; doctors and nurses have different knowledge and understanding of PC
service, drug use and availability; the system doesn’t respond to the needs of patients due
to the lack of services and resources; the patients with other diagnosis than cancer do not
receive PC and are excluded de facto of the system.
Conclusions: There is a gap between PC policy, normative documents and the
implementation level; there are geographically differences of law implementation and drug
availability, accessibility and affordability; the number of patients in need of PC in
Albania is increasing and the projected number of patients/year will put the system in
crises or will seriously endanger the access of patients for services.

Abstract ID: 288

Abstract Type: Poster - Euthanasia & MAID

## Creating narratives to support experiences of medical assistance in dying in Canada:
qualitative investigation of nurses’ views

David Lavoie* 1,2

1University of Quebec in Montreal, 2Centre for Research and
Intervention on Suicide, Ethical Issues and End-of-Life Practices
*Correspondence should be addressed to: lavoie.david.4@courrier.uqam.ca
Background: It’s been 6 years since Canada passed a federal legislation that
allows eligible adults to request medical assistance in dying (MAID). With good reason, much
attention in Canada has been focused on public views and physicians’ experiences of MAID.
Nurses’ experiences reported by international studies, particularly from Belgium where
euthanasia has been legal for 20 years, demonstrate the relevance of taking an interest in
the narratives of nurses to better understand how to improve the process of MAID. The aim of
this poster is to create a space for nurses to participate in this discussion by creating a
narrative from their stories collected during a doctoral thesis.
Methods: A qualitative meta-synthesis was conducted (n =11 articles) to
provide a review of the experience of Canadian nurses since the legalization of MAID.
In-depth interviews were conducted with 9 nurses working in MAID context. A thematic
analysis was used to analyze the data and an existential analysis was used as an
interpretative framework.
Results: This poster present a narrative scheme created from themes gathered
from both meta-synthesis and interviews with participants. We present various questions
related to both gaps and facilitating elements identified in MAID’s context, among which:
how does the vision of nursing influence the experience of MAID? What is a “good death” in
this context? What makes the interprofessional teams generally more comfortable and what
does not? How does professional communication and support spaces help through MAID
process?
Conclusion: The difficulties reported in the context of MAID being found in
the sphere of value conflicts in clinical situations, it is important to ask how to help
nurses and other caregivers to accompany patients at the end of life. Making room for
experience, particularly in dedicated communication spaces could in this sense promote
better understanding and interprofessional cohesion in this particular palliative care
setting.

Abstract ID: 289

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Loss and grief

## Quality Palliative Care: Interventions for Grieving and Bereaved Informal Caregivers in
Canada

Carly Thrower*1, Carol Barrie2,3, Sharon Baxter3,4,
Meryl Bloom5, Maria Carolina Borja6, Anica Butters6,
Deborah Dudgeon3,7,8, Ayeshah Haque1, Suzanna Lee6, Iqra
Mahmood6, Mehrnoush Mirhosseini3,9, Raza Mirza1,10,
Kate Murzin3,11, Ankita Ankita1, Neerjah Skantharajah1,
Christina Vadeboncoeur3,12,13, Andrew Wan1, Christopher
Klinger1,3,10,14

1University of Toronto, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, Translational Research
Program; Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2Canadian Frailty Network (CFN); Kingston,
Ontario, Canada, 3Quality End-of-Life Care Coalition of Canada (QELCCC); Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada, 4Canadian Hospice Palliative Care Association (CHPCA); Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada, 5McMaster University, Faculty of Health Sciences, Global Health
Office; Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, 6University of Toronto, Faculty of Arts and
Sciences, Health Studies Program; Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 7Canadian Partnership
Against Cancer (CPAC); Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 8Queen’s University, School of
Medicine; Kingston, Ontario, Canada, 9College of Family Physicians of Canada
(CFPC); Mississauga, Ontario, Canada, 10National Initiative for the Care of the
Elderly (NICE); Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 11Realize; Toronto, Ontario, Canada,
12Canadian Network of Palliative Care for Children (CNPCC); Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada, 13University of Ottawa, Department of Pediatrics; Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada, 14Pallium Canada; Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: carly.thrower@mail.utoronto.ca
Background: Within palliative care, informal caregivers play a crucial role as
part of the interdisciplinary care team. Ensuring high quality care includes providing
effective grief and bereavement supports. There is a paucity of research offering insight
into these interventions. The objective of this scoping review was to examine the types of
grief and bereavement interventions geared toward informal caregivers from a Canadian
perspective.
Methods: A scoping review of the literature was conducted following Arksey and
O’Malley’s 5-step framework. Seven electronic healthcare and social sciences databases
(e.g., CINAHL, PsycINFO, MEDLINE, etc.) were searched, along with the websites of several
Canadian organizations to identify grey literature sources. Relevant articles were screened
for inclusion criteria and a thematic content analysis was employed to summarize key
findings.
Results: 33,006 initial records were generated and 18 sources marked for
inclusion. The themes that emerged from these articles were: (1) classification of the
intervention (e.g., creative, educational, psychosocial, and comparative analyses), (2) the
format of the intervention (e.g., delivery channels, setting, frequency, and timing), and
(3) the intervention target (e.g., caregivers, healthcare professionals, and volunteers).
Each of these factors were considered in the design and evaluation of bereavement services
for informal caregivers in Canada.
Discussion/Conclusions: There is a need for further evidence and more robust
studies to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions for supporting informal caregivers
through grief and bereavement in Canada. Interdisciplinary collaboration between healthcare
providers, policy makers, researchers, and caregivers is necessary to further develop,
evaluate, and scale interventions.

Abstract ID: 290

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Arts and end of life

## Illuminating artists’ engagement with individuals with palliative care needs: a
convergent mixed methods study

Jenny Baxley Lee*1,2,3, Sonja McIlfatrick2, Lisa
Fitzpatrick3

1University of Florida Center for Arts in Medicine, College of the Arts,
2Ulster University Institute of Nursing and Health Sciences Research,
3Ulster University School of Arts and Humanities
*Correspondence should be addressed to: jlee@arts.ufl.edu
Background: Internationally, artists engage individuals with palliative care
needs in a wide range of settings, however little is written regarding artists’ practices.
The aim of this convergent mixed methods study was to address a gap in the literature
regarding artists’, health professionals’ and program coordinators’ experiences and
perceptions in an effort to shed light on artists’ work in palliative care.
Methods: Within a convergent mixed methods design, an integrative review of
the literature was conducted to inform the study from design to dissemination. An online,
cross-sectional survey with professionals with experience of artists engaging individuals
with palliative care needs provided breadth in description of the range, scope, benefits,
and risks of practice. Semi-structured, in-depth interviews with artists, health
professionals, and program coordinators garnered a depth of understanding. By engaging
professionals across disciplines, multiple points of view were triangulated to enrich
understanding of a complex and understudied phenomenon.
Results: Systematic literature review (N = 7), online survey (N = 101) and
interviews (N = 32) identified consistencies and variations in international artists’
professional practices in palliative care. Across all three data sets, wide variation in
artists’ education, training, and practices existed primarily across a continuum of contexts
from hospital to community settings. Artists benefited from literacies in their art form/s;
palliative care, grief, and developmentally- and culturally-informed approaches to adapting
arts engagement. A set of ‘vital signs’ were generated from side-by-side comparison of
findings, which offered indicators of thriving, resilient engagement of the arts in
palliative care at the levels of participants, artists, families, arts teams, healthcare
teams, and institutions. Recommendations for future research included probing awareness of
artists’ work in palliative care within communities and across the interdisciplinary fields
of arts in health and palliative care from medicine to public health.
Conclusions: This study highlights the value of articulating an international
range and scope of artists’ work in palliative and end-of-life care spaces in order to
advance practice. Critical analysis of patterns of consistency and variation in artists’
work in palliative care advances efforts to recognize, value, and provide infrastructure in
support of meaningful and effective arts engagement for artists and participants alike. To
the researchers’ knowledge, this study is the first effort to reach internationally across
palliative and end-of-life care settings, health conditions, and art forms in an effort to
document a range and present a continuum of artists’ engagement in palliative care.

Abstract ID: 293

Abstract Type: Poster - Community

## Implementation of community-based palliative care in Primary Health Care in integration
with Specialized Outpatient Care

Gabriela Alves de Oliveira Hidalgo*1,2, Francisco Timbó de Paiva
Neto1, Samara Ercolin de Souza1, Elaine Cristina Melo
Faria1, Isadora Siqueira de Souza1, Ana Alice Freire de
Sousa1

1Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, 2Department of Preventive
Medicine - Federal University of São Paulo Medical School
*Correspondence should be addressed to: bielahidalgo@gmail.com
Background: Palliative care (PC) assistance in Brazil is heterogeneous and
centralized at the hospital level. Health Care Planning (PAS) is a methodology for
organizing the macro-processes of Primary Health Care (PHC) and Specialized Ambulatory Care
(AAE), changing its practice in order to qualify a given care network, based on the
reference theory of the social construction of PHC, which includes PC as one of the
macro-processes to be developed.
Methods: Through 10 thematic steps, PAS is implemented nationwide by the
PlanificaSUS project in 18 Brazilian federative units. Step 8 directly involves CP. The
execution of the operational model involves management workshops (planning/monitoring) and
the mentoring process in the territory with: Workshop (general concepts); Tutorial Workshops
(technical operational moments in the services, where tutors and staff plan, execute and
monitor actions related to the processes worked on); Tutoring alignments for tutor
preparation; Monitoring meetings during the dispersion period, as additional support for the
implementation of new processes.
Results: Step 8 includes Workshop themes: Demystifying PCs; The CP
macroprocess; Who can benefit from CP. Topics of tutorial workshops divided into three
sub-steps: Person-centered palliative approach; Communication; At what point in the course
of the disease is the person?; How the user can participate in care decisions; Care in loss
and grief; How to support the person and the family when death approaches? Short distance
learning courses for healthcare teams: Symptom management; Palliative care in PHC.
Management monitoring workshop that evaluates the training process and palliative care
indicators.
Conclusion: Step 8 of PlanificaSUS brings perspectives of changes in the scope
of public health in terms of access to and provision of PC in Brazil.

Abstract ID: 294

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate communities research

## Canadian Evaluation Toolkit – Supporting those leading Compassionate Communities
Initiatives with their evaluation

Bonnie Tompkins*1, Dr. Eman Hassan2,3, Julie
Darnay4, Deborah Sattler4, Emilie Lessard5, Pam
Martin2

1Pallium Canada, 2BC Centre for Palliative Care,
3University of British Columbia, 4Hospice Palliative Care Ontario,
5Canada Research Chair in Partnership with Patients and Communities
*Correspondence should be addressed to: btompkins@pallium.ca
The creation of the Canadian Compassionate Communities (Com Com) Evaluation Toolkit started
in August 2018 through a collaboration between Pallium Canada, BC Centre for Palliative Care
and Hospice Palliative Care Ontario. The three organizations teamed up to co-lead and
co-sponsor the development and testing of the toolkit in consultation with local Com Com
initiatives throughout Canada. In 2020, the Canada Research Chair in Partnership with
Patients and Communities joined the project team in an advisory role.
The objective of the Evaluation Toolkit is to increase the capacity of Com Com champions in
Canada to evaluate their own initiatives and share their experiences, results and learnings
with their peers. To ensure the appropriateness and acceptability of the toolkit by the
intended users, including community members who lack experience and knowledge of evaluation,
the project team recognized the need for a toolkit that makes the creation of an evaluation
plan simple, easy, engaging and at no cost.
During the toolkit development, the project team held several community consultations to
gather end-user feedback and ensure the toolkit resources meet their needs and expectations.
Once the feedback was integrated, the evaluation framework and toolkit were refined and then
piloted in three communities.
A user-friendly, interactive website has been developed to ensure the evaluation framework
and toolkit are accessible to the community. The website provides basic information about
evaluation and a compilation of free evaluation resources. A key feature of the website is
that it allows the users to create an evaluation plan customized to their initiative through
an interactive and automated step-by-step process.
This session will provide an overview of the project phases and the milestones achieved to
date, including the Canadian Com Com definition, common stages of Com Com development in
Canada, evaluation framework, and online toolkit. The target audience for this session
includes those leading Com Com initiatives at the ground level, any organization supporting
initiatives, policymakers and evaluators.

Competing Interests

The Canadian Compassionate Communities Evaluation Toolkit was funded internally by the
project team partners. The Authors acknowledge a conflict of interest as they work for the
organizations on the project team.

Abstract ID: 295

Abstract Type: Workshop

## Let’s find a warmer lexicon for loss

Pieter Deknudt*1

1vzw Reveil
*Correspondence should be addressed to: pieter@reveil.org
Around the globe, many peoples have created beautiful mourning cultures which are
influenced by their local beliefs, traditions and visions concerning death and loss.
The bases of these mourning cultures are strongly connected with their language. Parallel
to the 50-words-for-snow-theory, which states that the indigenous Inuit people have an
abundant lexicon for various types of snow, due to their regular contact with it, it is
surprising that quite some Western languages do not boast a great deal of vocabularic
elements which make up the lexicon concerning death.
Without too lengthy theoretical discussion, this workshop aims to spark creativity in a
common search for a more modern, useful, practical or poetical lexicon around this
subject.
The idea is to make this ‘quest’ for words together, while building mindmaps, tasting the
connotations of words, and to hopefully come up with our own 50-words-for-death glossary to
accurately describe emotions related to loss.
Time to tap into our inner linguistic and poetry skills!

Abstract ID: 296

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Health Promoting Palliative Care

## Palliative Rehabilitation, an urgent need in the field of Public Health

Gabriela Rezende*1, Cristiane Aparecida Gomes-Ferraz2, Ingrid
Giovanna Ferreira Imbroinisi Bacon3, Marysia Mara Rodrigues do Prado De
Carlo4

1Occupational Therapist, Master and Doctor of Health Sciences by the Nursing
Program on Public Health of the Nursing School of Ribeirão Preto of the University of São
Paulo (EERP/USP), Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. Visiting Researcher at Kingston and St
George’s, University of London (United Kingdom), 2Occupational Therapist, Master
of Health Sciences. Doctorate fellow of the Nursing Program on Public Health of the Nursing
School of Ribeirão Preto of the University of São Paulo (EERP/USP), Ribeirão Preto, SP,
Brazil, 3Senior Lecturer Mental Health Nursing, Kingston and St George’s,
University of London, Visiting Lecturer at University of São Paulo (USP), Brazil,
4Associate Professor of the Ribeirão Preto Medical School and Graduate Program
on Nursing on Public Health of the Nursing School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São
Paulo. Master’s and PhD in Education. Coordinator of the “Laboratory of Research on Human
Activity and Palliative Care” - University of São Paulo, Brazil.
*Correspondence should be addressed to: gabirezende31@gmail.com
Background: Palliative Rehabilitation assists people with life-limiting
illnesses to maintain their active participation in everyday life, adapt to losses resulting
from the illness process, maintaining a sense of dignity, competence and resilience.
Objective: To present the conceptions of nurses and occupational therapists
from England and Brazil about palliative rehabilitation in oncological care.
Methods: Multicentre study, with qualitative approach and cross-sectional
design, carried out with 18 nurses and 18 occupational therapists. The research was approved
by the Research Ethics Committees of the University of São Paulo, Brazil and Kingston
University, England. Data collection was carried out from May 2020 to July 2021, through
interviews by videoconference. Data was analysed according to the method of reflective
thematic analysis.
Results and discussion: Three units of meaning were analysed: 1 – Structure of
palliative care services (Brazilian and English health systems); 2 – Concepts about
rehabilitation for palliative care cancer patients; 3 – Assistance provided by nurses and
occupational therapists in Brazil and England to the palliative care cancer patients.
Although the propositions are different between the two countries, there is a tendency
towards integration between rehabilitation and palliative care, finding its most complete
expression in palliative rehabilitation. Palliative rehabilitation brings a holistic and
person-centred conception, based on the integrality and multidimensionality of care that, in
addition to physical symptoms, includes care with psychological stress, socio-family
difficulties and spiritual suffering. Its objective is to improve the quality of life even
at the end of life.
Conclusion: Palliative rehabilitation is increasingly being included in the
care provided to people with life-limiting illnesses, which is a humanitarian, public health
and human rights need. However, it is still neglected in the distribution of resources and
provision of services, especially in countries like Brazil. There is a need for public
palliative care policies that address palliative rehabilitation around the world.

Abstract ID: 297

Abstract Type: Poster - Cancer

## Total Pain in The Context of Palliative Care and its Assessment in People with Advanced
Lung Cancer

Cristiane Aparecida Gomes-Ferraz*1, Gabriela Rezende 2,
Marysia Mara Rodrigues do Prado De Carlo3

1Occupational Therapist, Master of Health Sciences. Doctorate fellow of the
Nursing Program on Public Health of the Nursing School of Ribeirão Preto of the University
of São Paulo (EERP/USP), Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil, 2Occupational Therapist,
Master and Doctor of Health Sciences by the Nursing Program on Public Health of the Nursing
School of Ribeirão Preto of the University of São Paulo (EERP/USP), Ribeirão Preto, SP,
Brazil. Visiting Researcher at Kingston and St George’s, University of London (United
Kingdom), 3Associate Professor of the Ribeirão Preto Medical School and Graduate
Program on Nursing on Public Health of the Nursing School of Ribeirão Preto, University of
São Paulo. Master’s and PhD in Education. Coordinator of the “Laboratory of Research on
Human Activity and Palliative Care” - University of São Paulo, Brazil
*Correspondence should be addressed to: crissgomes@live.com
Introduction: Understanding the concept of Total Pain in a multidimensional
way, as proposed by Cicely Saunders, and evaluating the painful experience of patients with
a life-limiting disease, means considering the relationship between biopsychosocial and
spiritual factors.
Objective: To analyze the complexity of the multidimensional assessment of
Total Pain in patients with advanced lung cancer, with emphasis on social factors.
Method: Exploratory, cross-sectional study carried out with 81 participants,
of both sexes, diagnosed with advanced stage lung cancer. Data were collected using Brief
Pain Inventory, Palliative Outcome Scalle and a socioeconomic data questionnaire, which
assessed the multidimensionality of patients’ pain and symptoms. RESULTS: Among the results
of the analysis, those related to the participants’ social factors stand out here. The
analysis showed that female participants, aged between 51 and 75 years, smokers, with low
education and with financial difficulties, reported more pain and total suffering. The
association showed that, for female participants, a relative increase of 49.22% (CI 95%,
1,1834 - 1,8817) in mean pain score is expected compared to male participants. Regarding
education, a relative increase of 74.53% (CI 95%, 1,0529 - 2,8929) is expected in the
average level of pain among participants with primary education. The results also showed
that patients with low income showed an increase in symptoms such as pain, anxiety and
sadness, presenting a relative increase of 9.99% (CI 95%, 1,0470 - 1,1554) in the average
score, in relation to participants with a higher level of education.
Conclusion: The results indicate that social difficulties related to the
context in which they live, financial and family issues and level of education were
associated with worse results in the physical, emotional, social and spiritual dimensions of
patients with advanced stage lung cancer. It demonstrates, therefore, that it is necessary
to pay attention to the integrality of each person, apply a holistic approach to their care
at each stage of the Palliative Care process, which must include social aspects and carry
out a multidimensional assessment of Total Pain to improve the care provided and the quality
of life of these patients in palliative care.

Abstract ID: 298

Abstract Type: Poster – COVID

## Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on palliative care: a qualitative and multicentre
study

Gabriela Rezende*1, Cristiane Aparecida Gomes-Ferraz2, Ingrid
Giovanna Ferreira Imbroinisi Bacon3, Marysia Mara Rodrigues do Prado De
Carlo4

1Occupational Therapist, Master and Doctor of Health Sciences by the Nursing
Program on Public Health of the Nursing School of Ribeirão Preto of the University of São
Paulo (EERP/USP), Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. Visiting Researcher at Kingston and St
George’s, University of London (United Kingdom), 2Occupational Therapist, Master
of Health Sciences. Doctorate fellow of the Nursing Program on Public Health of the Nursing
School of Ribeirão Preto of the University of São Paulo (EERP/USP), Ribeirão Preto, SP,
Brazil, 3Senior Lecturer Mental Health Nursing, Kingston and St George’s,
University of London, Visiting Lecturer at University of São Paulo (USP), Brazil,
4Associate Professor of the Ribeirão Preto Medical School and Graduate Program
on Nursing on Public Health of the Nursing School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São
Paulo. Master’s and PhD in Education. Coordinator of the “Laboratory of Research on Human
Activity and Palliative Care” - University of São Paulo, Brazil
*Correspondence should be addressed to: gabirezende31@gmail.com
Background: The increase in the number of cases of COVID-19 had an intense
impact on services and health care professionals. It has been causing important imbalance
between the supply and demand for intensive care beds and exposed limitations of supplies
and availability of trained health professionals to deal with the pandemic.
Objective: To present how nurses and occupational therapists understand the impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic in the context of palliative care, in England and Brazil.
Methods: Multicenter study, with qualitative approach and cross-sectional
design, carried out with 18 nurses and 18 occupational therapists. The research was approved
by the Research Ethics Committees of the University of São Paulo, Brazil and Kingston
University, England. Data collection was carried out from May 2020 to July 2021, through
interviews by videoconference. Data was analysed according to the method of reflective
thematic analysis.
Results and discussion: Three units of meaning were analysed: 1 – The rapid
response to the COVID-19 pandemic; 2 – The suffering resulting from the pandemic; 3 – The
process of death and solitary mourning; 4 – Positive aspects arising from the crisis. People
affected by COVID-19 can experience a lonely death, putting their family members at high
risk for complicated grief. The importance of implementing PC during pandemics and moments
of crisis is highlighted. Alternative methods of providing PC can also be used, such as
telemedicine, tele counseling and bereavement support groups. Despite the multiple demands
and difficulties, changes in services provided professional growth and favored access to
Primary Care.
Conclusion: The restrictions imposed by preventive measures and social
isolation reflecting on the daily life and health of the world population. This process
highlighted the need for integrated PC models in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. Health
systems must consider the need to increase the capacity to provide PCs to this population,
to allow people to be treated in a dignified and adequate manner in all settings and
especially in end-of-life care.

Abstract ID: 299

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Compassionate cities

## Healthy End of Life Project (HELP) Ottawa: From Engaging, Gathering and Mapping to
Collectively Evaluating, Learning and Translating

Pamela Grassau*1, Lorraine Mercer1, Charles
Barrett2, James Nininger2, David K. Wright3, Arne
Stinchcombe4, Roanne Thomas5, Mary Lou Kelley2, on
behalf of the HELP Ottawa Project Team, Advisory Council Members, and the HELP Ottawa
Steering and Dissemination Committee

1School of Social Work, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada,
2Compassionate Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada, 3School of Nursing, University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada, 4School of Psychology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Canada, 5Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
*Correspondence should be addressed to: pamela.grassau@carleton.ca
Background: Inspired by the community development framework arising from the
‘Healthy End of Life Project (HELP); offering and providing, asking and accepting help’ in
Australia, Compassionate Ottawa, a citizen-led movement in Ottawa, Canada, collaboratively
designed HELP Ottawa.
Methods: Designed as a community-based, participatory action research
initiative, which draws on a mixed-methods, case study design, HELP Ottawa is based in two
urban community health centers (CHCs) and two suburban faith communities (FCs) in Ottawa.
Launched in the fall of 2019, and operating within multiple, consecutive waves of COVID-19,
three active-oriented cycles have unfolded 1) Engaging, Gathering and Mapping; 2)
Planning-Implementing- Evaluating-Sustaining (PIES); and 3) Collectively Evaluating,
Learning, and Translating.
Results: Conversations with stakeholders across all sites (n = 89) supported
general learning about the history and context of each site while also illuminating specific
supports for people who are frail (e.g. structural vulnerabilities), people living with
advanced illness, people who are dying, people who are caregiving, and people who are
grieving. Subsequent baseline data about experiences, comfort, and confidence in providing
and receiving care were collected with CHC community members including staff, volunteers,
clients/family and community partners (n = 105), and FC community members including
clergy/staff, lay leaders, parishioners, and community partners (n = 78). Each site
collaboratively planned, implemented and evaluated a range of community-led programs,
resources, pathways and events (>40 initiatives) to normalize conversations, increase
community capacity and capability around illness, dying, caregiving and loss, and strengthen
linkages across people, neighbourhoods, communities, social (care) services and health
services and systems. Visual and arts-based methods were integrated to build public
knowledge around illness, dying, caregiving, and grieving
Conclusion: Moving forward, the project team is engaging more centrally with
collective impact approaches, supporting our understanding of what needed to happen, how
well it worked (and for whom), and what difference these initiatives have made to develop a
collaborative end of life culture.

Abstract ID: 302

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Community engagement and development

## Allies or Interlopers? End of Life Doulas and Palliative Care

Marian Krawczyk*1, Merilynne Rush2

1End of Life Studies Group, University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK,
2MSHP, RN, BSN, The Dying Year, USA
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Marian.Krawczyk@glasgow.ac.uk
Objectives: This presentation will review findings from the first
international study of end of life doulas. The primary focus will centre on the ways in
which early innovators and key stakeholders within the movement compare and contrast the end
of life doula role to existing care roles within hospice palliative care.
Methods: In-depth semi-structured interviews with 21 early innovators and key
stakeholders in the end of life doula movement in Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and
the United States. Interview questions focused on the emergence and current practices of end
of life doulas, and the benefits and challenges of integrating this care role within
existing health care systems. Participants were identified through historical reputation and
public presence, professional and community connections, and selective snowball sampling.
Our analytic strategy was abductive and iterative, employing a social constructionist
approach.
Results: Analysis resulted in three themes that described the relationship
between end of life doulas and hospice palliative care: faithful, differentiated, and as
extension. “Faithful” articulated a perspective that end of life doulas adhere to the
originary holistic philosophy of hospice palliative care, often contrasted to the challenges
faced by health care professionals operating within conventional health care systems.
“Differentiated” articulated a distancing and difference from hospice palliative care,
particularly nursing and volunteer roles. “Integrated” articulated a belief that end of life
doulas can provide a crucial professional role within existing hospice palliative care
teams. Participants commonly employed more than one perspective, and often acknowledged
tension between perspectives.
Conclusions: Results indicate that the end of life doula movement, as it
grows, may be experiencing ambivalences of philosophy and practice similar to the historical
development of the hospice palliative care movement within conventional medical systems and
services.

Abstract ID: 305

Abstract Type: Free Communication - Loss and grief

## Bereavement Companionship Programme

Saif Mohammed*1

1CEO of Misson Better Tomorrow, India
*Correspondence should be addressed to: saifsabil@gmail.com
Background of the Bereavement Companionship Programme (BCP): Death is a
constant of human life, and every person experience bereavement in their lifetime. Societies
and cultures have various mechanisms for helping individuals cope with bereavement. This
includes assistance in completing final rites and rituals, and organising social support
measures.
Bereavement is a period of intense grief, involving a range of complex emotions. However,
communities are often deprived of proper knowledge and skills for addressing the grief and
loss associated with death. Moreover, over the years, the circumstances and features of
bereavement have changed. Increasing feelings of isolation and lesser avenues to communicate
have compounded grief. The Covid-19 pandemic has made the situation more complicated.
The Program: BCP is conceptualised and collaboratively implemented by 3 global
organisations; Mission Better Tomorrow, Institute of Palliative Medicine WHOCC and Death
Literacy Institute. It is operated as a 15 hour programme titled; ‘Foundation Course in
Bereavement Support’, to help communities build capacities to support its bereaved members.
The goal of the programme is not to create trained professionals, but to prepare community
members to be companions to a bereaved friend, colleague or family member. The topics
include; Knowing Oneself, Understanding Concepts of Bereavement, Grief and Loss,
Compassionate Communication, Group Discussions Based on Culturally Appropriate Case Studies
and Assignments.
So Far: BCP was introduced in Kerala, India with around 1000 people
registering for the course. Applicants are divided into batches of 30 and sessions are
organized over 3 days. 120 participants successfully completed the course so far. BCP proved
its replicability within 3 months of its initiation. Recently, the Ist international batch
consisting of participants from Bangladesh completed the course. The feedback from
participants from both local and international batches were highly encouraging.
Conclusion: BCP is rapidly evolving. Within a short period of time, BCP has
garnered high appreciation from participants and interest from various palliative care
organizations around the globe. BCP is now being scaled up rapidly through continuous
training and networking.
Note: We have included the abstracts in the overview, for which the presenting authors have
confirmed their attendance at the conference.

Abstract ID: 307

Abstract Type: Free Communication: Culture, philosophy and spirituality

## Supporting the dying process through volunteer biography services

Megan Best*1,2

1Associate Professor of Bioethics, Institute for Ethics and Society, The
University of Notre Dame Australia, 2Honorary Associate Professor, Sydney Medical
School, Faculty of Medicine and Health, the University of Sydney
*Correspondence should be addressed to: megan.best@nd.edu.au
Background: The prospect of imminent death precipitates the asking of
existential questions which can lead to suffering in the terminally ill individual if
meaning cannot be found in their experience. Biographical interventions are an important
tool to construct meaning, however, such interventions are not widely implemented by
healthcare professionals, in part due to the resources required. Volunteer biography
services involve regular meetings between terminally ill individuals and trained,
community-based volunteers to document a life history, which is made available to the
individual and the family.
Methods: This study involves a mixed-methods evaluation of the impact of the
volunteer-run Sacred Heart Community Palliative Care Biography Service in Sydney Australia.
Participants are recruited from each stakeholder group: the terminally ill individuals,
their family members, the volunteers, the volunteer trainers and supporters, and the
referrers. Effects of the intervention on the spiritual wellbeing of patients and their
families will be investigated, as well as the way the service supports communities to
improve societal understanding of and support for the dying process.
Results: Biographical interventions have been shown to increase the quality of
life and alleviate depression. Engagement with volunteers facilitates social connection and
interactions, which relieve isolation and loneliness, and the telling of one’s own life
story allows individuals to frame their legacy in their own terms. This has been shown to
benefit both the patient and the grieving family.
Conclusion: Biography services into community palliative care represent one
way in which individuals and their families can process, make sense of and celebrate the
closure of a person’s life outside of the medical context. Use of volunteer biographers
makes introduction of biography services in palliative care feasible.