3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1217299212172992121729924053042310.1016/j.isci.2025.112731Aurora B and INCENP co-overexpression severely disrupts mitosis and distinctly modifies the global transcriptional landscape
Galindo-MorenoMaría Muñoz-BarreraMarta MarcozziChiara BrunoFederica Maya-ÁlvarezCristina Cortés-LedesmaFelipe RíosRosa María González-AguileraCristina Monje-CasasFernando 1Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa (CABIMER), Spanish National Research Council (CSIC) - University of Seville - University Pablo de Olavide, Avda. Américo Vespucio, 24, 41092 Sevilla, Spain2Topology and DNA Breaks Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO), c/ Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain∗Corresponding author fernando.monje@cabimer.es
3Lead contact
22520252861127311127311762025© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

## Summary
Aurora B kinase, as part of the chromosomal passenger complex (CPC), controls key processes during the cell cycle such as DNA compaction, genome partitioning, or cytokinesis. Nonetheless, increased Aurora B levels are a potential threat for the cells and have been linked to different tumor types. We have carried out an exhaustive characterization of the global consequences of the overexpression of Aurora B and INCENP, the scaffold of the CPC and an activator of Aurora B kinase activity, in non-transformed human cells. Our data demonstrate not only that an individual increase in the levels of Aurora B or INCENP have a different impact on the cells, but more importantly that their simultaneous overexpression stabilizes both CPC components, exacerbates Aurora B activity, severely impairs mitotic progression and chromosome dynamics, and has a distinctive and more dramatic effect on the transcriptional landscape of the cells.
Subject areas: Cell biology, Transcriptomics

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Elevated AurkB and INCENP expression synergistically boosts Aurora B activity
•Concurrent AurkB and INCENP overexpression delays mitosis and elicits cell death
•Increased AurkB and INCENP levels activate SAC and impair chromosome segregation
•AurkB and/or INCENP overexpression distinctly reshapes global gene expression

Cell biology; Transcriptomics

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Sep 20; Revised 2025 Mar 17; Accepted 2025 May 20; Collection date 2025 Jun 20.

## Introduction
Aurora B kinase plays a fundamental role in the regulation of key cell division events such as DNA compaction, chromosome segregation or cytokinesis. , To fulfill these functions, Aurora B (AurkB in humans) is sequentially targeted to different subcellular locations as the catalytic subunit of the chromosomal passenger complex (CPC), which is also formed by inner centromere protein (INCENP), Borealin (CDCA8), and Survivin (BIRC5). , , INCENP is another critical CPC component, since it acts both as a scaffold for the complex and as an activator of Aurora B kinase, while Borealin and Survivin are other non-enzymatic subunits that facilitate targeting of the heterotetrameric complex to the inner centromere, the spindle midzone and the midbody. 
During a mitotic cell division, the CPC is initially observed at pericentric heterochromatin in S phase, but its localization becomes then rapidly restricted to the inner centromere where the complex is predominantly enriched at late prophase. , CPC association to heterochromatin in interphase is mediated by INCENP binding to heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1). , At this location, Aurora B phosphorylates histone H3 on serine 10 (H3S10P), which facilitates the subsequent accumulation of the CPC at the inner centromere. , , , H3S10P dissociates HP1 from trimethylated lysine 9 on H3 (H3K9me3), thereby stimulating CPC removal from chromosome arms. , Subsequently, Survivin binding to histone H3 phosphorylated on threonine 3 (H3T3P) and Borealin interaction with Shugoshin recruited to histone H2A phosphorylated on threonine 120 (H2AT120P), two histone modifications respectively generated by the Haspin and Bub1 kinases, uphold the enrichment of the CPC at the inner centromere. , , , Aurora B-dependent H3S10P also promotes DNA condensation during mitotic entry. This phosphorylation, however, does not spontaneously induce chromosome compaction. Instead, H3S10P seems to modulate the activity of other factors. In this way, studies in Saccharomyces cerevisiae revealed that following H3 phosphorylation on threonine 3 by Haspin, the CPC phosphorylates serine 10 on the same histone to facilitate recruitment of Hst2, which in turn deacetylates lysine 16 on histone H4. This cascade of events finally promotes chromosome condensation. Similarly, H3S10P has been shown to facilitate compaction of Drosophila chromosomes by mediating condensin recruitment. 
At the inner centromere, the CPC ensures faithful chromosome segregation. , For an even distribution of the duplicated genome in mitosis, the kinetochore of each sister chromatid from the same chromosome must attach to microtubules that emanate from opposite spindle poles (amphitelic attachment). When this bi-orientation of the sister chromatids is not properly established, Aurora B phosphorylates components of the outer kinetochore that are important for microtubule binding, thereby promoting kinetochore detachment from the spindle. , , , An unattached kinetochore activates the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), a surveillance mechanism that arrests cell cycle progression in metaphase until all chromosomes are bound to the spindle. , Only when newly established kinetochore-microtubule attachments ensure the correct bi-orientation of the chromosomes is Aurora B satisfied and progression into anaphase is finally allowed. Besides this error correction activity, Aurora B also directly supports SAC function by promoting the recruitment of components of this checkpoint, such as the Mps1 kinase, to kinetochores. , , 
Once that chromosome bi-orientation is achieved, the CPC is redistributed from the inner centromere to the mitotic spindle. This relocation is important for the formation and stabilization of the spindle midzone, as well as for furrow ingression and cytokinesis completion. , , , At the spindle, Aurora B activity is distributed according to a gradient that it is centered at the midzone and progressively reduced toward the poles. Interestingly, this gradient facilitates the resolution in anaphase of prevailing wrong attachments that might have evaded the metaphase error correction machinery, as well as the reintegration of lagging chromosomes that remained at the spindle midzone. , Furthermore, this midzone-centered gradient of Aurora B activity locally delays chromosome decondensation and nuclear envelope reassembly, hence preventing that lagging chromosomes could eventually generate micronuclei. The many functions of Aurora B in ensuring a faithful genome distribution, however, do not conclude here. Remarkably, the CPC is finally relocated again in telophase, first to the cleavage furrow and then to the midbody, where it is required not only for a successful completion of cytokinesis but also for the functionality of the abscission checkpoint. , , , This surveillance mechanism delays the completion of cytokinesis in mammalian cells when chromatin bridges or lagging chromosomes are present in the division plane, thereby preventing DNA breakage or tetraploidization due to cleavage furrow regression. , 
The pivotal roles of Aurora B during cell division make it a fundamental gatekeeper of genome stability and the correct cellular ploidy. Defects in the activity of this kinase cause severe chromosome segregation defects and the accumulation of aneuploid cells. , , , , Remarkably, elevated levels of Aurora B have similar detrimental consequences on genome partitioning. , , , , , In fact, while lack of Aurora B activity is rarely associated with cancer, likely due to its multiple essential functions, overexpression of this kinase is commonly found in many tumor types. Furthermore, elevated levels of Aurora B constitute a marker of poor prognosis in cancer patients. Despite its many links with tumorigenesis, there is still a strong controversy over the specific consequences of an uprise in Aurora B expression, and conflicting studies have accumulated with time. In this way, seminal work in Chinese hamster embryo and human cells, later validated by analyses in other organisms, revealed that elevated Aurora B protein levels give rise to an increase in its kinase activity that causes defects in chromosome segregation and cytokinesis, leading to the formation of aneuploid cells. , , , A more recent study, however, claims that the problems caused by Aurora B overexpression can be instead explained by increased levels of this kinase in fact inhibiting its activity. On the other hand, our previous work in S. cerevisiae demonstrated that, despite being part of the same complex, the simultaneous overexpression of the Aurora B and INCENP homologs in this organism has a synergistic disruptive impact on chromosome segregation and cell viability. In agreement with our data, early studies revealed that the co-expression of Aurora B and INCENP in COS-7 primate cells potentiates Aurora B activation in vivo. , Nonetheless, novel results alternatively suggest that simultaneous induction of INCENP restores normal levels of Aurora B activity and rescues the defects caused by increased expression of this kinase. In order to solve these discrepancies, we have carried out an exhaustive analysis of the consequences of an uprise in the cellular levels of Aurora B and INCENP in non-transformed human cells. Importantly, not only we have evaluated their effect on cell cycle progression and genome stability but we have further explored the changes that overexpression of Aurora B and/or INCENP impose on the transcriptional landscape of the cells. Our results demonstrate that increased expression of either Aurora B or INCENP, while stimulating a similar moderate increase in Aurora B activity, lead to different outcomes, in particular, in regard to their consequences on gene expression. Remarkably, our data also show that the simultaneous overexpression of both CPC components further exacerbates Aurora B activity, severely affects cell cycle progression and genome segregation, and has a distinctive and more profound impact in the transcriptional profile of the cells. Based on the link between Aurora B deregulation and cancer, these results have important implications in our understanding of tumorigenic processes associated to changes in the expression of this essential kinase.

## Results

## Increased expression of AURKB and INCENP stabilizes both CPC components and leads to a synergistic rise in Aurora B kinase activity
In order to analyze the differential consequences of Aurora B and/or INCENP overexpression, we generated lentiviruses carrying plasmids that contained either the AURKB or the INCENP human genes under the control of the constitutive spleen focus-forming virus (SFFV) promoter. These lentiviruses, separately or in combination, were used to transduce non-transformed hTERT RPE-1 (hereafter RPE-1) cells. Transcript levels of AURKB and INCENP were analyzed by RT-qPCR to corroborate their overexpression. RPE-1 cells transiently transduced with both lentiviral vectors displayed a substantial increase in AURKB and INCENP transcription that was similar, for each gene, to that observed in cells that were respectively transduced only with the corresponding individual vector ( A). Importantly, this uprise in gene expression correlated with a substantial increase in protein levels ( A). In contrast, no transcriptional changes were observed for the genes encoding Borealin and Survivin, the other members of the CPC ( A). Notably, while elevated expression of either AurkB or INCENP caused a similar modest global uprise in histone H3 phosphorylation in serine 10 (H3S10P), transduction with both AURKB and INCENP lentiviral vectors led to significantly higher levels of this Aurora B-induced modification ( A). Hence, as previously evidenced in yeast and primate, , , simultaneous AURKB and INCENP overexpression causes a synergistic upsurge in Aurora B kinase activity in RPE-1 human cells. Interestingly, transient transduction with both the AURKB- and INCENP-containing lentiviral vectors also led to substantially higher INCENP protein amounts than the sole transduction with the lentivirus for overexpression of the CPC scaffold, despite similar INCENP mRNA levels were achieved in both cases ( A and A), which indicates that a simultaneous uprise in AURKB and INCENP expression promotes an increase in INCENP protein stability.
 To further characterize the effects of AurkB and/or INCENP overexpression, we aimed to generate stable cell lines from transiently transduced RPE-1 cells. However, we could not obtain an established cell line that displayed constitutively high levels of AurkB and INCENP. Notably, cells that were initially transduced with both AURKB and INCENP lentiviral vectors consistently managed to somehow specifically restore INCENP expression to almost wild-type levels, which suggests that INCENP overexpression might pose a greater threat for the cells than that of AURKB ( B and B). To circumvent this issue, we used an alternative strategy to generate stable cell lines that allowed a conditional and more moderate increase in AurkB and INCENP expression, hence preventing the problems associated to the extraordinary uprise in Aurora B activity stimulated by the simultaneous overexpression of both CPC components with the lentiviral system. Specifically, we used the Flp-In strategy to introduce an extra copy of the AURKB or the INCENP gene under the control of the tetracycline-inducible TET promoter in RPE-1 cells with a Flp recombination target (FRT) site previously integrated into their genome. Similarly, we followed the same strategy to obtain a third cell line in which the TET promoter drove expression of a bicistronic construct encoding both INCENP and AurkB linked by a P2A “self-cleaving” oligopeptide. The P2A viral peptide mediates “cleavage” of the construct during translation by promoting ribosome skipping, thus allowing the simultaneous overexpression of the two CPC components. As previously observed with lentiviral transduction ( A), while TET-induced expression of either AurkB or INCENP determined a modest rise in Aurora B kinase activity, as measured by the levels of H3S10P, their simultaneous overexpression instigated again a dramatic increase in this histone H3 modification ( C). Likewise, concomitant TET-driven induction of AURKB and INCENP expression also greatly stabilized INCENP protein, leading to higher intracellular amounts of the CPC scaffold than its sole overexpression ( C). Furthermore, although the increase in protein stability was still especially patent for INCENP, in this case it was also evident for Aurora B, which accumulated at higher levels after simultaneous AURKB and INCENP conditional induction than following its individual overexpression ( C). These observations suggest that intracellular levels of AurkB and INCENP are normally stringently regulated. Indeed, both CPC components were barely detected in unsynchronized cultures of control RPE-1 cells, where most of the population is in interphase, and their expression could be only easily evidenced after cells were arrested in metaphase ( C and S1D), as previously described in lung fibroblasts. Similarly, accumulation of AurkB and INCENP was also facilitated if the proteasome was inhibited after tetracycline addition, corroborating a strong impediment for the expression of both CPC constituents in interphase ( E and S1F). Notably, in contrast to what previously observed with lentiviruses, RT-qPCR analyses finally revealed that concurrent overexpression of AURKB and INCENP using the TET-driven conditional system led to higher transcript levels of both genes than their individual induction ( G). This supports that elevated expression of AurkB and INCENP not only stabilizes both proteins, but also the mRNAs that encode them. This stabilization was not observed after lentiviral infection likely because overexpression with each individual vector was so strong that maximal transcript levels for the corresponding gene could be obtained even without the positive effect of the simultaneous co-transduction with the other.
After verifying the conditional increase in AurkB and/or INCENP expression in the stable knock-in RPE-1 cell lines, we next analyzed possible changes in the localization of both CPC components caused by alterations in their cellular levels. In uninduced control cells, AurkB and INCENP displayed the same localization pattern throughout the cell cycle ( D). According to what described, , these proteins are detected at centromeres from prophase to metaphase ( D). Then, at anaphase onset, AurkB and INCENP translocate to the spindle midzone ( D). Finally, both CPC components are directed to the midbody at telophase ( D). This distribution pattern was unperturbed after overexpression of either or both proteins ( E).
A strong diffused signal could also be observed throughout the cell in ∼25% of mitotic cells when AurkB and INCENP were simultaneously overexpressed, likely reflecting higher overall levels of these proteins as a consequence of their co-stabilization ( F). The analysis of the distribution of Survivin, another component of the CPC that was not overexpressed, demonstrated that, even in these cells, the whole complex still managed to properly localize despite the particularly high AurkB and INCENP levels ( G and H).

## Elevated Aurora B and INCENP levels determine a prolonged mitotic delay and increased cell death
Aurora B participates in the regulation of essential processes such as the maintenance of chromosome architecture, the control of genome distribution and cytokinesis. Hence, we first evaluated the specific consequences of an increase in the cellular levels of AurkB and/or INCENP on cell cycle progression. Flow cytometry analyses of DNA content revealed a modest accumulation in the population of G2/M cells that was only evident when both AurkB and INCENP levels were elevated, suggesting that their simultaneous overexpression could originate a mitotic delay ( A and 2B). Thus, to better assess cell cycle defects that were not easily detected at a population level, we used live cell imaging to more carefully evaluate mitotic progression in individual cells. Specifically, we first measured the length of mitosis in RPE-1 cells that endogenously expressed a mEmerald-tagged version of cyclin B1, which is translocated from the cytoplasm into the nucleus at the onset of mitosis and it is later rapidly destroyed at the metaphase-to-anaphase transition to facilitate mitotic exit. Corroborating our flow cytometry results, the time between Cyclin B1-mEmerald accumulation in the nucleus and its degradation was significantly prolonged when cells simultaneously overexpressed AurkB and INCENP, but not when the levels of only one of both proteins were elevated (average mitotic length: 95.3 ± 16.8 min, as compared to 42.1 ± 4.2 min or 38.8 ± 3.8 min in cells overexpressing AurkB or INCENP, respectively, and 34.6 ± 2.4 min in control cells) ( C and 2D; and ).
 

## Video S1. Cyclin B1 dynamics in an RPE-1 control cell, related to Figure 2
Fluorescence microscopy analysis of the distribution of a mEmerald-tagged version of Cyclin B1 (CycB, in green) and the DNA (SiR-DNA, in pink) in an RPE-1 control cell, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium. Merged and bright-field images are additionally included. The time from CycB translocation into the nucleus at mitotic onset (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 2C.

## Video S2. Cyclin B1 dynamics in an RPE-1 cell overexpressing Aurora B and INCENP, related to Figure 2
Fluorescence microscopy analysis of the distribution of a mEmerald-tagged version of Cyclin B1 (CycB) and the DNA (SiR-DNA, in pink) in an RPE-1 cell carrying a bicistronic construct that comprises an extra copy of both the INCENP and the AURKB genes linked by a sequence encoding a P2A “self-cleaving” oligopeptide and under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. Merged and bright-field images are additionally included. The time from CycB translocation into the nucleus at mitotic onset (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are shown also in Figure 2C.

In a parallel approach to confirm the slowdown in cell cycle progression as a consequence of increased AurkB activity, we next measured the time from initial establishment of the metaphase plate to mitotic exit onset using light microscopy. To also check whether the broad distribution in the extent of the mitotic delay caused by increased amounts of AurkB and INCENP ( D) could be associated to dissimilar levels of overexpression of the CPC components, we tagged the overexpressed proteins with a mTurquoise2 fluorescent label and exclusively analyzed mitotic progression in cells that displayed high levels of fluorescence. In agreement with our prior observations, elevated amounts of either AurkB or INCENP caused only a minor delay in the completion of mitosis after the initial establishment of the equatorial plate (average duration: 9.3 ± 1.2 min or 11.9 ± 0.6 min after AurkB or INCENP overexpression, respectively, as compared to 8.0 ± 0.2 min in control cells) ( E and 2F). In contrast, increased expression of both AurkB and INCENP led to a more evident and prolonged delay in the extension of this cell cycle period (average duration: 172.0 ± 9.6 min) ( E and 2F; , , , and ). This more dramatic and consistent phenotype is also in agreement with the mitotic delay being proportional to the levels of AurkB and INCENP overexpression. Remarkably, simultaneous AurkB and INCENP overexpression often led to cell death after an aberrant mitosis ( E and 2F). An exacerbated rise in Aurora B kinase activity severely disrupting cell viability is further in agreement with the difficulty to obtain stable cell lines that constitutively expressed high levels of both CPC components after lentiviral transduction. Hence, we evaluated the possibility that concurrent AurkB and INCENP overexpression could determine an increase in apoptosis. The population of apoptotic cells can be detected by flow cytometry analyses identifying those cells with a “sub-G1” or hypodiploid content, since the DNA gets fragmented during apoptosis. Notably, despite the high occurrence of cells dying after a catastrophic mitosis in our live cell microscopy experiments, we could only detect a small but consistent increase in the percentage of “sub-G1” cells that was exclusively evident when both AurkB and INCENP were overexpressed ( G). As previously indicated, the number of mitotic cells in a culture is quite low ( A). Moreover, only a fraction of cells do eventually die after the mitotic delay induced by AurkB and INCENP overexpression. Hence, the subtle increment in the “sub-G1” population could be explained by the fact that, while live cell microscopy allowed us to focus on individual cells going through mitosis and easily evidence cell death events, the rate of occurrence of these infrequent phenomena are more difficult to detect using a population level assay.

## Video S3. Live cell imaging of a dividing RPE-1 control cell, related to Figure 2
Light microscopy evaluation of the dynamics of cell division in an RPE-1 control cell, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium. The white arrow denotes metaphase plate formation. The time from initial establishment of the metaphase plate (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 2E.

## Video S4. Live cell imaging of a dividing RPE-1 cell overexpressing Aurora B, related to Figure 2
Light microscopy evaluation of the dynamics of cell division in an RPE-1 cell carrying an extra copy of the AURKB gene under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. The white arrow denotes metaphase plate formation. The time from initial establishment of the metaphase plate (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 2E.

## Video S5. Live cell imaging of a dividing RPE-1 cell overexpressing INCENP, related to Figure 2
Light microscopy evaluation of the dynamics of cell division in an RPE-1 cell carrying an extra copy of the INCENP gene under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. The white arrow denotes metaphase plate formation. The time from initial establishment of the metaphase plate (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 2E.

## Video S6. Live cell imaging of a dividing RPE-1 cell overexpressing Aurora B and INCENP, related to Figure 2
Light microscopy evaluation of the dynamics of cell division in an RPE-1 cell carrying a bicistronic construct that comprises an extra copy of both the INCENP and the AURKB genes linked by a sequence encoding a P2A “self-cleaving” oligopeptide and under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. The white arrow denotes metaphase plate formation. The time from initial establishment of the metaphase plate (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 2E.

## Aberrant chromosome segregation as a consequence of the concurrent overexpression of AurkB and INCENP
Live cell microscopy experiments showed that, in many cases, cells recurrently tried to achieve chromosome bi-orientation and form the equatorial plate until eventually either proceeding with chromosome segregation and genome partitioning or, alternatively, ceasing in their attempt and finally exiting mitosis without cytokinesis ( E and 2F; ). This observation suggests that the mitotic delay in cells overexpressing AurkB and INCENP likely emerged from problems in chromosome congression and the establishment of amphitelic kinetochore-microtubule attachments. Thus, we next more carefully evaluated nuclear segregation in cells overexpressing AurkB and/or INCENP. Notably, aberrant mitoses were observed in almost 50% of the cells after induction of AURKB and INCENP expression, while these events were significantly less frequent in control cells or in cells overexpressing only one of these CPC components ( A and 3B). Furthermore, in agreement with aberrant mitoses often ending up in cell death, increased expression of both AurkB and INCENP led to the accumulation of interphase cells with abnormal nuclear morphologies, some typically associated to apoptosis such as nuclear blebbing or fragmented nuclei ( C and 3D). Importantly, similar results were obtained when lentiviruses were instead used for protein overexpression ( A–S2C). Cells transduced with both AURKB and INCENP-containing lentiviral vectors exhibited higher rates of chromosome segregation defects (e.g., lagging chromosomes or unequal DNA distribution) than those transduced with each individual vector. These errors also led to a higher accumulation of cells with micronuclei or displaying aberrant nuclear morphologies ( B and S2C).
 We have previously demonstrated that the simultaneous overexpression of Ipl1 and Sli15 (the AurkB and INCENP homologues in S. cerevisiae, respectively) determines increased loading of these proteins on kinetochores and the subsequent destabilization even of correct amphitelic microtubule-kinetochore attachments in budding yeast. As a consequence, cells constitutively activate the SAC. Hence, we next evaluated whether this surveillance mechanism could be also triggered by simultaneous overexpression of AurkB and INCENP in human cells. Mad2 is a downstream component of the SAC that is loaded onto kinetochores until the correct attachments to the spindle are established. The increase in Aurora B kinase activity did not alter intracellular levels of the SAC component Mad2 ( E). However, the analysis of Mad2 localization in RPE-1 cells that expressed both a Ruby-tagged version of this SAC component and the kinetochore protein Mis12 labeled with iRFP670 demonstrated that, while Mad2-Ruby signal disappeared from the kinetochores shortly after achieving chromosome biorientation in control cells, it remained loaded on kinetochores during the whole extent of the mitotic delay in cells that simultaneously overexpressed AurkB and INCENP ( F and 3G; and ). These experiments further evidenced the frequent occurrence of chromosome segregation defects, such as incorrectly attached and lagging chromosomes ( D; ). Our results suggest that the extension in the length of mitosis caused by increased AurkB and INCENP levels is indeed associated with an incapacity to establish chromosome biorientation and the subsequent persistent activation of the SAC.

## Video S7. Mad2 localization onto kinetochores in an RPE-1 control cell, related to Figure 3
Fluorescence microscopy analysis of the distribution of a Mad2-Ruby fusion (in red) in an RPE-1 control cell also expressing the kinetochore marker Mis12 tagged with iRP670 (in blue), 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium. An image showing the overlap between the Mad2-Ruby and Mis12-iRP670 signal, as well as merged and bright-field images are additionally included. The time from initial recording of the video is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 3F.

## Video S8. Mad2 localization onto kinetochores in an RPE-1 cell overexpressing Aurora B and INCENP, related to Figure 3
Fluorescence microscopy analysis of the distribution of a Mad2-Ruby fusion (in red) in an RPE-1 cell also expressing the kinetochore marker Mis12 tagged with iRP670 (in blue) and carrying a bicistronic construct that comprises an extra copy of both the INCENP and the AURKB genes linked by a sequence encoding a P2A “self-cleaving” oligopeptide and under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. An image showing the overlap between the Mad2-Ruby and Mis12-iRP670 signal, as well as merged and bright-field images are additionally included. The time from initial recording of the video is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 3G.

## Video S9. Incorrectly attached chromosome in an RPE-1 cell overexpressing Aurora B and INCENP, related to Figure S2
Fluorescence microscopy analysis of the distribution of a Mad2-Ruby fusion (in red) in an RPE-1 cell also expressing the kinetochore marker Mis12 tagged with iRP670 (in blue) and carrying a bicistronic construct that comprises an extra copy of both the INCENP and the AURKB genes linked by a sequence encoding a P2A “self-cleaving” oligopeptide and under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. An image showing the overlap between the Mad2-Ruby and Mis12-iRP670 signal, as well as merged and bright-field images are additionally included. The time from initial recording of the video is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure S2D.

## Simultaneous overexpression of AurkB and INCENP dramatically modifies the transcriptional landscape in human cells
One of the most striking phenotypes displayed by cells that concomitantly overexpressed AurkB and INCENP was the dramatic increase in H3S10P. This histone modification is promoted by Aurora B kinase at the onset of mitosis and reaches its maximal abundance in metaphase, to be rapidly removed later in anaphase. Thus, the overall higher levels of H3S10P might in principle be associated to a greater presence of cells in metaphase as a consequence of the overexpression of AurkB and INCENP. However, in agreement with previous observations, , a strong H3S10P accumulation was detected after AurkB and INCENP co-overexpression even in interphase cells, while this histone phosphorylation was only evident as control cells entered mitosis ( A and 4B). As for the extension of the mitotic delay, the frequency of detection of H3S10P signal at interphase also correlated with the levels of AurkB and INCENP overexpression ( B). This result, together with the fact that the population of interphase cells was significantly higher than that of mitotic cells ( B), evidences that the extraordinary uprise in H3S10P cannot be simply attributed to an accumulation of cells in metaphase.
 In order to evaluate whether the genome-wide distribution of H3S10P was affected by the exacerbated increase in this epigenetic mark originated by AurkB and INCENP overexpression, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) experiments. In agreement with the substantial uprise in H3S10P levels, simultaneous AurkB and INCENP induction led to a significant enrichment in this histone modification throughout the genome ( C and A–S3C), which was similar for all chromosomes ( D). The overall H3S10P distribution profile was also comparable in cells overexpressing AurkB and INCENP and in control cells, differing only in the intensity of the signal ( C, 4E, and 4F). Notably, although the sole induction of either AURKB or INCENP expression slightly augmented H3S10P levels ( C), this increment had barely any effect on the genomic distribution of this histone modification ( D–4F). A minor enrichment in H3S10P (averaging 1.23-fold) was observed along the chromosomes only in cells overexpressing INCENP ( D and C).
Since H3S10P drives chromatin remodeling, increased levels of this histone mark could modify the accessibility of transcription factors to their targeted sequences in the DNA, subsequently also modifying global gene expression. Hence, we carried out RNA-seq experiments in order to assess how an increase in AurkB and/or INCENP levels alters the transcriptional landscape of the cells. In agreement with the synergistic effects of the concurrent overexpression of AurkB and INCENP on H3S10P, elevated amounts of either CPC component had a considerably lower impact on global gene expression than their concomitant induction. In this way, a total of 199 and 381 genes were differentially expressed (DE) (absolute fold change value (abs(FC))>1.5; adj p value < 0.05) after overexpression of AurkB or INCENP, respectively, as compared to control cells ( A). In contrast, transcript levels of up to 1102 genes were altered (abs(FC) > 1.5; adj p value < 0.05) when both proteins were simultaneously overexpressed ( A). The RNA-seq data further revealed that there is very little overlap between the pools of DE genes identified after overexpression of AurkB, INCENP or both CPC components ( A). Surprisingly, while most DE genes were downregulated following the sole induction of AurkB or INCENP (72.9% and 65.4% of the genes, respectively), the concurrent overexpression of both CPC components had the opposite effect, with the majority of DE genes (67.8%) showing increased RNA levels as compared to control cells ( A–5F and A). To validate these results, changes in the expression of a selected pool of genes were confirmed by RT-qPCR ( B). Likewise, it should be noted that, among the DE genes, the RNA-seq analysis verified the expected increase in AURKB and/or INCENP transcript levels in each of the cell lines where these genes were conditionally overexpressed.
 Chromosomal mapping of the RNA-seq data revealed that increased levels of AurkB and/or INCENP differentially affected discrete and distinct loci in each of the DNA strands ( G, C, and S4D), despite the accumulation of H3S10P induced by the concurrent overexpression of both proteins taking place at similar levels throughout the whole genome ( D). A global analysis showed no correlation between the amount of H3S10P mark and the levels of gene expression after AurkB and/or INCENP induction ( A and S5B). However, when this analysis was circumscribed to DE transcripts only, we observed that differentially up- and down-regulated genes exhibited a more pronounced increase and similar overall levels of H3S10P in cells with elevated AurkB and INCENP expression. In contrast, in control cells or those overexpressing either CPC component individually, down-regulated genes displayed higher levels of H3S10P mark than up-regulated genes ( H). To expand these analyses, we used metaplots to compare the H3S10P ChIP-seq signal intensity in genes with unchanged expression and those that were DE in cells overexpressing AurkB and INCENP. Notably, down-regulated DE genes already exhibited significantly higher H3S10P levels than non-altered genes in control RPE-1 cells ( I and C). Furthermore, this enrichment extended across promoters, gene bodies and downstream regions ( I and 5J). In contrast, up-regulated DE genes exhibited a comparatively moderate increase in H3S10P that was limited to their promoters, with no significant enrichment in gene bodies or downstream regions compared to non-altered genes ( I and 5J).
A gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the RNA-seq data using the DAVID bioinformatic platform (https://david.ncifcrf.gov) confirmed the profoundly distinct nature of the transcriptional changes prompted by an increase in the expression of AurkB, INCENP or both CPC components ( A–6C). Cell adhesion (GO:007155), extracellular matrix organization (GO:0030198) and angiogenesis (GO:0001525 and GO:0045765) were the only GO categories particularly enriched among DE genes independently of whether AurkB, INCENP or both proteins were overexpressed ( A–6C). Notably, all these processes are highly relevant for tumorigenesis. Reinforcing this observation, a gene set enrichment analysis using the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) hallmark gene set collection and the web-based RNAseqChef platform revealed the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) as the only common biological process associated to the sets of DE genes identified after the increase in the levels of AurkB, INCENP or both proteins. The sole increase in AurkB levels particularly affected genes involved in biological processes such as regulation of gene expression (GO:0000122 and GO:0010628), apoptosis (GO:0043065), development (GO:0007420), proliferation (GO:0001938, GO:0048661 and GO:0061469) or differentiation (GO:0045669 and GO:0045444) ( A). In contrast, INCENP overexpression especially interfered with the transcriptional levels of genes related to signal transduction (GO:0007165) and cell signaling (GO:0007267), negative regulation of proliferation (GO:0008285), apoptosis (GO:0043066 and GO:0043065), cell migration (GO:0030335), or actin cytoskeleton organization (GO:0030036) ( B). Notably, DE genes associated to a simultaneous increase in AurkB and INCENP levels were included in GO categories that combined those perturbed in cells that overexpressed each protein individually, but further expanding the total number of genes comprised in each category ( C). The concurrent uprise in AurkB and INCENP expression particularly affected a large number of genes that participate in the regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoters (GO:0000122), a biological process that seems to be also impacted by the sole overexpression of AurkB. It is worth noting, however, that only a reduced number of DE genes within this GO category were identified both when AurkB was induced alone or in combination with INCENP, in agreement with the widely different overall transcriptional landscape observed in each case.
 Interestingly, the restricted set of DE genes associated to AurkB overexpression, irrespective of whether or not INCENP levels were concomitantly increased, encode key transcriptional regulators such as c-Jun, FOXO1 and HES1, as well as proteins that have been proposed to also act as transcription factors (e.g., NR5A2, NR4A3 and ZNF608). Thus, and given that the observed differences in gene expression might be explained by alterations in the accessibility of transcription factors to the DNA as a consequence of the increased H3S10P levels, we used the TFEA.ChIP tool to search for transcriptional regulators that preferentially targeted DE genes identified after overexpression of AurkB and/or INCENP. This analysis further reinforced the idea that increased amounts of either AurkB or INCENP and the simultaneous induction of both proteins have a profoundly different impact on global gene expression. In this way, despite the group of transcription factors that might be determining the differences in gene expression are quite dissimilar overall, there is a higher overlap among the regulators that might govern the transcriptional changes induced by an increase in AurkB or INCENP levels than among those that might shape the gene expression pattern defined by the concurrent overexpression of both proteins ( ). Furthermore, most transcription factors that are predicted to be associated to the changes in gene expression observed following AurkB or INCENP induction are transcriptional repressors, in agreement with the majority of DE genes displaying reduced RNA levels in both cases ( ). In contrast, a simultaneous uprise in the amounts of AurkB and INCENP mainly resulted in most DE genes showing increased RNA levels ( A–5F and A) and, accordingly, this set of upregulated genes were predicted to be primarily under the mutual control of transcriptional activators such as JUN or FOS ( ). Among the common transcription factors that might be associated to the gene expression changes caused by individual induction of either AurkB or INCENP, it is particularly noteworthy the identification of several members of the Polycomb complex ( ). Interestingly, Polycomb components were also found as potential transcriptional regulators of the set of genes that showed reduced RNA levels after the concurrent overexpression of AurkB and INCENP ( ).
Our data clearly establishes that a simultaneous increase in AurkB and INCENP levels has more dramatic consequences for the viability of the cells than the individual overexpression of either protein. Remarkably, an analysis of data from TCGA PanCancer Atlas (https://www.cancer.gov/tcga) using the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics (https://www.cbioportal.org/) , revealed that the percentage of cancer cases in which both AURKB and INCENP showed an elevated expression (mRNA expression Z score >2) is significantly smaller than that of tumors in which only one of these genes displayed increased mRNA levels ( A). Furthermore, the probability of overall survival was severely reduced in patients with cancers that showed a high expression of AURKB and INCENP as compared to those with tumors displaying an increased expression of only one of both genes, in agreement with the synergistic effect of the simultaneous overexpression of AurkB and INCENP on Aurora B activity and its more dramatic effects on chromosome segregation, cell cycle progression and the transcriptional landscape of the cells ( B). Finally, in accordance with the fact that overexpression of AurkB and/or INCENP have distinct consequences on genome stability and gene expression, there is a broad distribution in the percentage of tumors that show overexpression of either or both CPC components among the different cancer types analyzed ( C).

## Discussion
Despite its critical role as a guardian of genome integrity, an uprise in the activity of Aurora B kinase has detrimental consequences for the cells and it is associated with tumorigenesis. , , Remarkably, however, and in contrast to our extensive knowledge regarding the consequences of the lack of Aurora B function, we are still far from fully understanding the precise impact of an increase in the activity of this kinase on cell physiology and viability. Furthermore, entirely contradictory results regarding the possible molecular mechanisms that explain the defects associated to Aurora B overexpression have accumulated in the bibliography. In order to clarify these fundamental issues, we have carried out an extensive characterization of the detrimental outcomes of elevated Aurora B protein levels in non-transformed human cells.
Our previous work in S. cerevisiae evidenced that, despite being part of the same protein complex, concurrent overexpression of the Aurora B and INCENP homologues in this organism determines a synergistic uprise in Aurora B kinase activity and aggravates its harmful impact on cell viability. In agreement with these studies and with the observation that a simultaneous increase in the levels of Aurora B and INCENP potentiates Aurora B activation in primate cells, , the results presented here demonstrate that the concomitant overexpression of AurkB and INCENP in human RPE-1 cells also determines a massive uprise in the levels of H3S10P, a widely used marker for Aurora B kinase activity, which is significantly greater than that observed when either one of these CPC components is individually overexpressed. Notably, our data further support that the synergistic uprise in Aurora B activity is partially explained by an increased stability of the AurkB and INCENP proteins as a consequence of their concurrent overexpression. This augmented stability is consistent with the observation that knock-down of Aurora B results in degradation of INCENP and vice versa. , Protein stabilization is particularly relevant in the case of INCENP, whose expression is tightly controlled to prevent an uprise in its protein levels in interphase even when INCENP transcription is highly induced. The extraordinary boost in Aurora B kinase activity severely affects long-term viability of the cells, hence precluding the generation of stable cells lines that simultaneously integrated lentiviral constructs for the overexpression of both AurkB and INCENP. Interestingly, as previously observed in budding yeast, higher levels of INCENP seem to be more detrimental for cells than an increase in Aurora B, since most RPE-1 cells that were initially transduced with both AURKB and INCENP lentiviral vectors managed to somehow re-establish normal INCENP expression. This observation is further in agreement with a particular need for a tight regulation of INCENP intracellular protein levels, which is probably linked to its central roles both as a scaffold for the CPC and as an activator of Aurora B. In this way, if the amounts of INCENP in the cell were a limiting factor, higher levels of this protein would enable increased CPC formation, assist targeting of the complex to its cellular destinations and efficiently promote the activity of Aurora B kinase at these locations.
The generation of a tetracycline-driven conditional system that additionally facilitated lower induction levels evidenced that a simultaneous increase in AurkB and INCENP expression not only stabilizes both proteins, but also determines a higher accumulation of the mRNAs encoding these two CPC components. Interestingly, AURKB gene expression is inhibited in interphase both at the transcriptional level and also through the regulation of the stability of its mRNA. , Since most cells in a culture are in interphase and no differences in transcript levels were observed in RT-qPCR analyses when using primers that amplified the endogenous 5′-UTR of AURKB and INCENP, which is not present in the construction that drives TET-driven expression of these genes, the simultaneous conditional overexpression of AurkB and INCENP probably inhibits the complex that destabilizes AURKB mRNA, but not transcription from its own promoter. Furthermore, based on the exceptional difficulties found to increase INCENP protein levels in the cells, it is likely that multiple mechanisms were also acting together in order to actively prevent INCENP expression during interphase.
Simultaneous Aurora B and INCENP overexpression causes frequent errors in chromosome segregation and, as a result of the problems amassed during mitosis, many cells finally become inviable and die. Accordingly, the increase in Aurora B and INCENP levels leads to an accumulation of cells displaying aberrant nuclear morphologies that are frequently associated to apoptosis. Although both the lack and an increase in Aurora B activity result in severe chromosome segregation defects, the mechanisms leading to the problems in genome distribution are different. While Aurora B deficiency makes the cells unable to repair incorrect kinetochore-microtubule attachments that do not facilitate the bi-orientation of sister chromatids during mitosis, our previous results in S. cerevisiae support that high levels of Aurora B kinase activity destabilize kinetochore-microtubule connections even when chromosomes are correctly bioriented, likely by increasing the proximity of the kinase to its substrates at the outer kinetochore. Several evidences favor that hyperactivity of Aurora B kinase also promotes a continuous detachment of chromosomes from the spindle microtubules in human cells. Firstly, live cell imaging experiments demonstrate that overexpression of Aurora B and INCENP causes a prolonged mitotic delay during which cells reiteratively fail to successfully assemble the metaphase plate, in agreement with Aurora B promoting a constant detachment of kinetochore-microtubule connections even when chromosomes are correctly bioriented. Likewise, these assays also revealed an increased incidence of lagging chromosomes and other genome segregation defects that are consistent with unstable binding of the chromosomes to the spindle microtubules. Lastly, and also coherent with our hypothesis, the overexpression of Aurora B and INCENP triggers a prolonged activation of the SAC, as expected based on the uprise in Aurora B activity causing a pervasive destabilization of kinetochore-microtubule attachments. Since the normal pattern of distribution of the CPC does not seem to be affected after Aurora B and INCENP overexpression, and although we cannot exclude that the large cytoplasmic pool of Aurora B and INCENP protein generated might be associated with other observed phenotypes, we favor that the chromosome segregation defects are specifically linked to an excess of centromeric Aurora B kinase. An interesting possibility to explore in the future is whether, as observed in budding yeast, a pool of the CPC complex might accumulate at the kinetochores of RPE-1 cells after simultaneous AurkB and INCENP overexpression, thereby facilitating access of the kinase to its substrates at this location.
The extraordinary upsurge in H3S10P determined by the concurrent overexpression of AurkB and INCENP is accompanied by increased accumulation of this epigenetic mark along the entire length of the chromosomes. It has been suggested that Aurora B overexpression might affect chromatin-based regulatory mechanisms, thereby causing epigenetic alterations in the cells that could lead to carcinogenesis. Interestingly, our results clearly evidence that a simultaneous increase in AurkB and INCENP levels have dramatically different consequences in terms of the global transcriptional changes imposed than the individual overexpression of each protein. In this way, while elevated amounts of Aurora B or INCENP predominantly determine a reduction in the transcription of the majority of DE genes, the simultaneous overexpression of both proteins most frequently triggers an increase in the transcript levels of the affected genes. H3S10P is a rather interesting histone modification mark, since it is mechanistically involved in two processes that are functionally divergent. In interphase, when levels of H3S10P are low, this histone modification stimulates gene expression in different ways (e.g., by facilitating the recruitment of transcriptional activators). However, the H3S10P mark then increases in abundance and promotes chromosome compaction, hence favoring transcriptional repression, as cell progress to metaphase. Notably, the strong H3S10P enrichment at genes that become down-regulated following the simultaneous increase in AurkB and INCENP levels extends across their promoters, gene bodies and downstream regions. This robust and widespread H3S10P accumulation may drive chromatin compaction, thereby explaining the reduction in transcription. In contrast, the milder, promoter-specific H3S10P enrichment observed in up-regulated DE genes may contribute to an open chromatin state, facilitating the recruitment of transcriptional machinery. These patterns of H3S10P association are already evident in control RPE-1 cells. Thus, the changes in gene expression caused by the simultaneous overexpression of AurkB and INCENP appear to correlate with the initial H3S10P levels at gene promoters, as well as with the extent to which this epigenetic mark spreads across gene bodies and downstream regions in normal RPE-1 cells.
The fact that individual induction of AurkB or INCENP mostly causes an overall reduction of gene expression is also in agreement with a tight control of INCENP protein levels in interphase. Even when INCENP transcription is highly stimulated, the CPC scaffold can only efficiently accumulate as cells progress into G2, and thus AurkB activity is primarily potentiated once that H3S10P determines DNA compaction. In contrast, simultaneous Aurora B and INCENP induction causes a considerable increase in global H3S10P levels already in interphase. We propose that most of the transcriptional changes stimulated by elevated Aurora B and INCENP expression are likely taking place at this cell cycle stage, thereby explaining the overall uprise in mRNA levels of the DE genes. The overexpression of AurkB and INCENP, nonetheless, also causes a reduction in the amounts of a substantial number of RNAs. In agreement with the dual and opposite effects of H3S10P on transcription, these might instead represent a subset of genes whose expression is mainly controlled by a higher compaction of the chromatin as a result of the increased Aurora B and INCENP levels. It is important to highlight that H3S10P does not induce spontaneous chromosomal condensation per se, but in combination with additional mechanisms (e.g., chromatin deacetylation), which would explain why, despite the high H3S10P levels in interphase, they do not necessarily cause chromatin compaction and transcriptional repression. Likewise, H3S10P can facilitate transcription, but it is also not a prerequisite for this process to occur. Therefore, despite the prior general considerations, and even though our results allow to draw a highly informative and thought-provoking portrait of how increased Aurora B and/or INCENP levels shape the overall transcriptional profile of the cells, understanding the specific consequences of the overexpression of these CPC components in a particular locus will require further analyses that should be carried out in a context-dependent manner.
In accordance to the distinctive global changes in gene expression, an individual increase in the levels of AurkB or INCENP and their simultaneous overexpression likely interfere with the function of different transcriptional regulators. In this way, gene expression changes originated by the sole overexpression of AurkB or INCENP are anticipated to be associated with alterations in transcription factors that primarily act as repressors. In contrast, a simultaneous increase in Aurora B and INCENP levels is predicted to mainly perturb the function of transcriptional activators such as c-JUN or c-FOS. Notably, the promoters of the proto-oncogenes encoding these two regulators are highly susceptible to H3S10P, which results in their rapid transcriptional induction. Accordingly, our RNA-seq analyses demonstrate that AurkB and INCENP overexpression determines an increase in c-JUN and c-FOS gene expression. In contrast, genes whose transcription is reduced as a result of increased Aurora B and INCENP levels are anticipated to be under the control of the Polycomb complex. Aurora B kinase not only phosphorylates histone H3 on serine 10, but also on serine 28 (H3S28P). Remarkably, H3S28P is essential for an efficient Polycomb-mediated gene repression in Drosophila. Likewise, the double H3K9me3/H3S10P modification has been also associated with gene silencing by Polycomb proteins in differentiated murine C3H10T1/2 mesenchymal stem cells. It is worth noting that the Polycomb complex is also predicted to be linked to the transcriptional changes determined by the individual overexpression of AurkB or INCENP. Therefore, Polycomb function seems to be especially sensitive even to small increases in Aurora B kinase activity.
Overexpression of Aurora B, as well as that of INCENP, has been associated to different tumorigenic processes. Supporting this link, GO analyses of our RNA-seq data revealed that increased levels of AurkB and/or INCENP particularly affected the expression of genes with roles in cell adhesion, extracellular matrix organization or angiogenesis. Likewise, EMT is the only common biological process associated to the transcriptional changes imposed by overexpression of AurkB, INCENP or both proteins. Hence, our data has important implications in cancer. In particular, our results supporting the synergistic effect of a simultaneous increase in AurkB and INCENP levels are of special relevance, since they are further substantiated by cumulative evidence that suggest that tumors displaying higher amounts of both proteins are more aggressive than those associated to an individual uprise in AurkB or INCENP expression. Our observations emphasize that elevated levels of other CPC components, and in particular INCENP, constitute an important factor to consider when assessing the prognosis of a certain tumor type connected to increased Aurora B expression.

## Limitations of the study
Our work offers valuable insights into the effects of increased Aurora B and/or INCENP expression in non-transformed human cells, which are supported by our experimental data and prior findings. Nonetheless, some inherent limitations should be acknowledged. Most experiments were conducted using a conditional model for gene overexpression in human RPE-1 cells, which led to variable Aurora B and INCENP protein levels across individual cells. In some experiments, we tagged the overexpressed proteins with a fluorescent label to distinguish between cells with high and low/intermediate levels of Aurora B and/or INCENP. Nevertheless, this intrinsic variability should be considered when interpreting results from other experiments. Finally, as our studies were performed on asynchronous cell populations, and our findings suggest that Aurora B and/or INCENP overexpression has stage-specific effects during the cell cycle, future studies using synchronized cells would help to further describe these differences.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Fernando Monje-Casas (fernando.monje@cabimer.es).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
All data are available in the main text and . Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this study is available from the upon reasonable request. This paper does not report original code. Data generated in RNA-seq and ChIP-seq experiments have been deposited at Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and are publicly available. GEO accession numbers are listed in the .

## Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Javier Manzano-López and members of the Monje-Casas’ lab for critical reading of the manuscript, Dr. Abelardo López-Rivas for helpful discussions, and Cristobal Coronel-Guisado for assistance with uploading ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data to the GEO repository. Vectors used for CCNB1, MAD2, and MIS12 tagging were kind gifts from Jonathon Pines.
This research was supported by grant PID2022-137413NB-I00 (funded by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and ERDF/EU) and grant P18-FR-3183 (funded by Junta de Andalucía and “ERDF A way of making Europe”) to F.M.-C. Work of M.G.-M. was supported by postdoctoral research contract POSTDOC_21_00376 funded by Junta de Andalucía and “ERDF A way of making Europe”. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or manuscript preparation.

## Author contributions
M.G.-M., M.M.-B., C.M., F.B., F.C.-L., R.M.R., and C.G.-A. contributed to the design of the experiments. M.G.-M., M.M.-B., and C.M.-A. carried out the experiments. M.G.-M., M.M.-B., F.B., and C.G.-A. analyzed the data. F.M.-C. wrote the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Cell lines
hTERT-RPE-1 (henceforth RPE-1) cells were acquired from ATCC by F. Cortés-Ledesma. RPE-1 FRT cells were kindly provided by J. Pines and were originally generated and characterized in his laboratory. After reception, morphological features and karyotype stability of RPE-1 cells were confirmed. RPE-1 cells were cultured in Dulbecco′s Modified Eagle’s Medium/Nutrient Mixture F-12 Ham medium supplemented with 2 mM L-Glutamine solution, 10% tetracycline-free fetal bovine serum (Capricorn), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. Cells were maintained in a humidified incubator at 37°C with 5% CO2. In live-cell imaging experiments, medium without red phenol was used and DNA was labelled adding 200 nM SiR-DNA (Spirochrome) to the culture 2 h prior live-cell imaging. HEK293 and AAV293 cells were exclusively used for viral production, and were cultured in Dulbecco′s Modified Eagle’s Medium - High Glucose (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 2 mM L-Glutamine solution (Sigma-Aldrich), 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich), 100 U/ml penicillin (Sigma-Aldrich) and 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich). All cell lines were periodically tested for mycoplasma contamination.

## Method details

## Lentiviral-mediated protein overexpression
AURKB and INCENP cDNAs were cloned into the dual-promoter lentiviral plasmid pHRSIN DUAL-GFP, which allows the cloning of a gene of interest and its expression driven by the spleen focus-forming virus (SFFV) promoter, and carries the GFP reporter gene under control of the constitutive ubiquitin (UBIQ) promoter. , The CalPhos (ClonTech) mammalian transfection protocol was used for lentiviral packaging and amplification. HEK293 cells were transfected either with empty pHRSIN DUAL-GFP plasmid (control) or with pHRSIN DUAL-GFP plasmids carrying the AURKB or INCENP cDNAs, as well as with the HIV packaging plasmids pCMVDR8.91 and pVSVG. Media containing viral particles were collected 72 h post-transfection, filtrated with a 0.45-μm sterile filter, and ultracentrifuged at 22.000 rpm and 4°C for 90 min to concentrate viral particles. For virus titration, HEK293 cells were transduced with increasing amounts of lentiviruses in medium containing 8 μg/ml sequabrene (Sigma). Infection efficiency was assessed by flow cytometry analyses, measuring GFP signal in order to determine the plaque-forming units per milliliter (PFU/ml). To transiently overexpress AurkB and/or INCENP, RPE-1 cells were transduced with lentiviral vectors carrying AURKB, INCENP or both genes, respectively, in complete medium with 8 μg/ml sequabrene. Cells transduced with an empty vector were used as a control. Subsequently, cells were incubated for 6 h at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator and then washed, embedded into fresh medium, and finally harvested 72 h post transduction. To obtain stable RPE-1 cell lines that constitutively overexpressed AurkB, INCENP or both proteins, GFP-expressing cells were sorted by FACS and later expanded into cell lines.

## Tetracycline-induced conditional protein overexpression
To generate cell lines that allowed conditional individual overexpression of each protein, the gene encoding either AurkB or INCENP was cloned downstream of the TET promoter in the pcDNA5 FRT/TO vector (Invitrogen). Likewise, to achieve their simultaneous overexpression, both the INCENP and AURKB ORFs, separated by the P2A sequence from pCW57-MCS1-2A-MCS2 (Addgene), were introduced in the pCDNA5/FRT/TO plasmid under control of the TET promoter. N-terminal mTurquoise2-tagged versions of all prior TET-driven gene constructs were additionally generated to assess expression and localization of the overexpressed proteins. Cloned sequences were later integrated into RPE-1 FRT cells using the Flp-In methodology. To this end, each of the generated pcDNA5 FRT/TO-based plasmids, together with the pOG44 plasmid for Flp recombinase expression, were transfected using a Neon electroporation system (Invitrogen). Electroporated cells were subsequently selected with 500 μg/ml G418 (PhytoTech Labs) and single clones were isolated using cloning discs (Sigma-Aldrich). In the tetracycline-inducible cell lines, CCNB1 was tagged with mEmerald by transfecting cells with a modified version of the PX466 “All-in-One” plasmid containing Cas9D10A-T2A-mRuby and gRNAs targeting CCNB1, as described elsewhere. mEmerald-expressing cells were selected using FACS (BD FACSAria™ III) and individually sorted into 96-well plates. After verification of the correct genotype using appropriate primers ( ), mEmerald positive clones were finally confirmed and analyzed by live-cell microscopy. To generate Ruby-MAD2+/− / RFP670-MIS12+/− tetracycline-inducible RPE-1 cell lines, recombinant adenovirus-associated virus (rAAV) containing homology arms to MAD2 and including the mRuby sequence in frame with MAD2 first exon were used first to infect cells, as previously reported. Cells expressing mRuby were selected by FACS and genotype was confirmed using suitable primers ( ). Subsequent MIS12-RFP670 integration in the Ruby-MAD2+/− RPE-1 FRT/TO cell line was accomplished using CRISPR/Cas9 technology, as previously described. RFP670-expressing cells were selected by FACS and sorted individually into 96-well plates. Genotype of selected cells was checked using appropriate primers ( ). Ruby-Mad2 and RFP670-Mis12 expression and localization were finally confirmed and analyzed by live-cell microscopy. For tetracycline-inducible expression of genes of interest, cells were treated with 2 μg/ml tetracycline (Sigma-Aldrich) for 32 h. Fresh tetracycline was readded to the medium 24 h after initial treatment to maintain continuous inducible expression.

## Live-cell imaging
For time-lapse microscopy, cells were seeded on 4/8-well chamber ibiTreat μslides (Ibidi) at least 48 h prior to live-cell imaging. Metaphase duration was analyzed using differential interference contrast (DIC) imaging on a Time-Lapse microscope (Leica DMI 6000B) equipped with a 1396 ORCA ERA I camera (Hamamatsu) and an environmental chamber at 37°C with controlled CO2 concentration. Single plane images were taken every 2 min, for 20 h, with a 20x objective. Time-lapse analyses of cell cycle progression in CCNB1-mEmerald cell lines and evaluation of Ruby-MAD2 and RFP670-MIS12 distribution in live cells were carried out using a Leica DMi8 THUNDER microscope equipped with a K5 camera and an OKOLAB environmental chamber at 37°C with controlled CO2 concentration. For CCNB1-mEmerald and SiR-DNA visualization, 7x 3 μm Z-stack images were acquired every 3 min with a 40x objective. Ruby-MAD2 and RFP670-MIS12 were visualized acquiring 5x 2 μm Z-stack images every 2 or 10 min with a x63 or a x100 objective. Images were subsequently deconvolved using the Large Volume Computational Clearing (LVCC) method of THUNDER Imager-Leica to obtain the final pictures that were used as sequential frames in the videos.

## Immunofluorescence
Cells were grown on coverslips and fixed at room temperature (RT) for 15 min in either 100% methanol at -20°C for 6 min or 60 mM Pipes, 25 mM Hepes, 10 mM EGTA and 2 mM MgCl2 (pH 6.9) buffer with 4% paraformaldehyde and 0.5% Triton X-100. After fixation, cells were blocked in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with 3% BSA, incubated with primary antibodies at RT for 1h and washed twice in PBS with 0.1% Tween 20. Cells were then incubated with the appropriate fluorescent secondary antibody at RT for 45 min and washed twice again. All antibodies are listed in and were diluted in PBS with 3% BSA and 0.1% Tween 20. DNA was stained with DAPI (1 μg/ml) after labelling with secondary antibody. Immunofluorescence images were acquired with a DM6000B fluorescence microscope (Leica) or an AxioImager.2 microscope (Zeiss), and were processed with LAS AF (Leica) and ImageJ (https://imagej.net/ji) software.

## Flow cytometry
Cells were trypsinized, washed twice with cold PBS and fixed overnight in 70% cold ethanol at -20°C. For cell cycle progression studies, fixed cells were washed twice with cold PBS, treated with 250 μg/ml RNAse A (Roche) at 37°C for 1 h and stained in a 10 μg/ml propidium iodide (PI) solution. For sub-G1 analysis, fixed cells were washed with PBS and incubated at 37°C for 15 min with DNA extraction buffer (0.2M Na2HPO4, 0.1M citric acid, pH 7.8) prior to RNAse A and PI treatments. DNA content was measured with a FACSCalibur cytometer (BD Biosciences) and data were acquired with Cell Quest Pro software (BD Biosciences).

## Protein extraction and Western blot analysis
Whole-cell extracts were prepared in RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1% Nonidet P-40 (NP40), 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (1 mM PMSF, 1x cOmplete cocktail, 50 mM β-glycerolphosphate, 5 mM NaF, 15 mM PNP and 0.1 mM Na3VO4) at 4°C for 20 min. Extracts were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min and protein concentration was determined using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Proteins were separated in SDS-PAGE gels and electroblotted onto nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were probed with specific antibodies at the dilutions indicated in . For chemiluminescence detection, antibodies were prepared and membranes incubated in 5% milk in Tris-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween 20 (TBS-T) or in 5% milk in PBS with 0.1% Tween 20 (PBS-T) at RT for 1 h. For fluorescence detection, membranes were blocked in Intercept (PBS) Blocking Buffer (LI-COR) at RT for 1 h and antibodies were diluted in the Intercept (PBS) Blocking Buffer with 0.1% Tween 20. Membranes were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibody and 2h at RT with secondary antibody. Protein expression levels were detected by chemiluminescence using WesternBright ECL reagents (Advansta) and the ChemiDoc MP system or by fluorescence with an Odyssey CLx Imaging System.

## RNA extraction, reverse transcription and real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR)
Total RNA for RNAseq and RT-qPCR experiments was extracted using the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen) and then treated with RNase-free DNase I (Qiagen). For RT-qPCR analyses, cDNA was generated using 2 μg of RNA and the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems) in a final volume of 20 μl. RT-qPCRs were carried out in 10 μl final volume, using 2 μl of a 1:10 dilution of the cDNA as a template, 5 μl of iTaq Universal SYBBR Green Supermix (BioRad) and oligonucleotides at 500 nM. RT-qPCR quantifications were carried out with the QuantStudio System (Applied Biosystems). The thermal cycling protocol included an initial 20 sec denaturation step at 95°C, followed by 40 amplification cycles of 1 sec at 95°C and 20 sec at 60°C, and a final melting curve from 60°C to 95°C at a 0.5°C/sec rate. Values were normalized to the expression of the GAPDH reference gene. At least three independent replicates of every experiment and three technical replicates of each sample were performed. Sequences of all oligonucleotides used are listed in .

## RNA-seq data sequencing and processing
Two independent replicates were performed for each RNA-seq experiment. Libraries were prepared and sequenced at the Genomic Unit of the Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine (CABIMER) (https://www.cabimer.es/en/core-facilities/) using an Illumina NovaSeq6000 to obtain 75 bp paired-end reads. Samples were filtered, trimmed and de-multiplexed with Illumina FastQ Generation. Data were analyzed using Galaxy Server (https://usegalaxy.eu). Paired-end FASTQ datasets for each RNA-seq experiment were concatenated with the “Concatenate datasets tail-to-head (cat)” tool. Sequencing reads were then aligned to human (Homo sapiens (b38): hg38) reference genome assembly using “Hisat2”. Number of reads per gene were estimated with the “featureCounts” tool. Subsequent differential gene expression (DGE) analyses were carried out using “DeSeq2” and the parental RPE-1 cell line as a reference. Both count files corresponding to each of the independent replicates were used for each RNA-seq experiment in all DGE comparisons. Normalized counts and Z-scores for DE genes were visualized with “heatmap2”. Alignment of reads to calculate genome coverage (bedgraph files) was performed using the “bamCoverage” tool. Transcriptional maps from RNA-seq data were generated with the “Wig/BedGraph-to-bigWig” tool on Galaxy Server and visualized in UCSC Browser (https://genome.ucsc.edu/).

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
Control and tetracycline-inducible RPE-1 cells were harvested by centrifugation at 300 g for 5 min and cell pellets were homogenized in cold PBS and cross-linked for 10 min at RT in 1% formaldehyde using a rotator. Reaction was stopped by adding glycine to a final 0.125 M concentration for 5 min at RT. Fixed cells were washed with cold PBS, pelleted by centrifugation and lysed for 20 min in ice-cold lysis buffer (100 mM NaCl, 66 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 5 mM EDTA, 0.3% SDS, 1.6% Triton X-100) with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (PMSF (Sigma-Aldrich), cOmplete cocktail (Roche) and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3 (Sigma-Aldrich)). Lysates were passed through a 23G needle and chromatin was fragmented by sonication using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) and the following settings: 15-20 cycles, 30 s ON, 30 s OFF, high intensity. Sonicated chromatin was centrifuged at 14,000 g and 4°C for 10 min, and the supernatant was isolated for subsequent steps. As an internal control, Drosophila S2 sonicated chromatin was added at a 0.5% proportion to total RPE-1 chromatin. For each ChIP, 30 μg of chromatin were diluted up to 500 μl in dialysis buffer (4% glycerol, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, pH 8) with protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and 400 μl of incubation buffer (2.5% Triton X-20, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.25% SDS, 0.35 M NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8), also including inhibitors, were next added. 1/100 of the total volume was kept apart for INPUT samples, and the rest of the chromatin was incubated overnight with a phospho-histone H3 (Ser10) antibody (17-685, Sigma-Aldrich) at 4°C. In parallel, 50 μl of Dynabeads Protein G (Thermo Fisher Scientific) per ChIP were washed overnight at 4°C with RIPA buffer (140 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, pH 8). Once pre-washed, protein G beads were added to chromatin samples and incubated at 4°C for 3 h on a rotating platform. Samples were cleansed 3 times in RIPA buffer, 4 times in RIPA buffer with 0.5 M NaCl, once in LiCl buffer (250 mM LiCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate; pH 8) and twice in 1x TE (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA; pH 8). All buffers were supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and washes were carried out for 5 min at 4°C on a rotating platform. Beads and INPUTs samples were resuspended in 100 μl 1x TE and incubated in 0.05 mg/ml DNase-free RNase A for 30 min at 37°C. SDS was next added to a final 0.5% concentration and samples were incubated with 0.5 mg/ml proteinase K for 10 h at 37°C. DNA was finally de-crosslinked with a 6 h incubation at 65°C and purified using the MinElute PCR purification kit (QIAGEN).

## ChIP-seq data sequencing and processing
For all ChIP-seq experiments, two independent replicates were carried out. Libraries were prepared and sequenced at the Genomic Unit of CABIMER (https://www.cabimer.es/en/core-facilities/) using an Illumina NovaSeq6000 to obtain 50 bp paired-end reads. Samples were de-multiplexed and trimmed with Illumina FastQ Generation. Mapping and subsequent analysis of the data were performed using Galaxy Server (https://usegalaxy.eu) and custom R scripts. Reads were mapped to human genome (GRCh38/hg38) and D. melanogaster genome (BDGP R5/dm3) assemblies using “Bowtie” and “-m1--best” parameters. PCR duplicates were removed using the “RmDup” tool with default parameters. BAM files from the two replicates of the same experiment were finally merged with the “Merge BAM Files” tool, summing the reads of each independent replicate, and then analyzed together in subsequent analysis. Genome coverage (bedgraph files) was calculated using the “bedtools Genome Coverage” tool with default parameters and normalized with D. melanogaster reads to perform spike-in normalization (RRPM), as described elsewhere. Maps were generated using the “Wig/BedGraph-to-bigWig” tool on Galaxy Server and visualized in UCSC Browser (https://genome.ucsc.edu/).

## Genome-wide ChIP-seq analyses
Genome-wide ChIP-seq analyses were conducted considering 15,718 genes from Ensembl (Ensembl Genes 108) and ensuring a minimum spacing of 2 kb between each other. Peak calling was performed in Galaxy using MACS2 software and the “Call peaks” function with default settings. Next, MACS peaks that were closer than 100 kb were merged using MergeBED from bedtools. For the analysis of H3S10P levels at promoters of DE genes, all Ensembl genes were considered. Promoters were defined as 1 kb or 500 bp upstream of the transcription start site (TSS), as indicated in each case, while the gene body spanned 1 kb from the TSS to the transcription end site (TES). Intergenic regions were defined as areas of the genome not overlapping with the promoter, gene bodies or cis-regulatory elements (cCRE elements), as detailed elsewhere. To calculate H3S10P enrichment in each chromosome, genome was divided in 1 kb non-overlapping windows using “bedtools MakeWindowsBed” with “-s 1001” parameters. RRPM reads were summed in each of the 1 kb genome windows by using “bedtools MapBed”. Quantification of H3S10P levels at promoters of DEGs represents the mean of RRPM reads in each promoter. For the rest of analyses, RRPM scores were divided to the length of the genome feature respectively analyzed to obtain the Relative Fragments per Kilobase Count Million (RFPKM) value. To assess differential enrichment at promoters, gene bodies and intergenic regions, RFPKMs were summed at each of these locations. All average profiles were generated with deepTools. In analyses using H3S10P peaks, average profiles were centered at the middle of the peak. For the analysis of H3S10P at DE genes, data was centered over genes and genes were scaled to 1000 bp to correct for gene length differences. For ChIP-seq and RNA-seq combined analyses, RFPKM from ChIP-seq studies were summed from the TSS to the TES for the up- and down-regulated genes that were previously defined in RNA-seq analyses. Only those genes included both in the gene table used for ChIP-seq experiments and in that employed for RNA-seq studies were considered for the combined analyses. All boxplots were generated with custom R scripts, where the bottom and the top of boxes indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively, and the middle line designates the median. Whiskers indicate the lowest and highest data points within 1.5x interquartile range from the box.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Details of the statistical analysis for each experiment, including the specific test used, the precise measure to estimate the variation within each group of data and the exact value of n, can be found in the figure legends. Statistically significant (∗∗∗, p < 0.001; ∗∗, p < 0.01; ∗, p < 0.05) or no significant (n.s.) differences are indicated in the corresponding graphs. For ChIP-seq analyses, more stringent statistically significant values (∗∗∗, p < 0.0005; ∗∗, p < 0.005; ∗, p < 0.05) were considered.

Published: May 22, 2025

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.112731.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6 and Tables S1–S5

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Video S1. Cyclin B1 dynamics in an RPE-1 control cell, related to Figure 2
Fluorescence microscopy analysis of the distribution of a mEmerald-tagged version of Cyclin B1 (CycB, in green) and the DNA (SiR-DNA, in pink) in an RPE-1 control cell, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium. Merged and bright-field images are additionally included. The time from CycB translocation into the nucleus at mitotic onset (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 2C.

## Video S2. Cyclin B1 dynamics in an RPE-1 cell overexpressing Aurora B and INCENP, related to Figure 2
Fluorescence microscopy analysis of the distribution of a mEmerald-tagged version of Cyclin B1 (CycB) and the DNA (SiR-DNA, in pink) in an RPE-1 cell carrying a bicistronic construct that comprises an extra copy of both the INCENP and the AURKB genes linked by a sequence encoding a P2A “self-cleaving” oligopeptide and under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. Merged and bright-field images are additionally included. The time from CycB translocation into the nucleus at mitotic onset (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are shown also in Figure 2C.

## Video S3. Live cell imaging of a dividing RPE-1 control cell, related to Figure 2
Light microscopy evaluation of the dynamics of cell division in an RPE-1 control cell, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium. The white arrow denotes metaphase plate formation. The time from initial establishment of the metaphase plate (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 2E.

## Video S4. Live cell imaging of a dividing RPE-1 cell overexpressing Aurora B, related to Figure 2
Light microscopy evaluation of the dynamics of cell division in an RPE-1 cell carrying an extra copy of the AURKB gene under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. The white arrow denotes metaphase plate formation. The time from initial establishment of the metaphase plate (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 2E.

## Video S5. Live cell imaging of a dividing RPE-1 cell overexpressing INCENP, related to Figure 2
Light microscopy evaluation of the dynamics of cell division in an RPE-1 cell carrying an extra copy of the INCENP gene under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. The white arrow denotes metaphase plate formation. The time from initial establishment of the metaphase plate (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 2E.

## Video S6. Live cell imaging of a dividing RPE-1 cell overexpressing Aurora B and INCENP, related to Figure 2
Light microscopy evaluation of the dynamics of cell division in an RPE-1 cell carrying a bicistronic construct that comprises an extra copy of both the INCENP and the AURKB genes linked by a sequence encoding a P2A “self-cleaving” oligopeptide and under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. The white arrow denotes metaphase plate formation. The time from initial establishment of the metaphase plate (t = 0 min) is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 2E.

## Video S7. Mad2 localization onto kinetochores in an RPE-1 control cell, related to Figure 3
Fluorescence microscopy analysis of the distribution of a Mad2-Ruby fusion (in red) in an RPE-1 control cell also expressing the kinetochore marker Mis12 tagged with iRP670 (in blue), 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium. An image showing the overlap between the Mad2-Ruby and Mis12-iRP670 signal, as well as merged and bright-field images are additionally included. The time from initial recording of the video is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 3F.

## Video S8. Mad2 localization onto kinetochores in an RPE-1 cell overexpressing Aurora B and INCENP, related to Figure 3
Fluorescence microscopy analysis of the distribution of a Mad2-Ruby fusion (in red) in an RPE-1 cell also expressing the kinetochore marker Mis12 tagged with iRP670 (in blue) and carrying a bicistronic construct that comprises an extra copy of both the INCENP and the AURKB genes linked by a sequence encoding a P2A “self-cleaving” oligopeptide and under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. An image showing the overlap between the Mad2-Ruby and Mis12-iRP670 signal, as well as merged and bright-field images are additionally included. The time from initial recording of the video is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure 3G.

## Video S9. Incorrectly attached chromosome in an RPE-1 cell overexpressing Aurora B and INCENP, related to Figure S2
Fluorescence microscopy analysis of the distribution of a Mad2-Ruby fusion (in red) in an RPE-1 cell also expressing the kinetochore marker Mis12 tagged with iRP670 (in blue) and carrying a bicistronic construct that comprises an extra copy of both the INCENP and the AURKB genes linked by a sequence encoding a P2A “self-cleaving” oligopeptide and under control of the TET promoter, 32 h after 2 μg/mL tetracycline was added to the medium to induce protein overexpression. An image showing the overlap between the Mad2-Ruby and Mis12-iRP670 signal, as well as merged and bright-field images are additionally included. The time from initial recording of the video is stamped in each frame. Selected pictures from the complete time course displayed in this video are also shown in Figure S2D.

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6 and Tables S1–S5

## Data Availability Statement
All data are available in the main text and . Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this study is available from the upon reasonable request. This paper does not report original code. Data generated in RNA-seq and ChIP-seq experiments have been deposited at Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and are publicly available. GEO accession numbers are listed in the .