pmceLifeElife1894elifeeLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC11186637PMC11186637.111186637111866373860217010.7554/eLife.85964859641version of recordResearch ArticleCell BiologyStatin-mediated reduction in mitochondrial cholesterol primes an anti-inflammatory response in macrophages by upregulating Jmjd3
SalloumZeinahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-5216-8601 ). In atherosclerosis, macrophages are overloaded with cholesterol and are inflamed, which causes lesion formation ( ). Statins, by inhibiting cholesterol biosynthesis and upregulating low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor expression in hepatocytes and other cells, lower the level of circulating LDL. This leads to a decrease in the amount of cholesterol in peripheral tissues including macrophages ( ; ; ; ). Statins reduce inflammation, but the mechanism for this effect is yet to be defined ( ). Previously, we and others have observed that the level of cholesterol in resting macrophages, i.e., prior to stimulation, correlates directly with their pattern of inflammatory activation ( ; ; ). For instance, when encountering lipopolysaccharides (LPS), cholesterol-rich macrophages release more inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-6, and IL12p40, and less anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, relative to control macrophages. Conversely, macrophages with reduced cholesterol content, such as those expressing ABCA1/G1 or being treated with statins, express fewer inflammatory cytokines, and more IL-10 upon identical LPS exposure ( ; ; ). Noticeably, this association of cholesterol with specific type of macrophage inflammation is observed with multiple inflammatory stimuli, including ligands to TLR2, 3, 4, and other TLRs ( ), implying a shared background in resting macrophages. It is known that, in order to mount a timely and vigorous defence against pathogens, macrophages activate several hundred genes immediately after sensing danger signals ( ). This is achieved by employing a few select signal-dependent transcription factors, such as NF-κB, on a genome that is largely poised, i.e., epigenetically configured, prior the stimulation ( ). The organization of the epigenome in macrophages is initially defined by lineage-determining transcription factors and subsequently by metabolic/environmental cues, including those experienced in the past ( ; ). This forms a poised state in resting macrophages and allows the expression of context-dependent inflammatory genes ( ; ). We therefore speculate that cholesterol levels may directly influence the epigenome in resting macrophages, thereby influencing the inflammatory phenotype upon activation.

## Results

## Reducing cholesterol levels in macrophages activates the NF-κB pathway and upregulates Jmjd3, a histone demethylase
To test whether cholesterol levels alone can produce factors that change the epigenetic configuration in macrophages, we first treated RAW macrophages with statins. Lovastatin, compactin, simvastatin, and pravastatin were used exchangeably throughout the study without significant differences in results. Cells were treated with statins for 2 days, reducing cellular cholesterol by about 30% ( ; ). We also used methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MCD) 1-hr treatment to acutely reduce cholesterol by a similar amount ( ). This was to verify the cholesterol specificity of statins’ effects and also to provide a 1-hr protocol for inhibitor studies. RNA-seq was performed at the end of statin- or MCD-based treatments. As shown in , macrophages treated with statins altered the expression of a large number of genes (log2 >1) ( ; ; the top 40 upregulated genes: ). We applied the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to all differentially expressed genes (DEGs; up- and downregulation), using the Hallmark genes database ( ). Genes of the NF-κB pathway activated by TNFα were the most highly represented group upon statin treatment ( ). Similarly, MCD-treated macrophages showed an identical, highly represented group, i.e., NF-κB pathway activated by TNFα ( ; ). The top 40 upregulated genes are in . This analysis suggests that cholesterol depletion induces activation of NF-κB pathways in macrophages. Additional analysis, using a mouse transcriptional regulatory network database ( ; ), also identified the Nfkb1 as the top transcription factor (TF) in the promoters of genes upregulated by statins or MCD treatment ( ). Genes downregulated by statins, on another hand, are less enriched in TFs ( ). In fact, MCD treatment produced no enrichment of TFs among downregulated genes. Together, the RNA-sequencing data suggest that reducing cholesterol in macrophages primarily activates NF-κB pathways to enhance gene expression.
 
 
 
 We investigated several known NF-κB target genes using qPCR and noted that Kdm6b, encoding the H3K27me3 demethylase Jmjd3 ( ), was among the upregulated genes ( ). Both statins and MCD enhanced Jmjd3 expression ( ). This upregulation was abolished by several structurally unrelated NF-κB inhibitors ( and ), confirming that Jmjd3 is a NF-κB target ( ). We further confirmed that JMJD3 protein level is increased ( ) and that the level of H3K27me3, the substrate of JMJD3, is reciprocally decreased in MCD-treated macrophages - with reduced cholesterol ( ). The elevated level of phosphorylated Creb (pCreb) is an indicator of effective cholesterol reduction ( ). Similar results were seen in macrophages treated with statins ( ). In addition, mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) responded to cholesterol reduction identically: Jmjd3 is upregulated by statins or MCD in an NF-κB-dependent manner ( ). Lastly, to verify the specificity of cholesterol in Jmjd3 upregulation, MCD/cholesterol complex was used to replenish cellular cholesterol in MCD-treated BMDMs. This reversed the Jmjd3 upregulation by cholesterol reduction in BMDMs ( ). We conclude that statin/MCD upregulates Jmjd3 in macrophages likely through cholesterol reduction and NF-κB activation.

## Reducing cholesterol in macrophages directly activates NF-κB
GSEA above identifies the NF-κB pathway as the top activated biological process in both statin- and MCD-treated macrophages ( ). We thus directly examined NF-κB activities in macrophages treated with statins or MCD. Using RAW-Blue cells containing an NF-κB reporter ( ), we observed elevated NF-κB activity when cells were treated with MCD or statins ( ). In addition, two known NF-κB target genes, ll1b and Tnfa, were upregulated by MCD and statins, respectively ( ). Furthermore, blocking NF-κB function by inhibitors prevented the upregulation of Il1b and Tnfa by MCD ( ). Lastly, to understand the scope of NF-κB activation by statins or MCD, we directly compared the magnitude of Il1b and Tnfa expression by statins or MCD, with those by LPS. The effect of statins or MCD is much weaker than LPS: the changes in Il1b and Tnfa levels of expression by statin/MCD are less than 1% of those stimulated by LPS ( ). We conclude that cholesterol reduction in macrophages likely activates NF-κB. However, this activation of NF-κB is of low magnitude, and distinct from the more robust NF-κB activation stimulated by LPS.
 

## Reducing cholesterol in macrophages decreases mitochondria respiration
We next explored potential mechanisms by which cholesterol reduction with statin/MCD activates NF-κB. In recent years, it has become evident that NF-κB can be activated by a metabolic shift in the cell from oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) in the mitochondria to glycolysis in the cytoplasm ( ; ). We therefore investigated whether statin/MCD modulates OXPHOS in macrophages to activate NF-κB. Using the extracellular flux analyzer (Seahorse), we found that 1 hr MCD treatment of BMDMs decreased overall resting mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate (OCR) ( ). Moreover, this decrease was entirely attributable to the suppression of the ATP synthase ( ), a protein embedded in the inner mitochondrial membrane (IMM) and a component of electron transport chain. Interestingly, the maximal respiration remains unchanged by MCD ( ). Statin treatment similarly decreased overall resting mitochondrial OCR ( ) and that of ATP synthase ( ). However, statins also lowered the maximal respiration ( ), possibly due to the 2-day treatment period required for the statin treatment. Overall, statin or MCD suppresses ATP synthase in macrophages.
 

## Reducing cholesterol in macrophages results in lower cholesterol level in IMM, which suppresses ATP synthase activity
We next asked how cholesterol reduction by statin/MCD might influence the ATP synthase in the IMM. In mammalian cells, the majority of cholesterol is in the plasma membrane. However, all intracellular membranes, including those in the mitochondria, also contain cholesterol ( ). Cholesterol distribution among cellular membranes is governed by a dynamic steady state ( ), such that reduction in total cellular cholesterol content by statin or MCD will decrease cholesterol levels in all membranes, including those in the mitochondria ( ). Levels of IMM cholesterol can be assessed by the activity of an IMM enzyme, sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27A1), which catalyzes the conversion of cholesterol to 27-hydroxycholesterol (27-HC) as a function of cholesterol availability in IMM ( ). The amount of 27-HC in macrophages thus directly reflects IMM cholesterol levels, if CYP27A1 remains constant ( ). We found that Cyp27a1 levels are significantly reduced by 2-day statin treatment ( ) but remain steady after 1-hr MCD treatment ( ). We thus analyzed 27-HC contents by mass spectrometry on MCD-treated macrophages to assess the cholesterol levels in IMM. We found that the amount of cellular 27-HC was decreased in a dose-dependent manner after a 1-hr MCD treatment ( ), indicating a reduction in cholesterol levels in IMM by MCD. Statins decrease total cholesterol content in macrophages similar to MCD ( ), which should then similarly lower cholesterol levels in IMM, even though this particularly assay could not be applied due to the changes in Cyp27a1 expression described above.
 
To understand precisely how cholesterol levels in the IMM might influence ATP synthase functions, we used an in vitro membrane system composed of mitochondria inner membrane vesicles (IMVs) from Escherichia coli ( ). E. coli inner membrane shares common features with those from mammalian cells ( ), including ATP synthase functions ( ), but lacks cholesterol or any other sterol derivative in their lipid composition ( ). Various levels of cholesterol can be incorporated into the IMVs to assess the impact of cholesterol ( ). With this system, we observed that the activity of the ATP synthase, both in synthesis and hydrolysis mode, is highly sensitive to cholesterol concentration in the membrane: the highest activity is found in IMV with membrane containing 7% cholesterol; decreasing cholesterol from 7% cholesterol suppresses ATP synthase activities ( ). The steady-state IMM cholesterol level in mammalian cells is about 5% ( ). If MCD reduces cholesterol in IMM, as we show above ( ), ATP synthase activity should be suppressed, as we have seen in OCR ( ). Therefore, the in vitro experimental model is consistent with the notion that MCD lowers cholesterol in the IMM, which suppresses ATP synthase activity.

## Reducing cholesterol levels in macrophages alters proton gradients in the mitochondria to activate NF-κB and upregulate Jmjd3
We next studied the potential role of suppressed ATP synthase on NF-κB activation and Jmjd3 upregulation. ATP synthase in the IMM uses proton flow from the inner space to the matrix to generate ATP ( ). As shown by extracellular flux analysis ( ), MCD suppresses the activity of ATP synthase. This will lead to fewer protons flowing down from the inner space into the matrix and, consequently, more protons will be retained in the inner space in MCD-treated macrophages ( ), which could activate NF-κB ( ). We tested this using carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazine (CCCP), a mitochondrial proton ionophore that prevents proton buildup in the inner space ( ; ). Indeed, in the presence of CCCP, MCD failed to activate NF-κB ( ). CCCP also prevented MCD from upregulating IL-1β ( ). In addition, it abolished Jmjd3 upregulation by MCD in RAW macrophages and BMDMs ( ), while cells remained fully viable ( ). Moreover, another structurally unrelated mitochondrion proton ionophore BAM15 ( ) similarly abolished MCD-induced Il1b and Jmjd3 expression ( ). We conclude that reducing cholesterol in macrophages suppresses ATP synthetase activity in the IMM, which likely activates NF-κB and upregulates Jmjd3.
 

## Reducing cholesterol in macrophages alters chromatin structure
The NF-κB target gene Jmjd3 primarily functions to demethylate H3K27me3, an abundant epigenetic mark associated with transcriptional repression ( ). The upregulation of Jmjd3 by statin/MCD is expected to decrease H3K27me3 levels, which should have an impact on the macrophage epigenome. We performed the assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with sequencing (ATAC-seq) to compare the transposase accessibility with or without MCD. We observed that MCD treatment significantly altered the genomic locations of open/close chromatin in macrophages ( and ). Consistent with our RNA-seq studies, GSEA of all genes showing altered chromatin accessibility upon MCD treatment identified NF-κB pathway as the top biological process ( ). We also analyzed genes being opened by MCD: they predominantly have NF-κB family of TFs in promoters ( ). We then compared ATAC-seq with RNA-seq and identified overlaps genes, i.e., increased accessibility to transposase and higher expression ( ). Noticeably, Jmjd3, Il1b, and Tnfa are among those. Also, Jmjd3 is the only gene with epigenetic modification function. The details of Il1b and Tnfa are shown in . We conclude that the epigenome is altered by cholesterol reduction in macrophages.
 

## Reducing cholesterol promotes anti-inflammatory responses in activated macrophages
The reconfigured epigenome upon cholesterol depletion could poise resting macrophages for different inflammatory responses. We therefore tested inflammatory responses in statin-treated macrophages with LPS (classically activated or M1 phenotype) or with IL-4 (alternatively activated or M2 phenotype). Macrophages were treated with statins or without and then stimulated by LPS. RNA-seq was performed. Cholesterol reduction by statins altered a large number of genes, up or down, in LPS-stimulated macrophages ( ; ). Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of genes with decreased expression upon statin treatment revealed that statins primarily suppress inflammatory processes ( ), while genes involved in cellular homeostatic functions were upregulated ( ). More specifically, in BMDMs activated by LPS, statin treatment led to suppressed expression of proinflammatory cytokines (Il1b, Tnfa, Il6, and Il12), but enhanced expression of anti-inflammatory cytokine Il10 ( ). When BMDMs were activated alternatively by IL-4, statin treatment promoted the expression of IL-4 target genes Arg1, Ym1, and Mrc1 ( ). The enhanced expression of the anti-inflammatory genes (Arg1, Ym1, Mrc1, and Il10) by statins in activated macrophages, both M1 and M2, was also correlated with the removal of H3K27me3, a repressive marker and the substrate of JMJD3 in resting macrophages ( ). Thus, experimental evidence supports the notion that cholesterol reduction by statins in macrophages leads to less proinflammatory responses to LPS, but higher expression of anti-inflammatory genes, such as these activated by IL-4, correlated with H3K27me3 removal ( ).
 

## Anti-inflammatory responses by cholesterol reduction in macrophages rely on Jmjd3 and its demethylase activities
Jmjd3 belongs to the JmjC demethylase family that requires α-ketoglutarate (α-KG) as co-factor to demethylate histone ( ). Noticeably, Jmjd3 (Kdm6b) is the only gene member of the JmjC family upregulated by MCD in macrophages and, importantly, the expression of closely related Utx (Kdm6a) is not changed by cholesterol reduction ( ). This presented an opportunity to specifically probe the involvement of Jmjd3 demethylation activity in suppressing Tnfa yet raising Il10 expression by MCD. Jmjd3 expression is increased with MCD in a concentration-dependent manner ( ). When subsequently stimulated by LPS, MCD-treated macrophages dose-dependently express less Tnfa, but more Il10: the ratio of Il10/Tnfa rises with MCD concentrations ( , white bars). However, if glutamine, the precursor of α-KG ( ), is absent in the medium, there is little change in the ratio of Il10/Tnfa ( , black bars), regardless of MCD concentration. Furthermore, if the demethylase activity of Jmjd3 is inhibited by a specific inhibitor GSKj4 ( ), the ratio of Il10/Tnfa also failed to rise upon MCD treatment ( ). BMDMs similarly modify their response upon glutamine availability. When stimulated by LPS, MCD-treated BMDMs rise Il10/Tnfa ratio, dependent on glutamine: Il10/Tnfa fails to increase by MCD in the absence of glutamine ( ). Glutamine is also necessary for MCD to boost IL-4-targeted Arg1 ( ). We next used shRNA to knockdown Jmjd3 (Jmjd3 KD) ( ) and tested its impact on statin-treated macrophages. When activated by LPS, statin-treated Jmjd3 KD macrophage failed to raise Il10/Tnfa ratio ( ). Jmkd3 KD also abolished the rise of Arg1 by statin when stimulated by IL-4 ( ). Together, we conclude that Jmjd3 and its demethylase activity are necessary to promote the expression of anti-inflammatory elements upon cholesterol in macrophages.
 
 

## Statin treatment vivo also reduces cholesterol content, upregulates Jmjd3, and promotes anti inflammatory gene expression in macrophages
To test the in vivo effect of statins on macrophages, mice were fed with statins or not for 14 days and the peritoneal macrophages were isolated ( ) and tested for inflammatory responses. The cholesterol content was decreased by about 20% in freshly isolated peritoneal macrophages from statin-fed mice, compared to those from control animals ( ). Expression of Jmjd3 was upregulated by statin feeding ( ). When subsequently challenged by LPS, macrophages from statin-fed mice showed lower expression of proinflammatory cytokines (Il1b, Tnfa, Il6, and Il12), and enhanced expression of anti-inflammatory cytokine Il10, relative to those from controls ( ). In addition, when activated alternatively by IL-4, macrophages from statin-fed mice expressed higher levels of Arg1, Ym1, and Mrc1, compared to these from controls ( ). Thus, statin treatment in vivo decreases cholesterol content, upregulates Jmjd3, and promotes anti-inflammatory functions in freshly isolated peritoneal macrophages, in an identical fashion to that of BMDMs treated in vitro with statins ( ).
 

## Discussion
In this study, we show that reducing cholesterol in macrophages, either with statins or MCD, upregulates Jmjd3 through suppressing mitochondria respiration. Cholesterol reduction also modifies the epigenome in macrophages. Upon subsequent activation by either M1 or M2 stimuli, statin-treated macrophages are phenotypically more anti-inflammatory. This anti-inflammatory phenotype is also observed in peritoneal macrophages freshly isolated from statin-treated mice.
We speculate that Jmid3 is the key responsible factor. Macrophages have two H3K27me3 demethylases, Utx and Jmjd3. Only Jmjd3 is upregulated by statin or MCD. It is plausible that Jmjd3, by removing H3K27me3 from ll10, Arg1, Yam1, and Mrc1, poises these genes in resting macrophages to promote their activated expression. On the other hand, statins suppress a large group of proinflammatory genes activated by LPS, which could not directly be attributed to Jmjd3. However, Il10 is poised by Jmjd3 and shows higher expression upon LPS stimulation. It could be that upregulation of Il10 leads to the suppression of the proinflammatory phenotype under LPS activation. Recent studies have shown that endogenously produced IL-10, through autocrine/paracrine mechanisms, modulates mitochondria respiration to inhibit cellular events, such as glycolysis and mTORC1. This suppresses the expression of proinflammatory genes ( ; ). The elevated Il10 expression in statin-/MCD-treated macrophages could play a similar role to suppress the proinflammatory phenotypes. Of note, this current study focuses mostly on the regulation of gene expression. The ultimate impact of statins on inflammation should be confirmed at the protein level in future studies.
We also document that reducing the level of macrophage cholesterol alters the epigenome, concurrent with Jmjd3 upregulation. Removing H3K27me3 by JMJD3 could open certain genome regions and contribute to the changes in the epigenome seen in ATAC-seq. However, the changes we observed are much more profound, indicating that other epigenetic modifiers, are activated by cholesterol reduction. Future studies will be required to identify these modifiers. Nevertheless, several lines of evidence support the notion that Jmjd3 is most relevant to inflammatory activation. First of all, only Jmjd3, among the members of the JmjC demethylase family, is upregulated by statin or MCD. Utx, also a H3K27me3 demethylase, is not altered by statin or MCD. Second, the JmjC demethylase family members require glutamine, the source of alpha-ketoglutarate, for demethylation. Since Jmjd3 is the only upregulated demethylase, glutamine could be used to specifically probe Jmjd3 demethylation function in macrophages M1/M2 activation. Glutamine is indeed necessary for MCD to modulate both LPS and IL-4 activation. Third, GSKj4, the inhibitor for H3K27me3 demethylases (Utx and Jmjd3), abolishes the MCD effect. Furthermore, knockdown of Jmjd3 by shRNA diminishes the effect of statins on LPS or IL-4 activations. Thus, the upregulation of Jmjd3 by statin/MCD significantly contributes to poise the epigenome in resting macrophages, which controls the subsequent inflammatory response to LPS or IL-4.
Our results here support the notion that the epigenome in resting macrophages is largely poised for inflammatory activation ( ). This also agrees with previous studies where cholesterol reduction was shown to decrease proinflammatory responses to multiple stimuli against multiple TLRs ( ). We have focused on classically activated (M1) and alternatively activated (M2) phenotypes, two extremes of inflammatory activation in macrophages. This could be an experimental starting point, since macrophages likely encounter a wide range of stimuli within a continuum between M1 and M2 phenotypes. The poised epigenome in resting macrophages, i.e., prior to activation, may serve as an initial blueprint to propel the activated inflammatory responses. In addition, the inflammation processes are thought to initially engage the M1 phenotype to fight pathogens and then gradually gain the M2 phenotype to restrain excessive damage and restore tissue homeostasis ( ).
Another novel finding here is that the level of cellular cholesterol directly controls mitochondria respiration. Except for specialized cell types (i.e., steroidogenic cells), the mitochondrial cholesterol in mammalian cells is in equilibrium with overall cellular cholesterol and, as such, fluctuates with cellular cholesterol through a dynamic steady state ( ). Our study here for the first time suggests the mitochondrial membrane as a locus sensing the cellular cholesterol level, which in turn contributes to the regulation of metabolic processes and gene expression. This is somewhat analogous to the regulation of sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBP) pathways by the cellular cholesterol level through the endoplasmic reticulum membrane ( ). We speculate that the mitochondria likely function far beyond the traditionally called powerhouse that produces ATP ( ).
Macrophages are a major component in both the innate and adaptive immune systems. The anti-inflammatory effect of statins is essentially due to their primary pharmacological action discovered in 1970s, i.e., the inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase ( ), decreasing the level of circulating LDL and inhibiting de novo synthesis of cholesterol in the macrophages themselves. Macrophages with less cholesterol are anti-inflammatory, thereby contributing to the anti-inflammatory action of statins.

## Materials and methods

## Reagents and chemicals
Cell culture Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) was purchased from Gibco (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watham, MA). Antibiotics (penicillin and streptomycin) and fatty acid-free bovine serum albumin (BSA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO). Fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Optima) was purchased from Atlanta Biologicals (R&D systems; Minneapolis, MN). As for the chemicals, the following inhibitors: MG-132 (proteasome inhibitor), BAY11-7082 (IKK inhibitor), and BAM15 (another mitochondrial uncoupler) were purchased from TOCRIS chemicals (part of R&D systems). MCD, simvastatin, mevalonate, oligomycin, rotenone, antimycin A, carbonyl cyanide 3-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP), 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. For the IMVs study, magnesium chloride (MgCl2), 2-(N-morpholino) ethanesulfonic (MES), sucrose, hexane, BSA, sulfuric acid (H2SO4), hydrochloric acid 37% (HCl), sodium chloride (NaCl), potassium chloride (KCl), dibasic potassium phosphate (K2HPO4), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), trichloroacetic acid (TCA), adenosine 5′-triphosphate disodium salt hydrate (Na2ATP), adenosine 5′-diphosphate sodium salt (Na2ADP), and cholesterol were also supplied by Sigma-Aldrich. Ammonium molybdate (VI) tetrahydrate and L-ascorbic acid were purchased from Acros Organics (part of Sigma-Aldrich). Ultrapure water was produced from a Milli-Q unit (Millipore, conductivity lower than 18 MΩ cm). Rabbit anti-mouse JMJD3 primary antibody was lab-generated as described in . The following antibodies were acquired from several vendors: mouse monoclonal anti-β-actin antibody (A1978) from Sigma-Aldrich, rabbit anti-mouse pCREB (87G3), rabbit anti-mouse CREB (86B10), and rabbit anti-mouse Tri-Methyl-Histone H3 (Lys27) antibodies were from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). The secondary antibody Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody was from Cayman chemicals (Ann Arbor, MI). The enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) solutions for the western blotting system were from GE Healthcare (Chicago, IL). The protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.

## RAW264.7
RAW 264.7 TIB-71 cells were directly ordered from American Type Collection Culture (ATCC) and authenticated using STR. Cells were tested for ‘Mycoplasma contamination’ by ATCC Cell Authentication Service in October 2023 and result was negative. Cells were maintained in 100-mm diameter tissue culture-treated polystyrene dishes (Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2. The cells were cultured in DMEM-based growth medium containing glutamine and without pyruvate, supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) heat-inactivated FBS and 1× penicillin/streptomycin. For experiments (and routine subculture), cells were collected in growth media after 25-min incubation with Accutase (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2. In preparation for experiments, cells were seeded in 6-well tissue culture-treated polystyrene plates (Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH) at 30,000 cells/cm2 for 2 days until cells have recovered in time for treatments. Unless otherwise indicated, cell treatments were prepared in DMEM supplemented with 0.25% (wt/vol) FA-free BSA that was sterilized by filtration through 0.2 µm pore size cellulose acetate syringe filters. For treatments, cells were washed with pre-warmed sterile PBS and were treated with media containing MCD (5 mM), cell culture-grade water (negative control). Then, the cells were incubated for 1 hr under cell culture conditions. RAW 264.7 macrophages were pre-incubated for 5 min with CCCP (50 µM), 30 min with BAM15 (200 µM), or 1 hr with NF-κB inhibitors (MG-132 [5 µM] or BAY11-7082 [10 µM]).

## Bone marrow-derived macrophages
BMDMs were differentiated from bone marrow cells isolated from the femora, and tibiae of 4- to 16-week-old wild type C57BL/6J mice. Euthanasia was performed by CO2 gas asphyxiation followed by cervical dislocation. Euthanized mice were soaked with 70% (vol/vol) ethanol immediately prior to dissection. After careful isolation of the bones, the ends of the bones were cut with sterile scissors and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 15 s at room temperature in a microcentrifuge (MCT) tube where the bone marrow is collected. The bone marrow is then filtered using sterile, combined and centrifuged at 480 × g for 10 min at room temperature. The cell pellet is resuspended briefly (<2 min) in red blood cell lysis buffer. The differentiation medium (DMEM + 20% L-929-conditioned media + 10% FBS + 1% penicillin–streptomycin) is then added and cells are centrifuged again at 480 × g for 10 min at room temperature. The cell suspension is filtered once more through a 70-µm strainer into another 50 ml centrifuge tube to rinse and collect all the cells. 100-mm diameter suspension dishes (Greiner Bio-One, Monroe, NC) are seeded with 10 ml per dish at 0.6–0.8 × 106 cells/ml (~10,000–15,000 cells/cm2). The dishes were then incubated for 6 days at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2. Differentiation media (10 ml) are added on day 3 or 4.
At the end of day 7, cells are detached with trypsin, counted and reseeded into 6-well plates at 0.5 million cells/well (~50,000 cells/cm2) using 2 ml/well of DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% P/S. Plates are left overnight at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2 to ensure cell adherence. BMDMs are now ready to be used for assays. Similar to RAW264.7 cells, cell treatments were prepared in DMEM supplemented with 0.25% (wt/vol) FA-free BSA. For treatments, cells were washed with pre-warmed sterile PBS and were treated with media containing MCD (5 mM), cell culture-grade water (negative control). Then, the cells were incubated for 1 hr under cell culture conditions.
With either BMDMs or RAW264.7, for LPS or Il-4 stimulation, cells were washed with sterile PBS post MCD or statins treatment and before adding LPS (100 ng/ml) or IL-4 (20 ng/ml) for an additional 3h incubation.

## JMJD3 shRNA preparation
For the JMJD3-shRNA construct, the ShKDM6B-265-Up CCGG CCTCTGTTCTTGAGGGACAAA CTCGAG TTTGTCCCTCAAGAACAGAGG TTTTTG and ShKDM6B-265-Down AATTCAAAAA
CCTCTGTTCTTGAGGGACAAA CTCGAG TTTGTCCCTCAAGAACAGAGG sequences were used to generate lentivirus harboring shRNA or empty Neo (control). The shRNAs were cloned in lab into pLKO.2 Neo plasmid using EcoR1 and AgeI restriction enzymes. The JMJD3 shRNA lentiviral titer was prepared using a polyethylenimine (PEI)-based transfection. Briefly, on day 1 HEK 293T cells were seeded at 8 × 106 cells in 15 cm dishes. On day 2 (transfection day), before the start of transfection, media was removed, cells were washed with media/PBS, then fresh media (media containing 5% FBS) is added. 30 µg total DNA was used (17.5 µg of shRNA) to transfect the cells seeded. OptiMEM media was used to prepare the transfection mix where 1 ml DNA is mixed to 1 ml PEI reagent, and incubated for another 20–30 min. The mix is added gently on to the cells, drop by drop. After overnight incubation, the media is replaced and fresh 5% FBS-containing media is added. The next day, i.e., 46-hr post-transfection, the media is collected. This media will contain virus particles. Fresh media is added and collected after 24 hr, i.e. 70-hr post-transfection. The media collected is pooled to process by ultracentrifugation and collect a concentrated titer of virus particles.

## Jmjd3 knockdown in RAW 264.7 macrophages
RAW 264.7 macrophages were transfected with JMJD3 shRNA lentiviral particles for 18–20 hr and then incubated for 48 hr in growth media (+/−statins). Cells were then stimulated with LPS or IL-4 before DNA extraction and qPCR analysis.

## In vivo statin experiment
C57BL/6J mice were fed the chow diet (WQJX Bio-technology) to which simvastatin (100 mg/kg/day; Merck & Co Inc) added for 14 days. Control animals were fed the chow diet. Peritoneal macrophages were harvested from the mice 4 days after 1.5 ml of thioglycolate broth (Sigma) was injected. Cells were washed with PBS, seeded at a density of 1,000,000 per well into 24-well dishes, incubated for 12 hr in DMEM containing 10% lipoprotein serum deficient (LPSD) and 1 μM simvastatin (to maintain in vivo cholesterol levels). Cells were then stimulated with 100 ng/ml LPS (MedChemExpress) or 20 ng/ml IL-4 (Aladdin), and RNA was isolated for qPCR. Cholesterol contents were analyzed with cholesterol quantification assay kit (Sigma).

## RNA purification and cDNA synthesis
After treatment, the cells were lysed and collected in TRIzol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watham, MA), and frozen at −80°C. Total RNA was extracted by phenol–chloroform extraction, followed by ethanol precipitation. RNA was purified through columns supplied in the Molecular Biology kit (BioBasic Inc, Markham, ON), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA concentrations and purity were determined using a NanoDrop One (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watham, MA) spectrophotometer. cDNA synthesis was performed on the Bio-Rad T100 PCR Gradient Thermal Cycler using the QuantiTect Reverse Transcription kit (QIAGEN, Germantown, MD), following the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR
Gene expression was analyzed by real-time reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR according to the Fast SYBR Green protocol with the AriaMx real-time PCR detection system (Agilent technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Primers were ordered from Invitrogen (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watham, MA) and are listed in . Each condition was prepared in triplicates and each sample was loaded as technical triplicates for each gene (target or reference) analyzed. The mRNA levels of mouse HPRT1 or GAPDH were used as internal controls (reference gene) as indicated.
 

## Immunoblotting
For western blot analysis, MCD-treated RAW 264.7 cells were washed in ice-cold PBS, lysed in radioimmune precipitation assay buffer (150 mm NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, and 25 mm Tris (pH 7.6)) supplemented with a cocktail of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Total cell lysis was achieved through sonication for 20 s at 20% amplitude and samples were stored at −80°C. Histone extraction was performed following a specific protocol from Abcam. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, 5000006). Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer (313 mm Tris (pH 6.8), 10% SDS, 0.05% bromophenol blue, 50% glycerol, and 0.1 m dithiothreitol [DTT]) was added, and the samples were boiled at 100°C for 5 min. Proteins were separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis on 10% acrylamide gels. After separation, proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes and were blocked in 5% milk powder (in PBS, 1% Triton X-100) for 1 hr. Membranes were incubated with the primary antibodies in the following conditions: overnight incubation with the anti-Jmjd3 antibody (1:400) at 4°C, and 1 hr with the anti-H3K27Me3 antibody at room temperature. After washes, blots were further incubated with an HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (1:10 000) for 1 hr. Blots were imaged using ECL-based film detection system.

## MCD/cholesterol (10:1 mol/mol) preparation
Cholesterol (0.3 mmol) of is dissolved in 1 ml chloroform solution and dried under nitrogen in a glass culture tube. 10 ml of a MCD solution (300 mM) prepared in BSA/BSS buffer solution (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 135 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1.8 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 5.6 mM glucose, and 1 mg/ml BSA) was added to the tube, and the resulting suspension was vortexed, and bath sonicated at 37°C until the suspension clarified. The suspension was then incubated in a rocking water bath overnight at 37°C to maximize formation of soluble complexes. This is the stock solution that can be diluted into desired concentrations.

## Macrophage cholesterol depletion and repletion
On the day of experiment, BMDMs are incubated with 5 mM MCD for 1 hr. The cells are rinsed in 0.25% BSA in DMEM and left to rest for 10 min before switching the media to media containing 1 mM MCD/cholesterol complex for 1 hr. RNAs are collected at the end of incubation for Jmjd3 expression. Controls cells will be cells that did not receive MCD nor MCD/cholesterol complex. Triplicate wells are prepared and Jmjd3 expression was determined by RT-PCR.

## NF-κB activation assay
NF-κB activation was determined by performing the QUANTI-Blue assay using the RAW-Blue cells (InvivoGen). Through exposure of the RAW-Blue cells to various substances, NF-κB/AP-1 activation is induced, making secreted embryonic alkaline phosphatase (SEAP) into the cell supernatant. In brief, RAW-Blue cells were seeded in 6-well plates (1.5 × 105 cells/ml) and were allowed to recover for 2 days in growth media (similar to RAW264.7 cells) before they were stimulated with LPS (100 ng/ml) or MCD (5 mM) for 3 hr. Then, the cells and medium for each sample were collected and sonicated on ice for 15 s at 20% amplitude. The supernatant was separated from cell debris by centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min at 10,000 rpm. For detection, the cell supernatant and an SEAP detection reagent (QUANTI-Blue) were mixed and the absorbance was measured at 650 nm as described in the assay instructions. Each condition was performed in triplicate samples and each sample was measured in technical triplicates.

## Mitochondrial oxygen consumption
Cellular OCRs were measured using an extracellular flux analyzer (Seahorse XF96e; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Briefly, the cartridge sensors were incubated overnight at 37°C in a hydration/calibration solution (XF Calibrant; Agilent Technologies). Specially designed polystyrene tissue culture-treated 96-well microplates with a clear flat bottom (Seahorse XF96 V3 PS Cell Culture Microplates; Agilent Technologies) were then seeded with 80 µl of cell suspension (4.4 × 105 cells/ml) per well and incubated 2–3 hr under cell culture conditions to allow cell attachment. For treatment with MCD, cells were washed with pre-warmed sterile PBS and the culture supernatants were replaced with medium containing MCD (5 mM). Then, the cells were incubated for 1 hr under cell culture conditions. For treatment with statins, cells were washed with pre-warmed sterile PBS and the culture supernatants were replaced with medium supplemented with lipoprotein-deficient serum, containing statins (7 mM lovastatin + 200 mM mevalonate). Then, the cells were incubated for 2 days under cell culture conditions. At the end of either treatment, the cells are washed and incubated 45 min at 37°C in extracellular flux analysis medium (sodium bicarbonate-, glucose-, phenol red-, pyruvate-, and glutamine-free modified DMEM [Sigma-Aldrich, catalog no. D5030] freshly supplemented with cell culture-grade D-glucose (4.5 g/L), cell culture-grade L-glutamine [4 mM; Wisent], and HEPES [4.5 mM; Sigma-Aldrich], pH adjusted to 7.35–7.40 at room temperature). OCR was measured to assess resting respiration, followed by ATP production-dependent respiration, maximal respiration, and non-mitochondrial oxygen consumption, after sequential injections of oligomycin (an ATP synthase inhibitor) at 1 µM (final concentration), CCCP (an ionophore acting as a proton uncoupler) at 2 µM, and rotenone together with antimycin A (complex I and III inhibitors, respectively), each at 0.5 µM. Mitochondrial ATP production-dependent respiration was calculated by subtracting the lowest OCR after oligomycin injection from resting OCR. For each parameter, OCR measurements were performed at least three times at 6-min intervals. Each condition was performed in 7–8 replicate samples. All OCR measurements were corrected for the OCR of cell-free wells containing only medium. Upon completion of the OCR measurements, the cells were washed once with PBS and lysed in 1 M NaOH (40 µl/well). The lysates were kept at 4°C for up to 24 hr, and protein determination was performed using the Bradford colorimetric assay with BSA as the standard protein (Thermo Scientific). Absorbance was measured at a wavelength of 595 nm using a hybrid microplate reader (Biotek).

## 27-HC quantification
Cell pellets were collected from RAW264.7 macrophages treated with 1, 3, and 5 mM of MCD for 1 hr. Samples were sent to the University of Texas (UT) Southwestern Medical center for analysis by ultraperformance liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization/tandem mass spectrometry allowing chromatographic resolution of the hydroxycholesterol species. 27-HC levels were calculated by normalizing the 27-HC amounts to the protein content in the whole-cell pellet.

## Purification and formation of E. coli IMVs
E. coli inner membranes were purified from E. coli MG1655 strain by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation (30 min at 80,000 rpm, Optima MAX-XP) as previously described ( ). The E. coli inner membranes were then resuspended in either the synthesis buffer (MES 100 mM, pH 6 and NaCl 25 mM) or the hydrolysis buffer (HEPES 25 mM, pH 8) and ultrasonicated for 15 min (5 s on–off cycles at 30% power, VCX500 Ultrasonic Processors). The resulting homogeneous solution contained the IMVs.

## Loading and depletion of cholesterol in IMVs
Prior to any treatment, the protein concentration of IMVs was determined by the BCA protein assay and IMVs were diluted to a final protein concentration of 0.5 mg/ml. IMVs were then loaded with cholesterol using a modified protocol based on the MCD/cholesterol complex ( ). To load IMVs, 25 mM MCD were mixed with 2.5 mg/ml of cholesterol on HEPES (25 mM, pH7.8) following the protocol described in . After incubation with MCD–cholesterol complexes, IMVs were ultracentrifuged (80,000 rpm for 30 min) and the supernatant removed. The IMVs were then resuspended in HEPES 25 mM (pH 7.8). After loading, the lipid, cholesterol, and protein concentration of IMVs were determined by the phosphate determination assay ( ), Amplex Red cholesterol assay kit ( ) and BCA protein assay ( ), respectively. To achieve vesicles with different cholesterol content, cholesterol-loaded IMVs (1 mg/ml protein concentration) were treated with increasing MCD concentrations (from 0 to 7.0 mM) for 30 min at 37°C3, ( ; ). Cholesterol-depleted vesicles were ultracentrifuged (80,000 rpm for 30 min) and the pellet was resuspended in HEPES (25 mM, pH = 7.8). Lipid, protein, and cholesterol concentration of depleted samples were quantified again after the MCD treatment.

## Hydrolysis and synthesis of ATP on cholesterol-doped IMVs
ATP hydrolysis was performed by adding a total concentration of 2 mM ATP to 200 mM IMVs (lipid concentration) and incubated for 30 min. The concentration of phosphates from ATP hydrolysis was measured using the malaquite green assay ( ). ATP synthesis was triggered by promoting a ΔpH across the IMV membranes by mixing the samples (IMVs resuspended in MES 100 mM, pH 6) with an external buffer with higher pH and in the presence of inorganic phosphate, ADP, and magnesium ion (HEPES 100 mM pH 8, 5 mM Pi, 2.5 mM ADP, 5 mM MgCl2, 25 mM NaCl) at a volume ratio of 1:10 and incubated for 2–5 min. The reaction was stopped by adding 20% TCA at a ratio volume of 10:1, and then the samples were equilibrated to neutral pH ( ). ATP concentration after synthesis was measured using ATP detection assay kit (Molecular Probes) with a luminometer GloMax-Multi Detection. Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay Kit and Pierce BCA Protein assay kits were supplied by Thermo Fisher. Luminescent ATP Detection Assay Kit (based on firefly’s luciferase/luciferin) was purchased from Molecular Probes.

## RNA-seq and data analysis
RAW 264.7 macrophages in duplicates were either left untreated or treated with 5 mM MCD for 1 hr. Total RNA was purified as described above, and the RNA concentrations and purity were determined using a NanoDrop One (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watham, MA) spectrophotometer. Library preparation and 150 bp paired-end RNA-seq were performed using standard Illumina procedures for the NextSeq 500 platform. Reads libraries produced from RNA sequencing for each replicate and condition were aligned against mouse genome reference provided by the GENCODE project – the mouse genome reference release M25 ( ). Transcript quantification count tables were generated per bait screening using the Salmon algorithm ver1.7.0 ( ). The following comparisons: MCD1 vs. Control, Statin vs. Control, and Statin-LPS vs. LPS were performed to identify DEGs using DESeq2 ver1.40.2 ( ).

## GO enrichment and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway analyses
GO functional enrichment and KEGG pathway analyses for the DEGs were performed using clusterProfiler ver4.8.2 ( ) to identify significantly enriched biological processes associated with the set of genes upregulated in the experimental condition greater than log2 fold change of 1 and with the set of genes downregulated with log2 fold change of less than −1. A p value cutoff of 0.05 was defined for the analyses. The Benjamini–Hochberg method was applied to adjust the p values for multiple testing. This method controls the false discovery rate during the adjustment process.

## ATAC-seq
RAW 264.7 macrophages in duplicates were either left untreated or treated with 5 mM MCD for 1 hr. Cells were detached using 0.5% trypsin and resuspended in chilled 1× PBS containing 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). Visible cell numbers per sample were obtained by staining the cells with trypan blue and counting them using hemocytometer. 50,000 cells were used for performing ATAC-seq. Cells were washed in 100 µl of ice-cold 1× PBS and centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min. Nuclei are prepared by lysing the cells in ice-cold lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris–Cl, pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, and 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630. Nuclei were pelleted by spinning the samples at 500 × g for 10 min in fixed-angle cold centrifuge and proceeded for tagmentation reaction. A 25-µl tagmentation reaction was setup by resuspending the nuclei in 12.5 µl of 2× Tagment DNA buffer and 5 µl of TDE1 transposase. Samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 min with gentle intermittent mixing. Following transposition, the sample volume was made up to 50 µl using resuspension buffer and was processed for DNA preparation. For tagmented DNA clean-up, 180 µl of Zymo DNA-binding buffer was added and mixed thoroughly before loading on to Zymo-spin concentrator-5 columns. For transposase-free DNA, the samples were eluted in 16.5 µl of elution buffer. Purified tagmented DNA was amplified with KAPA HIFI polymerase (12 PCR cycles) and Unique Dual Primers from Illumina (Cat number 20332088). Size selection (L:1.1; R:0.6) was performed with KAPA Pure beads and size distribution of the final libraries was assessed on bioanalyzer (Agilent). Libraries were quantified by qPCR and loaded equimolarly on a S4 Novaseq flowcell. Each library was sequenced with a coverage of 50 M paired-end reads (PE100).

## ATAC-seq analysis
Sequencing reads for chromatin accessibility (ATAC) were aligned to Mus musculus genome assembly GRCm38 (mm10) using Bowtie2 ( ) with default parameters. The resulting BAM files were filtered to remove duplicate reads using Picard Tools (https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/). Peaks were called using MACS2 ver2.0 ( ) with the parameter ‘-nomodel’. The generated narrow peaks files were used for downstream analysis. Diffbind ver3.10 ( ; ) was used to identify differentially accessible regions (peaks) called by MACS2. Comparison between the two replicates of the two conditions MCD1 vs. Control was conducted. DESeq2 ver1.40.2 ( ) and EdgeR ver3.42.4 ( ) were used within Diffbind to identify regions of differential accessible between MCD1 treated and control (p value <0.05 and RD <0.05). ChipSeeker ver1.3 ( ; ) was used to annotate the genomic features of the differentially accessible peaks identified by Diffbind, where the maximum range of promoter to transcription start site was set to 3 kb. The peaks were assigned to the nearest genes based on distance of the peak region to the transcription start site. This allowed the annotation of ATAC-seq peaks with genes. The heatmap was generated using Diffbind::dba.plotProfile in order to compute peakset profiles for MCD1 and control conditions of loss or gain of genomic accessibility.

## Gene set enrichment analysis
Functional gene set enrichment analysis (FGSEA) was conducted for all RNA-seq comparisons and ATAC-seq comparison. FGSEA was conducted using fgsea ver1.26 ( ). MSigDB gene sets utilized in fgsea were Hallmark gene sets ver7.1, C2 BioCarta pathways ver7.1, C2 KEGG pathways ver7.1, C2 Reactome pathways ver7.1, and C3 Transcription factor targets ver7.1. The gene list provided to fgsea was based on the DEGs, including both up- and downregulated genes ranked in descending order or log2 fold change. The size of the gene sets considered for the enrichment analysis was set to a minimum of 15 and maximum of 500. Only Hallmark pathways with adjusted p value of less than 0.01 was plotted. Enrichment plots for the Hallmark pathway with the highest normalized enrichment score are illustrated.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses between data groups were performed with PRISM software (GraphPad). Data for real-time RT-qPCR and Seahorse experiments are presented as the mean ± standard deviation as indicated. The statistical significance of differences between groups was analyzed by Student’s t-test. Differences were considered significant at a p value <0.05.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100004411Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada

G-19-0026359 to Xiaohui Zha.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000024Canadian Institutes of Health Research

PJT-180504 to Jeffrey F Dilworth.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health

HL020948 to Jeffrey McDonald.

Regional Government of Madrid

S2018/BAA-4403SINOXPHOS-CM to Iván López-Montero.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant (grant-in-aid) from Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada (HSFC), G-19-0026359, and a grant from Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR), PJT-180504. This work was also supported in part by the TECNOLOGÍAS 2018 program funded by the Regional Government of Madrid (Grant S2018/BAA-4403 SINOXPHOS-CM, to ILM) and by a grant from NIH (HL020948, to JGM). We thank Dr. T Lagace for reagents, and Dr. M Harper for access to use the XFe96 Seahorse Extracellular Flux Analyzer. We also thank the Ottawa Hospital Research Institute’s Biotherapeutic Manufacturing Centre-Virus Manufacturing Facility for making shRNA lentivirus. We knowledge the technical assistance of H Bandukwala, Yuefeng Li, and E S Qamsar.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
No competing interests declared.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology.
Data curation, Investigation.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation.
Data curation, Formal analysis.
Data curation, Formal analysis.
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Data curation, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Data curation, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Writing – review and editing.

## Additional files
MDAR checklistSupplementary file 1.

## RNA-seq data of macrophages treated or not with statins.
Supplementary file 2.

## RNA-seq data of macrophages treated or not with MCD.
Supplementary file 3.

## ATAC-seq data of macrophages treated or not with MCD.
Supplementary file 4.

## Genes showing chromatin opening (ATAC-Seq peak) and increased expression (RNA-Seq) after MCD treatment as well as Statin Treatment.
Supplementary file 5.

## RNA-seq of macrophages treated with or not with statins and then stimulated by LPS.

## Data availability
Sequencing data have been deposited in GEO under accession codes: GSE196187, GSE196188, GSE196189.2. All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in the manuscript.
The following datasets were generated:

SalloumZ
DaunerK
VermaN
ZhangJD
NakkaK
ChenMX
Valdivieso-GonzálezD
Almendro-VediaV
McDonaldJ
CorleyCD
SoriskyA
SongBL
LiYF
2024Data for: Statin-mediated reduction in mitochondrial cholesterol primes an anti-inflammatory response in macrophages by upregulating Jmjd3NCBI Gene Expression OmnibusGSE19618710.7554/eLife.85964PMC1118663738602170

SalloumZ
DaunerK
VermaN
ZhangJD
NakkaK
ChenMX
Valdivieso-GonzálezD
Almendro-VediaV
McDonaldJ
CorleyCD
SoriskyA
SongBL
López-MonteroI
LuoJ
DilworthJF
ZhaX
LiYF
2024Data for: Statin-mediated reduction in mitochondrial cholesterol primes an anti-inflammatory response in macrophages by upregulating Jmjd3NCBI Gene Expression OmnibusGSE19618810.7554/eLife.85964PMC1118663738602170

SalloumZ
DaunerK
VermaN
ZhangJD
NakkaK
ChenMX
Valdivieso-GonzálezD
Almendro-VediaV
McDonaldJ
CorleyCD
SoriskyA
SongBL
López-MonteroI
LuoJ
DilworthJF
ZhaX
LiYF
2024Data for: Statin-mediated reduction in mitochondrial cholesterol primes an anti-inflammatory response in macrophages by upregulating Jmjd3NCBI Gene Expression OmnibusGSE19618910.7554/eLife.85964PMC1118663738602170

 10.7554/eLife.85964.sa0Editor's evaluation
RehmanJaleesReviewing Editor
https://ror.org/02mpq6x41University of Illinois at Chicago
United States
The manuscript by Salloum and colleagues examines the role of statin-mediated regulation of mitochondrial cholesterol as a determinant of epigenetic programming via JMJD3 in macrophages. The findings could be valuable for understanding statin-mediated anti-inflammatory functions in macrophages. The evidence for a statin-cholesterol-JMJD3-H3K27 axis as a regulator of macrophage function is solid.
10.7554/eLife.85964.sa1Decision letter
RehmanJaleesReviewing Editor
https://ror.org/02mpq6x41University of Illinois at Chicago
United States
RehmanJaleesReviewer
https://ror.org/02mpq6x41University of Illinois at Chicago
United States
Sánchez-CeinosJuliaReviewer
https://ror.org/056d84691Karolinska Institute
Sweden
Our editorial process produces two outputs: i) public reviews designed to be posted alongside the preprint for the benefit of readers; ii) feedback on the manuscript for the authors, including requests for revisions, shown below. We also include an acceptance summary that explains what the editors found interesting or important about the work.

Decision letter after peer review:

Thank you for submitting your article "Statin-mediated reduction in mitochondrial cholesterol primes an anti-inflammatory response in macrophages by upregulating JMJD3" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by 3 peer reviewers, including Jalees Rehman as the Reviewing Editor and Reviewer #1, and the evaluation has been overseen by Satyajit Rath as the Senior Editor. The following individual involved in the review of your submission has agreed to reveal their identity: Julia Sánchez-Ceinos (Reviewer #3).
The reviewers have discussed their reviews with one another, and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this to help you prepare a revised submission.
Essential revisions (for the authors):
1) Need for in-depth analysis and presentation of the RNA-seq and ATAC-seq data
2) Mechanistic studies using more specific treatments such as genetic silencing of ATP synthase and JMJD3 (using siRNA, shRNA, or CRISPR with appropriate controls) and the use of additional NFKB inhibitors to ensure the specificity of the findings
3) Demonstrate in vivo relevance of the observed statin effects in order to justify that this is indeed a mechanism by which statins can affect inflammation
4) Provide details on which statins were used, which concentrations, and treatment durations

Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):

1. in vivo treatment with statins (either humans or animal models) versus control, followed by isolation of macrophages to assess gene expression, mitochondrial function, and mitochondrial membrane composition would be important to support the core conclusions
2. Instead of using CCCP, selective shRNA depletion of ATP synthase would provide more targeted information without potential mitochondrial toxicity and ROS generation that occurs with CCCP.
3. The RNA-seq and ATAC-seq data are presented in a very limited and superficial manner. Instead of showing only the inferred transcription factor binding sites, it would be helpful to first show the most upregulated and downregulated genes and gene expression pathways in the RNA-seq data. Similar in-depth analysis of the ATAC-seq data would be helpful, and further determination of concordance versus discordance between the RNA-seq and ATAC-seq data. Importantly, as H3K27 methylation is a key part of the conclusions, it would be important to perform ChIP-seq for H3K27 methylation instead of selected PCR. This would provide a comprehensive insight into which gene programs are affected. These in-depth bioinformatic analyses should be accompanied by the descriptions in the Methods sections
4. Statin experiments need to indicate which statins were used, which concentrations, and how long cells were treated. This is essential to ensure reproducibility and comparison with other statin studies.

Reviewer #2 (Recommendations for the authors):

The authors would benefit from thinking about their experiments and what they do or do not clearly show. It is clear that JMJD3 is being upregulated by statins and MCD however, some of the mechanistic claims that they are making feel a little too preliminary.
For example, MG-132 is a well-characterized proteasome inhibitor. There may be a better NFKB inhibitor to use here for this analysis.
The western blots in Figure 1 could be of slightly better quality to really convincingly show that these cholesterol perturbations are changing protein expression. Furthermore, for the TNF and IL1b results, they would be strengthened by showing these perturbations have an impact at the protein level. The authors also don't really discuss the literature about cholesterol and the inflammasome which may be contributing to the results that they are seeing with IL1b.
There are several figures that don't convey a clear message. For example, the presentation of the omics results could be improved in order to better convey a strong message. While it is clear that the statins impact the ATACseq result, whether this is at all related to altered JMJD3 expression is not clear so figure 6 in its current form is divorced from the narrative that was established in the earlier figures.
All small molecule perturbation experiments would benefit from (1) controls to show that the drugs are not toxic at the concentration used and (2) evidence that these results are specific for the target of interest and not just wholesale altering gene expression across the transcriptome.
[Editors' note: further revisions were suggested prior to acceptance, as described below.]
Thank you for resubmitting your work entitled "Statin-mediated reduction in mitochondrial cholesterol primes an anti-inflammatory response in macrophages by upregulating Jmjd3" for further consideration by eLife. Your revised article has been evaluated by Satyajit Rath (Senior Editor) and a Reviewing Editor.
The manuscript has been improved but there are some remaining issues that need to be addressed, as outlined below:
Essential revisions that were requested during the last review have not been addressed. This includes some in vivo data to support the key claims of the work as well as a standard bioinformatic analysis which shows all the differentially expressed genes (top 25 or 50 can be shown in heatmaps, full table can be a supplement). The answers that were provided to the essential revisions do not adequately address the reviewer comments. The interpretations and conclusions of the manuscript do not match the data that are presented.
Please review the comments and essential revisions requested from the 1st review and also take into account the comments provided again below:

Reviewer 1 (Recommendations for the authors):

1. There are no in vivo studies in the revision even though demonstrating in vivo relevance of the findings would be essential to bolster the claims of the work. There are several animal models available in which statin efficacy has been demonstrated
See Pecoraro et al., 2014:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/eci.12304
There are also classic review articles highlighting statin efficacy in mouse models:
https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/atvbaha.107.142570
In addition, non-rodent models such as rabbits are also an option.
2. The bioinformatic analysis does not show the various differentially regulated genes nor is there an in-depth analysis of the epigenetic data that was recommended as essential. In-depth analyses recommended listing all the differentially expressed genes – not just selected pathways via GSEA – for RNA, differentially accessible chromatin regions, etc. GSEA just gives a limited perspective and does not convey a sense of the overall data.

Reviewer #2 (Recommendations for the authors):

The authors have addressed many of my concerns; however, I suggest they review their language closely in their manuscript one more time to make sure that they are pursuing conservative interpretations of their data without overclaiming.

Reviewer #3 (Recommendations for the authors):

Although the findings are potentially of interest to eLife readership, regrettably the revised manuscript and author responses fail to address the comments pointed out by this reviewer.
10.7554/eLife.85964.sa2Author response
RNA-seq data from statin- and MCD-treated macrophages was re-analyzed by unsupervised Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) (Figure 1 A & B), which includes all differentially expressed genes, up and down, by cholesterol reduction. The conclusion is identical to the previous analysis, i.e. NF-κB is the top pathway activated by cholesterol reduction. The analysis in last version, which used a different program, is now moved to Supplementary Figure 1.
ATAC-seq data was similarly re-analyzed with GSEA (Figure 6 A). Again, NF-κB is the top pathway activated by cholesterol reduction (Figure 6 A, b). Examples of the lineups between ATAC-Seq peaks and RNA-seq peaks have been added (Figure 6 B).
RNA-seq data from LPS-stimulated macrophages with or without statins is also re-analyzed. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of genes showing decreased expression upon statin treatment revealed that statins primarily suppress inflammatory processes (Figure 7 A, b), while genes involved in cellular homeostatic functions were upregulated (Figure 7 A, c).
2) Mechanistic studies using more specific treatments such as genetic silencing of ATP synthase and JMJD3 (using siRNA, shRNA, or CRISPR with appropriate controls) and the use of additional NFKB inhibitors to ensure the specificity of the findings
Jmjd3
Jmjd3 was knocked down in macrophages by siRNA to < 20% of the control value (Supplementary 7). The impact of the knockdown on the statin effect on LPS- or IL-4 stimulated gene expression was tested. The results are identical to that of the glutamine removal strategy (Figure 8 B, a and b). With Jmjd3 KD, statin could no long promote anti-inflammatory IL-10 expression and fail to raise the ratio of TNF-a/IL-10. At the same time, Arg1 expression, which was elevated by statin, remains the same in statin-treated macrophages (Figure 8 C, a and b).
Mitochondria ATP-synthase
We agree with reviewer that directly manipulating ATP synthase in the mitochondria would significantly reinforce our existing observations and conclusions. However, as we have observed OCR by Seahorse, MCD decreases ATP synthase activity by 20% in BMDMs (Figure 3). The quick recovery of activity by cholesterol repletion (Figure 1 D, c) was seen in the case of this degree of inhibition. This reversible perturbance is not likely to occur by silencing ATP synthase – genetic silencing ATP synthase was shown to cause severe mitochondria structure damages (Quintana-Cabrera R. et al. The cristae modulator Optic atrophy 1 requires mitochondrial ATP synthase oligomers to safeguard mitochondrial function. Nat Commun. 2018 Aug 24;9(1):3399).
Additional NFKB inhibitors
Two additional NF-κB inhibitors have been tested on MCD-induced Jmjd3 expression. Once again, NF-κB inhibitors completely abolished MCD-induced Jmjd3 expression (Supplementary Figure 2).
3) Demonstrate in vivo relevance of the observed statin effects in order to justify that this is indeed a mechanism by which statins can affect inflammation
To understand the function of statins in vivo, we need to go back to some of the basic cell biology and lipid regulation.
About 50% of the total body cholesterol is derived from de novo synthesis in humans. The primary site of endogenous cholesterol biosynthesis is the liver, where statins inhibit cholesterol synthesis as their primary pharmacological action. This blockade of cholesterol production in the liver activates a compensatory mechanism: the upregulation of hepatic LDL-receptors. The liver then increases LDL uptake from the circulation to acquire cholesterol, thereby lowering plasma LDL levels.
In addition, statins can decrease cholesterol content in extrahepatic tissues by two processes.
1) Lowering the circulating LDL by statins would decrease cholesterol content of peripheral tissues/cells -- LDL has evolved to transport cholesterol (which is insoluble in plasma) to supply cholesterol to the peripheral tissues (Brown MS, Kovanen PT, Goldstein JL. Evolution of the LDL receptor concept-from cultured cells to intact animals. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1980; 348:48-6) The uptake of cholesterol into peripheral cells is through LDL receptor-mediated endocytosis. LDL receptors are widely expressed on the plasma membrane of nearly all peripheral tissues in animals, including blood immune cells (Kovanen PT, Basu SK, Goldstein JL, Brown MS. Low density lipoprotein receptors in bovine adrenal cortex. II. Low density lipoprotein binding to membranes prepared from fresh tissue. Endocrinology. 1979 Mar;104(3):610-6.). Therefore, cholesterol content of peripheral cells is directly associated with circulating LDL levels.
2) Statins could directly act on the peripheral tissues to suppress cholesterol biosynthesis -- Statins taken orally reach the liver though the circulation, which inevitably results in significant concentrations of statins in the plasma. The pharmacological effects of statins on peripheral cells depend on the half-life and dosage of statins and also on hydrophobicity of statin varieties. Nevertheless, statins are extremely potent (Ki = 0.2 to 1 nM) (Endo A, Hasumi K. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. Nat Prod Rep. 1993 Dec;10(6):541-50) and could significantly interfere with cholesterol synthesis in extrahepatic tissues. In addition, bone-marrow derived immune cells are highly proliferative and hence have a high demand for cholesterol, which makes them particularly susceptible to the inhibitory effects of statins. This is confirmed by studies that show that statins can inhibit cholesterol synthesis in circulating macrophages (Chow OA et al., Statins enhance formation of phagocyte extracellular traps. Cell Host Microbe. 2010 Nov 18;8(5):445-54).
We speculate that it is the reduction of cholesterol content in immune cells by statins that underlines the anti-inflammatory functions of statins. Thus, our in vitro studies reported here constitute an important first step and a proof-of-principle: lowering cholesterol content in macrophages leads to an anti-inflammatory state in macrophages.
We agree with the reviewers that the definitive test is an in vivo intervention with human subjects. For example, in matched individuals taking statin or not, macrophage/ cholesterol/Jmjd3 would be evaluated. Inflammatory responses to various stimuli would then follow. However, a clinical trial of this nature is beyond the scope of our current study. We hope that publishing the data in our manuscript will be a spark for readers to consider such in vivo studies as a future goal.
As for in vivo mouse models, the situation here is unique. Mice intrinsically have almost no LDL in the circulation and the major lipoprotein is HDL (unlike humans). In order to study the role of plasma cholesterol in atherosclerosis, applicable to humans, LDLr-/- or ApoE-/- mouse models (apoE is an LDL associated protein and binds to LDLr to enable LDL uptake) were established. These mouse models have elevated levels of plasma LDL, similar to that in human, and have greatly contributed to our knowledge of atherosclerosis. However, statins could not be used in these mouse models to lower plasma cholesterol, since there is no LDLr nor apoE -mediated uptake of LDL at the liver in these animals.
4) Provide details on which statins were used, which concentrations, and treatment durations
Stains names, concentrations and treatment conditions are added in figure legends.
Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):
1. in vivo treatment with statins (either humans or animal models) versus control, followed by isolation of macrophages to assess gene expression, mitochondrial function, and mitochondrial membrane composition would be important to support the core conclusions
See responses to Essential revision 3.
2. Instead of using CCCP, selective shRNA depletion of ATP synthase would provide more targeted information without potential mitochondrial toxicity and ROS generation that occurs with CCCP.
See responses to Essential revision 2.
3. The RNA-seq and ATAC-seq data are presented in a very limited and superficial manner. Instead of showing only the inferred transcription factor binding sites, it would be helpful to first show the most upregulated and downregulated genes and gene expression pathways in the RNA-seq data. Similar in-depth analysis of the ATAC-seq data would be helpful, and further determination of concordance versus discordance between the RNA-seq and ATAC-seq data. Importantly, as H3K27 methylation is a key part of the conclusions, it would be important to perform ChIP-seq for H3K27 methylation instead of selected PCR. This would provide a comprehensive insight into which gene programs are affected. These in-depth bioinformatic analyses should be accompanied by the descriptions in the Methods sections
RNA-seq data was re-analyzed by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) on all differentially expressed genes, both up and down. This analysis is unsupervised, i.e. no expectation whether genes would go up or go down by statins or MCD. This showed the NF-κB pathway is the dominant process activated by statin or MCD (Figure 1).
Similar GSEA on ATAC-seq gave identical conclusion (Figure 6 A), which is consistent with RNA-seq GSEA (Figure 1 B). The examples of IL-1b and TNF-a were added (Figure 6 B).
The current study focused on established anti-inflammatory genes, IL-10, Arg1, Ym1, and Mrc1. Their expressions are enhanced by statin. ChIP-PCR of H3K27me3 supplied a potential mechanism for this enhancement, which is sufficient at this stage of study. On another hand, ChIP-seq for H3K27me3 would provide genomic information of H3K27me3 distribution, including these mentioned above. It would be a big and complex undertaking and would also require RNA-seq of LPS and IL-4 RNA-seq to be meaningful. This is, in our opinion, beyond the scope of current study but in the future.
4. Statin experiments need to indicate which statins were used, which concentrations, and how long cells were treated. This is essential to ensure reproducibility and comparison with other statin studies.
The specific statin, dosage and incubation time used in each experiment have been added to figure legends.
Reviewer #2 (Recommendations for the authors):
The authors would benefit from thinking about their experiments and what they do or do not clearly show. It is clear that JMJD3 is being upregulated by statins and MCD however, some of the mechanistic claims that they are making feel a little too preliminary.
For example, MG-132 is a well-characterized proteasome inhibitor. There may be a better NFKB inhibitor to use here for this analysis.
Two additional NF-κB inhibitors were studied with identical effects on MCD-induced JMJD3 expression (Supplementary Figure 2).
The western blots in Figure 1 could be of slightly better quality to really convincingly show that these cholesterol perturbations are changing protein expression. Furthermore, for the TNF and IL1b results, they would be strengthened by showing these perturbations have an impact at the protein level.
For logistical reasons, repeating the western blots is not something we can go back to at the moment. I hope the reviewer will agree they are good enough as is.
We are also not in a position to add data at the protein level. At this stage of our investigations, the mechanism we are examining is at the stage of regulation of gene expression. However, I agree with the reviewer this is a limitation and we have added a comment to the manuscript to state this (P8, line 10): “Of note, this current study focuses mostly on the regulation of gene expression. The ultimate impact of statins on inflammation should be extended and confirmed at protein level in future studies.”
The authors also don't really discuss the literature about cholesterol and the inflammasome which may be contributing to the results that they are seeing with IL1b.
In terms of cholesterol levels and the inflammasome, it appears that the inflammasome is activated by excess cholesterol, not by cholesterol reduction (PMID: 25614320). Also, inflammasome activation does not necessarily leads to IL1b expression, as recently reviewed by Tall et al. (PMID: 37228237). In addition, the magnitude of change in IL1b by MCD or statin is extremely low, compared with LPS (Figure 2B, b), suggesting a mechanism that is unrelated to inflammation.
There are several figures that don't convey a clear message. For example, the presentation of the omics results could be improved in order to better convey a strong message. While it is clear that the statins impact the ATACseq result, whether this is at all related to altered JMJD3 expression is not clear so figure 6 in its current form is divorced from the narrative that was established in the earlier figures.
Sub-titles are added to more clearly convey the conclusions for each figure.
We agree that changes in ATAC-seq are not entirely due to JMJD3. We showed that NF-κB is upstream of JMJD3 upregulation. NF-κB could alter epigenome, as has been well documented by other studies. Jmjd3, by removal of H3K27me3, should further alter ATAC -seq. Therefore, the change in ATAC-seq by cholesterol reduction is consistent with NF-κB activation and JMJD3 upregulation. This change prompted us to hypothesize that cholesterol reduction changes epigenome and poises genes for alternative expression when activated. We therefore investigated LPS and IL-4 stimulated gene expression.
All small molecule perturbation experiments would benefit from (1) controls to show that the drugs are not toxic at the concentration used and (2) evidence that these results are specific for the target of interest and not just wholesale altering gene expression across the transcriptome.
Toxicity tests have been added.
[Editors' note: further revisions were suggested prior to acceptance, as described below.]
The manuscript has been improved but there are some remaining issues that need to be addressed, as outlined below:
Essential revisions that were requested during the last review have not been addressed. This includes some in vivo data to support the key claims of the work as well as a standard bioinformatic analysis which shows all the differentially expressed genes (top 25 or 50 can be shown in heatmaps, full table can be a supplement). The answers that were provided to the essential revisions do not adequately address the reviewer comments. The interpretations and conclusions of the manuscript do not match the data that are presented.
Please review the comments and essential revisions requested from the 1st review and also take into account the comments provided again below:
Reviewer 1 (Recommendations for the authors):
1. There are no in vivo studies in the revision even though demonstrating in vivo relevance of the findings would be essential to bolster the claims of the work. There are several animal models available in which statin efficacy has been demonstrated
We would like to thank this reviewer for insisting on the need for in vivo studies, which truly do elevate the impact of the study.
We have performed statin-feeding in wt mice on chow diet and analyzed freshly isolated peritoneal macrophages. As shown in Figure 9, 14 days of statin-feeding (simvastatin, 100 mg/kg/day, 14 days) led to about 20% decrease in peritoneal macrophage cholesterol and upregulation of the expression of Jmjd3. Inflammatory responses to LPS and IL4 were also identical to those of BMDMs when they were treated with statins in vitro.
We believe these new in vivo data bolster the conclusions of our manuscript.
2. The bioinformatic analysis does not show the various differentially regulated genes nor is there an in-depth analysis of the epigenetic data that was recommended as essential. In-depth analyses recommended listing all the differentially expressed genes – not just selected pathways via GSEA – for RNA, differentially accessible chromatin regions, etc. GSEA just gives a limited perspective and does not convey a sense of the overall data.
Following data have been added to supplementary files:
Excel file of differentially regulated genes (RNA-seq) by statin: Supplementary file 1.
Excel file of differentially regulated genes (RNA-seq) by MCD: Supplementary file 2.
Excel file of genes with altered accessibilities to transposase (ATAC-seq) by MCD: Supplementary file 3.
List of genes shared in ATAC-seq (Supplementary file 2) and RNA-seq (Supplementary file 3): Supplementary file 4.
Excel file of differentially regulated genes (RNA-seq) in LPS and statin/LPS stimulated cells: Supplementary file 5.
In addition, the following has been added to supplementary figures:
Top 40 upregulated genes by statin: Figure 1—figure supplement 1, A, a.
Top 40 upregulated genes by MCD: Figure 1—figure supplement 1, A, b.
Genes down-regulated by statin or MCD are analyzed for TF enrichment: Figure 1—figure supplement 2, C.
Reviewer #2 (Recommendations for the authors):
The authors have addressed many of my concerns; however, I suggest they review their language closely in their manuscript one more time to make sure that they are pursuing conservative interpretations of their data without overclaiming.
Text is edited to be more conservative in interpretations of the data and restrain on speculations. For example:
“We speculate that low level of activation of NF-κB could be part of homeostatic regulations.” (P4) is removed.
“However, statin also lowered the maximal respiration (Figure 3B, c), possibly due to the 2-day treatment period required for the statin treatment. Overall, statin or MCD suppresses ATP synthase in macrophages.”(P5)
Reviewer #3 (Recommendations for the authors):
Although the findings are potentially of interest to eLife readership, regrettably the revised manuscript and author responses fail to address the comments pointed out by this reviewer.
As none of the comments from reviewer 3 appeared in essential revision requests, we did not specifically address the comment about RNA-seq and ATAC-seq. Now we have added several files/figures to address the second comment of reviewer 1 above. We believe that these also sufficiently address the comments from reviewer 3.