pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11493277PMC11493277.111493277114932773943245410.1371/journal.pone.0310519PONE-D-24-292981Research ArticleResearch and analysis methodsBiological culturesCell linesHeLa cellsResearch and analysis methodsBiological culturesCell culturesCultured tumor cellsHeLa cellsBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionDNA transcriptionBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryProteinsDNA-binding proteinsHistonesBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyChromosome BiologyChromatinBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsEpigeneticsChromatinBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionChromatinBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionGene RegulationTranscriptional TerminationBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNAMessenger RNABiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionGene RegulationTranscriptional ControlIsoginkgetin and Madrasin are poor splicing inhibitors
Isoginkgetin and Madrasin are poor splicing inhibitorshttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4130-9050TellierMichaelConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing ]. Recent research has highlighted how transcription and pre-mRNA splicing can influence each other [ – ]. Coupling between transcription and pre-mRNA splicing is thought to occur, at least partially, via the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit of pol II, which is composed in humans of 52 repeats of the heptapeptide Tyr1-Ser2-Pro3-Thr4-Ser5-Pro6-Ser7. The pol II CTD can be modified by several post-translational modifications, including phosphorylation of Tyr1, Ser2, Thr4, Ser5, and Ser7 [ ]. While Ser2-P is associated with transcription elongation and Ser5P with transcription initiation and pol II pausing [ ], Ser2-P and Ser5-P have also been found to specifically interact with splicing factors [ , ], providing a physical link between the pol II complex and the spliceosome. A direct interaction between the pol II complex and the U1 snRNP was also observed by cryo-EM [ ]. In addition, the pol II elongation rate, which can be modified by cellular stresses or by mutating pol II, can affect the inclusion of exons in or the exclusion of exons from the mature mRNA in yeasts, mammals, and plants [ – , , – ]. In turn, inhibition of pre-mRNA splicing by Spliceostatin A (SSA) or Pladienolide B (PlaB), two small molecule inhibitors of the U2 snRNP protein SF3B1, affect pol II transcription [ , , , ], pol II CTD phosphorylation [ ], and recruitment of the key transcription elongation kinase, P-TEFb [ , ], which is composed of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)9 and Cyclin T1.
Coupling between pre-mRNA splicing and cleavage and polyadenylation (CPA) is also required to define the last exon of protein-coding genes and to promote mRNA CPA and transcription termination [ ]. This coupling involves interactions between splicing factors, including U2AF65 and the SF3B proteins, and CPA factors, including CPSF proteins and the poly(A) polymerase [ – ]. A consequence of this coupling is that failure to splice the terminal intron in pre-mRNA is associated with a transcription termination defect, as the poly(A) site is no longer recognised by the mRNA CPA complex [ , , ].
To further investigate the effects of pre-mRNA splicing inhibition on transcription elongation and transcription termination, we used two small molecules thought to be inhibitors of the early spliceosome, Madrasin [ ] and Isoginkgetin [ ]. We found that in contrast to the SF3B1 inhibitors, PlaB and Herboxidiene (HB), Madrasin and Isoginkgetin are poor splicing inhibitors. However, treatment with Madrasin and Isoginkgetin globally downregulates pol II transcription, which was previously observed for Isoginkgetin [ ]. These two small molecules should therefore not be considered to be primarily pre-mRNA splicing inhibitors.

## Materials and methods

## Cell culture
HeLa cells were obtained from ATCC (ATCC® CCL-2™) and grown in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine at 37°C and 5% CO2. HeLa cells were treated with 30–90 μM Madrasin (Sigma-Aldrich), 30 μM Isoginkgetin (Merck), 1 μM Herboxidiene (Cayman Chemical), 1 μM Pladienolide B (Cambridge Bioscience), or 100 μM 5,6-dichlorobenzimidazone-1-β-D-ribofuranoside (DRB, Sigma) for the time indicated in the figures. As a negative control, HeLa cells were treated with DMSO. Cells were routinely checked for mycoplasma contamination using Plasmo Test Mycoplasma Detection Kit (InvivoGen, rep-pt1).

## Protein extraction and western blotting
For cytoplasmic fractions, HeLa cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS then scraped into 15 ml tubes and centrifuged at 1,000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended thoroughly in 1 ml of Lysis buffer B (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8–8.4), 140 mM NaCl 1.5 mM MgCl2, and 0.5% NP40) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and PhosSTOP (Roche) by slow pipetting and then transferred to a 1.7 ml tube. The lysate was centrifuged at 1,000 g for 3 min at 4°C then 500 μl of the supernatant of the unpurified cytoplasmic fraction was transferred to a new tube. Purified cytoplasmic fraction was achieved by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 1 min at 4°C.
For nucleoplasm and chromatin fractions, the rest of the unpurified cytoplasmic fraction was discarded and the nuclear pellet resuspended in 1 ml of Lysis buffer B. Following the transfer to a 14 ml round bottom Falcon tube, 100 μl of Detergent stock (3.3% (w/v) Sodium Deoxycholate, 6.6% (v/v) Tween 40) was added drop-by-drop under slow vortexing. After a 5 min incubation on ice, the suspension was transferred to a new ice-cold 1.7 ml tube and centrifuged a 1,000 g for 3 min at 4°C. The nuclear pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of Lysis buffer B. Following centrifugation at 1,000 g for 3 min at 4°C, the nuclear pellets were resuspended by pipetting up and down in 125 μl of NUN1 buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.9, 75 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA and 50% (vol/vol) glycerol) and moved to a new 1.5 ml ice-cold microcentrifuge tube. After adding 1.2 ml of ice-cold NUN2 buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.6, 300 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 7.5 mM MgCl2, 1% (vol/vol) NP-40 and 1 M urea), the tubes were vortexed at maximum speed for 10 s and incubated on ice for 15 min with a vortexing step of 10 s every 3 min. The samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant kept as the nucleoplasm fraction while the chromatin pellets were washed with 500 μl of ice-cold PBS and then with 100 μl of ice-cold nuclease-free water. The chromatin pellet was then digested in 100 μl of nuclease-free water supplemented with 1 μl of Benzonase (25–29 units, Merck Millipore) for 15 min at 37°C in a thermomixer at 1,400 rpm.
For chromatin extraction only, a ~ 80% confluent 15 cm dish was washed twice with ice-cold PBS and scrapped in 5 ml of ice-cold PBS. After pelleting the cells at 420 g for 5 min at 4°C and removing the supernatant, the cells were resuspended in 4 ml of ice-cold HLB + N buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2 and 0.5% (vol/vol) NP-40) and incubated on ice for 5 min. The cell pellets were then underlayed with 1 ml of ice-cold HLB + NS buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% (vol/vol) NP-40 and 10% (wt/vol) sucrose). Following centrifugation at 420 g for 5 min at 4°C, the nuclear pellets were resuspended by pipetting up and down in 125 μl of NUN1 buffer and transferred into a new 1.5 ml ice-cold microcentrifuge tube. Following the addition of 1.2 ml of ice-cold NUN2 buffer, the tube was vortexed at maximum speed for 10 s and incubated on ice for 15 min with a vortexing step of 10 s every 3 min. The sample was centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant discarded while the chromatin pellet was washed with 500 μl of ice-cold PBS and then with 100 μl of ice-cold water. The chromatin pellet was then digested in 100 μl of water supplemented with 1 μl of Benzonase (25–29 units, Merck Millipore) for 15 min at 37°C in a thermomixer at 1,400 rpm. For loading, 10 μg of proteins were boiled in 1× LDS plus 100 mM DTT.
For whole-cell extract, cells were washed in ice-cold PBS twice, collected in ice-cold PBS with an 800 g centrifugation for 5 min at 4°C. The pellets were resuspended in RIPA buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail and PhosSTOP, kept on ice for 30 min with a vortexing step every 10 min. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min at 4°C, the supernatants were kept and quantified with the Bradford method. For loading, 20 μg of proteins were boiled in 1× LDS plus 100 mM DTT.
Western blots were performed with NuPAGE Novex 4–12% Bis–Tris Protein Gels (Life Technologies) with the following primary antibodies: Rpb1 NTD (D8L4Y) Rabbit mAb (14958S, Cell Signaling Technology), Phospho-Rpb1 CTD (Ser2) (E1Z3G) Rabbit mAb (13499S, Cell Signaling Technology), Phospho-Rpb1 CTD (Ser5) (D9N5I) Rabbit mAb (13523S, Cell Signaling Technology), Rabbit anti-SF3b155/SAP155 (A300-996A, Bethyl Laboratories), Rabbit anti-α-Tubulin (2144S, Cell Signaling), Proteintech SUMO1 Monoclonal antibody (67559-1-IG-20UL, Proteintech Europe), Proteintech SUMO2/3 Polyclonal antibody (11251-1-AP-20UL, Proteintech Europe), and Histone H3 (ab1791, Abcam). Secondary antibodies were purchased from Merck Millipore (Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG Antibody, HRP-conjugate, 12–348, and Goat Anti-Mouse IgG Antibody, HRP conjugate, 12–349), the chemiluminescent substrate (SuperSignal West Pico PLUS) from Thermo Fisher, and the membranes visualized on an iBright FL1000 Imaging System (Thermo Fisher). Ponceau S–Proteomics Grade staining (VWR International) was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Quantifications were performed with Image Studio Lite version 5.2.5. For each antibody, the quantification has been calculated as: (IP treated signal / histone H3 treated signal) / (IP DMSO signal / histone H3 DMSO signal).

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by qPCR (ChIP-qPCR)
ChIP was performed as previously described [ ]. HeLa cells were grown in 100- or 150-mm dishes until they reached ~80% confluence. The cells were fixed with 1% formaldehyde at room temperature for 10 min with shaking. Quenching was performed with 125 mM Glycine for 5 min at room temperature with shaking. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and then scrapped in ice-cold PBS and pelleted for 10 min at 1,500 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Lysis was performed on ice for 10 min with ChIP lysis buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl ph8.0, 0.25% Triton X-100, 10 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitor cocktail) before being centrifuged at 1,500 g for 5 min at 4°C. Pellets were washed once with ChIP Wash buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitor cocktail). Pellets were then resuspended in ChIP Sonication buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, protease inhibitor cocktail, and phosphatase inhibitor), incubated 10 min on ice, and sonicated for 30 cycles, 30 seconds on/30 seconds off using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode). The samples were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. Supernatants were transferred to new Eppendorf tubes and pre-cleared with 10 μl of Protein G Dynabeads for 30 min on a rotating wheel at 4°C. For each IP, 60 μg of chromatin was incubated overnight on a rotating wheel at 4°C with the following antibodies: normal rabbit IgG (2729S, Cell Signaling), RNA polymerase II antibody (NBP2-32080, Novus Biologicals), Phospho-Rpb1 CTD (Ser2) (E1Z3G) Rabbit mAb (13499S, Cell Signaling Technology), Phospho-Rpb1 CTD (Ser5) (D9N5I) Rabbit mAb (13523S, Cell Signaling Technology), CDC73 (A300-170A, Bethyl Laboratories), SUPT5H antibody (A300-868A, Bethyl Laboratories), and CPSF73 (A301-091A, Bethyl Laboratories). Protein G Dynabeads were saturated overnight with RIPA buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with 10 mg/ml of bovine serum albumin on a rotating wheel at 4°C.
The chromatin-antibody mix was incubated for 1h on a rotating wheel at 4°C with pre-blocked Protein G Dynabeads. IgG supernatant was kept as input. Beads were then washed three times with ice-cold RIPA buffer, three times with ice-cold High Salt buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate), twice with LiCl Wash buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH8.0, 250 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate), and twice with TE buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA). The samples were eluted twice with Elution buffer (100 mM NaHCO3, 1% SDS, 10 mM DTT) from the beads on a thermomixer for 15 min at 25°C at 1,400 rpm. Each input was diluted 1/10 in Elution buffer. The samples were treated with RNase A for 30 min at 37°C before reversal of the crosslink with 200 mM NaCl for 5h at 65°C. DNA-protein mix was precipitated with 2.5x volume of 100% ethanol overnight at -20°C. The ethanol was removed after centrifugation for 15 min at 13,000 rpm 4°C. The pellets were resuspended in TE, 5x Proteinase K buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 25 mM EDTA, 1.25% SDS) and Proteinase K (20 mg/ml), and incubated for 2h at 45°C. DNA was purified with a QIAGEN PCR purification kit and kept at -20°C.
ChIP samples were analysed by real-time qPCR with a QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR kit (QIAGEN) and a Rotor-Gene RG-3000 (Corbett Research). Each reaction was performed with: 1 μl of template, 1 μl of primer pair mix (10 μM), 3 μl of water and 5 μl of SYBR Green Mix (2×). The sequences of primers used in this study can be found in . The thermo-cycling parameters were: 95°C for 15 min followed by 40 cycles of 94°C for 15 s, 57°C for 20 s and 72°C for 25 s. The Roto-Gene Q Series Software was used to calculate the threshold cycle (Ct) value. Signals are presented as a percentage of Input DNA after removal of the IgG background signal. Each ChIP sample was measured in triplicate by qPCR. The number of biological replicates is indicated on each figure.
 

## RNA preparation and PCR/qPCR
Total RNA was extracted from ~70% confluent HeLa cells grown in 6-wells plate using a RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen) with a DNase step according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse-transcription (RT) was performed with 500 ng of RNA using random hexamers or oligo(dT) with the SuperScript III kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. PCR reactions were performed with the Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase (NEB) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The sequence of primers used for PCR is given in Table  . Quantifications were performed with Image Studio Lite version 5.2.5. The quantifications are shown as % of unspliced reads and calculated as follow: (unspliced RNA signal) / (spliced RNA signal + unspliced RNA signal) * 100.
cDNA was amplified by qPCR with a QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR kit (QIAGEN) and a Rotor-Gene RG-3000 (Corbett Research). The sequence of primers used for qPCR is given in Table 1. Values are normalized to the 7SK non-coding RNA (random primers), or the GAPDH mRNA (oligo d(T)), that have been used as control. Experiments were replicated at least three times to ensure reproducibility, and each RNA sample was measured in triplicate by qPCR.

## 5’EU
HeLa cells were seeded at 40–50% confluency on coverslips in a 6-well plate, then treated the following day with Madrasin or Isoginkgetin for the time indicated on the figure before being incubated with 1 mM 5-ethylnyl uridine (5-EU) for 1 h to label newly synthesized RNA. Cells were then fixed by transferring coverslips to 3.7% formaldehyde diluted in PBS for 15 min, washed with PBS, and then permeabilised in 0.5% Triton X-100 diluted in PBS for 15 min at room temperature. Global nascent RNA transcription was detected using Click-iT® RNA Alexa Fluor 488 Imaging kit (ThermoFisher, C10329) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Following Click-iT reaction, cellular DNA was immunostained with Hoechst 33342 diluted 1:1000 in PBS for 15 min at room temperature, protected from light. Coverslips were then washed twice with PBS, then mounted onto slides using Fluoromount-G (SouthernBiotech, 0100–01) containing DAPI. Slides were visualised with an inverted multi-channel fluorescence microscope (Evos M7000; ThermoFisher). Fluorescent intensity was analysed and quantified with ImageJ (version 1.53q) by first using the DAPI channel (λEx/λEm (with DNA) = 350/461 nm) image to define the nucleus, then GFP channel (λEx/λEm = 495/519 nm) to measure the fluorescent intensity within the nucleus. Data were plotted by box-and-whisker plot with GraphPad Prism 9.5 software with the following settings: boxes: 25–75 percentile range; whiskers: min-max values; horizontal bars: median.

## mNET-seq
mNET-seq was carried out as previously described [ ]. In brief, the chromatin fraction was isolated from 4 × 107 HeLa cells treated with DMSO or 90 μM Madrasin for 30 min. Chromatin was digested in 100 μl of MNase (40 units/μl) reaction buffer for 2 min at 37°C in a thermomixer at 1,400 rpm. MNase was inactivated with the addition of 10 μl EGTA (25 mM) and soluble digested chromatin was collected after centrifugation at 13 000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was diluted with 400 μl of NET-2 buffer and antibody-conjugated beads were added. Antibodies used: Pol II (MABI0601, MBL International) and Ser5P (MABI0603, MBL International). Immunoprecipitation was performed at 4°C on a rotating wheel at 16 rpm for 1h. The beads were washed six times with 1 ml of ice-cold NET-2 buffer and once with 100 μl of 1x PNKT (1x PNK buffer and 0.05% Triton X-100) buffer. Washed beads were incubated in 200 μl PNK reaction mix for 6 min in a Thermomixer at 1,400 rpm at 37°C. The beads were then washed once with 1 ml of NET-2 buffer and RNA was extracted with Trizol reagent. RNA was suspended in urea Dye and resolved on a 6% TBU gel (Invitrogen) at 200 V for 5 min. In order to size select 35–100 nt RNAs, a gel fragment was cut between BPB and XC dye markers. For each sample, several small holes were made with a 25G needle at the bottom of a 0.5 ml tube, which is then placed in a 1.5 ml tube. Gel fragments were placed in the layered tube and broken down by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 1 min. The small RNAs were eluted from the gel using RNA elution buffer (1 M NaOAc and 1 mM EDTA) for 1h on a rotating wheel at 16 rpm at room temperature. Eluted RNAs were purified with SpinX column (Coster) and two glass filters (Millipore) and the resulting flow-through RNA was precipitated overnight with ethanol. RNA libraries were prepared according to manual of Truseq small RNA library prep kit (Illumina). Deep sequencing (Hiseq4000, Illumina) was conducted by the high throughput genomics team of the Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics (WTCHG), Oxford.

## Bioinformatics analyses

## Transcription units’ annotation
Gencode V35 annotation, based on the GRCh38 version of the human genome, was used to obtain the list of protein-coding genes as in [ ]. To obtain the list of expressed mRNA isoforms, Salmon version 0.14.1 [ ] was used on two HeLa nucleoplasm RNA-seq (GSE110028 [ ]) and the most expressed mRNA isoform of each gene was kept for further analysis. HeLa chromatin RNA-seq signal (GSE110028 [ ]) was then quantified with BEDtools version 2.29.2 [ ] multicov to keep only the most expressed mRNA isoform with more than 10 reads in two biological replicates.
For the intron-containing, intronless, and histone genes, the mRNAs isoforms were separated in 193 intronless genes, 40 histone genes, and 2,236 intron-containing genes with a maximal gene size corresponding to the size of the longest intronless gene. The list of used exons was extracted from Gencode V35 by using the annotation of each most expressed mRNA isoform. The first and final exons of each mRNA isoform were then removed to keep only internal exons.

## mNET-seq analysis
Adapters were trimmed with Cutadapt version 1.18 [ ] in paired-end mode with the following options:—minimum-length 10 -q 15,10 -j 16 –A GATCGTCGGACTGTAGAACTCTGAAC –a AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCAC. Trimmed reads were mapped to the human GRCh38.p13 reference sequence with STAR version 2.7.3a [ ] and the parameters:—runThreadN 16—readFilesCommand gunzip -c -k—limitBAMsortRAM 20000000000—outSAMtype BAM SortedByCoordinate. SAMtools version 1.9 [ ] was used to retain the properly paired and mapped reads (-f 3). A custom python script [ ] was used to obtain the 3ʹ nucleotide of the second read and the strandedness of the first read. Strand-specific bam files were generated with SAMtools. FPKM-normalized bigwig files were created with deepTools2 version 3.4.2 [ ] bamCoverage tool with the parameters -bs 1 -p max—normalizeUsing RPKM.

## RNA-seq analysis
RNA-seq in HeLa cells treated for 12h with DMSO or 35 μM Isoginkgetin were taken from GSE72055 [ ]. Total RNA-seq in HeLa cells for 6h or 18h treatment with DMSO or 30 μM Isoginkgetin were taken from GSE86857 [ ]. RNA-seq were analysed as in [ ]. Adapters were trimmed with Cutadapt in paired-end mode with the following options:—minimum-length 10 -q 15,10 -j 16 -a AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCA -A AGATCGGAAGAGCGTCGTGTAGGGAAAGAGTGT. The remaining rRNA reads were removed by mapping the trimmed reads to the rRNA genes defined in the Human ribosomal DNA complete repeating unit (GenBank: U13369.1) with STAR and the parameters—runThreadN 16—readFilesCommand gunzip -c–k—outReadsUnmapped Fastx—limitBAMsortRAM 20000000000—outSAMtype BAM SortedByCoordinate. The unmapped reads were mapped to the human GRCh38.p13 reference sequence with STAR and the and the ENCODE parameters:—runThreadN 16—limitBAMsortRAM 20000000000—outSAMtype BAM SortedByCoordinate—quantMode GeneCounts—outFilterMultimapNmax 20—outFilterType BySJout—alignSJoverhangMin 8—alignSJDBoverhangMin 1—outFilterMismatchNmax 999—alignIntronMin 20—alignIntronMax 1000000—alignMatesGapMax 1000000. SAMtools was used to retain the properly paired and mapped reads (-f 3) and to produce strand-specific bam files. HTSeq version 1.99.2 [ ] count tool and the Gencode v35 annotation has been used to obtain the number of counts per gene. DESeq2 version 1.30.1 [ ] was then used to perform the differential expression analysis. Any gene with a two-fold fold change and an adjusted p-value < 0.05 was considered as significant. FPKM-normalized bigwig files were created with deepTools bamCoverage tool with the parameters -bs 10 -p max—normalizeUsing RPKM.

## Splicing efficiency
RNA-seq splicing efficiency was calculated as previously [ ] by first parsing each bam file to obtain the list of spliced and unspliced reads with the awk command (awk ‘/^@/|| $6 ∼ /N/’ for spliced reads and awk ‘/^@/|| $6! ∼ /N/’ for unspliced reads). The splicing efficiency was then calculated as the number of spliced reads over total reads for each expressed protein-coding gene with BEDtools multicov–s–split.

## Metagene profiles
Metagene profiles of genes scaled to the same length were generated with deepTools2 computeMatrix tool with a bin size of 10 bp and the plotting data obtained with plotProfile–outFileNameData tool. Graphs representing the RNA-seq or the mNET-seq signal were then created with GraphPad Prism 9.5. Metagene profiles are shown as the average of two biological replicates.

## P values and significance tests
P-values were computed with unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test, Wilcoxon rank sum test, or Wilcoxon signed-rank test, as indicated in the legends. Statistical tests were performed in GraphPad Prism 9.5.

## Results

## Isoginkgetin and Madrasin are poor splicing inhibitors
We first determined whether a short treatment with Madrasin or Isoginkgetin ( ) inhibits pre-mRNA splicing in HeLa cells as observed for PlaB and HB [ , ]. As the effect of Madrasin is less well characterised than Isoginkgetin, we first determined which concentration of Madrasin would be optimal for short-term inhibition. We treated HeLa cells with 30 μM, 60 μM, or 90 μM Madrasin for 30 min followed by RT-PCR analysis ( ). We observed a concentration-dependent inhibition of splicing of the intron located between exons 4 and 5 of BRD2 and selected 90 μM as a working concentration. To compare the efficiency of the different splicing inhibitors, we treated HeLa cells for 1h with DMSO, 1 μM PlaB, 1 μM HB, 30 μM Isoginkgetin, or 90 μM Madrasin and performed RT-PCR for exons 2 and 3 of DNAJB1 and exons 4 and 5 of BRD2 ( ). While SF3B1 inhibition with PlaB and HB shows, as expected, a clear increase in intron retention for both genes, Isoginkgetin and Madrasin have little effect on pre-mRNA splicing of these two genes. As SF3B1 inhibition also affects transcription [ , , , ], we investigated nascent transcription activity via 5’EU incorporation in HeLa cells treated for 1h with DMSO, 100 μM DRB, a CDK9 inhibitor, 1 μM PlaB, 1 μM HB, 30 μM Isoginkgetin, or 90 μM Madrasin ( ). As we previously observed, CDK9 and SF3B1 inhibition results in a reduction in 5’EU incorporation [ ] whereas Madrasin, but not Isoginkgetin, decreases the 5’EU signal. To determine whether the decrease in 5’EU signal is due to a degradation of pol II, we fractionated into chromatin, nucleoplasm, and cytoplasm fractions HeLa cells treated for 1h with DMSO, 1 μM PlaB, 1 μM HB, 30 μM Isoginkgetin, or 90 μM Madrasin and probed for total pol II, SF3B1, and α-tubulin and histone H3 as loading controls ( ). Madrasin and SF3B1 inhibition with PlaB and HB decrease SF3B1 chromatin association but do not affect the level of Rpb1, whereas Isoginkgetin does not affect SF3B1 or Rpb1 levels.
 These results indicate that both Madrasin and Isoginkgetin are poor splicing inhibitors but that Madrasin affects transcription without degrading pol II.

## Madrasin decreases transcription of protein-coding genes
As Madrasin reduces 5’EU signal, we first investigated by qRT-PCR whether rDNA transcription is decreased after 30 min or 60 min treatment with 90 μM Madrasin ( ). As the pre-rRNA level is not affected by Madrasin, we investigated pol II nascent transcription by performing total pol II and Ser5-P mNET-seq in HeLa cells following 30 min treatment with DMSO (Control) or 90 μM Madrasin ( and ). Madrasin treatment causes a decrease in pol II pausing and in pol II levels across the gene body on protein-coding genes while the pol II level increases downstream of poly(A) sites, indicating a transcription termination defect. We confirmed the decrease in pol II transcription following Madrasin treatment in mNET-seq by qRT-PCR on eight protein-coding genes ( ) and by pol II ChIP-qPCR on our model protein-coding gene KPNB1 ( ). To understand whether the effect of Madrasin on transcription could be mediated by a loss of transcription elongation and termination factors, we performed ChIP-qPCR on the KPNB1 gene of the elongation factors SPT5 and CDC73, a subunit of the PAF1 complex, and of CPSF73, the pre-mRNA cleavage enzyme, in HeLa cells treated with DMSO or 90 μM Madrasin for 30 min ( ). When the results are not ratioed to pol II ( ), the effect of Madrasin on SPT5 and CDC73 mimics the effect on pol II, with a reduction across the whole gene body and an increase in the delayed transcription termination region and the CPSF73 signal is not affected by Madrasin treatment. When ratioed to pol II, there is a relative increase in SPT5, CDC73, and CPSF73 across the gene body of KPNB1 but a reduced level of the three proteins on the delayed transcription termination region following Madrasin treatment ( ).
 These results indicate that while Madrasin has a limited effect on pre-mRNA splicing, it downregulates pol II transcription of protein-coding genes and causes a transcription termination defect.

## Transcription of intronless and histone genes is also affected by Madrasin
As Madrasin promotes a general transcriptional defect on protein-coding genes, which also include intronless and histone genes, we have analysed the effect of this drug on intronless genes with poly(A) sites and on intronless replication-activated histone genes. As intron-containing genes are generally longer than intronless genes, we selected three groups of expressed genes in HeLa cells: histone genes (n = 40), intronless genes (n = 193), and intron-containing protein-coding genes with a gene size inferior or equal to the longest intronless genes (n = 2,236) ( ). The RNA level from the intron-containing and intronless genes is similar in chromatin RNA-seq, while histone genes produce more RNA ( ). As expected, transcription of intron-containing genes is similarly affected by Madrasin as all protein-coding genes ( ). Madrasin also decreases nascent transcription of intronless genes and causes a higher pol II signal downstream of the poly(A) site ( and ). Interestingly, Madrasin activates the expression of some intronless genes, such as JUN ( ). We confirmed the increase in pol II, SPT5, and CDC73, but not CPSF73, on JUN after Madrasin treatment by ChIP-qPCR ( and ). Histone genes are also affected by Madrasin, mostly promoting a higher pol II signal downstream of the histone genes without affecting the level of nascent transcripts across the coding region ( and ). While pol II ChIP-qPCR on the H1-2 gene confirmed the mNET-seq profile, Madrasin treatment reduces SPT5 and CDC73, but not CPSF73, on this histone gene ( and ).
 These results indicate that Madrasin globally affects pol II transcription on intron-containing and intronless genes, and in the case of histone genes, mostly on transcription downstream of the normal transcription termination region.

## Isoginkgetin treatment affects pol I and pol II transcription
While a 1h treatment with 30 μM Isoginkgetin did not affect pre-mRNA splicing and 5’EU incorporation ( ), we investigated whether a longer treatment time would result in a change in splicing and transcription as Isoginkgetin was already shown to affect transcription after 6h of treatment [ ]. We treated HeLa cells with 30 μM Isoginkgetin from 1h to 6h and found virtually no effect on pre-mRNA splicing as analysed by RT-PCR on DNAJB1 and BRD2 genes ( ). Re-analysis of previously-published total RNA-seq datasets [ , ] in HeLa cells following 6h, 12h, or 18h treatment with 30 μM Isoginkgetin confirms that pre-mRNA splicing is not affected by Isoginkgetin at 6h but is significantly decreased at 12h and 18h ( ). Isoginkgetin is therefore unlikely to act on pre-mRNA splicing as a primary effect, in agreement with [ ]. To test whether Isoginkgetin affects transcription prior to 6h treatment, we first monitored 5’EU incorporation in HeLa cells following a time-course of 1h to 6h treatment with 30 μM Isoginkgetin ( ). It takes approximately 5h of Isoginkgetin treatment to see a marked decrease in 5’EU incorporation while shorter treatment time points show rather an increase in 5’EU incorporation. To determine whether pre-rRNA transcription could be responsible for the change in 5’EU incorporation, we investigated whether Isoginkgetin affects pol I transcription by qRT-PCR ( ). Transcription of rDNA starts to decrease after 2h treatment with Isoginkgetin but becomes significantly reduced only at 4h and 5h.
 We next investigated by oligo d(T) qRT-PCR the expression of 11 protein-coding genes in HeLa cells treated with DMSO or 30 μM Isoginkgetin from 1h to 6h ( ). We observed a detectable effect on the production of poly(A)+ mRNA from 3h onwards (NR4A3, LDLR, and KPNB1), with generally a downregulation of protein-coding gene expression, with the exception of the intronless gene JUN, following Isoginkgetin treatment. A general downregulation of expression of protein-coding genes by this drug is also apparent after re-analysis of previously published RNA-seq datasets (6h, 12h, and 18h Isoginkgetin treatment), which shows that protein-coding genes are generally downregulated while non-coding genes tend to be upregulated ( ). ATF3 expression was previously shown to be upregulated in HeLa cells after a 24h treatment with Isoginkgetin [ ], while we observed a decrease in ATF3 expression after 6h treatment ( ). We performed qRT-PCR following a 24h treatment with Isoginkgetin and confirmed that both JUN and ATF3 are upregulated while four other protein-coding genes are downregulated ( ). As changes in the level of poly(A)+ mRNA take more time to appear than changes in transcription, we performed pol II ChIP-qPCR following Isoginkgetin treatment ( and ). We did not observe any change in total pol II across KPNB1 after treating HeLa cells with Isoginkgetin for 30 min ( ). However, an Isoginkgetin time-course from 1h to 6h shows a decrease in pol II signal from 2h onwards across KPNB1, JUN, and H1-2 ( ), which would explain the downregulation in poly(A)+ mRNA production apparent from 3h treatment onwards.
 To determine whether Isoginkgetin could affect pol II CTD phosphorylation before transcription, we purified the chromatin fraction of HeLa cells treated with DMSO or 30 μM Isoginkgetin for 1h, 2h, or 4h and performed western blots for total pol II, Ser2-P, and Ser5-P ( ). We generally observed a loss of total pol II and of Ser2 and Ser5 phosphorylation on chromatin over time, with the exception of an increase in Ser5-P at the 1h timepoint. To confirm these observations, we performed pol II, Ser2-P, and Ser5-P ChIP-qPCR across the KPNB1 gene following Isoginkgetin treatment for 1h, 1h30, and 2h ( ). The changes in total pol II profile looks similar to what we previously observed after Isoginkgetin treatment ( ) and the changes in Ser2-P profile match the changes in total pol II, indicating that this mark is largely unaffected. However, the Ser5-P level increases at the promoter region after 1h treatment but returns to control levels after 1h30, in agreement with the chromatin western blot.
Isoginkgetin is a bioflavonoid, a group of small molecules that have been shown to regulate the SUMO post-translational modification [ ]. The SUMO modification is present on mRNA splicing and CPA factors and regulates their activities [ – ]. To determine whether 1h, 2h, or 4h treatment of 30 μM Isoginkgetin modifies SUMO1 or SUMO2/3 levels, we performed western blots on HeLa whole cell extract ( ). We only observed a slight increase in total SUMO2/3 level after 4h treatment.
These results indicate that Isoginkgetin affects pol I and pol II transcription and pol II CTD phosphorylation rather than pre-mRNA splicing. The effect of Isoginkgetin on transcription is also not likely mediated via a global change in SUMOylation.

## Discussion
We set out to test whether inhibition of pre-mRNA splicing affects transcription elongation and transcription termination using two small molecules, Madrasin and Isoginkgetin, that were found to inhibit pre-mRNA splicing following a 24h treatment [ , ]. To limit confounding effects associated with long treatment times, we have carried out short time courses of treatment. However, we rather found that both Madrasin and Isoginkgetin are poor splicing inhibitors and should therefore not considered as primarily inhibitors of pre-mRNA splicing.
While Madrasin has a limited effect on pre-mRNA splicing following a 30 min treatment, this small molecule promotes a general transcriptional downregulation and a delay in transcription termination, which is observed on intron-containing, intronless, and histone genes. The transcriptional dysregulation resulting from Madrasin could potentially explain the longer-term indirect effect on splicing via changes in proteins interacting with pol II, as we observed for the elongation factors SPT5 and CDC73. Another non-mutually exclusive possibility is a higher pol II elongation rate following Madrasin treatment, which could also explain the delayed transcription termination, as pol II elongation rate is known to regulate RNA processing [ – , , , ]. However, the cellular target(s) of Madrasin is unknown.
In line with a previous report [ ], our results clearly indicate that Isoginkgetin is not a potent pre-mRNA splicing inhibitor. Splicing defects take more than 6h of Isoginkgetin treatment to appear, strongly suggesting that this is a secondary effect. However, Isoginkgetin affects pol II transcription and pol II CTD Ser2 and Ser5 phosphorylation in ~1h and pol I transcription in ~2h. Additionally, Isoginkgetin can also affect post-transcriptional regulation, as exemplified by the JUN gene. While we observed a clear increase in JUN poly(A)+ mRNA, transcription of JUN by pol II was decreased by Isoginkgetin, indicating a stabilisation of the JUN mRNA. The re-analysis of Isoginkgetin RNA-seq datasets also shows a clear enrichment of non-coding (nc)RNAs in upregulated genes, with ncRNAs representing approximately 2/3 of these genes. This upregulation may be partially explained by the transcriptional readthrough previously observed for Isoginkgetin [ , ] ( ) from upstream protein-coding genes into ncRNA genes, transforming them into expressed genes in the differential expression analysis software. However, we could not observe a transcription termination defect nor the increase in total, but not poly(A)+, RNA-seq signal in the first intron [ ] following Isoginkgetin treatment by total pol II ChIP-qPCR. As Isoginkgetin mimics RNA exosome inhibition [ ], it is therefore likely that the accumulation of poorly processed transcripts (increased signal in the first intron, increased signal downstream of the poly(A) site, and increased non-polyadenylated ncRNAs) are due to a loss of RNA exosome activity rather than a transcriptional defect. The cellular target(s) of Isoginkgetin is also unknown. Isoginkgetin can partially inhibit SENP1 [ ], a protease deconjugating SUMO modification, in vitro, and in agreement with this, we start to see an increase in global SUMO2/3 levels after 4h treatment. It remains to be determined whether the effect of Isoginkgetin on pol I and pol II transcription is mediated by rapid changes (< 4h) in SUMO modifications on proteins involved in transcription.
The effects of Isoginkgetin and Madrasin on transcription and pre-mRNA splicing also differ from the effects of SF3B1 inhibitors as we and others have found that PlaB rapidly inhibits co-transcriptional splicing (30 min) and reduces P-TEFb recruitment to chromatin, resulting in an increased pol II pausing, reduced transcription elongation, and increased premature transcription termination [ , , – ]. These results indicate that Isoginkgetin and Madrasin are unlikely to be SF3B1 inhibitors.
Understanding the coupling between transcription, pre-mRNA splicing, and mRNA CPA remains technically challenging. Based on our and other groups’ analyses, Madrasin and Isoginkgetin should not be considered splicing inhibitors. It is also important to use short timepoints to screen for potential splicing inhibitors rather than 24h treatment in order to limit the influence of secondary/indirect effects.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Madrasin decreases transcription of protein-coding genes.
(A) RT-PCR with primers amplifying the intron located between exons 4 and 5 of BRD2. HeLa cells were treated with DMSO or 30 μM, 60 μM, or 90 μM Madrasin for 30 min. The location of the spliced and unspliced RNA is shown on the left of the panel. The percentages of unspliced RNA compared to total (spliced + unspliced) are shown below. (B) qRT-PCR with primers amplifying a region from the pol I transcribed pre-rRNA. HeLa cells were treated with DMSO or 90 μM Madrasin for 30 min (red) or 60 min (orange). cDNA was generated with random hexamers. Values are normalised to the 7SK snRNA and shown as relative to DMSO, mean ± SEM, n  =  3 biological replicates. Statistical test: two-tailed unpaired t-test. P-value: n.s. not significant. (C) Metagene profile of pol II CTD Ser5-P mNET-seq performed in HeLa cells treated with DMSO (blue) or 90 μM Madrasin for 30 min (red) on scaled expressed protein-coding genes.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## Transcription of intronless and histone genes is also affected by Madrasin.
(A) Violin plots, defined as min to max values, first and third quartiles (thin dotted lines), and mean (thicker dotted line), showing the log10 of gene length distribution (in bp) for intron-containing (red), intronless (blue), and histone (black) genes. Statistical test: Wilcoxon rank sum test. P-value: *** < 0.001, **** < 0.0001. (B) Violin plots, defined as min to max values, first and third quartiles (thin dotted lines), and mean (thicker dotted line), showing the log10 of gene expression distribution, from two biological HeLa chromatin RNA-seq experiments, for intron-containing (red), intronless (blue), and histone (black) genes. Statistical test: Wilcoxon rank sum test. P-value: ns: not significant, **** < 0.0001. (C) Metagene profile of total pol II mNET-seq performed in HeLa cells treated with DMSO (blue) or 90 μM Madrasin for 30 min (red) on scaled expressed intron-containing genes. (D) Screenshots of the genome browser total pol II mNET-seq DMSO (blue) and Madrasin (red) tracks of the intronless genes SOX4 and SF3B5. The arrow indicates the sense of transcription. (E) Ratios of SPT5 / total pol II, CDC73 / total pol II, or CPSF73 / total pol II from ChIP-qPCR on the intronless gene JUN in HeLa cells treated with DMSO (blue) or 90 μM Madrasin for 30 min (red). Mean ± SEM, n  =  3 biological replicates. Statistical test: two-tailed unpaired t-test. P-value: * < 0.05. (F) Screenshot of the genome browser total pol II mNET-seq DMSO (blue) and Madrasin (red) tracks of the histone gene H1-4. The arrow indicates the sense of transcription. (G) Ratios of SPT5 / total pol II, CDC73 / total pol II, or CPSF73 / total pol II from ChIP-qPCR on the histone gene H1-2 in HeLa cells treated with DMSO (blue) or 90 μM Madrasin for 30 min (red). Mean ± SEM, n  =  3 biological replicates. Statistical test: two-tailed unpaired t-test. P-value: * < 0.05, *** < 0.001.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## Isoginkgetin treatment affects pol I and pol II transcription.
(A) MA plot of total RNA-seq in HeLa cells treated with DMSO or Isoginkgetin for 6h or 18h. Significantly upregulated genes are shown in red while significantly downregulated genes are shown in blue. Other genes are shown in grey. The numbers of differentially expressed genes are shown on the figure. (B) MA plot of total RNA-seq in HeLa cells treated with DMSO or Isoginkgetin for 12h. Significantly upregulated genes are shown in red while significantly downregulated genes are shown in blue. Other genes are shown in grey. The numbers of differentially expressed genes are shown on the figure. (C) qRT-PCR with primers amplifying different protein-coding genes. HeLa cells were treated with DMSO or 30 μM Isoginkgetin for 24h. cDNA was generated with oligo(dT). Values are normalised to the protein-coding gene GAPDH and shown as relative to DMSO, mean ± SEM, n  =  3 biological replicates. Statistical test: two-tailed unpaired t-test. P-value: * < 0.05, ** < 0.01, **** < 0.0001. (D) Total pol II ChIP-qPCR of the intron-containing gene KPNB1 in HeLa cells treated with DMSO (black) or 30 μM Isoginkgetin (white) for 30 min. Mean ± SEM, n  =  3 biological replicates. Statistical test: two-tailed unpaired t-test. P-value: not significant. (E) Western blot on whole cell extract of HeLa cells treated with DMSO or 30 μM Isoginkgetin for 1h, 2h, or 4h. The antibodies are indicated at the bottom, with Ponceau S staining used as loading control.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## Isoginkgetin treatment affects transcription termination in RNA-seq.
(A) Metagene profile of total RNA-seq performed in HeLa cells treated with DMSO (blue) or Isoginkgetin (red) for 12h on scaled expressed intron-containing, intronless, and histone genes. The metagene profiles are shown as the average of two biological replicates. (B) Screenshots of the genome browser tracks for HeLa RNA-seq treated with DMSO (blue) or Isoginkgetin (red) for 12h on the intron-containing gene KPNB1, intronless genes SOX4, SF3B5, and JUN, and histone genes H1-2, H1-4, and H2BC5. The arrow indicates the sense of transcription.
(TIF)

We thank the High-Throughput Genomics Group at the Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics for sequencing.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0310519.r001Decision Letter 0
Palit DebSwatiAcademic Editor© 2024 Swati Palit Deb2024Swati Palit Debhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
13 Aug 2024

PONE-D-24-29298Isoginkgetin and Madrasin are poor splicing inhibitorsPLOS ONE
Dear Dr.  Tellier,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, both the reviewers are enthusiastic about the report, however Reviewer 1 has some suggestions for minor revision.  Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Sep 27 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Swati Palit Deb
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: 
   "This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust Investigator Awards [WT106134AIA and WT210641/Z/18/Z to S.M.]. Funding for open access charge: University of Leicester."
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript." 
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. When completing the data availability statement of the submission form, you indicated that you will make your data available on acceptance. We strongly recommend all authors decide on a data sharing plan before acceptance, as the process can be lengthy and hold up publication timelines. Please note that, though access restrictions are acceptable now, your entire data will need to be made freely accessible if your manuscript is accepted for publication. This policy applies to all data except where public deposition would breach compliance with the protocol approved by your research ethics board. If you are unable to adhere to our open data policy, please kindly revise your statement to explain your reasoning and we will seek the editor's input on an exemption. Please be assured that, once you have provided your new statement, the assessment of your exemption will not hold up the peer review process.
4. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels.   
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
5. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: 1. It would be great to show some of the qPCR data using the ddPCR method to understand the exact defect in the splicing or at the transcriptional level.
2. How are RNA Pol II subunit expression levels altered following Madrasin treatment compared to Isoginkgetin? Also, as a positive control, some of the figures in Figure 3 (such as 3F) are better suited for a PladB treatment comparison.
3. Similarly, for short-term treatment of Isoginkgetin, PladB comparison will be helpful to justify that splicing is secondary to transcriptional inhibition.
Reviewer #2: In this study, authors have investigated the effect of Madrasin and Isoginkgetin, two non-SF3B1 splicing inhibitors, on splicing and transcription. The results show that Madrasin and Isoginkgetin are poor splicing inhibitors using assays like RT-PCR for exons 2 and 3 of DNAJB1 and exons 4 and 5 of BRD2, nascent transcription activity via 5’EU incorporation, metagene profiling of total pol II mNET-seq and qRT-PCR with primers amplifying different protein-coding genes. My recommendation is to accept the manuscript in current without any additional changes.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0310519.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
22 Aug 2024

Reviewer #1: 1. It would be great to show some of the qPCR data using the ddPCR method to understand the exact defect in the splicing or at the transcriptional level.
We thank the reviewer for their positive comments. While interesting, we think that ddPCR is beyond the scope of the study as the main message of the manuscript is that Isoginkgetin and Madrasin are poor splicing inhibitors and should therefore not be used to inhibit pre-mRNA splicing.
2. How are RNA Pol II subunit expression levels altered following Madrasin treatment compared to Isoginkgetin? Also, as a positive control, some of the figures in Figure 3 (such as 3F) are better suited for a PladB treatment comparison. 3. Similarly, for short-term treatment of Isoginkgetin, PladB comparison will be helpful to justify that splicing is secondary to transcriptional inhibition.
We added to Fig 1E western blots of the large subunit RNA polymerase II (Rpb1), SF3B1, α-tubulin, and histone H3 performed on chromatin/nucleoplasm/cytoplasm fractions of HeLa cells treated for 1 hour with DMSO, Isoginkgetin, Madrasin, Pladienolide B, and Herboxidiene. While SF3B1 (as positive control) is decreased on chromatin and increased in nucleoplasm and cytoplasm fractions after treatment with PlaB, HB, and Madrasin, Isoginkgetin has no effect on SF3B1. For total Rpb1, none of the inhibitors has an effect on its cellular distribution indicating that the decrease in transcription is not due to degradation of pol II.
For the comparison of Isoginkgetin and Madrasin to PlaB, we have extended the Discussion to describe the results we obtained on the effect of PlaB on splicing and transcription and how they differ to what we observe for Isoginkgetin and Madrasin. 
Added to the Discussion- “The effects of Isoginkgetin and Madrasin on transcription and pre-mRNA splicing also differ from the effects of SF3B1 inhibitors as we and others have found that PlaB rapidly inhibits co-transcriptional splicing (30 min) and reduces P-TEFb recruitment to chromatin, resulting in an increased pol II pausing, reduced transcription elongation, and increased premature transcription termination (5, 7, 19-21). These results indicate that Isoginkgetin and Madrasin are unlikely to be SF3B1 inhibitors.”
Reviewer #2: In this study, authors have investigated the effect of Madrasin and Isoginkgetin, two non-SF3B1 splicing inhibitors, on splicing and transcription. The results show that Madrasin and Isoginkgetin are poor splicing inhibitors using assays like RT-PCR for exons 2 and 3 of DNAJB1 and exons 4 and 5 of BRD2, nascent transcription activity via 5’EU incorporation, metagene profiling of total pol II mNET-seq and qRT-PCR with primers amplifying different protein-coding genes. My recommendation is to accept the manuscript in current without any additional changes.
We thank the reviewer for their positive comments.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_To_Reviewers_V2.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0310519.r003Decision Letter 1
Palit DebSwatiAcademic Editor© 2024 Swati Palit Deb2024Swati Palit Debhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
3 Sep 2024

Isoginkgetin and Madrasin are poor splicing inhibitors
PONE-D-24-29298R1
Dear Dr. Tellier,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter, and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up to date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Swati Palit Deb
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0310519.r004Acceptance letter
Palit DebSwatiAcademic Editor© 2024 Swati Palit Deb2024Swati Palit Debhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
10 Oct 2024

PONE-D-24-29298R1 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tellier, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Swati Palit Deb 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE