pmcPLoS BiolPLoS Biol212plosbiolplosPLOS Biology1544-91731545-7885PLOSPMC12714216PMC12714216.112714216127142164138558410.1371/journal.pbio.3003547PBIOLOGY-D-25-002901Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsHepatocytesBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyLiverHepatocytesMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyLiverHepatocytesBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsEpithelial CellsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBiological TissueEpitheliumEpithelial CellsMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBiological TissueEpitheliumEpithelial CellsBiology and Life SciencesComputational BiologyGenome AnalysisTranscriptome AnalysisBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGenomicsGenome AnalysisTranscriptome AnalysisBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyCell DifferentiationResearch and Analysis MethodsPrecipitation TechniquesImmunoprecipitationBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionDNA transcriptionDerepression of the epithelial transcription factor GRHL2 promotes direct hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transdifferentiation
Hepatocyte reprogramming to cholangiocyte-like cells involves the epithelial master regulator GRHL2VasseurLudivineConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing GheeraertCélineConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – review & editing Dubois-ChevalierJulieConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareVisualizationWriting – review & editing VeryNinonConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – review & editing GuilleLoïcInvestigationMethodologyVisualization Bou SalehMohamedFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – review & editing BouletClémenceInvestigationMethodology SobolewskiCyrilInvestigationMethodology LoyerPascalInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing BerthierAlexandreInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing LegrandNoémieInvestigationMethodology CorluAnneMethodologyWriting – review & editing GnemmiVivianeMethodologyResourcesVisualizationWriting – review & editing LasaillyGuillaumeResources LeteurtreEmmanuelleResourcesWriting – review & editing GalinouskyDmitrySoftwareVisualization BongiovanniAntoninoMethodologySoftware TarontSolenneInvestigation ToftNicolaj I.MethodologyVisualization GrøntvedLarsMethodologyVisualization TulasneDavidResources FurlanAlessandroResources Ntandja-WandjiLine CarolleResources StaelsBartFunding acquisitionProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing LefebvrePhilippeFunding acquisitionProject administrationWriting – review & editing DubuquoyLaurentConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7222-9264EeckhouteJérômeConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationProject administrationSupervisionVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Univ. Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1011-EGID, F-59000, Lille, France2
Univ. Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1286 – INFINITE – Institute for Translational Research in Inflammation, F-59000, Lille, France3
Inserm, INRAE, Univ Rennes, Institut NUMECAN (Nutrition Métabolismes et Cancer) UMR-A 1341, UMR-S 1317, F-35000, Rennes, France4
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, UMR9020-U1277 – CANTHER – Cancer Heterogeneity Plasticity and Resistance to Therapies, F-59000, Lille, France5
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, US 41 – UAR 2014 – PLBS, Lille, France6
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense M, Denmark7
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, UMR9020 – U1277 – Canther – Cancer Heterogeneity, Plasticity and Resistance to Therapies, Lille, France8
Tumorigenesis and Resistance to Treatment Unit, Centre Oscar Lambret, F-59000, Lille, FranceLeeJoo-HyeonAcademic Editor file. All ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data generated in this study have been deposited into the Gene Expression Omnibus SuperSeries under accession number GSE281717. Codes and data related to integrated mouse liver single-cell RNA-seq data have been deposited into zenodo (https://zenodo.org/records/13897656 and https://zenodo.org/records/13897729, respectively).PLOS Publication Stagevor-update-to-uncorrected-proofPublication Update2025-12-18

## Data Availability
All individual numerical values that underlie originally generated data in this study data are available in the file. All ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data generated in this study have been deposited into the Gene Expression Omnibus SuperSeries under accession number GSE281717. Codes and data related to integrated mouse liver single-cell RNA-seq data have been deposited into zenodo (https://zenodo.org/records/13897656 and https://zenodo.org/records/13897729, respectively).

## Introduction
Hepatocytes, the predominant liver cell type, play a crucial role in the organ’s homeostatic and secretory functions. Indeed, hepatocytes are key regulators of energy and iron homeostasis, and bear critical functions related to detoxification, coagulation, and the acute phase response. These unique hepatocyte functionalities are acquired during cellular differentiation, which is itself driven by establishment of a hepatocyte-specific transcriptional program. This phenomenon is orchestrated by transcriptional regulators, primarily hepatocyte identity transcription factors (Hep-ID TFs), which are hepatocyte-specific/enriched TFs [ – ].
Hepatocytes originate from hepatoblasts, which can alternatively differentiate into cholangiocytes. Cholangiocytes line the lumen of bile ducts and control bile volume and composition [ ]. Together, hepatocytes and cholangiocytes constitute the two types of epithelial cells found in the liver [ ]. However, unlike cholangiocytes, which form a conventional monolayer of cuboidal or columnar epithelial cells with a single apico-basal axis (hereafter defined as monopolarized epithelial cells), hepatocytes are characterized by multiple apical (and basal) surfaces, a unique feature among epithelia [ – ]. The liver possesses unique regenerative capacities where epithelial cell plasticity is instrumental while the existence of adult liver stem cells is highly disputed [ – ]. Indeed, the plasticity of adult liver epithelial cells allows them to reciprocally transdifferentiate [ , ]. In the mouse, this has been identified as a pro-regenerative mechanism operating when repair through proliferation of the injured cell type is not sufficient and/or impaired [ ].
For example, in a mouse model mimicking the phenotype of Alagille syndrome (ALGS) with a deficient intrahepatic biliary system at birth, hepatocytes transdifferentiate to fully mature cholangiocytes to form functional bile ducts [ ]. Lineage tracing has provided compelling evidence for transdifferentiation of liver epithelial cells in such conditions [ ]. In humans, end stages of chronic liver diseases, such as alcohol-related liver diseases (ALD) [ ] and metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) [ ], are characterized by the presence of cells co-expressing hepatocyte and cholangiocyte marker genes. In line, transcriptomic analyses of hepatocytes from humans with end-stage ALD and MASLD revealed instances of hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte-like cell transdifferentiation [ , ]. HCT is also observed in livers from patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) [ ]. In this context, hepatocyte-derived cells contribute to the ductular reaction, a histologically defined phenomenon of hyperplasia of bile duct-like structures [ ].
Despite its pathophysiological importance, HCT remains a poorly understood phenomenon. In particular, how HCT is orchestrated at the molecular level to induce a cholangiocyte-like transcriptional program remains ill-defined.

## Results

## HCT occurs directly without transitioning through a hepatoblast-like transcriptional state
In several previous studies, HCT was proposed to involve dedifferentiation of hepatocytes into so-called bipotent liver progenitor-like cells [ – ]. To further compare gene expression changes involved in HCT with those defining developmental cholangiocyte differentiation from progenitors, we integrated single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) data obtained from embryonic, postnatal, and adult mouse livers [ , ]. In order to broadly capture the hepatocyte heterogeneity landscape, data from adult mouse livers comprised a wide range of injury models: acute exposure to acetaminophen (APAP) [ , ] or lipopolysaccharide [ ], chronic exposure to 3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine (DDC) inducing cholestasis [ , ], western diet-induced metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis [ ] and partial hepatectomy (PHx) [ , , ] ( ). Cells from the liver epithelial lineage were recovered from each dataset and batch correction was performed before visualization using uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) (see for details). This approach resulted in the segregation of hepatoblasts from mature cholangiocytes or hepatocytes ( and ). For instance, clustering analysis identified a cluster of cholangiocytes (denoted cluster 1; ). Interestingly, this cluster was, however, connected to two other clusters comprising, on the one hand, hepatoblasts/postnatal epithelial cells (cluster 2) and, on the other hand, mostly adult hepatocytes (cluster 3) ( and ). Interrogating the origin of hepatocytes from cluster 3 revealed that they almost exclusively stemmed from DDC-treated mice (95%; ) including yellow fluorescent protein-labeled hepatocytes used for lineage tracing in this study [ ] ( ). This is consistent with cluster 3 capturing HCT, which is known to be prominently induced in the chronic DDC-induced cholestasis model, most probably due to exhaustion of the cholangiocyte regenerative potential [ , ]. These data also indicated that HCT was unrelated to hepatocyte reprogramming occurring in other conditions such as APAP intoxication or PHx. This implies that induction of SOX9 in a subset of hepatocytes, commonly observed across these injury models ( ) and interpreted in the literature as hepatocytes acquiring biliary features [ ], is in fact associated with different context-specific hepatocyte reprogramming events not necessarily involving transition towards a cholangiocyte-like cellular state. Using cells from clusters 1, 2, and 3, we performed RNA velocity analyses, which indicated that the developmental differentiation of cholangiocytes either from hepatoblasts or through HCT are independent ( and ). In line, refined analysis of cellular trajectory and fate transition probability using CellRank2 [ ] indicated that a subset of hepatocytes from DDC-treated mice (called HCT) was characterized by an extremely high probability to become cholangiocytes ( and ). Further arguing against HCT involving hepatocytes to transiently adopt a progenitor-like transcriptional program, no hepatocytes from DDC-treated mice displayed significant fate probability towards hepatoblasts ( and ). Finally, the fraction of variable genes showing peak expression at intermediate stages during HCT was limited (9%; ). Moreover, these genes were enriched for biological pathways shared with both hepatocytes and cholangiocytes ( ) and were not characterized by heightened expression in hepatoblasts ( ). Indeed, hepatocytes in intermediate stages in the HCT process still express hepatocyte markers [e.g., Apoc3 (Apolipoprotein C-III) or Alb (Albumin)] and start expressing cholangiocyte markers [e.g., Epcam (Epithelial cell adhesion molecule)]) while lacking expression of typical progenitor genes [e.g., Afp (Alpha fetoprotein)] ( and ).
 Altogether, these data indicate that HCT occurs through a process, which does not involve transient acquisition of a progenitor-like cell state.

## HCT is mainly characterized by induction of the transcriptional signature of monopolarized epithelial cells in hepatocytes
In order to characterize the transcriptional reprogramming underlying HCT, we compared the transcriptome of lineage-traced hepatocytes from DDC-treated mice with that from healthy hepatocytes and cholangiocytes obtained using bulk RNA-seq of sorted cells (see ) [ , ]. When projected onto a space defined by the first two principal components from a principal component analysis (PCA) conducted on the transcriptomes of hepatocytes and cholangiocytes, hepatocytes undergoing HCT localized near cholangiocytes ( and ). As expected, these data therefore verified that hepatocytes undergoing HCT in the liver of DDC-treated mice have a transcriptome similar to that of cholangiocytes. In line, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) indicated that genes characterized by enriched expression in cholangiocytes among the different liver cell-types (n = 57 obtained from [ ] and denoted as Chol-enriched genes; ) were significantly biased towards up-regulated genes during HCT ( ). To unbiasedly assess the nature of the transcriptional reprogramming, enrichment analyses for biological or molecular pathways and their clustering by similarity was next performed using the database for annotation, visualization, and integrate discovery (DAVID) [ ]. In line with a transdifferentiation process, genes down-regulated in hepatocytes undergoing HCT, when compared to healthy hepatocytes, were enriched for terms related to normal hepatocyte functions ( ). When up-regulated genes were considered, enriched terms pointed to archetypal epithelial cell features such as cilium and tight junctions ( and ). GSEA further indicated that genes characterizing the human epithelial cell lineage identified in [ ] (n = 837; hereafter denoted as Epith-Signature. See ) displayed significantly greater expression in hepatocytes undergoing HCT ( ). Similar results were obtained when using genes characteristic of the monopolar cell polarity ( ). Moreover, genes from the Epith-Signature were enriched in the subset of HCT up-regulated genes characterized by low basal expression in healthy hepatocytes and strong induction in HCT (p-value < 0.0001, chi-squared test; ). Among those genes were commonly used cholangiocyte markers such as Krt7 (Keratin 7), Krt19 (Keratin 19), and Epcam ( ; over 60% of the Chol-enriched genes are comprised within the Epith-Signature). Consistent with these findings, comparing expression of genes from the Epith-Signature in different human cells from the epithelial lineage obtained from the Human Protein Atlas [ ] indicated that, unlike cholangiocytes, hepatocytes were characterized by low expression levels ( and ). Further indication that the transcriptome of hepatocytes differs from that of other epithelial cells, including cholangiocytes, was provided when mining the number of genes with high expression selectivity among individual epithelial cells [i.e., genes with a tau specificity index >0.9 when all individual epithelial cell types are considered [ ]. Indeed, hepatocytes were characterized by the greatest number of specifically expressed genes, i.e., with low expression in the other individual epithelial cells, while cholangiocytes had very few ( ).
 Altogether, these data indicate that a main event underlying HCT is induction of a conventional monopolarized epithelial cell gene signature, which is typically absent in healthy hepatocytes.

## Epithelial lineage TFs are repressed by the polycomb repressive complex 2 in hepatocytes
Mining transcriptional changes underlying HCT using a procedure similar to but applied only to TF-encoding genes generated similar results ( and ). This revealed that changes in TF-encoding gene expression were fully informative with regards to capturing HCT, which prompted us to further characterize deregulated TFs as a mean to define drivers of HCT. Calling differentially expressed genes (q-value < 0.05) in hepatocytes that underwent HCT compared to healthy ones identified 115 down- and 423 up-regulated TF-encoding genes, respectively ( ). As expected, down-regulated TFs comprised many Hep-ID TFs ( ) consistent with loss of hepatocyte identity upon HCT. With regards to up-regulated TFs, 82% of them were also significantly induced in cholangiocyte-like cells derived from hepatocytes in the mouse model of ALGS lacking an intrahepatic biliary system [ ] ( ), consistent with a role for these identified up-regulated TFs in HCT.
 The up-regulated TFs displayed low basal expression levels in healthy hepatocytes, and were also the most strongly induced upon HCT ( ). These data suggest that a subset of up-regulated TFs might be originally repressed in hepatocytes. We therefore next characterized the promoters of up-regulated TFs in healthy hepatocytes by monitoring levels of chromatin accessibility [DNase I Hypersensitivity (DHS)] as well as levels of modified histones prototypically linked to gene activation [histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac)], transcription (H3K36me3 and RNA Polymerase II) or repression (H3K27me3). We used DHS-seq and ChIP-seq data obtained from healthy mouse livers [hepatocytes overwhelmingly contribute to chromatin-based signals obtained using whole liver [ – ] or isolated mouse primary hepatocytes (MPH) ( ). Using the Spark software [ ], we identified 3 main clusters of promoters with divergent epigenetic patterns ( ). The largest cluster (C1) comprised promoters already active in normal liver with accessible chromatin and strong H3K4me3 and H3K27ac signals, while C2 and C3 gradually displayed features of inactive but transcriptionally competent or repressed promoters, respectively. In particular, promoters within C2 displayed moderate levels of both H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, i.e., potential bivalent promoters [ ], while promoters in C3 were characterized by lack of any feature of gene activation concomitant with strong repressive H3K27me3 signals ( and ). Mining single-nucleus ATAC sequencing data [ ] confirmed the differences in promoter accessibility between the 3 clusters and did not reveal any difference between periportal and pericentral hepatocytes ( ). In line with the chromatin status of their promoters, TF-encoding genes from C2, and even more so from C3, displayed low basal expression in mouse hepatocytes but showed greater induction during HCT when compared to those from C1 ( ). Adding ChIP-seq data for the heterochromatin mark H3K9me3 to Spark did not significantly modify the clustering of up-regulated TF promoters ( ). In line, genes from C3 were not found within mouse liver chromatin domains primarily characterized by the presence of H3K9me3 [ ] ( ). Consistently, promoters from C3 did not display DNA methylation, which is often found at H3K9me3 repressed genes [ ] ( ). Biophysically identified heterochromatin regions in mouse hepatocytes, defined through sequencing of sonication-resistant heterochromatin [ ], indicated that C3 promoters were found both in euchromatin and heterochromatin ( ). These findings further emphasize the role of H3K27me3 in repressing genes of alternative cell fates in these two chromatin compartments, independently of H3K9me3 [ , ].
We next aimed to define whether observations in mice are consistent with promoter epigenetic patterns found in humans using ChIP-seq data for H3K4me3, H3K27ac and H3K27me3 from human healthy livers [ ] and human HepG2 cells [this study and [ ]; ]. We found epigenetic patterns in human livers ( ) and HepG2 cells ( ) reminiscent of those observed in mouse hepatocytes ( and ), which was in line with greater mRNA expression of C1 genes ( and ). These data both verified the robustness of our clusters of TF-encoding gene promoters and indicated its human relevance.
Deposition of H3K27me3 is under the control of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and more particularly of the enzymes EZH1 and 2 (Enhancer Of Zeste 1 and 2 Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Subunits) [ , ]. In line, mining ChIP-seq data from [ ] ( ) indicated that presence of H3K27me3 at TF-encoding gene promoters in mouse liver is linked to stronger recruitment of EZH2, especially for promoters from C3 ( ). Moreover, Ezh1/2 deletion in mouse livers [ ] ( ) triggered both a decrease in H3K27me3 ( ) at the C2 and C3 genes and their transcriptional induction ( ). This translated into induction of the Epith-Signature and Chol-enriched gene sets ( ). Finally, treatment of HepG2 cells with pharmacological inhibitors of EZH1/2 (UNC1999 and valemetostat tosylate together referred to as EZHi), which decreased H3K27me3 levels ( ), also triggered concomitant derepression of TF-encoding genes from C2 and C3 as measured by RNA-seq analysis ( ).
 Altogether, these data indicate that HCT involves the induction of TF-encoding genes normally repressed through polycomb-dependent H3K27me3 in hepatocytes.

## Forced expression of the epithelial lineage TF GRHL2 promotes HCT
We next aimed to demonstrate a functional role for up-regulated TFs in HCT. In addition to being repressed in normal hepatocytes and highly induced upon HCT, TF-encoding genes from C3 displayed the highest tau lineage-specificity indexes calculated from gene expression in 13 human cell lineages (including the epithelial lineage) obtained from [ ] ( ). We therefore reasoned that C3 comprises key TFs involved in the establishment of the alternative bona fide epithelial transcriptional program characterizing HCT. We therefore monitored individual TFs from C3 by simultaneously comparing: i) their expression enrichment in epithelial cells (ranking based on highest to lowest expression levels among aforementioned human cell lineages); ii) their level of induction upon HCT and iii) their presence in the Epith-Signature and Chol-enriched gene set. The TFs Grainyhead Like Transcription Factor 2 (GRHL2) and EHF (ETS Homologous Factor) emerged from these analyses as they were enriched in epithelial cells and cholangiocytes and strongly induced in HCT ( ). Interestingly, these TFs, together with OVOL1/2 (Ovo Like Transcriptional Repressors 1 and 2), had previously been suspected to inhibit epithelial–mesenchymal transition in cancer cells [ , ] with a hierarchically dominant position for GRHL2, which directly induces expression of EHF and OVOL2 [ , ] ( ). Moreover, GRHL2 is considered a master regulator of epithelial cell differentiation [ , ]. In line with our previous characterization of genes from C3, Grhl2 displays H3K27me3-mediated repression in hepatocytes ( ). We next set out to experimentally define if GRHL2 could induce expression of genes reminiscent of those activated upon HCT in bipotential mouse embryonic liver (BMEL) cells, which have the ability to differentiate both in hepatocytes and cholangiocytes [ , ]. Ectopic expression of GRHL2 ( and ) triggered induction of a cholangiocyte-like transcriptional program. Indeed, RNA-seq data mining using biological pathway enrichment analyses indicated that expressing GRHL2 in BMEL cells increased the expression of genes related to cell fate commitment including epithelial cell differentiation ( and and – ). In line, GSEA pointed to stimulation of expression of the Epith-Signature and Chol-enriched genes ( ). Accordingly, when BMEL were grown in three-dimensional Matrigel, GRHL2 promoted acquisition of cell aggregates with a cystic organization ( , , and ) typically adopted by cholangiocytes [ , ].
 To more directly assess the ability of GRHL2 to promote HCT, we performed similar experiments in the HepG2 hepatic cell line ( and ). Although the global reprogramming of the transcriptome was less pronounced than in BMEL cells ( and and and ), GRHL2 again promoted expression of an archetypal epithelial transcriptional program as judged both through biological pathway enrichment analyses ( ) and GSEA using the Epith-Signature and Chol-enriched gene sets ( and ). This was not associated with a decrease in hepatocyte-enriched gene expression ( and ). To further characterize how GRHL2 induces transcriptional reprogramming, we defined its cistrome using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-seq in HepG2 cells. Importantly, the GRHL2 binding sites we identified in HepG2 cells (top 10,000 peaks) also displayed recruitment of endogenous GRHL2 previously defined in primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells [ ] or an ovarian epithelial cancer cell line [ – ] ( ), albeit with lower enrichment ( ). This indicated that, while forced TF expression can lead to spurious chromatin binding and gene regulation, chromatin binding of ectopically expressed GRHL2 in hepatocytes recapitulates that of the endogenously expressed protein [ , ]. Moreover, the CistromeGO tool [ ] indicated that GRHL2 peaks from HepG2 cells were enriched near genes related to terms consistent with transcriptional remodeling towards an archetypal epithelial cell program such as cell adhesion and junction ( ). We next inspected GRHL2 ChIP-seq data at genes selected on the basis of their induction upon HCT and GRHL2 ectopic expression as well as their presence in the Epith-Signature and/or cholangiocyte-enriched gene list. In addition to the previously identified GRHL2 target genes EHF, CLDN4 (Claudin 4) and RAB25 (RAB25, Member RAS Oncogene Family) [ , ], these analyses also pointed to direct regulation of genes such as ESRP1 (Epithelial splicing regulatory protein 1), ITGA3 (Integrin Subunit Alpha 3), ITGB8 (Integrin Subunit Beta 8), JUP (Junction Plakoglobin), and KRT7 ( and and ). These genes have a proven role in establishment and maintenance of epithelial cell identity and epithelium integrity [ , – ]. The sensitivity of these genes to GRHL2-mediated up-regulation was further supported by their induction upon moderate ectopic expression of GRHL2 ( ). As an additional model of human hepatocytes, we used differentiated HepaRG cells [ , ]. GRHL2 overexpression in these cells ( ) also triggered induction of CLDN4, EHF, JUP, KRT7, and RAB25 ( ). We also induced GRHL2 expression in human organoids issued from EPCAM-positive cells expanded in three-dimensional Matrigel and induced to differentiate according to [ ]. We found that this procedure gives rise to a population of cells expressing both hepatocyte and cholangiocyte markers [ ]. GRHL2 triggered moderate induction of several of its target genes concomitant with reduced expression of the ALB and CYP3A4 (Cytochrome P450 family 3 subfamily A member 4) hepatocytes markers ( ).
 Finally, the impact of forced GRHL2 expression in mouse hepatocytes in vivo was assessed following hydrodynamic tail vein injection of the GRHL2-encoding plasmid ( and ) or injection of recombinant adeno-associated viruses (AAV8) ( and ). Reminiscent of our in vitro findings, we observed that GRHL2 induces expression of the cholangiocyte-enriched epithelial genes Cldn4, Ehf, Esrp1, Itga3, Itgb8, Jup, Krt7, and Rab25 when expressed in hepatocytes in vivo ( and ). Concomitantly, expression of hepatocyte marker genes such as Alb, Gsta3 (Glutathione S-transferase, alpha 3) or Fmo5 (Flavin containing monooxygenase 5) was reduced ( ). Expression of the hepatic bile acid exporter Abcb11 (ATP-binding cassette, sub-family B member 11; Bsep) was also diminished while that of Cyp3a11 was increased, changes characterizing mice with altered hepatic bile acid metabolism [ , ]. While the liver architecture was not affected after 1 week ( ), dramatic histological alterations to the hepatocyte parenchyma, characterized by gained heterogeneity in cell shape and size ( and ), and to immune cell infiltration ( ) was observed after 2 weeks.
 Taken together, these results indicate that GRHL2 promotes direct HCT through activation of genes characteristic of an archetypal epithelial cell program.

## Induction of GRHL2 in hepatocytes undergoing HCT in human livers
We and others have reported that livers of patients with end-stage chronic liver diseases are characterized by populations of hepatocytes displaying signs of HCT, i.e., concomitant loss of hepatocyte identity gene expression and induction of cholangiocyte markers [ , – , , ]. To assess GRHL2 expression and its link to HCT in human livers, we first used samples from patients with ALD-related decompensated cirrhosis. Fragments of healthy liver samples from patients subjected to liver resection due to hepatic tumors were used as control in these experiments. First, we found that GRHL2 expression was induced in patients with liver failure both at the mRNA and protein levels ( and ). This was associated with decreased EZH2 and H3K27me3 levels in those livers ( ). To define that GRHL2 was specifically induced in hepatocytes, we monitored its mRNA levels in RNA-seq-based transcriptomic data previously obtained using microdissection of hepatocyte-enriched areas from those livers [ ]. Compared to control samples, GRHL2 expression was induced in ALD-related liver failure (log2 FC = 1.38, q-value = 0.11), which correlated with the induction of genes defined as up-regulated during HCT as well as genes from the Epith-Signature ( ). Moreover, unlike control tissues which stained positive for GRHL2 in cholangiocytes only, GRHL2 immunostaining in livers from ALD patients was positive not only in neoductules but also in hepatocytes found at the border of the regenerative nodules next to the fibrotic bands ( , , and ). Immunofluorescence co-staining of GRHL2 and albumin (ALB) showed a gradual increase in GRHL2 together with a gradual loss of ALB staining in hepatocytes bordering the fibrotic scar ( ). Additional co-staining for KRT7 further revealed triple-positive cells at the scar interface ( , , and ), in line with HCT occurring in this specific micro-environment in human cirrhotic livers [ ]. Single-nuclei RNA-seq data analysis of human livers at different stages of MASLD [ ] showed increased GRHL2-expressing hepatocytes in end-stages of the disease (i.e., cirrhosis and liver failure) when compared to healthy control livers ( – ). Moreover, GRHL2 expression was found in hepatocytes acquiring mixed expression of hepatocyte and cholangiocyte identity genes consistent with its HCT-promoting activities ( ). Finally, GRHL2 immunostaining in samples from patients with liver failure due to primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) or PSC also revealed GRHL2-positive hepatocytes ( and ).
 Overall, these data indicate that induction of GRHL2 characterizes HCT in human livers.

## Discussion
Hepatocyte plasticity is of primary importance for the regenerative potential of the liver. As such HCT assists the liver when coping with compromised or exhausted renewal potential of cholangiocytes [ , ]. Thus, understanding the molecular basis of HCT is of primary interest for regenerative medicine in the field of bile duct diseases including ALGS and intrahepatic biliary injuries such as PBC and PSC [ ]. Beyond such conditions, HCT has also been described as a feature of end-stage disease-associated hepatocytes in ALD and MASLD [ , , ]. In this specific context, whether HCT is indicative of ongoing regeneration in cirrhotic livers or is a phenomenon contributing to precipitate liver failure remains to be established.
Changes to the hepatocyte microenvironment are main drivers of HCT. For instance, cytokines such as transforming growth factor beta are instrumental in inducing this process [ , , ], which occurs in human ALD-related cirrhosis at the scar interface (this study and [ ]). Here, we show that HCT is linked to expression of GRHL2 in hepatocytes lining the fibrotic bands in livers of patients with end-stage ALD, PBC, and PSC. This implies that loss of hepatocyte intercellular junctions and interaction with stiff extracellular matrices likely also contribute to HCT. Indeed, this can lead to activation of the Hippo/YAP signaling pathway, a well-established driver of cholangiocyte differentiation and bile duct development [ , , ]. Moreover, alterations in the unique multi-polarization of hepatocytes could also contribute to reprogram their transcriptomes. Indeed, modulation of the cellular polarity during differentiation processes is not merely a consequence, but rather actively contributes to cell fate decisions [ , ]. Hence, HCT is most probably triggered by a complex interplay of signals. Defining how these different mechanisms operate in concert to drive HCT and, in particular, how they are functionally connected with the activities of TFs such as GRHL2 will further improve our understanding of this process.
Previous reports have posited that hepatocytes acquire a progenitor-like hepatobiliary identity in injured livers [ ]. However, this assumption has usually been based on the co-expression of a limited number of hepatocyte- and cholangiocyte-specific markers including notably SOX9 [ , ]. However, careful examination of data reported in [ ] indicates that only a limited subset of the genes induced in so-called “progenitor-like cells” have stronger expression levels in hepatoblasts than in hepatocytes. Moreover, this study also pointed to gene induction in these cells involving transcriptional enhancers different from the ones active in hepatoblasts. Although relying on data issued from hepatocyte lineage tracing is not possible in humans, scRNA-seq analysis of livers from patients with MASLD-associated liver failure pointed to HCT occurring in the absence of cells displaying a progenitor-like state [ ]. These findings are consistent with our study, which also indicates that ectopic GRHL2 expression is sufficient to directly induce HCT genes in mature hepatocytes. Altogether, these data establish that HCT is a direct conversion process not requiring reversion to a progenitor-like cellular state.
Our study points to induction of a transcriptional program characterizing archetypal epithelial cells with a single apico-basal axis as the primary gene expression reprogramming event underlying HCT. In this context, GRHL2 induces epithelial genes such as genes involved in tight junctions and promotes acquisition of cyst-like structures. GRHL2 induced expression of some classical cholangiocyte markers (e.g., KRT7), but not all commonly used ones, indicating GRHL2 is most likely not sufficient to drive full HCT. GRHL2’s role in promoting HCT is most probably incorporated into a network of collaborating TFs. For instance, GRHL2 promoted expression of the epithelial transcriptional regulators EHF and ESRP1 [ , ]. Accordingly, spatial transcriptomics in human cirrhotic livers indicated that areas where HCT occurs are enriched for expression of GRHL2 and several of its target genes we identified in our study including ESRP1 [ ]. Besides forming the bile ducts, a subset of cholangiocytes is also equipped with the ability to modify the hepatocyte-secreted bile and control its flow [ ]. This involves genes such as Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR), which were not significantly induced by GRHL2 in our experimental models. Additional regulatory pathways such as those induced by retinoic acid may be required to further modulate cholangiocyte functionalities [ ]. Besides GRHL2, we also confirmed the previously described induction of SOX4 (SRY-Box Transcription Factor 4) ( ). In addition to promoting HCT by operating as a pioneer factor, SOX4 also directly represses the hepatocyte transcriptional program [ ]. We also observed reduced expression of hepatocyte markers upon GRHL2 ectopic expression in vivo in mouse hepatocytes together with profound alteration of the hepatic parenchyma structure. These data suggest that GRHL2 contributes to the repression of hepatocyte identity although this warrants further investigation. Finally, GHRL2-induced changes in gene expression in HCT may also result from the regulation of non-coding RNAs such as MIR122 [ , ].
Induction of the cholangiocyte transcriptional program involves epigenetic remodeling events including removal of H3K27me3. A recent assessment of the epigenetic control of HCT identified a role for enzymes controlling H3K36me3 (NSD1 and KDM2A) but not for EZH and H3K27me3 [ ]. However, Ezh1 and Ezh2 were silenced individually, which most probably explains these results since these two enzymes are redundant in hepatocytes and combined deletion of the two genes is required to trigger loss of H3K27me3 [ ]. In ALD-related liver failure samples, we found decreased EZH2 and H3K27me3 levels, whose functional consequences is supported by a recent study showing that even a transient PRC2 inhibition is sufficient to trigger irreversible induction of TF encoding genes [ ]. A role for H3K27me3 in controlling hepatoblast-to-cholangiocyte differentiation has been reported in a study showing that EZH2 inhibition promotes cholangiocyte differentiation [ ]. This is in line with our findings that loss of EZH2-mediated repression is involved in HCT even if HCT does not per se phenocopy the developmental process. Hence, a better understanding of the precise kinetics of epigenetic remodeling events and their functional connection to TF activities along the course of HCT is warranted.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
Work performed in this study using human samples is authorized by the Lille ethical committee (Lille University Hospital), and informed consent was obtained from all subjects. The research was carried out according to the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki. All animal studies were performed in compliance with EU specifications regarding the use of laboratory animals and have been approved by the Nord-Pas de Calais Ethical Committee (CEEA-075; approval numbers 44535-2023030722295795 v6 and 30418-20210824091242 v8).

## Cell culture, transfection, and treatments
HepG2 cells were cultured in William’s E medium (Gibco, 22551022) supplemented with 10% FBS (Life, SVF30160.03), 20 mU/mL bovine insulin (Sigma, I5550), 50 mM dexamethasone (Sigma, D1756), and 100 U/mL penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco, 15140). Plates were coated with gelatin 1 g/L (Sigma, G1890). BMEL cells, described in [ ], were cultured in RPMI 1640 Glutamax (Gibco, 61870-044), supplemented with 10% FBS (EuroBio, CVFSVF00-01), 30 mg/mL IGFII (PeproTech, 100-12-100 µg), 50ng/mL mouse EGF (PeproTech, 315-09-1 mg), 10 µg/mL bovine insulin, and 100 U/mL penicillin-streptomycin. BMEL cells were grown on type I collagen-coated plates. All cells were grown at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2.
HepaRG cells previously described in [ ] were seeded at the density of 2.6 × 104 cells/cm2 and maintained in a Williams E medium supplemented with 10% FCS, 100 units/mL penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, 5 µg/mL insulin, and 5 × 10−5 M hydrocortisone hemisuccinate. After 15 days, cells were maintained in the same medium supplemented with 2% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) for 2 more weeks to obtain complete hepatocyte differentiation. Differentiated cells were then detached with trypsin and resuspended in Williams E medium without DMSO prior to electroporation.
RT-qPCR analyses indicated that GRHL2 expression was low or not detectable in all these cell lines when grown in basal conditions.
Pharmacological inhibition of EZH1 and EZH2 was obtained by treating cells with a combination of 1µM of UNC1999 (Target Mol, T3057) [ ] and 1µM of Valemetostat Tosylate (MedChem Express, 1809336-93-3) [ ] for 4 days. DMSO 0.02% was used as control.
Plasmids were transfected either in HepG2 cells or BMEL cells using JetPrime (Polyplus transfection) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The GRHL2 encoding construct was purchased from VectorBuilder. It allowed for expression of the GRHL2 cDNA (NM_024915.4) fused to a flag tag under the control of an EEF1A1 (EF1A) promoter. This bicistronic construct also allowed for expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein, which was leveraged to monitor transfection efficiency using green fluorescence microscopy. The pcDNA3 vector (Invitrogen) was used as control. Cell culture medium was refreshed after 24 h and cells were harvested 48 h after transfection.
Plasmids were electroporated in differentiated HepaRG cells using the Neon electroporation system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described [ ]. Briefly, 106 HepaRG cells were electroporated with 2 µg of control or GRHL2 encoding plasmids with a single pulse of 1,500 volts for 20 ms. The cells were then plated at low density (2.6 × 104 cells/cm2) in Williams E medium without DMSO. After 24 hours, the medium was renewed. Forty-eight hours after electroporation, the cells were harvested in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), scraped and pelleted by centrifugation at 400 g during 5 min.

## Three-dimensional cell culture
BMEL cells transfected using JetPrime as detailed hereabove were 48 h latter used for three-dimensional culture in Matrigel (Corning, 356255). 20,000 cells were resuspended in 5 µL of culture medium and gently mixed with 30 µL of Matrigel using a pre-chilled pipette tip, taking care to avoid introducing air bubbles. Matrigel-embedded cells were deposited at the center of pre-warmed Ibidi plates (IBIDI, 80806). Plates were incubated at 37°C for 20 min to allow the Matrigel to solidify before adding complete medium to each well.

## RNA extraction and gene expression analyses using real-time PCR
Tissues were homogenized using Minilys and 1.4 mm Ceramic beads (Bertin Technology) (3 × 15 s, 5,000 rpm). Total RNA was extracted from cell lines and tissues using the Nucleospin RNA kit (Macherey-Nagel, 740955) following the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA was reverse-transcribed using high-capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystem). Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed on a QuantStudio 3 (Applied Biosystem) with the Fast program (Applied Biosystem) using the PowerTrack SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystem). The specificity of amplification was checked by recording the dissociation curves, and the PCR efficiency was verified to be above 95% for each primer pair. mRNA levels were normalized to the average expression of housekeeping genes (TBP only for human livers and organoids) and the fold induction was calculated using the ∆∆CT method. The sequences of primers used are listed in . To measure GRHL2 and EHF mRNA expression levels, duplex real-time PCR using the TaqMan technology (Applied Biosystem) was performed. FAM (6-carboxyfloresceine)-labeled probes against GRHL2 (ThermoFisher, Hs00227745) and VIC (2′-chloro-7′phenyl-1,4-dichloro-6-carboxy-fluorescein)-labeled probes against ribosome RNA 18S (housekeeping control) were used together with the TaqMan Fast Advanced Master Mix (Applied Biosystem) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Alternatively, RNA integrity and quantity were evaluated using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyser (Agilent Technologies) before samples were used for library preparation and high-throughput sequencing.

## Protein extraction

## Total cellular extracts.
For total protein extraction, cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, scraped and pelleted by centrifugation at 400 g during 5 min. Cell pellets were resuspended in high salt lysis buffer [25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, 0.9 mM Na Butyrate, 0.1 mM NA+ Orthovanadate (Sigma, 450243), deacetylase inhibitor cocktail (MCE; HY-K0030), 83 U/µL Benzonase (Sigma, E1014-25KU) and protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC) (Roche; 63592800)]. After 10 min of incubation at 4°C, samples were sonicated twice for 10 min (10 cycles of 30 s ON/ 30 s OFF) with Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode). Samples were next centrifugated at 16,000g for 5 min at 4°C and supernatants were transferred to new tubes. An aliquot was used to determine protein concentration using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo scientific) and Laemmli 6× (175 mM Tris-HCL pH 6.8, 15% glycerol, 5% Sodium docetyl sulfate (SDS), 300 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), and 0.01% Bromophenol blue) was added.

## Chromatin fractionation.
Human liver tissues were homogenized in Buffer A (10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 340 mM sucrose, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, PIC) and Triton X-100,0.1% using Polytron (Fisher Scientific, IKA T10 basic ULTRA-TURRAX), followed by 10 min incubation at 4°C. Then, samples were centrifuged at 1,300g for 5 min at 4°C and supernatants were transferred to new tubes subjected to centrifugation at 1,3,000g for 5 min at 4°C in order to remove any insoluble material. Cell pellets were washed with buffer A once and subsequently incubated in solution B (3 mM EDTA, 0.2 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, and PIC) for 30 min at 4°C. Samples were centrifuged at 1,700g for 5 min at 4°C and supernatants were discarded. Chromatin pellets were washed a first time with solution B and a second time with PBS, and then resuspended in buffer C (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM MgCl2, and 83 U/µl benzonase). Samples were incubated for 20 min at 4°C before protein quantification and addition of Laemmli buffer 6× as indicated hereabove.

## Nuclear extract and Immunoprecipitation.
For mouse experiment, the posterior right lobe was systematically used for protein extraction. Liver samples were filtered through 0.7 µm filters in 1mL of cold PBS and transfered onto 1.5 mL Eppendorf. Samples were centrifugated at 400g at 4°C during 5 min and supernatants were removed. Pellets were suspended into 500 µL of hypotonic buffer (20 mM of Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM of NaCl, 3 mM of MgCl2, 0.4% NP40, 5mM of sodium butyrate (Sigma, 303410), PIC, phosphatase, and deacetylase inhibitor cocktails and incubated 5 min at 4°C. Samples were spin at 600g at 4°C during 5 min and supernatants were transfer into new tubes (cytoplasmic fraction). Pellets were suspended in 200 µL of nucleus lysis buffer (25 mM of Tri pH 8.0, 500 mM of NaCl, 1 mM of EDTA, 0.5% of NP40, PIC, 5 mM of sodium butyrate, PIC, phosphatase, and deacetylase inhibitor cocktails. After 20 min of incubation at 4°C, samples were sonicated for 10 min (10 cycles of 30 s ON/30 s OFF) with Bioruptor Pico and then centrifugate at max speed during 5 min at 4°C. Soluble fractions (nuclear extract) were collected and transfer into new tubes. 500 µg of nuclear extract was used per immunoprecipitation and 2 volume of dilution buffer (25 mM of Tris pH 8.0, 500 mM of NaCl, 1 mM of EDTA, 0.5% of NP40, PIC, 5 mM of sodium butyrate, PIC, phosphatase, and deacetylase inhibitor cocktails) was added. Samples were incubated with 2 µg of antibody [anti-IgG and anti-flag (listed in )] overnight at 4°C under rotation. Dynal magnetic beads (Sigma, A9418) (5 µL of protein A and 5 µL of protein G per IP) were washed 3 times in PBS-BSA. Beads were block in 500 µL of PBS-BSA (5 mg/mL) overnight at 4°C under rotation before been added into samples. After 4 h of incubation at 4°C, samples were washed 4 times with cold washing buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.2% NP40, PIC, 5 mM of sodium butyrate, PIC, phosphatase, and deacetylase inhibitor cocktails), each time 5 min under rotation at room temperature. Samples were eluted in 40 µL of Laemmli.

## Western blotting
Twenty µg of proteins were separated by 15% SDS-PAGE and immunodetected using primary antibodies (listed in ). Detection was achieved using HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (Sigma-Aldrich). Images were acquired with an iBrigth CL1500 Imaging System (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

## Simple western immunoassays (Wes)
Protein extracts were analyzed using a Wes system (Protein Simple) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were diluted in 0.1× sample buffer 2 (Protein Sample). Final protein concentrations used in our assays ranged from 0.4 to 0.5 mg/mL. Separation was performed using the 12–230 kDa capillary cartridges. Primary antibodies used are listed in . Secondary antibodies were provided by the manufacturer (PS-MK14 and PS-MK15, Protein Simple). Data were analyzed using the Compass software (Protein Simple). Quantifications were obtained using the area under the peak of the protein of interest. Total protein loading control was performed using the chemiluminescent total protein assay (Protein Simple, DM-TP01).

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
HepG2 (5 × 106 cells) were transfected with GRHL2 plasmid using JetPrime (Polyplus transfection) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Cells were collected 48 h after transfection, washed with PBS, and fixed with 1% formaldehyde (Thermo Scientific; 28908) for 10 min at room temperature (RT) before quenching by incubation with 125 mM of glycine for 5 min. After 2 washes with ice-cold PBS, cells were scraped and pelleted by centrifugation at 600 g for 5 min at 4°C. Cell pellets were incubated for 10 min in 0,25% Triton X-100, 10 mM EDTA, 10 mM HEPES, 0.5 mM EGTA, and span 5 min at 600g at 4°C. Supernatants were removed and cell pellets were resuspended and incubated 10 min in 0.2 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM HEPES, 0.5 mM EGTA, followed by 5 min of centrifugation at 4°C at 600g. Nuclei were then resuspended in 600 µL of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 1% SDS) and sonicated (45 cycles 30 s ON/30 s OFF). All buffers were supplemented with PIC (Roche). Chromatin (30 µg for input, H3K27ac and H3K27me3 ChIP and 200 µg for GRHL2 ChIP) was diluted 10-fold in dilution buffer (20 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl) and incubated overnight at 4°C with 2 μg of anti-H3K27me3 antibody, 2 μg of anti-H3K27ac antibody or 1.5 µg of anti-flag antibody (Sigma, F1804) combined with 1.5 µg of anti-GRHL2 antibody (antibodies are listed in ). Protein A/G sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) were added and samples were incubated for 4 h at 4°C under agitation in the presence of 10 μg/mL yeast tRNA (Sigma-Aldrich, R5636). Beads were washed three times with RIPA buffer (50 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, 0.7% Na Deoxycholate, 1% NP40 and 500 mM LiCl) containing 10 μg/mL yeast tRNA and once with TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA). DNA was then eluted in 100 mM NaHCO3 containing 1% SDS and incubated overnight at 65°C for reverse cross-linking. DNA purification was performed using Nucleospin PCR and Gel purification kit (Macherey Nagel, 740609). ChIPed DNA and input samples were subjected to high-throughput sequencing and were further analyzed as described hereafter.

## Histology, immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescent assays
Liver samples were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA; mouse samples) or buffered formalin (human samples) and embedded in paraffin. 4 µm-thick tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin or underwent an antigen retrieval step with sodium citrate solution (pH 6.0) during 21 min at 110°C into TintoRetriever Pressure Cooker (Bio SB) for immunostaining. Sections were then sequentially incubated with 0.1% Triton X-100 in Tris-Buffered Saline (TBS) for 10 min at 4°C, Bloxall Endogenous Blocking solution (Vector Laboratories) for 10 min at RT, 7% goat serum in 0.05% Tween-20 in TBS (TBS-T) for 15 min at RT, 15 min at RT with 5% milk and 3% BSA in TBS-T and primary GRHL2 antibody ( ) diluted 1:300 in 5% milk and 3% BSA in TBS-T overnight at 4°C. After each step, sections were washed in TBS-T. Subsequently, tissue sections were incubated 30 min at RT with ImmPRESS HRP Polymer anti-mouse IgG Reagent (Vector Laboratories), followed by a TBS wash. Signal was revealed with diaminobenzidine [DAB (Cell Signaling)], and sections were counterstained with hematoxylin (solution Gill N°1, Sigma-Aldrich) and mounted in Aquatex (Sigma-Aldrich). Stained slices were imaged with an Axioscan Z1 slide scanner (Zeiss). Images processing was performed using ZEN software (Zeiss).
For GRHL2 and ALB co-staining, the procedure was adapted as follows. For ALB labeling, instead of using 7% goat serum in TBS-T and DAB, sections were incubated for 15 min at RT with Animal-Free Blocking solution 1× (Cell Signaling) in TBS-T, primary anti-ALB antibody diluted 1:50 ( ), ImmPRESS HRP Polymer horse anti-goat IgG reagent (Vector Laboratories) and 10 min at RT with Alexa Fluor 594 Tyramide SuperBoost reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Following ALB labeling, similar steps were repeated for GRHL2 staining after an antigen retrieval step using primary anti-GRHL2 antibody (1:300), ImmPRESS HRP Polymer horse anti-mouse IgG reagent (Vector Laboratories), and Alexa Fluor 488 Tyramide SuperBoost reagent (Invitrogen). Stained slices were imaged using Axioscan Z1 slide scanner after nuclei counterstaining with DAPI (62248, Thermo Scientific, 1:10,000).
For triple immunofluorescent staining of GRHL2, ALB, and KRT7, the procedure was further adapted. After blocking with Animal-Free Blocking solution 1× in TBS-T, sections were incubated with primary anti-KRT7 antibody diluted 1:50 ( ), ImmPRESS HRP Polymer horse anti-mouse IgG reagent and Alexa Fluor 488 Tyramide SuperBoost reagent. GRHL2 detection was then performed following an antigen retrieval step, using the same HRP-base amplification system (primary anti-GRHL2 antibody 1:300 and Alexa Fluor 594 Tyramide SuperBoost dye). Finally, ALB staining was carried out using the primary anti-ALB antibody (1:50), followed by Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated donkey anti-goat IgG (A21447, Invitrogen, 1:250). Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI and sections were scanned using an Axioscan Z1 slide scanner.
BMEL cells grown in Matrigel for 4 days were fixed using 4% PFA during 20 min at RT, washed with PBS and quenched with NH4Cl 50 mM 15 min at RT. Cells were then permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 5 min and samples were incubated for 1 h at RT with a blocking solution [PBS + BSA 1%] followed by 1 h incubation with phalloidin (Invitrogen AlexaFluor Plus A30107, 2379366) diluted 1:1000 and 5 min with Hoechst diluted 1:5,000 in PBS + BSA 1%. Samples were washed with PBS between each step. Cell aggregates were imaged using Celldiscoverer 7 (Zeiss) or confocal microscopy (Zeiss, LSM700) and analyzed using the ZEN software.

## Animal studies
Male mice (C57BL/6J) were purchased from Charles River at 6–11 weeks of age and housed in standard cages in a temperature-controlled room (22–24°C) with 12 hours light-dark cycles and provided with water and standard diet ad libitum. Mice were allowed to acclimate for at least 1 week prior to any experiment.
Hydrodynamic plasmid transfection was performed using intravenous tail vein injections (5-s injections) of 30 µg of plasmid diluted in saline solution (0.9% w/v sodium chloride; final volume was adjusted to mouse body weight, i.e., 0.1 mL/g was used). After hydrodynamic injection, mice were closely monitored during 2 hours. Livers were collected 48 hours later.
Intravenous viral injections using a 26G syringe were performed via the retro-orbital sinus with 4 × 10¹⁰ viral genomes of AAV8 suspended in 100 μL of sterile 0.9% NaCl per animal. Recombinant AAV8 vectors enabling the expression of GRHL2 (NM_024915.4) under the EF1A promoter, or GFP-expressing control viruses, were used (VectorBuilder). Tissue samples were collected 1 or 2 weeks after injection for subsequent analyses.

## Human samples
Liver samples with alcohol-related decompensated cirrhosis were obtained from the TargetOH cohort (“Comparison of Inflammatory Profiles and Regenerative Potential in Alcoholic Liver Disease”; ClinGov NCT03773887; and DC-2008-642) [ , , ]. Controls consisted in liver samples obtained from the non-cancerous part of liver resections performed in patients with hepatic tumors. All human liver samples were obtained from patients who underwent liver transplantation at Huriez Hospital’s Liver Unit (Lille, France). The liver samples were immediately fixed for histology or frozen for RNA and protein extraction.

## Human liver organoid culture and AAV transduction
Human liver organoids were derived from histologically normal liver tissue obtained from patients undergoing PHx for metastasis excision. Tissue samples were collected from macroscopically healthy regions distant from metastatic lesions. Organoid isolation, expansion, and differentiation were performed as described in [ , ]. Briefly, liver cells were dissociated through enzymatic digestion and EPCAM-positive cells sorted out using magnetic-activated cell sorting using anti-EpCAM microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-061-101) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were embedded in 20 µL domes of growth factor–reduced Matrigel (Corning, 356231) and cultured for two weeks in HepatiCult Organoid Growth Medium (STEMCELL Technologies, 100-0385) to enable organoid formation and expansion. Expanded organoids were dissociated using gentle trypsinization and re-seeded at a density of 1,000 cells per Matrigel dome. After reformation, organoids were transduced with recombinant AAV serotype 3 (AAV3) vectors encoding either GRHL2 (NM_024915.4) or GFP under the EF1A promoter (VectorBuilder). Transduction was performed in differentiation medium at a dose of 1 × 10⁵ viral genomes (vg) per organoid-forming cell. Medium was change on the third day post-infection. Organoids were maintained in differentiation medium for an additional 12 days before being harvested and processed for total RNA extraction.

## Origin and recovery of public datasets
Public transcriptomic and functional genomics data used in this study were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) [ ], ENCODE [ ], Roadmap epigenome (http://www.roadmapepigenomics.org) [ ], CistromeDB (http://cistrome.org/db/#/) [ ], or the Human Protein atlas (https://www.proteinatlas.org) [ ]. Details are provided in and .
The list of mouse TF encoding genes was obtained from the AnimalTFDB 3.0 database [ ].
Gene transcriptional start sites (TSS) used in this study were obtained from [ ]. For each individual gene, the most active TSS in the mouse liver was considered. Mouse TSS coordinates (mm10; coordinates corresponding to windows of ± 500 bp around the TSS) were used in the LiftOver tool of the UCSC genome browser (https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgLiftOver) [ ] to get the corresponding human coordinates (hg38).
The Epith-Signature gene list was obtained from [ ] by selecting “Epithelial” as the cell type in their (https://genome.cshlp.org/content/30/7/1047/suppl/DC1). Ensembl ID were converted to official gene symbols using the ENSEMBL Gene ID Converted from biotools.fr (https://www.biotools.fr/human/ensembl_symbol_converter).
Hepatocyte- and cholangiocyte-enriched genes were retrieved from the Human Protein Atlas website (https://www.proteinatlas.org) [ ].

## RNA-seq data processing and transcriptomic analyses

## Bulk RNA-Seq data analyses.
For public transcriptomic data, SRA files were first downloaded and converted into FastQ files using the SRA toolkit [ ]. FastQ files were uploaded and analyzed on a local instance of Galaxy [ ]. Reads were mapped either to the human genome (hg38) or to the mouse genome (mm10) using Hisat2 (version 2.0.1) [ ]. Read counting was performed using the count function of the HTSeq tool (version 0.9.1) using the following parameters: mode = UNION, Stranded = No, Minimum alignment quality = 10, Feature types = Exon, ID attributes = Gene ID [ ]. Normalization of gene expression data and differential expression analyses were performed in R [ ] using the DESeq2 (version 1.42.1) package [ ]. Pre-filtering was applied to remove genes with low counts, i.e., genes with cumulated reads in all samples below 10. Significant changes in gene expression were defined considering corrected p-values using cut-offs indicated in figure legends. Fold Changes used in our analyses were those provided by DeSeq2. Normalized gene expression data were obtained by dividing Rlog normalized gene expression data obtained from DESeq2 by transcript lengths. Transcript lengths had previously been calculated by averaging the lengths of all transcripts associated to a given gene symbol in Ensembl (GRCm39 or GRCh.38.p13) [ ].
Results of bulk RNA-seq transcriptomic data analyses were visualized using dot plots, box plots or pie charts generated using the ggplot2 R package (version 3.5.1) [ ] or using heatmaps generated using the ComplexHeatmap R package (version 2.15.4) [ ].
 provides the list and version of all bioinformatical tools used in this study.

## Comparison of transcriptomes using principal component analysis (PCA).
The transcriptome of hepatocytes undergoing HCT (denoted as “reprogrammed hepatocytes” in the initial study) in livers of mice treated with DDC was compared to that of hepatocytes and cholangiocytes from control mice [ ]. All genes, pending their expression was detected in all datasets, were considered in these analyses. In order to strengthen the robustness of our analyses, transcriptomes of hepatocytes and cholangiocytes sorted from healthy mouse livers obtained in our laboratory were also considered [ ]. Batch correction was performed using the Combat function of the sva R package (version 3.50.0) [ ] using the transcriptome of hepatocytes from [ ] as the reference dataset and the following parameters: mean.only = T, par.prior = T, prior.plots = F. Next, a PCA was computed using the PCA function of the FactomineR package [ ] on the transcriptome of hepatocytes and cholangiocytes from [ ], the other datasets being considered as supplemental individuals. The 2 first principal components were used to project individual datasets showing that healthy hepatocytes from the two initial different studies were overlapping. This entire process was similarly performed using only TF encoding genes.

## Gene ontology and pathway enrichment analyses.
Enrichment analysis for biological or molecular pathways were performed using Metascape (https://metascape.org) [ ] or Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrate Discovery (DAVID 2021, DAVID Knowledgebase v2023q4) [ ]. For analyses using DAVID, the top 3,000 deregulated genes were selected based on corrected p-values when required. Functional annotation clustering was performed using default parameters except for similarity term overlap and similarity threshold which were set to 5 and 0.5, respectively. In order to name the clusters, enriched GO terms and pathways from each cluster were used for word counting using WordArt (https://wordart.com).

## Gene set enrichment analyses.
Gene set enrichment analyses (GSEA) were performed using the GSEA software (version 4.3.2) from the Broad Institute [ ] and gene sets from . We used 1,000 gene-set permutations, no collapse, and the following additional parameters: enrichment statistic = weighted, gene ranking metric = difference of classes. Ranking was performed by the GSEA software using Rlog normalized gene expression data obtained from DeSeq2. In addition to enrichment plots, figures also provide NES and q-value, which are the normalized enrichment score and the false discovery rate provided by the GSEA software, respectively.

## Mouse liver single-cell RNA-seq analyses

## Pre-processing of individual datasets.
Data were analyzed with R (version 4.3.1) using raw count matrices obtained as.rds files. Details about all datasets re-analyzed are provided in . First, each dataset was filtered using Seurat (version 4.0.3) [ ] to keep only cells with more than 1,000 and less than 5,000 expressed genes (excepted for GSE186554 for which the authors had already selected cells comprising 1,500–4,500 expressed genes) and with less than 20% of mitochondrial counts. Details of the Seurat functions used together with all parameters can be retrieved in the supplemental Rscript “1_PreprocessingExample.R” (available at https://zenodo.org/records/13897656), which provides the code used for one of the re-analyzed study. Then data were normalized with sctransform [ ] followed by a PCA used to compute UMAP. When required, Louvain clustering was performed in order to remove any remaining cell cluster not within the hepatocyte/cholangiocyte lineages. This involved monitoring expression of the following marker genes: Alb and Apoc3 for hepatocytes, Sox9 and Epcam, for cholangiocytes, Hnf4a, Afp, Dlk1, Cd13, Fgb, Fxyd1 and Gjb1, Id3 for hepatoblast, Gypa, Vim, Flt1, Pecam1, Itgam, Clec4f, Eln, Cd248, Upk1b, Dcn, Lrat, Des, Pdgfrb, Lox, Acta2, Col1a1 for non-parenchymal cells (NPC). Clusters characterized by expression of NPC marker genes were discarded (see for details regarding clustering resolution and numbers of selected cells for each dataset). Finally, to prevent potential bias arising from an unbalanced cell number across datasets and experimental conditions, two datasets were subsampled so that cells from injured livers did not exceed the maximal number of healthy hepatocytes provided by a single study (n = 8,964) ( ).

## Integration of the different datasets.
Data were log-normalized and the 2000 most variable genes in each dataset were defined with the vst method using Seurat. Next, STACAS (version 2.0) [ ] was used on the 500 common most variable genes selected by SelectIntegrationFeatures function with nfeatures = 500. The FindAnchors and IntegrateData functions were used with the following parameters: dims = 1:30, alpha = 0.8, coverage = 0.5, semisupervised = false. Efficient batch correction was validated on basis of the LISI and ASW scores following guidelines from STACAS. To evaluate integration with the ASW score, a unifying nomenclature where cells were labeled using cell type identity and experimental condition (e.g., healthy control, DDC etc) was used. All codes and parameters are provided in “Rscript 2_Integration_and_Focus.R” available at https://zenodo.org/records/13897656.

## Selection of cells to specifically investigate HCT and trajectory analyses.
Finally, PCA, UMAP, and Louvain clustering were computed on the integrated data provided by STACAS. Data were visualized using ISCEBERG [Interactive Single Cell Expression Browser for Exploration of RNAseq data using Graphics; [ ]]. Cells from clusters 2, 8, and 15 (resolution = 0.8; ) were further considered after removal of studies contributing less than 5% of all cells from these 3 clusters. In order to compute RNA velocity, healthy hepatocytes from [ ], condition: « control »] were added to the selected cells. Reads from all selected cells were mapped to Ensembl (GRCm39 v108) using salmon-alevin (salmon version 1.10.1) [ ] to generate spliced and unspliced transcript count matrices. These matrices were batch corrected to match the aforementioned STACAS computed integration. RNA velocity was next computed using ScVelo (v0.2.5 under Python 3.9.5) [ ] and data uploaded into CellRank2 (version 2.0.0) [ ] to compute cell fate probabilities. Pseudotime analyses were performed using slingshot (version 2.10.0) [ ] and next also uploaded to CellRank2 in order to specifically select cells defining a trajectory of HCT. The batch corrected gene expression data from cells belonging to this HCT trajectory from DDC-treated mice [ ] were used to plot gene expression along pseudotime. Normalization was performed with the “LogNormalize“ function of Seurat (i.e., for each cell, gene counts were divided by the total number of counts, multiplied by a scale factor set to 10000 and then log-transformed). All codes and parameters are provided in “Rscript 3_Velocity_CellRank.R” available at https://zenodo.org/records/13897656. Gene set expression analyses were performed using the AddModuleScore function of Seurat in ISCEBERG.

## Human single-nuclei RNA-seq data analyses
Data from [ ] were mined using the R Shiny application provided by the authors at https://www.mohorianulab.org/shiny/vallier/LiverPlasticity_GribbenGalanakis2024/ or using Seurat and data downloaded from GEO (GSE202379). In all instances, only cells labeled as hepatocytes were considered. Odds ratios and gene expression were computed using hepatocytes originating only from the right lobe so that each patient contributed only one sample to the dataset. Odds ratio were computed using median-unbiased estimation thanks to the oddsratio function of the epitools (version 0.5-10.1) [ ].

## Mining transcriptomic data of human primary cells from the Human Protein Atlas
Data from scRNA-seq were downloaded from the Human Protein Atlas website (https://www.proteinatlas.org/about/download) and corresponded to normalized gene expression in transcripts per million (nTPM) issued from pseudo-bulk analyses [ ]. Gene expression in different cell lineages (epithelial, mesenchymal, endothelial, etc.) was computed as the mean of nTPM from the individual cell types associated to the different cell lineages according to the nomenclature provided by the Human Protein Atlas.
The Tau index was computed to assess gene expression lineage-specificity using tspex (https://tspex.lge.ibi.unicamp.br) [ ] after expression data had been log2-transformed. Expression data for cell lineages were here defined as the median expression from all individual cell types linked to a given lineage.
Hierarchical clustering based on expression of the Epith-Signature was performed using the hclsust (version) and dist functions of the R package stats version 4.3.1 [ ] with the following method parameters: Ward.D2 and Euclidean.

## ChIP-Seq data analysis
After initial quality controls of FastQ files, reads were mapped to hg38 using Chromap version 0.1.3-R256 [ ] with preset parameters for “chip” including: remove PCR duplicates; error threshold = 8; min-num-seeds = 2; max-seed-frequency = 500−1,000; max-num-best-mappings = 1; max-insert-size = 1,000; MAPQ-threshold = 10; min-read-length = 30; bc-error-threshold = 1; bc-probability-threshold = 0.90.
For H3K27ac and H3K27me3 ChIP-seq, signal tracks were obtained using the bamCoverage function of the DeepTools version 3.5.1 [ ] with the following parameters: bin size = 25; normalize = CPM; read extension = 200.
For GRHL2 ChIP-seq, Bam files (n = 4 biological replicates) were analyzed using the Irreproducible Discovery Rate (IDR), which allows to identify TF binding peaks that are reproducible and rank-concordant across replicates (https://github.com/nboley/idr). This was performed using the IDR pipeline from ENCODE (version 2.2.1) installed from https://github.com/ENCODE-DCC/chip-seq-pipeline2/tree/master [ ]. ChIP-seq data from mocked transfected cells were used as controls. Since all replicates passed the reproducibility tests of IDR, the top 10,000 peaks based on the IDR score and the average signal from the 4 replicates were used in subsequent analyses. GRHL2 target genes and their enrichment for specific biological terms or pathways were predicted using the CistromeGO tool [ ]. The solo mode or the ensemble mode, i.e., combined prediction of target genes using both the GRHL2 binding peaks and genes modulated by GRHL2 as defined using RNA-seq were used with a half-decay distance of 1 kb automatically defined by the CistromeGO algorithm.
All ChIP-seq and chromatin accessibility signals analyses were made looking at gene TSS and monitored using the DeepTools version 3.5.1 [ ]. First, the compute matrix tool was used with the following parameters: TSS set as the reference point, binSize of 500 bp, ± 2,500 bp window around the TSS. Then, issued matrices were used to generate average signal plots using the PlotProfile tool. ChIP-seq signals at individual genes were visualized using the Integrated Genome Browser (IGB) (version 10.0.1) [ ] or the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) (version 2.17.4) [ ].
In order to identify groups of genes with distinct epigenetic patterns around their TSS, the SPARK software (version 1.3.0) was used [ ]. SPARK clustering was performed using a window of 2.5 kb centered around gene TSS split into 10 bins and signal normalization set as global, i.e., signal across the whole genome is considered for normalization.

## Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses were performed using R 4.3.1 [ ] or GraphPad Prism. The number of samples and statistical tests used are indicated in the figure legends. Corrections for multiple testing was performed by computing false discovery rates reported as q-values. Exact p- or q-values are indicated unless they exceed 0.15. All bar graphs show means SD (standard deviations). Box plots are composed of a box from the 25th to the 75th percentile with the median as a line and min to max as whiskers.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Additional characterization of the mouse parenchymal liver cells scRNA-seq atlas and of the cellular trajectory involved in HCT.
(PDF)
S2 Fig

## Additional characterization of the gene transcriptional changes occurring in HCT.
(PDF)
S3 Fig

## Additional characterization of deregulated TF-encoding genes during HCT.
(PDF)
S4 Fig

## Average DHS-seq, H3K36me3 and RNAPolII ChIP-seq signals at the promoters of genes from clusters C1–3 in the mouse liver.
(PDF)
S5 Fig

## Role of H3K9me3 in the repression of HCT genes in normal hepatocytes.
(PDF)
S6 Fig

## Basal expression of TF-encoding genes from the C1–3 clusters.
(PDF)
S7 Fig

## Additional validation of GRHL2 ectopic expression and characterization of induced transcriptional changes in BMEL and HepG2 cells.
(PDF)
S8 Fig

## Additional representative images of BMEL cell aggregates.
(PDF)
S9 Fig

## Dose-dependent induction of GRHL2 target genes in HepG2 cells.
(PDF)
S10 Fig

## Additional validation of GRHL2 ectopic expression in the mouse liver of mice subjected to hydrodynamic tail vain injection.
(PDF)
S11 Fig

## Additional immunostainings of GRHL2 in human end-stage chronic liver diseases.
(PDF)
S12 Fig

## Characterization of GRHL2-expressing hepatocytes in human MASLD using snRNA-seq data.
(PDF)
S13 Fig

## Additional immunostainings of GRHL2 in human PBC and PSC samples.
(PDF)
S1 Table

## Details regarding single-cell RNA-seq datasets used in Fig 1.
(XLSX)
S2 Table

## Gene sets used in this study.
(XLS)
S3 Table

## List of genes and TF-encoding genes differentially expressed between HCT and Hepatocytes.
(XLSX)
S4 Table

## Transcriptomic and functional genomic data used in this study.
(XLS)
S5 Table

## List of genes down-regulated upon ectopic expression of GRHL2 in BMEL cells (q ≤ 0.05).
(TXT)
S6 Table

## List of genes up-regulated upon ectopic expression of GRHL2 in BMEL cells (q ≤ 0.05).
(TXT)
S7 Table

## List of genes down-regulated upon ectopic expression of GRHL2 in HepG2 cells (q ≤ 0.05).
(TXT)
S8 Table

## List of genes up-regulated upon ectopic expression of GRHL2 in HepG2 cells (q ≤ 0.05).
(TXT)
S9 Table

## Features of the selected GRHL2 target genes.
(XLSX)
S10 Table

## Primer sequences used in this study.
(XLS)
S11 Table

## Antibodies used in this study.
(XLSX)
S12 Table

## Bioinformatical tools used in this study.
(XLS)
S1 Data

## All individual numerical values that underlie the experimental data generated specifically for this study.
(XLSX)
S1 Raw Images

## Uncropped images issued from western blotting or simple western immunoassays.
(PDF)

The authors thank Gilles Salbert (Univ Rennes) and Réjane Paumelle (Univ Lille) for discussions, Jean-Sébastien Annicotte and Joel Haas for help with animal experimentation and Solène Audry for technical assistance. The authors are indebted to Yassine Jarmouni and the BioImaging Center Lille (BICeL; Plateformes Lilloises en Biologie et Santé (PLBS) – UMS 2014 – US 41, Univ. Lille). We acknowledge Bilille platform – US 41 – UAR 2014 – PLBS and the i–tensive computing center of the University of Lille for the computing resources (Cloud Bilille).

## Abbreviations
AAV3adeno-associated viruses serotype 3
AAV8adeno-associated viruses serotype 8
ALBalbumin
ALDalcohol-related liver diseases
ALGSAlagille syndrome
APAPacetaminophen
BMELbipotential mouse embryonic liver
ChIPchromatin immunoprecipitation
DAVIDdatabase for annotation, visualization, and integrate discovery
DDC3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine
DHSDNase I Hypersensitivity
DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide
DTTdithiothreitol
GRHL2Grainyhead Like Transcription Factor 2
GSEAgene set enrichment analysis
HBEhuman bronchial epithelial
HCThepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transdifferentiation
Hep-ID TFshepatocyte identity transcription factors
MASLDmetabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease
MPHmouse primary hepatocytes
NPCnon-parenchymal cells
nTPMnormalized gene expression in transcripts per million
PBCprimary biliary cholangitis
PBSphosphate-buffered saline
PCAprincipal component analysis
PFAparaformaldehyde
PHxpartial hepatectomy
PRC2polycomb repressive complex 2
PSCprimary sclerosing cholangitis
qPCRQuantitative PCR
RTroom temperature
scRNA-seqsingle-cell RNA-seq
SDSsodium docetyl sulfate
TBSTris-Buffered Saline
TFstranscription factors
TSStranscriptional start sites
UMAPuniform manifold approximation and projection
 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003547.r001Decision Letter 0
SmithLucasSenior Editor© 2025 Lucas Smith2025Lucas Smithhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
5 Feb 2025

Dear Dr Eeckhoute,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Direct hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transdifferentiation driven by derepression of the epithelial transcription factor GRHL2" for consideration as a Research Article by PLOS Biology.
Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editorial staff as well as by an academic editor with relevant expertise and I am writing to let you know that we would like to send your submission out for external peer review.
However, before we can send your manuscript to reviewers, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks in preparation for peer review. After your manuscript has passed the checks it will be sent out for review. To provide the metadata for your submission, please Login to Editorial Manager (https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology) within two working days, i.e. by Feb 07 2025 11:59PM.
If your manuscript has been previously peer-reviewed at another journal, PLOS Biology is willing to work with those reviews in order to avoid re-starting the process. Submission of the previous reviews is entirely optional and our ability to use them effectively will depend on the willingness of the previous journal to confirm the content of the reports and share the reviewer identities. Please note that we reserve the right to invite additional reviewers if we consider that additional/independent reviewers are needed, although we aim to avoid this as far as possible. In our experience, working with previous reviews does save time.
If you would like us to consider previous reviewer reports, please edit your cover letter to let us know and include the name of the journal where the work was previously considered and the manuscript ID it was given. In addition, please upload a response to the reviews as a 'Prior Peer Review' file type, which should include the reports in full and a point-by-point reply detailing how you have or plan to address the reviewers' concerns.
During the process of completing your manuscript submission, you will be invited to opt-in to posting your pre-review manuscript as a bioRxiv preprint. Visit http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/preprints for full details. If you consent to posting your current manuscript as a preprint, please upload a single Preprint PDF.
Feel free to email us at plosbiology@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Luke
Lucas Smith, Ph.D.
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology
lsmith@plos.org
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003547.r002Decision Letter 1
SmithLucasSenior Editor© 2025 Lucas Smith2025Lucas Smithhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
3 Apr 2025

Dear Jerome,
Thank you for your patience while your manuscript "Direct hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transdifferentiation driven by derepression of the epithelial transcription factor GRHL2" was peer-reviewed at PLOS Biology. It has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, an Academic Editor with relevant expertise, and by several independent reviewers.
In light of the reviews, which you will find at the end of this email, we would like to invite you to revise the work to thoroughly address the reviewers' reports.
As you will see below, while the reviewers appreciate that your study offers interesting insights, they have also raised a number of important points which we think will need to be addressed before we can consider your study for publication. Reviewers 2 and 3, in particular, identify important limitations with this study, including the use of HepG2 cancer cell lines and limited data demonstrating GRHL2's direct role in the transition process - and we feel these points will need to be experimentally addressed.
We think the revision will need to more clearly demonstrate the mechanistic role of GRHL2 in inducing biliary cell fate while suppressing hepatocyte fate, using a primary organoid model system. Additionally, we think it would strengthen the study to revisit the in vivo mouse model to assess biliary cell fate in GRHL2-overexpressing cells and to test the direct link between EZH2, PRC2, and the modulation of GRHL2 expression. We also agree with reviewer 3 that it would be valuable to discuss your findings in the context of previous studies on hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transition (HCT). As a last editorial note, we would not require that you provide additional loss-of-function data as suggested by reviewer 2. We appreciate that that line of research would be interesting, but we do no think it is essential to support the conclusions, if you develop the study as outlined above, and thoroughly address the other reviewer points.
Given the extent of revision needed, we cannot make a decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is likely to be sent for further evaluation by all or a subset of the reviewers.
In addition to these revisions, you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests shortly.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within 3 months. However, we understand that it may require a lot of work to expand the mechanistic insights provided by the study and so we would be happy to extend the deadline for the revision by a few months, if needed. Please email us (plosbiology@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns, or would like to request an extension.
At this stage, your manuscript remains formally under active consideration at our journal; please notify us by email if you do not intend to submit a revision so that we may withdraw it.
**IMPORTANT - SUBMITTING YOUR REVISION**
Your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. Please submit the following files along with your revised manuscript:
1. A 'Response to Reviewers' file - this should detail your responses to the editorial requests, present a point-by-point response to all of the reviewers' comments, and indicate the changes made to the manuscript.
*NOTE: In your point-by-point response to the reviewers, please provide the full context of each review. Do not selectively quote paragraphs or sentences to reply to. The entire set of reviewer comments should be present in full and each specific point should be responded to individually, point by point.
You should also cite any additional relevant literature that has been published since the original submission and mention any additional citations in your response.
2. In addition to a clean copy of the manuscript, please also upload a 'track-changes' version of your manuscript that specifies the edits made. This should be uploaded as a "Revised Article with Changes Highlighted" file type.
*Re-submission Checklist*
When you are ready to resubmit your revised manuscript, please refer to this re-submission checklist: https://plos.io/Biology_Checklist
To submit a revised version of your manuscript, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' where you will find your submission record.
Please make sure to read the following important policies and guidelines while preparing your revision:
*Published Peer Review*
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/

*PLOS Data Policy*
Please note that as a condition of publication PLOS' data policy (http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability) requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions arrived at in your manuscript. If you have not already done so, you must include any data used in your manuscript either in appropriate repositories, within the body of the manuscript, or as supporting information (N.B. this includes any numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.). For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5
*Blot and Gel Data Policy*
We require the original, uncropped and minimally adjusted images supporting all blot and gel results reported in an article's figures or Supporting Information files. We will require these files before a manuscript can be accepted so please prepare them now, if you have not already uploaded them. Please carefully read our guidelines for how to prepare and upload this data: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive thus far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Luke
Lucas Smith, Ph.D.
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology
lsmith@plos.org
------------------------------------
REVIEWS:
Reviewer #1, Holger Willenbring (note, reviewer 1 has signed this review): The manuscript by Vasseur et al investigates epigenetic mechanism of hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transdifferentiation, which has been identified as a response to liver injury in both mice and humans. The authors make good use of published datasets to arrive at the compelling conclusion that hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transdifferentiation is, at its core, the introduction of a generic epithelial transcriptional program at the expense of the unique transcriptome and specification characteristic for hepatocytes. The authors show that this process does not involve a progenitor-like intermediate as suggested by others. They identify an epigenetic mechanism regulating this process, that is, loss of EZH1/2 expression freeing epithelial transcription factor genes such as GRHL2 from repression by H3K27me3. Their conclusions rest on multiple lines of evidence, including functional testing in several liver cell lines. The data are clearly presented and described, and rounded out by several tables. There are only a couple of places where the descriptions seem incomplete or off.
1. In the results on page 13 it is not totally clear what genes constitute the "cholangiocyte-like transcriptional program", that is, what genes are induced by GRHL2 beyond established downstream targets like RAB25 and CLDN4 and the four others genes that are mentioned. This deficiency could be addressed by highlighting genes in Fig. S7B, D and expanding Supplementary Table 5. Along these lines, the authors mention SOX4 on page 18 but it does not seem to feature in any of the figures.
2. In the discussion on page 18 the authors refer to a paper by Yang et al from 2023 as being "at apparent odds with our findings". However, that paper shows that EZH2 inhibition or knockout results in more EPCAM-positive cells (that is, cholangiocytes) in E12.5 liver slices (Fig. 5B-D) or in mice at E17.5 and P0 (Fig. 6A-D), which is associated with reduced H3K27me3 levels and therefore seems consistent with the results by Vasseur et al.
Reviewer #2, Pinglong Xu (note, reviewer 2 has signed this review): The manuscript titled "Direct hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transdifferentiation driven by derepression of the epithelial transcription factor GRHL2" by Eeckhoute et al. presents interesting findings that adult hepatocytes can convert directly into cholangiocytes (HCT) by relieving polycomb-mediated epigenetic repression of epithelial transcriptional regulator GRHL2. The authors propose that HCT bypasses a hepatoblast-like state, instead triggering a monopolarized epithelial gene program upon GRHL2 induction, thereby suggesting that derepressing an epithelial transcription factor is sufficient for lineage reprogramming and providing implications in human liver diseases.
Understanding HCT is crucial for liver regeneration and for understanding chronic liver diseases. These findings highlight the importance of the repression of the epithelial transcription program during the HCT transition. The manuscript presents a convincing data analysis supporting the conclusions drawn. However, a few key issues remain unaddressed:
1. The manuscript provides strong gain-of-function evidence that overexpression of GRHL2 in hepatocytes can induce epithelial gene expression and promote HCT both in vitro and in vivo. However, the proposed mechanism remains incomplete due to the lack of rigorous loss-of-function data. Will depleting or inhibiting GRHL2 interrupt the HCT process, such as during the in vitro HCT system and with a hepatocyte-specific knockout of GRHL2 by AAV or other systems?
2. How precisely PRC2 and H3K27me3 target GRHL2 and other "epithelial" genes in hepatocytes is unclear. Is there direct evidence that modulating EZH2 or PRC2 activity can promptly derepress GRHL2?
3. Beyond changes in transcript profiles, do these cells acquire bile duct-like structures or secretory functions to confirm full cholangiocyte functionality?
4. Fig. 6B, the correlation between GRHL2 protein levels and H3K27me3/EZH2 is weak in individual samples.
Reviewer #3: This study aims to further understand the mechanisms controlling the transdifferentiation of hepatocytes into cholangiocytes (or so called HCT by the authors) which has been well studied in the DDC mouse model and more recently described in human liver affected by progressive MASLD. Analysing published data set, the authors confirm that HCT does not involve a intermediate progenitors state and they also uncover GRHL2 as a potential transcription factor regulating this process. These data are interesting and are in line with previous studies. The main interesting part is the role of GRHL2 and additional validations are necessary to validate the conclusions of this study.
HCT has been widely studied in the DDC mouse model. These previous studies have already uncovered key epigenetic regulations and regulators such as Sox4 [ doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-45939-z.]. Similarly, a recent publication in human have demonstrated the existence of HCT in chronically injured liver and already established the absence of progenitor state [DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-07465-2]. It would be very useful that the authors discussed their results in more details in the context of these previous publications.
The epigenetic analyses (ChIP-Seq) are performed on very heterogeneous population. The hepatocytes represent 80% of the liver mass. However, they are extremely heterogenous due to zonation. This heterogeneity could play a key role in regenerative capacity and thus in the interpretation of their analyses.
The characterization of GRHL2 function is too limited and not convincing. Indeed, the data presented show that GRHL2 manipulation induces an epithelial signature but not a cholangiocytes signature. Indeed, they don't show the expression of cholangiocytes markers especially KRT19, KRT7, BICC1 etc. They need to provide data (QPCR and immunostaining with primary cells control cholangiocytes and hepatocytes) demonstrating that GRHL2 truly induces a change in cellular identity. HEPG2 or other transformed cells are a very poor model for these experiments. Tumor cells are likely impossible to transdifferentiate. They should use cholangiocytes organoids. Finally, the human data need to be reinforced. They need to show that GRHL2 is expressed in biphenotypic cells co expressing KRT19/ALB for example.
Minor comments:
Figure 1F:
* ALB expression should be investigated and shown to support the findings.
* Clarification is needed regarding the type of normalization used. Was normalization performed relative to a control group or endogenous gene expression?
* It would be helpful to indicate the drawn trajectory on the UMAP visualization. Specifically, does the trajectory begin from cluster 4 and cross cluster 1? Is the trajectory determined only by the cells that overlap with cluster 1?
Figure 2
* Have cholangiocytes been traced to confirm they do not transdifferentiate into hepatocytes in this model?
Figure 4
* GRHL2 Overexpression (OE): It should be demonstrated whether GRHL2 OE has any negative effects on hepatocyte differentiation. Additional data on the impact of GRHL2 ectopic expression on hepatocyte signature should be included.
* BMEL Cells: Are genes involved in hepatocyte differentiation downregulated in BMEL cells in concert with GRHL2 OE? This aspect should be investigated and presented.
Figure 5
* Similar to Figure 4, it is necessary to determine and present whether GRHL2 OE affects hepatocyte differentiation and signature-related genes.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003547.r003Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
2 Sep 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: 2025_08_29_Rebuttal.docx
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003547.r004Decision Letter 2
SmithLucasSenior Editor© 2025 Lucas Smith2025Lucas Smithhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
11 Nov 2025

Dear Jerome,
Thank you again for your patience while we considered your revised manuscript "Direct hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transdifferentiation driven by derepression of the epithelial transcription factor GRHL2" for publication as a Research Article at PLOS Biology. This revised version of your manuscript has been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, the Academic Editor and the original reviewers.
You will see that two of the reviewers are fully satisfied by the revision. Reviewer 3 also appreciates that the study has been strengthened after your revision, but s/he has some lingering concerns and suggests that more markers are needed to support claims about cholangiocyte transdifferentiation. Reviewer 3 suggests that you either characterize additional markers, or tone down some of the conclusions (including your title). After discussion with the Academic Editor, we agree with Reviewer 3's lingering concern. We would welcome new data to address his/her comment, but we are also OK with you toning down the conclusions and title of your study to more clearly reflect the limitations of the study.
Based on the reviews, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, provided you satisfactorily address the remaining points raised by reviewer 3, with new data or textual changes. Please also make sure to address the following data and other policy-related requests.
**IMPORTANT - Please address the following editorial points:
1) ETHICS STATEMENT: Please update your ethics statement to include the approval number for the protocol approved by the Lille Ethical Committee.
2) DATA: Thank you for providing the CHIP-Seq and RNA-seq data on GEO. Please add a note to every relevant figure legend, pointing readers to these datasets. (ex you can say "the data underlying this figure can be found at ___")
3) DATA: In addition to the data you have already provided, we also need you to provide the underlying data for all other figures in your paper. While the RNA-seq and CHIP-seq data are fine, we also need the underlying data for your qPCR and Western blot analysis, etc (ex Fig 8A-B)
Note that we do not require all raw data. Rather, we ask that all individual quantitative observations that underlie the data summarized in the figures and results of your paper be made available in one of the following forms:
a. Supplementary files (e.g., excel). Please ensure that all data files are uploaded as 'Supporting Information' and are invariably referred to (in the manuscript, figure legends, and the Description field when uploading your files) using the following format verbatim: S1 Data, S2 Data, etc. Multiple panels of a single or even several figures can be included as multiple sheets in one excel file that is saved using exactly the following convention: S1_Data.xlsx (using an underscore).
b. Deposition in a publicly available repository. Please also provide the accession code or a reviewer link so that we may view your data before publication.
NOTE: the numerical data provided should include all replicates AND the way in which the plotted mean and errors were derived (it should not present only the mean/average values).
Please also ensure that figure legends in your manuscript include information on where the underlying data can be found, and ensure your supplemental data file/s has a legend.
Please ensure that your Data Statement in the submission system accurately describes where your data can be found.
4) CODE: Thank you for depositing the code for your study on Zenodo. I see that those files are currently set to private, and I could not access the code (even when I used the reviewer links that you provided). Can you provide me with reviewer access so that I can verify that the code deposition meets our requirements? Note that you will need to make all code and data public before publication.
5) BLOT AND GEL IMAGES: Thank you for providing a file with the raw western blot images for your study. The images that you provided look a bit cropped, and so I ask that you edit this file to include the fully uncropped images taken from the scanner.
As you address these items, please take this last chance to review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the cover letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.
In addition to these revisions, you may need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests shortly. If you do not receive a separate email within a few days, please assume that checks have been completed, and no additional changes are required.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within two weeks.
To submit your revision, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' to find your submission record. Your revised submission must include the following:
- a cover letter that should detail your responses to any editorial requests, if applicable, and whether changes have been made to the reference list
- a Response to Reviewers file that provides a detailed response to the reviewers' comments (if applicable, if not applicable please do not delete your existing 'Response to Reviewers' file.)
- a track-changes file indicating any changes that you have made to the manuscript.
NOTE: If Supporting Information files are included with your article, note that these are not copyedited and will be published as they are submitted. Please ensure that these files are legible and of high quality (at least 300 dpi) in an easily accessible file format. For this reason, please be aware that any references listed in an SI file will not be indexed. For more information, see our Supporting Information guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/supporting-information

*Published Peer Review History*
Please note that you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://plos.org/published-peer-review-history/

*Press*
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, please ensure you have opted out of Early Article Posting on the submission form. We ask that you notify us as soon as possible if you or your institution is planning to press release the article.
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please do not hesitate to contact me should you have any questions.
Sincerely,
Lucas
Lucas Smith, Ph.D.
Senior Editor
lsmith@plos.org
PLOS Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reviewer remarks:
Reviewer #1: The revised manuscript by Vasseur et al. addresses the points raised in the initial review. The revised manuscript convincingly shows that hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transdifferentiation can be driven by derepression of GRHL2 and activation of a canonical epithelial transcriptional program, rather than by reactivating a progenitor-like state. The revised manuscript includes substantial new data that strengthen the mechanistic and functional analyses. The revised manuscript is clearly written, well contextualized, and ready for publication.
Response to previous concerns
1. Definition of the cholangiocyte-like transcriptional program: The authors now define this program as induction of an "Epith-Signature" capturing over 60% of cholangiocyte-enriched genes. They included complete gene lists (Suppl. Table 2), full sets of GRHL2-induced genes (Suppl. Tables 6 and 8), and highlighted direct targets such as ESRP1 and KRT7 (Figs. 6, 7). The role of SOX4 is clarified (p. 18).
2. Clarification of EZH2 effects in the discussion: The confusing statement regarding Yang et al. (2023) has been corrected to state that EZH2 inhibition promotes cholangiocyte differentiation, which is consistent with the authors' findings.
3. Addition of mechanistic and functional evidence: New data show direct binding of EZH2 and H3K27me3 at the Grhl2 promoter (Fig. 5), derepression of Grhl2 after Ezh1/2 loss, and activation of Epith-Signature genes. GRHL2 overexpression promotes 3D cyst formation in BMEL cells and reprogramming of hepatocytes in vivo (Figs. 5-7).
4. Integration with recent literature and human data: The revised discussion references recent studies (SOX4/H3K36me axis, MASLD, spatial transcriptomics) and emphasizes concordance of findings in mice with human alcoholic hepatitis, PSC, and PBC samples showing GRHL2+/KRT7+ hepatocytes at scar regions (Fig. 8).
5. Additional experimental validation: The authors performed new GRHL2 expression experiments in human liver organoids, confirming the induction of epithelial/cholangiocyte genes and repression of hepatocyte markers (Fig. 6J). Zonation and cell-type heterogeneity were examined using snATAC-seq and hepatocyte-specific epigenomic data.
Reviewer #2, Pinglong Xu (note, Reviewer 2 has signed this review): The questions raised during my initial review have largely been addressed and the manuscript is significantly improved.
Reviewer #3: The authors have done a lot of efforts to answer the reviewers' comments. The data showing that GRHL2 plays a role in the transdifferentiationof hepatocytes into cholangiocytes are indeed convincing. However, the problem remains the capacity of GRHL2 to directly drive the transdifferentiation of hepatocyte into cholangiocytes. The functional data either in vitro or in vivo show that GRHL2 overexpression results in the up regulation of epithelial markers which are expressed in a number of cells (EHF, CLDN4). KRT7 and ESPR1 are indeed specific for cholangiocytes. However, KRT7 is associated with functional maturation and KRT19 is more broadly used. What about other specific/functional markers markers which are universally used such as KRT19, HNF1B, CFTR, BICC1, EPCAM, DCD2 etc These markers are commonly used to characterise cholangiocytes. Why are they not using these markers in Figure 5, 6 and 7. It seems that the authors have handpicked few markers which can support their conclusions. Of note the data in human mainly show that GRHL2 is expressed in ductular reaction. These cholangiocytes are usually located closed to the regenerative nodule but this does not mean that they are produced by hepatocytes. Furthermore, only few biphenotypic cells truly express GRHL2. So again GRHL2 is likely to participate in the transdifferentiation process but not to drive it. This factor is not sufficient for this process. So, it would be incredibly useful either to include the markers mentioned above in Figure 6 and 7 or to adapt their conclusions/title to reflect their results more accurately.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003547.r005Author response to Decision Letter 3
Submission Version3
18 Nov 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: 2025_17_11_Rebuttal.docx
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003547.r006Decision Letter 3
SmithLucasSenior Editor© 2025 Lucas Smith2025Lucas Smithhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
21 Nov 2025

Dear Jerome,
Thank you for the submission of your revised Research Article "Direct hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transdifferentiation promoted by derepression of the epithelial transcription factor GRHL2" for publication in PLOS Biology, and thank you for addressing the last reviewer and editorial requests in this revision. On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Joo-Hyeon Lee, I am pleased to say that we can in principle accept your manuscript for publication, provided you address any remaining formatting and reporting issues. These will be detailed in an email you should receive within 2-3 business days from our colleagues in the journal operations team; no action is required from you until then. Please note that we will not be able to formally accept your manuscript and schedule it for publication until you have completed any requested changes.
**IMPORTANT - as you address any production requests, to come, we would also like to propose a tweak to the title, to make it a bit more active. Specifically, we suggest you change the title to:
"Derepression of the epithelial transcription factor GRHL2 promotes direct hepatocyte-to-cholangiocyte transdifferentiation"
Please take a minute to log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process.
PRESS
We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with biologypress@plos.org. If you have previously opted in to the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may opt out on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
Thank you again for choosing PLOS Biology for publication and supporting Open Access publishing. We look forward to publishing your study. 
Sincerely, 
Lucas Smith, Ph.D.
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology
lsmith@plos.org