pmcCell Rep MedCell Rep Med3954cellrepsmedCell Reports Medicine2666-3791ElsevierPMC11604474PMC11604474.111604474116044743948642010.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101804S2666-3791(24)00551-21018041ReportDegradation of IKZF1 prevents epigenetic progression of T cell exhaustion in an antigen-specific assay
TayTristan BommakantiGayathri JaenschElizabeth GorthiAparna Karapa ReddyIswarya HuYan ZhangRuochi DoshiAatman S. TanSin Lih Brucklacher-WaldertVerena PrickettLaura KurasawaJames OverstreetMichael Glen CriscioneSteven BuenrostroJason Danieljason_buenrostro@harvard.edu MeleDeanna A.deanna.mele@astrazeneca.com 1Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA2Gene Regulation Observatory, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA3Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca, Waltham, MA, USA4Revvity, Cambridge, UK5Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA∗Corresponding author jason_buenrostro@harvard.edu∗∗Corresponding author deanna.mele@astrazeneca.com6Present address: Fog Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA, USA
7Present address: Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK
8Present address: Precede Biosciences, Boston, MA, USA
9These authors contributed equally
10Lead contact
1911202431102024511475998101804253202430720244102024311020243011202410032026© 2024 Published by Elsevier Inc.2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
In cancer, chronic antigen stimulation drives effector T cells to exhaustion, limiting the efficacy of T cell therapies. Recent studies have demonstrated that epigenetic rewiring governs the transition of T cells from effector to exhausted states and makes a subset of exhausted T cells non-responsive to PD1 checkpoint blockade. Here, we describe an antigen-specific assay for T cell exhaustion that generates T cells phenotypically and transcriptionally similar to those found in human tumors. We perform a screen of human epigenetic regulators, identifying IKZF1 as a driver of T cell exhaustion. We determine that the IKZF1 degrader iberdomide prevents exhaustion by blocking chromatin remodeling at T cell effector enhancers and preserving the binding of AP-1, NF-κB, and NFAT. Thus, our study uncovers a role for IKZF1 as a driver of T cell exhaustion through epigenetic modulation, providing a rationale for the use of iberdomide in solid tumors to prevent T cell exhaustion.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•In vitro assay generates antigen-specific exhausted T cells from human T cells
•IKZF1 (IKAROS) is a key driver of T cell exhaustion
•Iberdomide (IKZF1/3 degrader) prevents the progression of exhaustion
•IKZF1 silences effector genes by inhibiting AP-1, NF-κB, and NFAT binding

Tay et al. demonstrate an antigen-specific assay producing exhausted T cells that reflect those found in human tumors. They identify IKZF1 (IKAROS) as a driver of exhaustion progression and validate that the IKZF1 degrader iberdomide is sufficient to preserve effector function by preventing IKZF1-induced silencing of effector gene enhancers.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDPublished: October 31, 2024

## Introduction
In patients with cancer, tumor-specific T cells are driven to exhaustion in the tumor microenvironment and become non-functional. Immune checkpoint therapies directed at blocking inhibitory receptors have shown great promise across several tumor types, albeit effective only in some patients. Exhaustion of T cells is also a significant problem for chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T and T cell engager therapies. , , , Functional genomics has defined a central role for epigenetics in driving and maintaining exhausted T cell states. Distinct alterations to DNA methylation and chromatin accessibility profiles at well-defined immunological loci accompany T cell exhaustion, which includes stable silencing of effector cytokines necessary for T cell-mediated killing. Single-cell assay for transposase-accessible chromatin (ATAC) with sequencing (ATAC-seq) studies reveal that exhausted T cells are heterogeneous, displaying differences in their function , and in their response to therapy. , 
Epigenetically reprogramming exhausted T cells to a responsive state could enable broader and perhaps deeper responses to cancer immunotherapies across indications. Toward this end, epigenomic modifications such as pharmacologic inhibition of DNA demethylation, histone deacetylases, , SWI/SNF, , and EZH2 , , have been reported to rescue aspects of T cell exhaustion. However, current understanding of T cell exhaustion comes mostly from chronic viral infection and syngeneic tumor studies in mice. A model of human T cells exhausted in a physiologically relevant manner would greatly enhance the understanding of this process and would enable the screening of relevant agents for human cancer immunotherapy.
We sought to identify and expand our knowledge of key drivers in T cell exhaustion using human T cells. We first develop a human T cell exhaustion model using healthy donor PBMCs (peripheral blood mononuclear cells) to generate exhausted antigen-specific T cells that demonstrate the hallmarks of exhaustion: lower cytotoxicity and cytokine secretion. We characterize these exhausted T cells using single-cell epigenome and transcriptome profiling, demonstrating that they resemble human tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). We then perform a CRISPR screen in human T cells exhausted by repeated stimulation and identify IKZF1 (IKAROS) as a key player in establishing T cell exhaustion. Further, we demonstrate that T cell exhaustion can be prevented by treating cells with iberdomide, an IKZF1 degrader in clinical trials to treat multiple myeloma. Transcriptional profiling and transcription factor (TF) footprinting analysis reveal that iberdomide halts IKZF1-driven chromatin remodeling at key T cell effector enhancers, preventing T cell exhaustion phenotypes. Our study describes a role for IKZF1 in T cell exhaustion and provides a mechanistic understanding of how iberdomide prevents exhaustion and maintains a functional T cell state.

## Results

## Antigen-specific exhaustion model generates exhausted T cells consistent with TILs from human tumors
To investigate the molecular mechanisms of exhaustion, we developed an antigen-driven model of T cell exhaustion that closely mimics the in vivo process. We sought to use peptide major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-driven stimulation of T cells to mirror the activation stimulus of T cells in the tumor instead of non-specific anti-CD3/CD28 activation methods that bypass antigen presentation to directly stimulate the T cell receptor (TCR). , We utilized known MHC class I peptides from viral antigens (CMV, influenza, and EBV) to expand virus-specific T cells from healthy donor PBMCs containing memory T cells from prior exposures ( A). 
Upon peptide re-challenge, T cells under chronic repeated stimulation for 14 days (Tex) had lower levels of cytokine production than cells subjected to acute stimulation for 7 days (Teff), a classic sign of T cell exhaustion ( A). To assess the cytotoxic ability of day 7 Teff and day 14 Tex cells, we engineered an OE21 tumor cell line that expressed GFP and the same viral peptides used for expansion ( B). By co-culturing viral peptide-expanded T cells with the engineered OE21-viral peptide-GFP tumor cell line, we were able to assess tumor killing in an antigen-dependent manner. Day 7 Teff cells were able to efficiently kill tumor cells in contrast to the day 14 Tex cells, which were unable to control tumor cell growth, supporting an exhaustion phenotype for day 14 Tex cells ( B and C). Culture supernatants from the tumor cell co-culture revealed reduced cytokine secretion by day 14 Tex cells ( C) consistent with their overall reduced functionality.
To comprehensively characterize our antigen-specific model, we sought to determine if our exhausted T cells recapitulated exhaustion-associated cell signatures seen in previous studies. , , , To do this, we enriched antigen-specific T cells from day 7 Teff and day 14 Tex cultures ( D) with flow sorting using MHC tetramers staining for viral peptide-reactive T cells. We performed SHARE-seq, a multimodal single-cell ATAC and RNA sequencing method, and generated 84,685 matched ATAC and RNA profiles of antigen-specific cells across four donors with median ATAC and RNA depths of 11,772 fragments and 2,730 reads per cell, respectively ( E and S1F). After Harmony correction to remove donor-specific batch effects ( G), uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization of the RNA profiles reveals that T cells separate by the length of stimulation time ( D). This separation of day 7 Teff cells is mirrored by the higher expression of cytokines such as IFNG, IL-2, TNF, and GZMB essential for effector function and the absence of expression of known exhaustion regulators such as CBLB, HAVCR2, SNX9, and ENTPD1 ( E).
To systematically map the differential gene programs within day 7 Teff and day 14 Tex cells, we created gene modules based on covarying expression profiles across clusters of cells ( A). We detected four modules that we annotated as effector, exhaustion, transition, and memory modules ( B and S2C). The effector module was annotated based on canonical cytokine markers IFNG, IL-2, and TNF and had top Gene Ontology (GO) annotations including positive regulation of metabolic process and regulation of leukocyte activation, consistent with the effector phenotype of high proliferation and activation ( D). Meanwhile, the exhaustion module included negative regulators of T cell activation such as HAVCR2, CBLB, and CTLA4 and had top GO annotations such as negative regulation of T cell proliferation and T cell activation. We labeled the memory module based on marker genes IL7R and LEF1 typically associated with naive or memory T cells. Interestingly, cells expressing this module had no canonical markers of activation or exhaustion despite having a TCR that recognizes viral antigens. Lastly, we labeled the transition gene module because it includes both effector and exhaustion-associated genes such as CRTAM, REL, and NR4A3 not included in other signatures. These genes may associate in the same module because they persist longer in transitioning effector cells or turn on early in initiating exhaustion progression.
We compared our de novo gene modules to gene programs found in human cancer CD8+ TILs to determine the biological relevance of our antigen-specific model ( E). Our exhaustion gene module was highly enriched in the same genes comprising the terminally exhausted cluster (p = 1.83 ∗ 10−45) found in multiple tumor types, supporting that our exhausted T cells reflect their in vivo clinical counterpart. Indeed, the expression of our exhaustion module highly overlapped with the exhaustion program found in human cancer CD8+ TILs at the single-cell level ( F). On the other hand, our effector gene module had little enrichment with any TIL cluster, which is expected due to the dysfunctional state of T cells in patient tumors. Our memory module had high enrichment with terminally differentiated effector memory T cells (p = 1.15 ∗ 10−19), GZMK+ effector memory T cells (p = 1.61 ∗ 10−18), and ZNF683+ CXCR6+-resident memory T cells (p = 5.25 ∗ 10−25). Therefore, our model produces an antigen-specific memory T cell population and a spectrum of exhausted cell states recapitulating the functional and transcriptomic features found in exhausted T cells from human tumors.
To analyze the progression and heterogeneity of exhaustion in our model, we took advantage of the single-cell resolution of our dataset and compiled a score reflecting the overall T cell state of exhaustion (see ). Low-scoring effector cells were significantly enriched in day 7 Teff while high-scoring exhausted cells were enriched in day 14 Tex (p < 2.2e−10, Kolmogorov-Smirnov) ( G). Despite this enrichment, however, 45% of day 14 Tex retained an effector-like transcriptomic signature, highlighting the heterogeneity of exhaustion and the need for single-cell measurements. We used this score to rank cells and visualize the trajectory from effector to exhaustion in our assay ( H). Interestingly, genes like KLRC1 are only expressed in terminally exhausted cells while other exhaustion genes like CBLB are expressed throughout the transition of effector cells to exhaustion. This reflects the role of CBLB as a key inhibitor of TCR signaling and early regulator of T cell exhaustion. These results are consistent with the acquisition of an exhaustion-associated transcriptional signature over the course of our assay.
We also investigated chromatin profiles in the day 7 Teff and day 14 Tex to identify peaks uniquely accessible in effector or exhausted cells. Key enhancers of cytokine genes at XCL2 and CRTAM have decreased chromatin accessibility in exhausted cells ( I). Interestingly, enhancers at IFNG (p = 0.0178) and IL-2 (p = 0.0424) were not significantly silenced in day 14 Tex, indicating that loss of expression during exhaustion progression may be attributable to other factors such as differential TF binding ( F). To broadly quantify gene-associated changes of chromatin accessibility, we correlated the paired RNA expression of each gene with the chromatin accessibility of all peaks to identify gene-enhancer relationships. Genes with high numbers of regulating enhancers are defined as domains of regulatory chromatin (DORCs) and are enriched for key exhaustion regulators such as NR4A3 and CTLA4 ( G). We calculated DORC scores by summing the accessibility of regulating enhancers for each gene (see ). DORC scores were decreased in exhausted cells for genes implicated in maintaining T cell effector function such as CRTAM (p = 3.25 ∗ 10−249), EOMES (p = 3.38 ∗ 10−99), and NFATC2 (p = 4.11 ∗ 10−35), in addition to IFNG (p = 2.85 ∗ 10−11) and IL2 (p = 3.92 ∗ 10−5) as cells progress along the exhaustion trajectory ( J). On the other hand, DORC scores were increased for exhaustion-associated genes such as at CTLA4 (p = 1.64 ∗ 10−84), UBASH3B (p = 4.90 ∗ 10−152), and KLRC1 (p = 1.58 ∗ 10−68).
To identify TF regulators of exhaustion, we computed TF motif accessibility scores. KLF4, NF-κB1/REL, and JUN/FOS TF families had higher activity in effector T cells, consistent with previous data describing these TFs as important drivers of T cell activation , ( K). On the other hand, exhausted T cells had higher activity in the TFs FOXO1 and IKZF1 previously shown to negatively regulate cytokine production. Together, these data demonstrate that this in vitro antigen-specific exhaustion assay generates T cells with functional and cell-intrinsic characteristics of exhausted T cells from human tumors and can nominate TFs driving exhaustion in an unbiased manner.

## IKZF1 (IKAROS) identified as a top hit in a human Tex cell CRISPR knockout screen
We sought to find drivers of T cell exhaustion with a CRISPR screen of human epigenetic regulators. However, the antigen-specific assay generates a limited number of exhausted T cells with variability in yield between donors, making it technically unfeasible to have appropriate representation of library members. Additionally, the tumor killing readout is not amenable for high-throughput screening. To overcome this limitation, we used a chronic stimulation model using repeated stimulation with anti-CD3/CD28 antibodies more suited for high-throughput screening ( A). In this model, T cells produced lower levels of cytokines consistent with exhaustion over successive rounds of stimulation ( B and A). We included biological replicates and found that across the 3 separate donors, the lethal controls resulted in cell death ( B) and knockout of beta-2-microglobulin was detectable by flow cytometry ( C), supporting a functional CRISPR protocol. 
This screen revealed known and previously unidentified regulators of T cell exhaustion. Knockouts of DNMT3a and HDAC2, both of which have previously been reported to have a role in T cell exhaustion, , , , enhanced IL-2 production in Tex cells ( D), giving us confidence in the success of our screen. Top screen hits also included CUL3, which is a known regulator of T cell function, and ACTR5 and NFRKB, members of the INO80 complex, which have been implicated in other exhaustion screens. Other hits such as USP7, a ubiquitinyl hydrolase whose other family members are negative regulators of T cell activation, and CHUK (IKKα), a known inhibitor of inflammation and the NF-κB complex in macrophages, , were previously unlinked to T cell exhaustion. Finally, IKZF1 (IKAROS) was nominated as an exhaustion regulator ( C), a TF previously known for its role in lymphocyte differentiation and repressive effect on T cell activation. , , We had high confidence in IKZF1 as an exhaustion regulator because of its higher activity in exhausted cells (see K) and its known recruitment of histone deacetylase complexes, including the components HDAC2 and SAP30 that were also hits in our screen. Interestingly, cereblon E3 ligase modulators (CELMoDs), currently in trials for multiple myeloma and acute myeloid leukemia, are known to activate T cell function by inducing the degradation of IKZF1 and its family member Aiolos (IKZF3) through cereblon E3 ligase. Additionally, the previous-generation IKZF1 degrader lenalidomide has shown beneficial effects in enhancing CAR-T cell function in a small clinical trial. Indeed, upon follow-up CRISPR knockout of IKZF1, the loss of IKZF1 protein ( E) was accompanied by a corresponding increase in cytokine secretion ( F) even after chronic stimulation, confirming a role for IKZF1 in promoting T cell exhaustion and warranting future mechanistic investigation using our assay.
To extend our findings in IKZF1 to clinically relevant therapies, we tested if the CELMoD iberdomide (CC-220) could prevent T cell exhaustion in our physiologically relevant antigen-specific assay. Iberdomide degraded IKZF1 within a few hours of treatment in day 7 Teff and maintained negligible IKZF1 levels for the remainder of the 14-day chronic stimulation time course ( D). Treatment with iberdomide prevented T cell exhaustion phenotypes seen after 14 days of chronic stimulation, restoring tumor cell killing in our co-culture assay ( E and G) and increasing cytokine production ( F and H). These results confirmed that iberdomide treatment phenocopies IKZF1 knockout and highlights iberdomide as a promising therapeutic to rescue T cell exhaustion. In contrast, PDL1 checkpoint blockade had a little to no effect on the function of Tex cells in this system (data not shown).

## Iberdomide preserves the chromatin landscape of effector cells despite chronic stimulation
Although iberdomide could sustain effector T cell function in chronically stimulated T cells, we wanted to investigate whether these protective effects extended to the genomic level. We performed SHARE-seq, a paired single-cell RNA and chromatin accessibility sequencing method, on antigen-specific day 14 Tex at the end of the iberdomide and chronic stimulation time course. The iberdomide-treated cells clustered separately from the DMSO-treated cells, reflecting the dramatic effect of the drug ( A). In agreement with functional assays, iberdomide treatment upregulated the expression of effector genes such as IFNG, IL-2, and TNF while downregulating exhaustion markers including TIGIT, CTLA4, and CBLB ( B). Interestingly, iberdomide also induced higher IKZF1 expression, likely caused by a compensatory mechanism to IKZF1 degradation. We ranked day 14 DMSO or iberdomide-treated cells by their exhaustion score and discovered significant enrichment of iberdomide-treated cells in the effector population (p < 2.2e−10, Kolmogorov-Smirnov) ( C). Treatment with iberdomide also altered the expression of non-exhaustion genes, including programs associated with cellular response to stress (p = 6.88 ∗ 10−10) and defense responses (p = 2.73 ∗ 10−9) ( A). 
Further investigation of chromatin profiles revealed that iberdomide preserves chromatin accessibility at enhancers of immune genes such as TNFSF8 and STAT4 ( D), but did not affect chromatin accessibility at other key effector genes such as IFNG and IL-2. Interestingly, most chromatin changes following iberdomide treatment were gains in accessibility, suggesting that IKZF1 is a repressor ( E). To identify how iberdomide-induced IKZF1 degradation restores T cell exhaustion, we used chromVAR to globally detect TF motifs with differential accessibility. Motifs of TF families associated with effector function such as JUN/FOS, IRF, REL/NF-κB, and NFAT were significantly more accessible after iberdomide treatment ( F). On the other hand, the TFs NR4A1 and NR4A2, known to promote T cell exhaustion, had reduced activity after treatment, indicating that IKZF1 function was necessary for the onset of the exhaustion program.
To further associate changes in TF function to target genes, we analyzed iberdomide-induced differentially expressed genes using the Causal Reasoning algorithm. Briefly, Causal Reasoning uses protein-protein interaction databases to infer direct relationships from gene expression data, identifying the top genes mediating iberdomide response. Consistent with our chromatin accessibility analysis, the TFs NFATC2, REL, and IRF8 scored among the top factors inducing changes in expression of key effector cytokines ( B). Activity of these TF families is associated with T cell effector function in both viral and tumor backgrounds, suggesting that IKZF1 may function to repress these transcriptional programs. Together, analysis of the transcriptome and epigenome provides further mechanistic understanding of iberdomide’s ability to preserve T cell effector function, despite chronic stimulation.

## Iberdomide rescues TF binding at effector enhancers
To identify the primary mechanism of iberdomide in preserving T cell effector state, we acutely treated primary human T cells with iberdomide for 6 h, stimulated them using Immunocult anti-CD3/CD28 reagent, and performed bulk ATAC-seq. Of the regions with differential chromatin accessibility, 95.1% had higher accessibility, affirming that IKZF1 functions as a repressor of its target genes ( A). This differential ATAC-seq peak set had the highest similarity with IKZF1 ChIP-seq sites when compared to Cistrome DB’s database of all ChIP-seq studies, confirming that acute depletion reveals the direct effects of IKZF1 degradation ( C). 
To further investigate the interplay of TFs at exhaustion-associated regulatory elements, we employed TF footprinting with the computational pipeline PRINT. By analyzing Tn5 insertions at base-pair resolution, PRINT identifies binding of individual DNA elements at the sub-enhancer level using ATAC data (see ). We use TF footprinting to identify differential nucleosome or TF binding events even in enhancers with no change in chromatin accessibility, granting us insight into the mechanism of iberdomide-mediated maintenance of T cell effector function ( B). In both the acute 6-h iberdomide treatment on naive T cells and 7-day treatment on exhausted T cells, TF footprinting revealed that iberdomide increased binding at key motifs of ETS1, JUN/FOS, STAT/IRF, REL/NF-κB, and NFAT families as was previously seen with chromVAR analysis ( C). Previous immunomodulatory drugs (IMIDs) related to iberdomide are known to upregulate JUN/FOS and NFAT families, further supporting our results. Differential binding at these key motifs during iberdomide treatment largely occurs without changes in TF expression (see B; ), suggesting that IKZF1 degradation is reshaping the regulatory element landscape. Additionally, the similarity in affected motifs from IKZF1 degradation in naive vs. exhausted T cells indicates that iberdomide primarily prevents exhaustion by preserving the activity of TFs at effector genes, rather than reversing the activation of exhaustion genes, which would not be relevant in the naive T cells.
Intriguingly, loss of nucleosome binding upon iberdomide treatment primarily occurs at a GGAA motif shared by IKZF1 and the ETS family of TFs ( D). IKZF1 has been previously identified as a direct competitor with ETS activators at joint binding sites, supporting our analysis. , The ETS family is implicated with pioneer factor behavior in effector T cells, where it is required for the binding of adjacent activating TFs like AP-1, NFAT, and REL. At peaks with IKZF1 ChIP-seq signal, aggregated TF footprinting results illustrated that iberdomide causes a loss of binding of nucleosomes at the joint IKZF1/ETS motif, coupled with a general increase in footprints of TF size ( D) when compared to a TSS background control ( E), in agreement with our previous analysis.
There were specific examples of this phenomenon at enhancers of key immune loci like IFNG ( E). At an enhancer 31 kb from the IFNG promoter with high IKZF1 ChIP-seq signal, TF footprinting analysis reveals increased nucleosome binding during exhaustion progression at an IKZF1/3 motif, coupled with loss of Jun binding at a nearby AP-1 motif ( F). Iberdomide treatment is sufficient to prevent exhaustion reprogramming at this enhancer, preserving AP-1 binding and IFNG expression in chronically stimulated T cells. These regions were not nominated by differential chromatin accessibility levels despite the clear ejection of a nucleosome ( F), highlighting the need for TF footprinting to identify sub-enhancer events. At other locations, such as at a distal enhancer of CSF2 (GM-CSF) with differential chromatin accessibility ( G), there was a similar loss of nucleosome binding upon iberdomide treatment coupled with a gain of TF binding at the joint IKZF1/ETS motif ( G). At another distal enhancer of IFNG, loss of nucleosome binding at an IKZF1 motif was paired with loss of binding of the TF NR4A2 ( H).
This leads us to a model whereby ETS1 and IKZF1 competitively bind during exhaustion progression ( G). During exhaustion, IKZF1 binds to enhancers of effector genes such as IFNG, IL2, and TNF, promoting nucleosome occupancy and shutting down nearby AP-1, NFAT, and REL binding sites necessary for T cell activation. Iberdomide-mediated degradation of IKZF1 preserves ETS binding and effector gene function. However, iberdomide treatment did not affect inhibitory receptor expression (LAG3, PD-1, and TIGIT) as measured by flow cytometry analysis (not shown). In summary, we propose that the direct impact of iberdomide in preventing exhaustion progression is achieved by removing the inhibitory effects of IKZF1 on effector gene function.

## Discussion
Epigenetics controls the differentiation of T cells into specialized subsets, including exhausted T cell states, which have been associated with the heterogeneity of patient response rates to cancer immunotherapy. , However, the field lacks a comprehensive view of epigenetic remodeling during exhaustion progression and whether therapies can be developed to revert the epigenetic barriers establishing an exhausted cell state.
Here, we identified IKZF1 (IKAROS) as a driver of T cell exhaustion, in addition to its previously known roles in T cell development, differentiation, and cytokine suppression. , , Using our antigen-specific in vitro assay and single-cell multi-omics, we characterized the mechanism of the IKZF1 degrader iberdomide across multiple layers of gene regulation, providing an integrated understanding of how IKZF1 degradation prevents the silencing of effector genes and preserves effector function. We discovered that iberdomide prevents IKZF1-mediated recruitment of nucleosomes, safeguarding chromatin accessibility and binding of the TF families NFAT, AP-1, ETS, and NF-κB/REL at effector genes despite chronic stimulation. Additional experiments are required to determine the plasticity of these iberdomide-induced changes, especially in the case of treatment withdrawal. Future experiments are also needed to determine if IKZF1 overexpression or activation is sufficient to drive T cell exhaustion. Our findings are consistent with previous reports of IKZF1 acting as a transcriptional repressor through the recruitment of histone deacetylase (HDAC) complexes , . Indeed, our CRISPR screen identified HDAC components (SAP30 and HDAC2) as regulators, raising the possibility that HDAC inhibitors may phenocopy or amplify the effects of iberdomide treatment.
Although iberdomide is a more specific degrader than previous-generation IMIDs, it degrades both IKZF1 (IKAROS) and a closely related family member IKZF3 (AIOLOS). In our ATAC-seq dataset from iberdomide-treated T cells, our list of differential peaks had the highest overlap with IKZF1 ChIP-seq datasets, suggesting that IKZF1 degradation contributes significantly to the observed phenotype. Interestingly, the IMID lenalidomide has been reported to partially rescue T cell exhaustion through IKZF3 degradation. IKZF3 degradation also enhanced CAR-T cell proliferation and activity, suggesting that IKZF1 and IKZF3 may have similar roles in T cell exhaustion. Degradation of these two proteins by CELMoDs such as iberdomide impacts the function of multiple cell types beyond T cells , ; however, indicating dose optimization, scheduling, and combination drugs for iberdomide (or other IKZF1 degraders) might be needed to translate these in vitro findings to clinical benefits in patients.
Despite the necessity of epigenetic remodeling in the progression of exhaustion, targeting epigenetic factors to restore exhausted T cell function has been challenging. Employing pleotropic agents such as Dnmt1i, HDACi, and even more focused inhibitors targeting readers (BETi) , and HMT (EZH2i) , , has had limited clinical success in treating tumors. Identification of the TF families Tox and NR4A as exhaustion regulators , , , has been similarly challenging to translate to therapies due to difficulty in druggability. Our identification of a clinical-stage drug, iberdomide, and its mechanism in preventing T cell exhaustion provide a rationale for using iberdomide and other selective IKZF1 degraders in the clinic to revive exhausted T cells in solid tumors. Iberdomide may also be promising for preserving effector function of TILs and engineered T cells (CAR-T and TCR-T) during ex vivo expansion when they are subject to long periods of stimulation, highlighting the broad potential use of IKZF1 degraders for oncology treatment.

## Limitations of the study
For the CRISPR screen, we used a CD3/CD28 chronic stimulation model because the antigen-specific assay generates a limited number of exhausted T cells with variability in yield between donors. Additionally, this work demonstrated that IKZF1 degradation is sufficient to prevent exhaustion progression, but future experiments are needed to determine if IKZF1 activation is sufficient to drive T cell exhaustion on its own. TF footprinting indicates binding of DNA elements, whose identity is inferred by the DNA motif at that site. To confirm our findings on IKZF1-induced chromatin remodeling at effector gene enhancers driving exhaustion progression, ChIP-seq experiments on TF families such as IKZF, AP-1, NFAT, ETS, and NF-κB/REL are needed.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Deanna Mele (Deanna.Mele@astrazeneca.com).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
All sequencing data generated in this paper have been deposited to GEO as GEO: GSE244184 and are publicly available as of the date of publication. This paper does not report original code. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this work paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
We thank members of AstraZeneca and the Buenrostro lab for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful discussions. We are grateful to the Broad Walkup Sequencing Core and the Bauer Core at Harvard for providing sequencing services. J.D.B. and the Buenrostro lab acknowledge support from the NIH New Innovator Award (DP2) and 10.13039/100004325AstraZeneca. T.T. is supported by an 10.13039/501100020414NSF Fellowship.

## Author contributions
J.K. and M.G.O. generated the viral peptide cell line and developed a co-culture assay to measure tumor cell killing. A.S.D. and I.K.R. developed the antigen-specific exhaustion assay. G.B., I.K.R., and L.P. adapted the protocol with tetramer sorting. G.B. designed and coordinated the CRISPR screen run from AstraZeneca while S.L.T. and V.B.-W. ran the CRISPR screen at Revvity. E.J. and A.G. analyzed the screen dataset. E.J. ran assays testing iberdomide. I.K.R., E.J., G.B., and L.P. generated T cell samples for sequencing. T.T. generated sequencing datasets. T.T. analyzed the sequencing data with computational support from R.Z., Y.H., and S.C. T.T., G.B., J.D.B., and D.A.M. wrote the manuscript. J.D.B. and D.A.M. supervised the research, and all authors reviewed the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
J.D.B. holds patents related to ATAC-seq and is an SAB member of Camp4 and seqWell. G.B., E.J., A.G., I.K.R., A.S.D., L.P., J.K., M.G.O., S.C., and D.A.M. are current or former employees of AstraZeneca. V.B.-W. is an employee of Revvity. S.L.T. was formerly an employee of Revvity.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and subject details

## Cell culture
CD3+ T cells were isolated from healthy donor leukopaks (Stemcell Technologies) using bead separation (Stemcell Technologies) and cryopreserved. Cells were thawed as needed for CD3/CD28 exhaustion assays as described below.
PBMCs were isolated from HLA A2:01 specific healthy donor leukopaks (Stemcell Technologies) using Ficoll Paque and cryopreserved. Cells were thawed and resuspended at 4 million cells/mL in RPMI media supplemented with heat-inactivated FBS, Pen/Strep, HEPES, non-essential amino acids, sodium pyruvate, Glutamax (All Gibco). Cells were subsequently used for antigen-specific exhaustion assays as described below.
Healthy donor leukopaks were purchased from vendors approved by the AstraZeneca Human Biological Samples (HBS) Governance Board. PBMCs were stored and used in accordance with institutional policies.

## Method details

## CD3/CD28 T cell exhaustion assay

## CD3/CD28 chronic stimulation
CD3+ T cells were isolated from healthy donor leukopaks (Stemcell Technologies) using bead separation (Stemcell Technologies) and cryopreserved. Thawed T cells were resuspended in RPMI medium supplemented with heat-inactivated FBS, Pen/Strep, HEPES, non-essential amino acids, sodium pyruvate, Glutamax and 2-mercapto-ethanol (all Gibco). 10 million cells were plated in a T25 tissue culture flask at a density of 1 million/mL. 250 μL of ImmunoCult Human CD3/CD28 T cell Activator Mix (StemCell Technology) was added to the cells and incubated at 37°C. After 3 days of culture, cells were transferred to fresh culture medium and stimulated again. After 3 rounds of stimulation, cells were washed and stimulated for a final cytokine assessment 24h post the last round (chronic stim). Freshly thawed cells stimulated for 24h or 72h were used for cytokine and proliferation measurements respectively as acute stim control. Cytokines were measured using a Mesoscale Discovery V-PLEX Proinflammatory Panel 1 Human Kit and read on an MSD SECTOR S 600 plate reader. Proliferation of cells in the last 18h of stimulation was assessed by labeling and staining proliferating cells with Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 647 Flow Cytometry Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific.) Edu positive cells were detected using a MACSQuant Analyzer 10 Flow Cytometer (Miltenyi Biotec).

## Arrayed CRISPRko screen in T cells
The screen was performed at Revvity in Cambridge, UK. CD3+ T cells were isolated by magnetic bead separation (StemCell Technology) from PBMCs of three leukopaks (Cambridge Biosciences) and cryopreserved. Revived CD3+ T cells were resuspended in P3 buffer (Lonza) and electroporated (Amaxa HT Nucleofector; Lonza) in a 1:3 v/v ratio of Cas9-NLS (Feldan) and a synthetic sgRNA library targeting 829 genes (3 guides per gene, Revvity Dharmacon). The library used consisted of the Edit-R Human sgRNA Library-Epigenetics (QTE2954349G) and Edit-R Human Synthetic B2M (67), CBLB (8680), Rosa26 (custom synthesis using following gRNA sequence AGTCGCTTCTCGATTATGGG), non-targeting control (NTC) #1, and lethal synthetic sgRNA control #1 (all 3 guides per gene, Revvity Dharmacon). Immediately after electroporation, each well was transferred to RPMI media supplemented with heat-inactivated FBS, Pen/Strep, HEPES, non-essential amino acids, sodium pyruvate, Glutamax and 2-mercapto-ethanol (all Gibco) and splitted into four technical replicates with 20,000 cells per well of a 384 well culture plate. Cells were stimulated with ImmunoCult Human CD3/CD28 T cell Activator Mix (1:80; StemCell Technology) and incubated at 37°C. Three days after the first stimulation, cells were spun down and supernatant was removed. This was followed by a second, third and fourth round of stimulation every three days with fresh ImmunoCult Human CD3/CD28 T cell Activator Mix (1:80) resuspended in complete assay medium. Cell Titer Glo 2.0 readout was assessed on the 2103 EnVision multilabel plate reader (Revvity). Secretion of IL-2, TNF-α and IFN-γ in the supernatant was assessed using HTRF technology (Revvity HTRF) and acquired on the 2105 EnVision multilabel plate reader (Revvity). CBLB served as a positive control that revives exhausted T cell function. Lethal #1, B2M, NTC and Rosa26 served as phenotypical editing controls. For lethal #1, B2M, NTC and Rosa26 cell viability was assessed and surface expression of CD3 and B2M was compared to NTC and Rosa26 using fluorescence-labelled antibodies (anti-CD3 BV421, UCTH1 clone; anti-B2M FITC, 2M2 clone; both BioLegend) and flow cytometry (IntelliCyt iQue Screener Plus; Sartorius) on day 6 post-electroporation. The most significant hits were identified by evaluating genes whose knockout results in a significant (adjusted p value <0.005) increase in at least 3 out of 4 readouts for at least 2 out of 3 donors.

## T cell electroporation of gRNAs
T cells were transferred to P3 buffer (Lonza) and electroporated with NTC (non-targeting control) sgRNA or IKZF1 sgRNA (IDT) and TrueCut Cas9 Protein v2 (Invitrogen). Cells were transferred to culture medium and incubated for 72 h at 37degC. After three rounds of activation with ImmunoCult Human CD3/CD28 T cell Activator Mix as described above before, cells were washed, counted and 100,000 cells each of control and IKZF1 KO cells plated per well of a 96 well U bottom plate. Cells were stimulated with the activator mix for 24h and culture supernatants collected for cytokine analysis. KO efficiency was assessed by running cell lysates (72h post CRISPR editing) on an SDS PAGE gel and western blotting for IKZF1 (clone D10E5, Cell Signaling Technology).

## Antigen specific exhaustion model

## Antigen specific chronic stimulation
PBMCs were isolated from HLA A2:01 specific healthy donor leukopaks (Stemcell Technologies) using a Ficoll Paque and cryopreserved. Cells were thawed and resuspended at 4 million cells/mL in RPMI media supplemented with heat-inactivated FBS, Pen/Strep, HEPES, non-essential amino acids, sodium pyruvate, Glutamax (All Gibco). Cells were plated in a 24 well culture plate (1mL cell suspension/well). 20 ng/mL of recombinant human IL-2 (Peprotech) was added to the cells along with 1ug/mL each of HLA A2:01 binding CMV pp65, EBV LMP2, EBV BMLF1, Influenza M peptide and EBV LMP2 viral peptides (MBL International). Cells were incubated for 7 days at 37°C. At the end of 7 days, stimulated cells (consisting of effector T cells) were washed and harvested for further characterization or assays.
To generate exhausted T (Tex) cells, day 7 cells were transferred to fresh culture medium with IL-2 and stimulated again with peptides and 1ug/mL of anti-human CD28 antibody (BD Biosciences) for another 7 days. In some experiments, cells were treated with 10nM iberdomide (MedChemExpress) during this phase of culture. At the end of total 14 days of culture, these chronically stimulated cells (consisting of exhausted T cells) were washed and harvested for further assays/characterization.

## Determining frequency of tetramer positive cells
Cells were stained with Fixable Live Dead Violet (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by staining with fluorescent antibodies for CD3 (clone SK7, Biolegend), CD8 (clone HIT1a, BD Biosciences) and PE conjugated tetramers for HLA-A∗02:01 CMV pp65 (NLVPMAVATV), HLA-A∗02:01 EBV LMP2 (FLYALALLL), HLA-A∗02:01 EBV (GLCTLVAML), HLA-A∗02:01 EBV LMP2 (CLGGLLTMV) and HLA-A∗02:01 Influenza-M1 (GILGFVFTL) (MBL International). Stained samples were run on a MACSQuant Analyzer 10 Flow Cytometer (Miltenyi Biotec) to determine the frequency of tetramer positive cells in the sample.

## Sorting of antigen specific cells for SHARE-seq
To enrich for viral peptide specific CD8 T cells from the Day 7 and Day 14 cells (expanded described above) from 4 separate donors, 10 million expanded cells were plated @ 2 million/mL in a 6-well plate with peptides (1ug/ml) and anti-CD28 (1ug/ml) as described above but without IL-2. 10nM iberdomide was added to some wells for iberdomide treatment cells. After 4 h of incubation, cells were stained for dead cells (fixable Live Dead stain, Thermofisher), CD8 APC (clone HIT1a, BD Biosciences) and PE conjugated tetramers (MBL International). Cells were fixed by adding formaldehyde (28906, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a final concentration of 0.2% and incubated at room temperature for 5 min and washed in PBS. Cells were kept on ice until sorting. Live tetramer positive cells were bulk sorted into CryoStor freezing medium (07959, STEMCELL Technologies) on a Sony SH800 sorter using a 100μm nozzle and frozen at −80°C for single cell sequencing.

## Cytokine staining and readout
In some experiments, Day 7 or Day 14 cells (described above) were plated in a 96 well V-bottom plate (200,000 cells/well) and 1ug/mL peptides added to restimulate cells along with Monensin and Brefeldin A (Biolegend). Iberdomide (10nM) was added to some wells as required. Cells were incubated for 4h, surface stained with fluorescent antibodies for CD3 (clone SK7, BD Biosciences), CD8 (clone SK1, BD Biosciences), CD4 (clone OKT4, Biolegend) followed by intracellular staining for IFNγ (clone B27, BD Biosciences) and TNFα (clone MAb11, BD Biosciences). Samples were run on a BD Biosciences LSRFortessa cell analyzer and data analyzed using Flowjo 10.8 software.

## Tumor cell killing assay

## Generation of viral peptide expressing OE21 cell line
OE21 cells were obtained from the European Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures (Salisbury, United Kingdom). The sequences for the six viral peptides were concatenated into a single construct, each peptide was separated by a glycine-serine10 linker. This polyepitope insert was synthesized by GeneArt (Waltham, MA), and NheI and NotI restriction sites were used to clone the insert into the pCDH-EF1-MCS-T2A-GFP lentiviral vector (System Biosciences, Palo Alto, CA). OE21 tumor cells were then transduced with the resultant lentivirus, and GFP+ cells were sort-purified.

## T cell and tumor cell co-culture with readout
Viral peptide and GFP expressing OE21 engineered cells from above (OE21-VP-GFP) were seeded at 5,000 cells/well into 96 well plates (PhenoPlate, black, Revvity). Cells were incubated in an Incucyte S3 Live-Cell Analysis Instrument (Sartorius) overnight. The following day, Day 7 or Day 14 viral peptide expanded PBMCs were added at different E:T ratios after adjusting effector cell number to match tetramer positive cell number in each sample. 10nM iberdomide was added to some wells as required. Plates were returned to the Incucyte and imaged every 2 h to monitor tumor cell confluence (GFP fluorescence) over the next 3 days 24h after co-culture, 50 μL of culture supernatant was harvested to assess cytokine secretion using a Mesoscale Discovery V-PLEX Proinflammatory Panel 1 Human Kit.

## IKZF1 degradation with iberdomide treatment
Human T cells were cultured in medium containing 20 ng/mL of IL-2 with different concentrations of iberdomide over 7 days. The extent and kinetics of IKZF1 degradation was determined by western blotting of cell lysates with an IKZF1 antibody (clone D6N9Y, Cell Signaling Technology).

## SHARE-seq

## Generation of scATAC and scRNA libraries
SHARE-seq was performed as previously described. Briefly, cells were fixed and permeabilized. For joint measurements of single cell chromatin accessibility and expression (scATAC- and scRNA-seq), cells were first transposed by Tn5 transposase to mark regions of open chromatin. To improve transposition, transposition was performed using pre-assembled Tn5 (seqWell, Tagify SHARE-seq Reagent). The mRNA was reverse transcribed using a poly(T) primer containing a unique molecular identifier (UMI) and a biotin tag. Permeabilized cells were distributed in a 96-well plate to hybridize well-specific barcoded oligonucleotides to transposed chromatin fragments and poly(T) cDNA. Hybridization was repeated three times to expand the barcoding space and ligate cell barcodes to cDNA and chromatin fragments. Reverse crosslinking was performed to release barcoded molecules. cDNA was separated from chromatin using streptavidin beads, and each library was prepared separately for sequencing.

## Quantification and sequencing of SHARE-seq libraries
Both scATAC-seq and scRNA-seq libraries were quantified with the KAPA Library Quantification Kit and pooled for sequencing. Single cell libraries were sequenced on the Nova-seq platform (Illumina) using a 200-cycle kit (Read 1: 50 cycles, Index 1: 99 cycles, Index 2: 8 cycles, Read 2: 50 cycles). Bulk libraries were sequenced on the Nova-seq platform (Illumina) using a 100-cycle kit 483 (Read 1: 50 cycles, Index 1: 8 cycles, Index 2: 8 cycles, Read 2: 50 cycles).

## SHARE-seq data pre-processing
SHARE-seq data were processed using the SHARE-seqV2 alignment pipeline (https://github.com/masai1116/SHARE-seq-alignmentV2/) and aligned to hg38. RNA cell profiles were filtered to have at least 500 unique features (genes) and less than 5% mitochondrial reads. Seurat V3 was used to scale the gene expression matrix by total UMI counts, multiplied by the mean number of transcripts, and values were log transformed. Open chromatin region peaks were called on individual samples using MACS2 peak caller with the following parameters: --nomodel – nolambda –keep-dup -call-summits. Peaks from all samples were merged and peaks overlapping with ENCODE blacklisted regions (https://sites.google.com/site/anshulkundaje/projects/blacklists) were filtered out. Peak summits were extended by 150 bp on each side and defined as accessible regions (for footprinting analyses, these peaks were later resized to 1000 bp in width). Peaks were annotated to genes using Homer. The fragment counts in peaks and TF scores were calculated using chromVAR. Cell barcodes with less than 45% reads in peaks (FRiP) or 2000 unique fragments in peaks were removed. The aligned reads were then intersected with peak window regions, producing a matrix of chromatin accessibility counts in peaks (rows) by cells (columns). For visualization of T cell exhaustion progression, the top 2,000 variable genes were used for principal component analysis. These principal components were batch-corrected by donor and cell cycle phase using Harmony. The top 20 harmony-corrected principal components were projected into 2D space by UMAP. For all sequencing analysis after harmony-based batch correction, individual cells across donors were weighted equally and donor-blind.

## SHARE-seq data analysis

## DORC identification
The DORC call computational pipeline is described here (https://buenrostrolab.github.io/FigR). To calculate peak-gene associations in cis, we considered all ATAC peaks that are located in the ±50 kb or ±500 kb window around each annotated TSS. We used peak counts and gene expression values to calculate the observed Spearman correlation (obs) of each peak-gene pair. To estimate the background, we used chromVAR to generate 100 background peaks for each peak by matching accessibility and GC content, and calculated the Spearman correlation coefficient between those background peaks and the gene, resulting in a null peak-gene Spearman correlation distribution that is independent of peak-gene proximity. We calculated the expected population mean (pop.mean) and expected population standard deviation (pop.sd) from expected Spearman correlations. The Z score is calculated by z = (obs-pop.mean)/pop.sd. We used a one-sided z-test to determine p-values. For peaks associated with multiple genes, we only kept peak-gene associations with the smallest p-value. Of note, when background peak correction is not performed, the peak-gene associations show strong bias toward higher accessibility regions resulting in a strong bias toward promoter associated interactions.
To define DORCs (a set of nearby peaks per gene), we rank genes by the number of significantly associated peaks (±50kb around TSSs, p < 0.05). We then re-calculate peak-gene association by expanding the window to ±500kb around TSSs. Prior to calculating DORC scores, we first normalized peak counts by the total number of unique fragments in peaks per cell. Following normalization, we defined the DORC score for a gene as the sum of counts in all significantly correlated peaks per gene to obtain a cell x DORC score matrix. To calculate the DORC score in a population, we simply compute the average across all cells in that population.

## Gene modules
The top variable genes across T cell clusters in UMAP space were calculated using Seurat V3 and filtered for less than 10−100 adjusted p value using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Expression of these genes was aggregated across the same T cell clusters to produce pseudobulks as input for DESeq2 normalization. Spearman correlation was used on normalized variable gene counts to produce a distances matrix between all variable genes. Hierarchical clustering was performed on this distances matrix to create a dendrogram linking groups of co-varying genes. The number of modules produced by the tree-cutting method was determined to be 4 using the elbow plot method, minimizing the total Euclidean distance of cells in the same cluster. A combined effector – exhaustion score was created by subtracting the scaled effector module from the scaled exhaustion module. This combined score was used as a metric for exhaustion progression.

## Causal reasoning analysis
Causal reasoning analysis was performed on gene expression change associated with Iberdomide treatment. The functions implementing Causal reasoning are embedded in a commercially available R toolkit called Computational Biology Methods for Drug Discovery (CBDD, Clarivate Analytics, v16.1.0). MetaBase, a manually curated database (also from Clarivate) was used as the knowledge base for drawing causal inferences. The most significant differentially expressed genes (fold change +/− 1.5, adjusted p value <0.05) were used as input to the causal reasoning wrapper function within the toolkit. Transcription factors from the results of causal reasoning analyses were prioritized based on relevance to current biology.

## TF footprinting analysis
To comprehensively identify transcription factors (TFs) that exhibit significant changes in binding activity during a specific biological process, we employed footprinting-based analyses described here (https://github.com/HYsxe/PRINT). At a conceptual level, PRINT detects DNA binding proteins in open chromatin regions by measuring the depletion of Tn5 insertion at each position resulting from these binding events. Briefly, PRINT first internally calculates the Tn5 sequence bias at single base-pair resolution. It then uses a statistical model to compare observed and expected cutting densities and calculate a footprint score for each position within enhancers and promoters. The process is performed with a range of footprint kernel sizes, capturing DNA-binding proteins of different sizes and shapes, creating a multi-scale footprint as seen in F.
To demonstrate the effects of iberdomide treatment, we generated aggregate multi-scale footprints for IKZF1 binding sites. Based on MOODS, we identified matches of IKZF1 motifs across genome. These matches were then categorized as either binding or non-binding sites based on IKZF1 ChIP-seq data, employing cutoffs at the top and bottom 25% quantiles. The multi-scale footprints of treated and nontreated cells at binding and non-binding IKZF1 motif sites were aggregated into 4 maps accordingly. We normalized the IKZF1 binding footprints by subtracting the matched non-binding footprint. To discern the effect of the treatment, we calculated the differential between the normalized iberdomide treated footprint and the DMSO control to create D.
We evaluated the relevance of a TF to a set of regions of interest by examining its motif enrichment and differential footprints. For the TF binding motif enrichment analysis, we utilized pycisTarget and employed the normalized enrichment score (NES) score from the software output as the quantitative metric. Notably, in the pycisTarget analysis using the SCENIC+ motif collection, each motif corresponds to a TF cluster, which can comprise one or more TFs. For the differential analysis based on footprints, we first obtained the position weight matrix (PWM) matrices for each TF cluster utilized in pycisTarget and SCENIC+. We then located the matches of a given TF cluster motif on the genome using MOODS. Subsequently, we calculated the TF binding scores (TFBS) for all matches using the PRINT framework for each condition separately. We further assessed the significance of differential TFBS between the two conditions using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. To further elucidate which TF within an SCENIC+ TF cluster might account for the enrichment of the corresponding TF cluster motif in open chromatin regions, we conducted a correlation-based analysis. Utilizing chromVAR, we calculated a matrix where each entry represents the normalized enrichment of each motif in each cell. For all TFs associated with a TF cluster motif, those with a zero read count based on scRNA-seq were excluded. Subsequently, we determined the correlation between the expression level of a TF and the chromVAR score of the motif across cells. TFs with absolute correlation values equal to or greater than 90% of the maximal absolute correlation for each motif cluster were identified as the representative TFs for their respective clusters.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical significance in C, B, and 2F was calculated using GraphPad Prism 10.2 with a two-tailed t-test. Other statistical details for experiments can be found in the Method Details section. For all comparisons of independent observations between two groups, two-tailed t tests were performed, with p values unless otherwise specified. Z-tests were used to describe variance across groups.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S4

## Table S1. De novo gene modules and differential RNA expression, related to Figures 1 and 3

## Table S2. Differential TF motifs and representative TF for each SCENIC+ TF cluster, related to Figure 4

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101804.