eLifeElife1894elife101579614eLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC7255804PMC7255804.1725580472558043240681710.7554/eLife.51339513391Research ArticleImmunology and InflammationSingle-cell transcriptome reveals the novel role of T-bet in suppressing the immature NK gene signature
YangChao ; ). In the bone marrow (BM) of mice, the expression of IL-15/IL-2 receptor β chain (CD122) is the hallmark of commitment to the NK cell lineage from the common lymphoid progenitor (CLP) cells ( ). Thus, the canonical definition of NK progenitor (NKP) is a Lin−CD122+ cell without cell surface expression of NK-lineage marker NK1.1. However, the Lin−CD122+NK1.1− cells are still a heterogeneous population as approximately only one in ten cells can give rise to NK cells in vitro ( ). Recently, the definition of NKPs has been refined to Lin−Flt3−CD27+2B4+CD127+CD122+NK1.1− cells which have a 50% chance to develop into NK cells in vitro ( ; ). The other lineage cell type in the heterogenous Lin−CD122+NK1.1− population is yet to be fully-defined.
Following commitment, NK lineage cells go through step-wise developmental process to become functionally mature NK cells. The Lin−CD122+NK1.1+CD27+CD49b− population represents the least mature NK cells ( ; ; ; ). Subsequent to the expression of CD49b, the developmental stages of murine NK cells further classified into three stages based on two cell surface markers CD27 and CD11b ( ; ). The relatively immature CD27+CD11b− (CD27 single positive, SP) NK cells develop into CD27−CD11b+ (CD11b single positive, SP) terminally mature with a transitional stage of CD27+CD11b+ (double positive, DP) cells ( ). The terminal CD11b SP NK cells are also marked with expression of KLRG1 ( ).
The developmental process is controlled by temporal activation of stage-specific transcription factors. Ets-1 and PU.1 regulate the transition from CLPs to NKPs, while E4BP4 is critical in the induction of CD122 and NKP commitment ( ; ; ; ). E4BP4 also induces the expression of Id2 and Eomes, both of which are critical in immature NK cells development and the transition to the later stages ( ; ; ; ; ). T-bet and Zeb2 have been shown to be critical for terminal NK cell maturation ( ; ). The signaling downstream of IL-15 receptors are essential for regulating the expression of these transcription factors. PDK1 is required for the induction of E4BP4 during early NK cell development ( ). We have previously reported that mTORC1 is required for the expression of Eomes and the transition from CD27 SP to DP NK stage, while mTORC2 is required for the terminal CD11b SP NK cell maturation through mTORC2-AktS473-FoxO1 axis ( ).
Although the cell surface markers have been useful in studying the development of NK cells, there are inherent limitations associated with them. The spectrum of NK cell developmental heterogeneity is unlikely to be fully defined by the current cell surface markers-defined stages. Based on the CD27/CD11b-defined stages, NK cells deficient in Id2, Eomes or Gata3 all fail to progress from CD27 SP to DP stages ( ; ; ). Currently no well-defined model clearly explains developmental differences between these three NK models. In addition, the altered expression of CD27/CD11b in genetically-engineered mice does not necessarily result from developmental changes. The recent breakthrough in the quantification of transcriptome at a single-cell level has offered an unprecedented methodology in determining the cell identity and exploration of cellular heterogeneity. The definition of cell identities based on the expression of thousands of transcripts seems more reliable than the detection of limited number of cell surface markers. has explored the murine and human NK cells from spleen and blood using single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) technology and identified a novel population in the mouse spleen and revealed the conserved NK subsets in human and mice. However, the developmental heterogeneity of NK cells in the BM, the critical anatomic location of murine NK cell development, has not been explored.
In this study, we define the heterogeneity of murine CD3ε−CD122+ cell from BM of wide type (WT) mice using scRNA-seq technology. The single-cell transcriptome analyses revealed three major cell types from the CD3ε−CD122+ compartment: conventional NK cells, innate lymphoid cells 1 (ILC1), and cells with high transcripts contents of Cd3d/e/g. We define five distinct NK developmental subsets: an immature NK (iNK) cell cluster, three transitional NK (transNK) cell clusters, and a terminally mature NK (termNK) cell cluster. We explored the transcriptome-based cellular stage of Raptor- or Rictor-deficient NK cells. Unexpectedly, half of the Rictor-deficient NK cells are classified into the least mature iNK cluster which only comprise 25% of the WT NK cell in the BM. This is contradictory to cell surface markers-defined maturity with only the loss of terminally mature NK cells in Rictor conditional knockout (cKO) mice. As we previously proposed that mTORC2 regulates terminal NK cell maturation through promoting the expression of T-bet via AktS473-FoxO1 axis, we explored the maturation status of T-bet deficient NK cells using scRNA-seq. Strikingly, more than 65% of T-bet-deficient NK cells are classified into the least mature iNK cluster and the expression of immature NK signature genes are highly up-regulated in the T-bet-deficient NK cells. Finally, deletion of Foxo1 successfully rescued the developmental impairment of Rictor-deficient NK cells defined by both cell surface markers and developmental transcriptome markers. These findings revealed previously unappreciated role of mTORC2-AktS473-FoxO1-T-bet axis in suppressing the immature NK transcriptional signature during the development of NK cells.

## Results

## Single-cell transcriptome-based heterogeneity among CD3ε−CD122+ cells
The BM is the anatomic location where most conventional murine NK cells develop. Thus, we decided to study the developmental heterogeneity of BM NK cells at single cell level using the 10X Genomics single cell gene expression system. To cover the broad NK cell developmental stages, we sorted the CD3ε−CD122+ population from BM of the Rptorfl/fl Ncr1Cre/WT, Rictorfl/fl Ncr1Cre/WT, or Tbx21−/− mouse and the corresponding WT control mouse. The post-sorting purity ranged from 90% to 98% ( ). To validate the NK cell development phenotype specifically in these six mice used, we detected the expression of CD27 and CD11b via flow cytometry using the cells from BM and spleen of these six mice. Consistent with our previous observation ( ), in the BM, most of the NK cells from the Rptorfl/fl Ncr1Cre/WT mouse were CD27 SP. The NK cells from the Rictorfl/fl Ncr1Cre/WT mouse were unable to fully progress to the CD11b SP stage ( ), and the T-bet-deficient mouse completely lost the CD11b SP NK compartment ( ; ). The expression pattern of CD27 and CD11b on NK cells in the spleen also matched with previous reports ( ; ; ). There was no difference in surface expression of CD27/CD11b among the three WT mice ( ).
After sequencing the libraries, the initial quality control (QC) analysis indicates successful library assembly, optimal sequencing and good cell viability. ( ). We started our analyses with a focus on exploring the heterogeneity of CD3ε−CD122+ cells from WT mice using principal component analysis (PCA). To increase the clustering efficiency, cells from three WT mice were combined for analysis ( ). After initial quality control and clustering analysis, we filtered out the contaminating cells from other lineages, particularly those that did not express Il2rb (data not shown). The clustering analysis of the remaining pure CD3ε−CD122+ cells revealed that the cells from Tbx21+/+ mouse ordered from the Jackson Laboratory clustered separately from the Rptorfl/fl Ncr1WT/WT and Rictorfl/fl Ncr1WT/WT mice housed at the Medical College of Wisconsin animal facility ( ). These data revealed that different housing conditions could result in alteration in the transcriptome profile that leads to individual-specific phenotype in scRNA-seq analysis of NK cells.
Therefore, we scaled the sample variance to ensure the cells from different WT mice cluster together. At low clustering resolution, we found five distinct clusters of CD3ε−CD122+ cells ( ). Through exploring the differential expressed genes (DEGs) of each cluster, we found that Cluster #1 were conventional NK cells with high expression of Ncr1 and three subunits (Klrb1a, Klrb1b, and Klrb1c) of NK1.1 and comprised majority of the CD3ε−CD122+ cells ( ). The expression of Mki67 indicated that cells in Cluster #2 were cycling ( ). Cluster #3 contained ILC1 cells indicated by the high expression of Tmem176a/b and Cxcr6 ( ; ). Notably, Ncr1 and Klrb1a/b/c were abundantly expressed in the ILC1 cluster that was higher than the NK cluster ( ). Cluster #4 was marked with high expression of Cd3d/e/g and low Ncr1 and Klrb1a/b/c expression ( ). This population has been reported before in the scRNA-seq dataset of group 1 ILC in the lung and is potentially related to NK-T lineage ( ). We referred to it as Cd3high cluster. ILC1, Cd3high cells and NKP potentially make up the Lin−CD122+NK1.1− cells. Cells in Cluster #5 were activated by inflammatory stimuli as made evident by the high expression of interferon-induced genes ( ). Clusters #2 and #5 cells did not express Tmem176a/b, Cxcr6, Cd3d/e/g, or other lineage-defining transcripts, and therefore, were likely to be conventional NK cells.
 
 

## Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of murine BM NK cells reveals five distinct clusters
Next, we removed Clusters #2 to #5 to focus on the analysis of the heterogeneity of the canonical NK cells. Unbiased clustering analysis revealed five distinct NK clusters as shown using a tSNE plot ( ). The three WT mice contributed relatively equal to each cluster, and each wild type had relatively similar proportions of each cluster ( ). Clusters #1 through #5 accounted for 25%, 20%, 25%, 10%, and 20% of the total NK cells, respectively ( ). Based on the expression of several NK cell maturation-defining markers, we found that Cluster #1 represented the most immature NK cells with high expression of Cd27 and low expression of Itgam (CD11b) and Ly49s (Klra1/3/4/7/8/9) ( and ). The immature nature of Cluster #1 was further supported by the high transcriptional expression of Ltb, Thy1, Cd3d/g, and Cd7 ( ), all of which have been shown to be highly expressed in the immature CD27 SP NK cells ( ). In comparison, the low expression of Cd27 and high expression of Itgam (CD11b) and Klrg1 marked Cluster #5 as the terminally mature NK cells ( ). NK cells are known to acquire effector functions as they mature. The high expression of functional molecules including Gzma and Gzmb further demonstrated the terminal maturity of cells in Cluster #5 ( ). Based on this information, we deemed Cluster #1 and #5 as immature NK (iNK) cluster and terminally mature NK (termNK) cluster, respectively. We further defined Clusters #2, 3, and four as transitional NK stages (transNK1, 2, and 3, respectively).
Next, we sought to explore the identity of the three transNK clusters. TransNK1 represented a unique NK sub-population with high expression of genes encoding proteins involved in ribosomal biogenesis including ribonucleoproteins (Nop10, Nhp2, Gar1, Npm1, Npm3), RNA modification enzymes (Mettl1, Ddx21, Fbl), and GTPase related to nucleocytoplasmic transport (Ran, Ranbp1). We also found high expression of genes encoding the ribosomal subunits in this cluster ( ). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed significantly enrichment of transcription factors MYC and E2F in transNK1 cluster compared to all other cells, both of which are involved in cell growth and proliferation ( ; ; ). We also found major metabolic pathways were enriched in this cluster including glycolysis, oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid metabolism ( ). Fewer up-regulated transcripts were identified within the transNK2 cluster ( ). This cluster was featured with high expression of Ly49 family members especially Klra4 (Ly49D) and Klra8 (Ly49H) ( and ). As for the transNK3 cluster, we found multiple genes that belong to the category of immediate early genes (IEGs) were up-regulated (Nr4a1, Nr4a2, Nr4a3, Dusp1, Junb, Nfkbia, Nfkbid, Nfkbiz, Egr1, ). This cluster is transcriptionally similar to the novel NK_3 cluster defined previously in the mouse spleen with up-regulation of genes including Pim1, Gadd45b, Bhlhe40, Irf8, Ccl3, Ccl4 besides the IEGs ( ; ).
To further elucidate the relative maturity of the three transitional NK clusters, we explored the transcriptomic progression along the maturation process. The Euclidean distance indicated transcriptional similarity between transNK1 and transNK2, both of which had higher transcriptional similarity to the iNK cluster ( ). In comparison, the transNK3 had higher transcriptional similarity to the termNK cluster ( ). As NK cells progress along the developmental stages, a gradual expression and loss of distinct set of genes are expected to occur temporally. Most of these genes are uniquely and abundantly expressed at the two developmental extremes: the immature and terminally mature stages. Therefore, we calculated the module score of all five clusters based on the up-regulated or down-regulated DEGs of the iNK and termNK clusters. When we ordered the five clusters as iNK→transNK1→transNK2→transNK3→termNK, the module score based on the up-regulated DEGs of the iNK cluster or the down-regulated DEGs of the termNK cluster gradually declined ( ). In contrast, the module score based on the up-regulated DEGs of the termNK or the down-regulated DEGs of the iNK cluster gradually increased ( ). This indicated a sequential developmental progression of these five clusters in the order listed above. To further validate this notion, we analyzed the bulk RNA-seq dataset of CD27 SP, DP and CD11b SP NK subsets published previously and defined the up-regulated DEGs from both CD27 SP and CD11b SP NK subsets as the target gene list (named as ‘CD27/CD11b gene sets’ here) to calculate the module score ( ; ). The overall low module score yield indicated the low coverage of the transcriptome in the 10X-based scRNA-seq dataset. Nevertheless, we still found a trend in increasing expression of genes for terminally mature NK cells and decreasing expression of genes for immature NK cells validating the order of clusters ( ).
 To further establish the developmental progression of these five clusters, we used the Monocle2 pseudotime analysis to simulate the maturation trajectory in an unbiased manner. Based on the transcriptional information, each cell from the five clusters were assigned to the pseudotime trajectory ( ). The pseudotime progression indicated the maturation order. As shown in , we picked the far-left side of the trajectory as the root point as we found cells from iNK and transNK1 clusters mostly resided here ( ). Based on this root point, the pseudotime dictated that the far-right side of the trajectory was the most mature population which was dominated by the termNK cluster ( ). The cells in transNK2 and transNK3 clusters spread across the trajectory ( ). In conclusion, based on the transcriptome signature associated with each cluster and the unbiased analysis of the maturation trajectory, we define the relative maturity of this five NK clusters as iNK→transNK1→transNK2→transNK3→termNK. It is important to point out that this relative maturity does not necessarily imply distinct developmental stages that all NK cells follow. As an example, the high expression of IEGs in transNK3 cluster implies an activated state. In this regard, transNK3 cluster may be a heterogenous population consists of NK cells from different developmental stages. Nevertheless, this relative maturity is instrumental in characterizing the NK cells from the knockout mice as shown below.

## Transcriptional alterations of raptor- or Rictor-deficient NK cells at single-cell level
The expression of cell surface markers has been conventionally used to define cellular identity. Although it is useful in many cases, there are limitations and potential drawbacks associated with this methodology especially in disordered conditions seen in patients or transgenic mice. Previously, we have characterized the development of Raptor- or Rictor-deficient NK cells that do not possess mTORC1 or mTORC2, respectively ( ). We found differential maturation impairment with Raptor-deficient NK cells accumulating at the CD27 SP stage while Rictor-deficient NK cells are impaired in transition from DP to terminal CD11b SP stage. We profiled the BM CD3−CD122+ cells using scRNA-seq in these transgenic mice to validate whether transcriptome-based cell stage classification match with previous cell surface markers-defined maturity. We combined the mutant cells with their corresponding WT cells and conducted PCA-based clustering analysis. Strikingly, nearly all the Raptor-deficient CD3−CD122+ cells clustered distinctly from the WT cells ( ). As illustrated in the t-SNE plot, Cluster #1 through #5 were dominated by WT cells, while Cluster #6 and #7 were mostly Raptor-deficient cells ( and ). This is consistent with our previous demonstration of a large transcriptome alteration in the absence of Raptor ( ). Cluster #8 is the only shared group with both Raptor-deficient and WT cells ( and ). The high expression of Tmem176a/b and Cxcr6 revealed Cluster #8 were ILC1 while all the rest seven clusters were NK cells ( ). Comparatively, Cluster #1 had higher expression of Cd3d/e/g, however, this was not Cd3high cluster defined previously based on the high expression of Ncr1. Instead, cluster #1 were iNK cells and the higher transcripts level of CD3 chains has been reported before in immature NK cells ( ). We did not find cycling or inflamed cluster in this analysis presumably due to lower cell number from these two samples compared to the previous combined WT NK cell analysis ( ). As the expression of iCre driven by Ncr1 presumably also occurred in the ILC1, this data indicated that mTORC1 is potentially dispensable for the development of ILC1.
 
Next, we examined the relationship between the five WT NK clusters and the two Raptor-deficient NK clusters. The DEGs revealed Cluster #1 and #5 represent the least and most mature NK clusters in the WT sample, respectively ( ). Module scores based on DEGs of iNK and termNK from above combined WT analysis supported this identity of Cluster #1 and #5 ( ). Consistent with their immature phenotype, Raptor-deficient NK cells from Cluster #6 and #7 expressed the termNK signature genes at low levels ( ). We calculated the module score based on the CD27/CD11b gene sets. The iNK and termNK features of Cluster #1 and #5 were consistent ( ). The Cluster #6 and #7 from the Rptor cKO mouse demonstrated similar level of CD27 SP stage signature gene expression as Cluster #1 and had lowest CD11b SP stage signature gene expression ( ). The Euclidean distance further emphasized the large transcriptome alteration of Raptor-deficient NK cells as Cluster #6 and #7 were distant from the WT clusters ( ).
Compared to Raptor-deficiency, Rictor-deficient NK cells have a more restricted transcriptomic alteration ( ). Nevertheless, clustering analysis largely separated the WT NK cells with the Rictor-deficient NK cells ( and ). Within the nine identified clusters from the CD3ε−CD122+ cells, Clusters #1 through #4 were mostly comprised with WT NK cells, while Clusters #5 through #7 were dominated by Rictor-deficient NK cells ( and ). We identified Cluster #8 and #9 as ILC1 and cycling cells indicated by the expression of Tmem176a/b, Cxcr6 and Mki67, respectively ( ). The reduced contribution of Rictor cKO mice to the ILC1 cluster was potentially due to the impaired expression of T-bet which is critical to the ILC1 lineage ( ; ). The reduced cycling cells from the Rictor cKO mice was consistent with our previous report ( ).
When we focused on the analysis of NK cells, the DEGs and module scores based on DEGs of iNK and termNK of combined WT analysis indicated that Cluster #1 and #4 represent the iNK and termNK in the Rictorfl/fl Ncr1WT/WT mouse, respectively, with Cluster #2 and #3 being the transitional stages ( and ). Interestingly, all three Rictor-deficient NK cells-dominated clusters (#5, 6, 7) had high expression of up-regulated genes in the iNK cluster to the level similar to the least mature Cluster #1 of WT NK cells ( , iNK_up). The module scores based on CD27/CD11b gene sets demonstrated similar phenomenon, though less striking ( , CD27 SP_up). The relative expression of signature genes associated with terminally mature NK cells in Rictor-deficient NK clusters (#5, 6, 7) was similar to the transitional NK clusters (#2, 3) from WT mouse ( and ). Strikingly, the hierarchical clustering analysis indicated that nearly all the Rictor-deficient NK cell-dominated clusters (#5, 6, 7) had more transcriptome similarity to the most immature cluster #1 and the less mature transitional cluster #2 of WT mouse ( ). The fact that cluster #1 and #2 only accounted for less than 50% of the WT NK cells emphasized that the Rictor-deficient NK cells were less mature than previously cell surface CD27/CD11b-defined maturity ( ).

## Transcriptome-defined maturity of raptor- or Rictor-deficient NK cells
As both Raptor- and Rictor-deficient NK cells clustered separate from their corresponding WT NK cells, we decided to apply machine-learning-based algorithm to classify the developmental stages of these genetically modified NK cells based on the WT controls. In total, we utilized five different machine-learning algorithms including generalized linear classifier (GL), gradient boosting classifier (GB), extreme gradient boosting classifier (XGB), random forest classifier (RF), and deep learning classifier (DL, neural networks). To train the classifiers, we randomly sampled 80% of the cells from the combined WT analysis. We tested the prediction accuracy of each classifier using the remaining 20% of the cells which were not included in the initial training process. As summarized in the , the overall accuracy of all classifiers ranged from 60% to 70% with deep learning (DL) classifier being the most accurate with the lowest error rate. Importantly, all five NK clusters were identified by the classifiers except for the RF classifier which failed to detect the transNK3 subset ( ). The overall composition of the five NK clusters assigned by the machine-learning classifiers were similar to the original identity defined in the PCA analysis ( ).
 
When we applied the classifier algorithms to the Rptor cKO samples, we barely detected transNK3 and termNK clusters ( and ). The most dominant cluster of the Rptorfl/fl Ncr1Cre/WT mouse was transNK2 accounting for more than 50% of the total Raptor-deficient NK cells ( ). The classification of Rictor-deficient NK cells resulted in 50% of all cells fell into the category of iNK cluster ( and ). This is a drastic contradiction to the cell surface markers-defined maturity which revealed only terminal maturation defects of Rictor-deficient NK cells ( ). This result was consistent with the high expression of iNK signature genes in Rictor cKO NK cells and short Euclidean distance between the WT immature NK compartments and all the Rictor-deficient NK cells ( ). Unlike the Rptor cKO sample, we could still detect transNK3 and termNK clusters in Rictor cKO NK cells with a reduction in percentage of termNK clusters compared to the littermate WT mouse consistent with reduced CD11b SP cells in Rictor cKO mice ( ). In summary, through machine-learning based classification, we found new insights into the maturity of Rictor-deficient NK cells that were previously masked by the cell surface markers-based definition.

## T-bet-deficient NK cells had a transcriptional profile similar to the iNK cluster
In our previous report, we proposed that mTORC2 regulates the terminal maturation of NK cells through AktS473-FoxO1-T-bet axis ( ). As the impaired expression of T-bet in Rictor-deficient NK cells is potentially responsible for the maturation defects, we reasoned whether a large proportion of the T-bet-deficient NK cells are also transcriptionally similar to immature NK cells in WT, a phenomenon seen in Rictor cKO NK cells. To test this, we conducted the scRNA-seq experiment using CD3ε−CD122+ cells from BM of WT and Tbx21−/− mice purchased from the Jackson Laboratory. The PCA-based clustering analysis of CD3ε−CD122+ cells from WT and Tbx21 KO mice resulted in 12 distinct clusters with nearly complete separation between WT and Tbx21 KO cells ( ). Based on the expression of key markers ( ), we found that Clusters #1–7 comprised of NK cells. Clusters #8–10 were ILC1, Cd3high, and inflamed clusters, respectively. Both Cluster #11 and #12 were cycling cells with high expression of Mki67 (Ki-67) ( ). The G2M.Score (module score of genes associated with G2M phase of cell cycle) and S.Score (module score of genes associated with S phase of cell cycle) indicated that cells in the Cluster #11 were mostly in the S phase while cells in the Cluster #12 were mostly in the G2M phase (data not shown). Illustrated by the distribution, there was almost no ILC1 (#8) and Cd3high (#9) cluster cells in the Tbx21−/− sample ( ). This was consistent with T-bet being the master transcription factor of ILC1 lineage ( ), and the Cd3high cluster being a lineage related to NK-T cells which is nearly absent in Tbx21−/− mice ( ). The dominance of inflamed Cluster (#10) by T-bet-deficient NK cells indicated perturbation of inflammatory response resulted from global deletion of Tbx21 ( ).
Next, we focused on the analysis of Clusters #1 through #7 comprised of NK cells. DEGs and module scores indicated that Cluster #1 and #4 were the least and most mature NK cluster of WT mouse, respectively ( and ). All three T-bet-deficient NK cells-dominated clusters (#5, 6, 7) presented similar module score pattern as the immature cluster #1 in all up- or down-regulated DEGs of iNK or termNK cluster ( ). This pattern was also present in the module scores calculated based on the CD27/CD11b gene set ( ). The transcriptional similarity between the least immature WT NK cells (Cluster #1) and the bulk T-bet-deficient NK cells (Clusters #5, #6, #7) were further manifested by the hierarchical clustering analysis ( ). The short Euclidean distance among these clusters was even more striking when compared to the Rictor-deficient NK sample ( ). When we applied the machine-learning-based classifiers, more than 60% of the T-bet-deficient NK cells were categorized into the iNK cluster and there were only few cells in the transNK3 and termNK clusters ( and ). Collectively, these data revealed that T-bet-deficient NK cells were less mature than previously defined by cell surface markers. Direct comparison of the bulk WT and Tbx21−/− NK cells in the scRNA-seq dataset revealed that T-bet deficiency resulted in up-regulation of immature NK signature genes and down-regulation of terminally mature NK genes ( ). Within the 14 up-regulated genes (average logFC ≥0.25) in the iNK cluster from three WT combined analysis, we found 10 of those genes with significantly increased expression in T-bet-deficient NK cells compared to WT NK cells ( ). Within the 56 termNK cluster signature genes (average logFC ≥0.25), we also observed decreased expression of 18 genes in T-bet-deficient NK cells compared to WT NK cells ( ). These results imply that the large proportion of T-bet-deficient NK cells are halted at the transcriptionally immature NK cell stage.
 
 
The technical limitation of 10X-based scRNA-seq with capture of the most abundant transcripts only covered partial iNK signature transcripts. The extent to which T-bet suppresses the expression of immature NK signature genes is still unknown. To achieve a fair comparison and in-depth coverage of the transcriptome, we conducted bulk RNA-seq analysis using only the CD27+ NK cells from BM of both Tbx21 WT and KO mice. We first validated the expression of those 28 genes identified in the scRNA-seq dataset ( ). As demonstrated in the heatmap, indeed nearly all the 10 iNK signature genes were significantly up-regulated and the 18 termNK signature genes were significantly down-regulated in the T-bet-deficient NK cells comparing to the WT cells ( ). To investigate whether this up-regulation of immature NK signature genes is intrinsic to the loss of T-bet, we conducted mixed bone marrow chimera experiment and performed bulk RNA-seq analysis using CD27+ NK cells from BM. Consistent with previous report ( ), we found absence of CD11b SP NK cells and significantly reduced KLRG1 expression on NK cells developed from T-bet KO donors ( ). RNAseq analysis indicated up-regulation of immature NK genes in the absent of T-bet, emphasizing cell-intrinsic defects ( ). Through analyzing the bulk RNA-seq dataset from Rictor-deficient CD27+ NK cells we published previously ( ), we found a similar pattern when we evaluated the expression of these 28 genes, consistent with the immaturity of the Rictor-deficient NK cells ( ). Next, to obtain a larger immature NK transcriptional signature, we analyzed the CD27/CD11b bulk RNA-seq dataset and found genes that have highest expression in the CD27 SP NK subset with more than one-fold increased expression comparing to both DP and CD11b SP NK cells. In total, we found 796 genes representing the transcriptional signature of the relatively immature CD27 SP NK subset. GSEA revealed that these 796 immature NK signature genes were significantly enriched in the T-bet-deficient NK cells comparing to the WT counterparts, emphasizing that T-bet is required to suppress the expression of genes associated with immature NK cells to a large extent ( ). In summary, these data revealed the previously unappreciated role of T-bet in suppressing the immature NK transcriptional signature during the development of NK cells.

## T-bet is unlikely to directly bind and suppress the expression of the bulk immature NK genes
With the novel finding that T-bet is required for the suppression of immature NK transcriptional signature, we sought to explore the potential mechanisms for the induction of immature NK genes in T-bet-deficient NK cells. One potential explanation is that T-bet, as a transcription factor, directly binds to the regulatory elements associated with immature NK genes and actively suppresses the expression of these genes. we reanalyzed the recently published T-bet ChIP-seq dataset generated using splenic NK cells and assessed whether T-bet directly targets the immature NK genes ( ). With q-value set at 1 × 10−5 and focus on the protein-coding genes, we found a list of 654 T-bet-binding genes. Next, we used the GSEA to determine whether the T-bet-binding genes were enriched in the signature genes associated with either iNK cluster or CD27 SP NK subset. We found a significant depletion of T-bet-binding genes in the iNK cluster compared to all other cells, indicating that T-bet does not directly bind to the majority of these iNK signature genes ( , left). On the contrary, we found the T-bet-binding genes were significantly enriched in the termNK cluster comparing to all other cells ( , right). Similarly, when comparing the CD27 SP with the CD11b SP NK subset in the bulk RNA-seq dataset, we found significant enrichment of the T-bet ChIP-seq peaks in the CD11b SP NK cells compared to the CD27 SP compartment ( ). These data were consistent with T-bet being the master transcription factor in driving terminal maturation of NK cells. Nevertheless, we found several immature NK signature genes that are up-regulated in T-bet-deficient NK cells with direct T-bet binding of the regulatory regions ( ). The expression of these genes might be subject to direct suppression from T-bet. In conclusion, T-bet is unlikely to directly bind and suppress the bulk of the immature NK genes.
 
Our second hypothesis was that T-bet regulates the expression and/or activity of other transcription factors which in turn regulate the expression of immature NK signature genes. We examined the expression of transcription factors that are known to play a role in the development of NK cells and found majority of them have an expression profile in either T-bet- or Rictor-deficient NK cells comparable to the WT ( ; ). Next, we explored the GSEA and looked for enriched or depleted transcription factors in both T-bet- and Rictor-deficient NK cells. Interestingly, we found that transcription factor FoxO1 was enriched in the T-bet-deficient NK cells comparing to WT controls ( ), a phenomenon that we have previously established in the Rictor-deficient NK cells ( ). We also found the transcripts level of Foxo1 was significantly higher in the T-bet-deficient NK cells indicating that T-bet may suppress the expression of Foxo1 ( ). The direct binding of T-bet in the intron region and the regulatory region up-stream of transcription starting site of Foxo1 locus further supported this possibility ( ). These data prompted us to hypothesize that Foxo1, which has the highest expression in the CD27 SP subset ( ), is essential in driving the expression of immature NK signature genes.

## Deletion of Foxo1 rescues the maturation of Rictor-deficient NK cells
Previously we proposed that hyperactive FoxO1 suppresses the expression of T-bet in Rictor-deficient NK cells leading to the terminal maturation defects ( ). Based on the data we presented above, we hypothesized that FoxO1 promotes the expression of immature NK genes in both T-bet- and Rictor-deficient NK cells. Therefore, we asked the question whether deletion of Foxo1 in Rictor-deficient NK cells could not only rescue the impaired expression of T-bet and the terminal maturation defect, but also correct the abnormal induction of the immature NK transcriptional signature. To address this question, we bred the Rictorfl/flNcr1Cre/WT mice with Foxo1fl/flNcr1WT/WT mice. To ensure efficient generation of experimental mice with littermate control, we used Rictorfl/+Foxo1fl/+Ncr1Cre/WT mice as the WT control mice since both Rictor and FoxO1 are haplo-sufficient to the development of NK cells (data not shown). Due to the mixed background of these mice, we had large variation among each genotype most pronounced in terms of the number of NK cells in these mice ( ). Nevertheless, consistent with previous report ( ), we found a decrease in both percentage and absolute number of NK cells in the spleen of Rictor cKO mice compared to the WT control ( ). Importantly, deletion of Foxo1 in Rictor cKO mice rescued the number of NK cells in the spleen to the level compatible to the WT control ( ). Specific to the maturation of NK cells, Rictor cKO mice had a smaller terminally-mature population compared to the WT control indicated by either the percentage of CD11b SP subset or the KLRG1+ NK cells ( , ), although the difference is less pronounced compared to the previous report likely due to the fact that the mixed background mice had generally more mature NK cells than the pure B6 background mice at the age of eight weeks ( and ). Notably, deletion of Foxo1 in Rictor-deficient NK cells completely rescued the percentage of CD11b SP subset or the KLRG1+ NK cells to the level compatible to the WT control ( , ). These data indicated that FoxO1 is the transcription factor suppressing the terminal maturation program in Rictor-deficient NK cells. To further explore whether the impaired expression of T-bet is the downstream of hyperactive FoxO1 in Rictor-deficient NK cells, we evaluated the expression of T-bet in the Rictor/Foxo1 cDKO mice. Gated on three subsets of NK cells from the spleen, we found deletion of Foxo1 in the Rictor-deficient NK cells rescued the expression of T-bet in the CD27 SP and DP subsets to the level of the corresponding WT control ( ). The rescue was incomplete in the terminal CD11b SP NK compartments ( ). Deletion of Foxo1 alone resulted in almost a fold increasing of the T-bet protein level in all three developmental stages compared to the WT control. These data indicated that, in addition to FoxO1, other factors downstream of mTORC2 are involved in the regulation of T-bet expression.
 
Next, we wanted to assess whether the transcriptome-defined maturation defects in Rictor-deficient NK cells were also rescued via deletion of Foxo1. We profiled the CD3ε−CD122+ cells from BM of littermate Rictorfl/flFoxo1fl/+Ncr1Cre/WT and Rictorfl/flFoxo1fl/flNcr1Cre/WT mice using scRNA-seq and classified the NK cells from these mice with machine-learning algorithms ( ). Compared to the Rictor cKO mouse, the Rictor/Foxo1 cDKO mouse harbored reduced percentage of iNK cluster and substantially increased percentage of termNK population indicating successful rescue of the Rictor-deficient NK cells via deletion of Foxo1 ( ). We further explored the expression of the immature NK genes in both samples and found reduced expression of iNK signature genes in the Rictor/Foxo1 cDKO mouse compared to the Rictor cKO mouse ( ). Consistent with the rescue, we also found increased expression of termNK signature genes in the Rictor/Foxo1 cDKO mouse compared to the Rictor cKO mouse ( ). The correction of the abnormal expression of iNK signature genes in the Rictor-deficient NK cells via deletion of Foxo1 were further manifested with the reduced expression of a few mostly highly expressed iNK genes in the Rictor/Foxo1 cDKO mouse sample ( ). Whether the restored expression of T-bet, complete loss of FoxO1, or potentially both are responsible for the correction of the iNK gene expression requires further dissection in the future.

## Discussion
The transcriptional programs that regulate NK cell development is not yet fully understood. Specifically, the transcriptional activation or repression during NK cell ontology is poorly defined. Here, we used scRNA-seq technology and found five distinct NK clusters in the BM of WT mice. Based on the expression of known markers and transcriptional similarity, we delineated the relative maturity of these five NK clusters. Based on the transcriptome information of the WT clusters, we utilized the machine-learning classifiers to define the identity of Raptor- or Rictor-deficient NK cells and found maturation profiles of these mutant NK cells distinct from the cell surface markers-based definition that we previously reported ( ). The striking immaturity of the Rictor-deficient NK cells promoted us to evaluate the maturation of the T-bet-deficient NK cells with single-cell transcriptome analysis. We found a higher percentage of immature NK cells in Tbx21 KO mice than the Rictor cKO mice and significant up-regulation of immature NK transcriptional signature in T-bet-deficient NK cells, a phenomenon that was not previously appreciated. Lastly, through deletion of Foxo1, we completely rescued the maturation defects of the Rictor-deficient NK cells defined by both cell surface markers and the transcriptome.
With the profiling of CD3ε−CD122+ cells from the BM of WT mice, we found two distinct cell subsets, the ILC1 and Cd3high cells, besides the conventional NK population. These two cell populations presumably contribute to the heterogeneity of CD3ε−CD122+NK1.1− cells, the original definition of the NKP subset. We believe the Cd3high cells are related to the NK-T cell lineage as this population contains high transcripts level of Cd3d/e/g and is nearly absent in the Tbx21 KO mice which have fewer NK-T cells ( ). Further investigation of these unique Cd3high cells is warranted to determine their developmental and functional relevance. Specific to the five clusters formed by the conventional NK cells, besides the reliably identifiable least mature (iNK) and most mature (termNK) clusters, we named the rest three clusters as the transitional NK subsets. TransNK1 are transcriptionally closer to the iNK cluster and demonstrates a proliferative phenotype with high ribosomal contents and active metabolic profile. TransNK3 represents a unique NK subset with high expression of IEGs similar to the novel NK_3 cluster defined previously in the mouse spleen ( ). This group may be upregulating IEG’s as a part of the developmental process or they may be a unique NK subset that branches off late in the developmental process.
Although we could not find reliable cell surface markers to faithfully define these five WT NK clusters, it provides an important dataset that we can utilize to profile the NK cells from mutant mice whose transcriptomic profiles are distinct from WT cells. Previously, we have reported the differential role mTORC1 and mTORC2 in regulating the development of NK cells ( ). Based on the cell surface markers expression, we found mTORC1 is important for the early NK cell maturation from the CD27 SP to the DP stage, while mTORC2 governs the terminal maturation program, transiting from the DP to the CD11 SP stage. However, through utilizing machine-learning classifiers, we found more immature NK cells in the Rictor cKO mice as compared to the Rptor cKO mice, contradictory to the cell-surface markers-defined developmental maturity. We further profiled the T-bet-deficient NK cells as we previously proposed that the impaired expression of T-bet is responsible for the terminal maturation defect of Rictor-deficient NK cells. Strikingly, we found even more immature NK cells in the Tbx21 KO mice and a significant up-regulation of immature NK signature genes in the T-bet-deficient NK cells, which reveals a previously unappreciated role of T-bet in suppressing the immature program of NK cells.
The further exploration of the mechanisms underlining the suppressive role of T-bet in regulating the expression of immature NK genes indicated that T-bet binds the regulatory elements of only a few immature NK genes and suppresses their transcription in mature NK cells. The increased expression of large number of immature NK genes implied additional transcription factors downstream of T-bet may play a role. We proposed that, in addition to the well-established role of FoxO1 in suppressing the expression of T-bet ( ), T-bet can also suppress the expression of FoxO1 as the expression and activity of FoxO1 are increased in T-bet-deficient NK cells, and that this negative feedback loop is part of what transcriptionally defines mature NK cells as a lineage. Based on this information, we hypothesized that hyperactive FoxO1 in both the Rictor- and T-bet-deficient NK cells drive the expression of immature NK genes. One evidence to support this hypothesis is that deletion of Foxo1 in Rictor-deficient NK cells not only rescues the terminal maturation defects but also corrects the abnormal expression of immature NK genes. Additional experiments are required to fully establish the reciprocal regulation between FoxO1 and T-bet during the development of NK cells and their precise role in regulating the immature and terminal maturation programs.
In conclusion, we utilized scRNA-seq technology to define the developmental heterogeneity of NK cells in the BM. We further utilized these transcriptome-defined developmental clusters to reveal a previously unappreciated role of mTORC2-AktS473-FoxO1-T-bet axis in regulating the expression of immature NK genes during NK cell development. More importantly, through using machine-learning algorithms, we present a novel approach to define cellular differentiation.

## Materials and methods

## Mice and reagents

Rptorfl/fl, Rictorfl/fl, Foxo1fl/fl, and Tbx21−/− mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Ncr1iCre mice were a generous gift from Dr. Eric Vivier ( ). Rptorfl/fl, Rictorfl/fl, Tbx21−/−, and Ncr1iCre mice are in C57BL/6 background. The Foxo1fl/fl mice were in FVB background. All mice were maintained in pathogen-free conditions in the Biological Resource Center at the Medical College of Wisconsin. All animal protocols were approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees. The following antibodies and reagents were used in this study: CD3 (17A2), NK1.1 (PK136), CD27 (LG.7F9), CD11b (M1/70), KLRG1 (2F1), NCR1 (29A1.4), CD122 (5H4), T-bet (4B10) are from Thermo-Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA).

## Cell separation, flow cytometry and cell sorting. Bone marrow cells were flushed, and single-cell suspensions were made by passing through the syringe/needles
Cells from spleen were prepared by gently grinding the dissected organs with micro slides (VWR, Radnor, PA). Flow cytometry analyses were conducted in LSR-II (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) or MACSQuant Analyzer 10 (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) and analyzed with FlowJo software (FlowJo LLC, Ashland, OR). For cell sorting, the bulk BM cells were used to isolate the CD3ε−CD122+ cells for scRNA-seq experiments. Specific to the bulk RNA-seq experiment, NK cells were first enriched using negative selection kit (STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, Canada). The CD27+ NK cells were further sorted by FACSAria (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), and the purity was generally above 95%.

## Mixed bone marrow chimera
BM from CD45.1+ WT mice and CD45.2+
Tbx21−/− mice were mixed at 1:2 ratio. 10 million cell mixture was injected into each sub-lethally irradiated CD45.2+Rag1−/−Il2rg−/− recipient mouse. A pair of donor cells were injected into three recipients and the other pair of donor cells were injected into two recipients. 8 weeks later, BM CD27+ NK cells from recipients were sorted and subject to bulkRNA-seq analysis (cells derived from the same donor were pooled.). Splenocytes were also collected for phenotypical analysis using flow cytometry.

## Single-cell RNA-sequencing
After sorting, cells were washed once with ice-cold PBS containing 10% FBS post-sorting and counted using hemocytometer. After that, the cells were loaded to 10X Chromium system (10X Genomics, San Francisco, CA) and run through the library preparation following guidance from the Chromium Single Cell 3’ Reagent Kits v2. The libraries were quantified using NEBNext Library Quant Kit (NEW ENGLAND Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) and sequenced via Illumina NextSeq 550 (Illumina, San Diego, CA).

## scRNA-seq data analyses
After the sequencing, the raw data from each sample was demultiplexed, aligned to mm10 reference genome, and UMI counts were quantified using the 10X Genomics Cell Ranger pipeline (v2.1.1, 10X Genomics). Then, we continued the data analysis with the filtered barcode matrix files using the Seurat package (v2.3.1) ( ) in R (v3.4.3 or above). For initial quality control, we filtered out the cells that expressed less than 200 genes or more than 2500 genes. We also removed cells with more than 5% mitochondrial transcripts content. Gene expression values for each cell were log-normalized and scaled by a factor of 10,000. To prevent clusters from being biased by cellular library size and mitochondrial transcript content, gene expression values were scaled based on the number of UMIs in each cell and the cell mitochondrial transcript content. We combined cells from all three WT mice to increase the power of unsupervised clustering analysis ( ). Based on the PCElbowPlot, we picked certain number of principal components (PCs) for the clustering analysis when that number reached to the baseline of the standard deviation of PC. Specific to the choice of cluster resolution, we used the ‘Clustree’ function to visualize the clustering progression and picked the highest resolution that still gave stable clusters ( ). Cell clusters were visualized using t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding plots (t-SNE). For differential gene expression, we used Model-based Analysis of Single-cell Transcriptomics (MAST) test ( ) with genes detected in a minimum of 10% of all cells, a minimum of 0.25 average log fold-change (logFC), and a minimum of 0.05 adjusted p value. For gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), we used fgsea function with gene sets from the Broad Institute’s molecular signatures database (MSigDB) ( ; ). All the p-value shown in the figures were adjusted for multiple gene sets enrichment comparison. In order to predict cellular differentiation, cells were ordered in pseudotime using Monocle2 (v2.6.4) ( ). All significant DEGs across five NK clusters with more than 0.25 average logFC were used to order the cells. Finally, to predict the developmental cluster of the cells from the knock out mice, we utilized one of several classifiers including: a generalized linear model, a gradient boosting model, a deep learning neural network model, and a extreme gradient boosting model, from the H2O Python Module ( ). Further, we used the Seurat wrapper for the random forest classifier from the ranger package ( ). These classifiers were trained on a random sample made up of 80 percent of the WT NK cell non-scaled transcription data, using cross-validation and accuracy as a target end-point for the classifier to avoid overfitting. The accuracy and error of the machine-learning classifiers was measured by using the classifier to predict the developmental cluster of the remaining 20 percent of the WT NK cells which had a known cluster identity and had not been used in the initial training.

## Bulk RNA-sequencing and data analysis
The bulk RNA-seq experiment using the CD27+ NK cells from Tbx21−/− and the WT mice (n=4 per group) was performed as previously described ( ). The final libraries were sequenced via Illumina NextSeq 550 (Illumina, San Diego, CA). The dataset from the Rictor cKO mice was generated in the previous study ( ). Fastq sequence data were pseudo-aligned and quantified using Salmon v0.12 ( ), with an index built on the mm10 reference transcriptome ( ) downloaded from the UCSC genome browser. Following pseudo-alignment, we used tximport ( ) and DESeq2 ( ) to analyze differential gene expression between WT and KO NK cells. Finally, we used gene set enrichment analysis via fgsea (explained above) to identify potential downstream transcription factor targets and enrichment of T-bet targets from the T-bet ChIP-Seq analysis.

## ChIP-seq analysis
The T-bet ChIP-seq dataset was published previously ( ). After downloading the fastq files from Sequence Read Archive (SRA), the raw fastq sequence data from the T-bet ChIP sample and the input sample were aligned to the mouse genome mm10 individually using bowtie2 ( ). Significant T-bet binding peaks were identified using MACS2 with a peak q-value cutoff of 1 × 105 ( ). These significant peaks were then annotated using the ‘annotate peaks’ tool from the HOMER package ( ). A gene set of potential T-bet target genes was produced by selecting protein-coding genes with significant T-bet peaks within the gene-body or promoter. This gene set of potential T-bet targets was used in GSEA analyses with both combined WT scRNAs-seq dataset and the CD27/CD11b bulk RNA-seq dataset.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health
R01 AI102893 to Subramaniam Malarkannan, Monica S Thakar.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000054National Cancer Institute
R01 CA179363 to Subramaniam Malarkannan, Monica S Thakar.
MACC Fund
HRHM Program to Subramaniam Malarkannan, Monica S Thakar.
Nicholas Family Foundation to Subramaniam Malarkannan.
Gardetto Family to Subramaniam Malarkannan.
MACC Fund to Monica S Thakar, Subramaniam Malarkannan.
Blood Research Institute
Graduate Scholar Award to Chao Yang.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Lucia Sammarco and her Lulu’s Lemonade Stand for inspiration, motivation and support. This work was supported in part by NIH R01 AI102893 and NCI R01 CA179363 (SM and MST); HRHM Program of MACC Fund (SM and MST), Nicholas Family Foundation (SM); Gardetto Family (SM); and MACC Fund (MST and SM). Ncr1iCre mice were a kind gift from Dr Eric Vivier, Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, France. CY is the inaugural recipient of the J Evan Sadler Graduate Scholar Award in the Blood Research Institute and we extend our special thanks to Dr. Sadler’s family.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
No competing interests declared.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology.
Conceptualization, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology.
Software, Formal analysis, Visualization, Methodology.
Data curation.
Data curation.
Data curation.
Supervision.
Conceptualization, Resources, Investigation.
Conceptualization, Resources, Investigation.
Conceptualization, Resources, Investigation.
Conceptualization, Resources, Investigation.
Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Investigation.
Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Project administration.

## Ethics
Animal experimentation: All mice were maintained in pathogen-free conditions in the Biological Resource Center at the Medical College of Wisconsin. All animal protocols were approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees. The unique animal protocols that are approved by the IACUC and used in this study is: AUA1512.

## Additional files
Supplementary file 1.

## DEGs of five WT NK clusters.
Related to and .
Supplementary file 2.

## DEGs of clusters formed by WT and Raptor-deficient cells.
Related to .
Supplementary file 3.

## DEGs of clusters formed by WT and Rictor-deficient cells.
Related to .
Supplementary file 4.

## DEGs of clusters formed by WT and T-bet-deficient cells.
Related to .
Transparent reporting form

## Data availability
Sequencing data have been deposited in GEO under accession code GSE150166.
The following dataset was generated:
YangCSiebertJRBurnsRZhengYMeiABonacciBWangDUrrutiaRARieseMJRaoSCarlsonKThakarMSMalarkannanS2020Single-cell transcriptome reveals the novel role of T-bet in suppressing the immature NK gene signature the immature NK gene signatureNCBI Gene Expression OmnibusGSE15016610.7554/eLife.51339PMC725580432406817
The following previously published datasets were used:
YangCTsaihSWLemkeAFlisterMJThakarMSMalarkannanS2018mTORC1 and mTORC2 differentially regulate NK cell developmentNCBI BioProjectPRJNA43442410.7554/eLife.35619PMC597643829809146
ShihHYSciumeGMikamiYGuoLSunHWBrooksSRUrbanJFDavisFPKannoYO'SheaJJ2016Developmental Acquisition of Regulomes Underlies Innate Lymphoid Cell FunctionalityNCBI Gene Expression OmnibusGSE7769510.1016/j.cell.2016.04.029PMC487483927156451

 10.7554/eLife.51339.sa1Decision letter
GinhouxFlorentReviewing EditorAgency for Science Technology and ResearchSingaporeHuntingtonNicholasReviewerThe Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical ResearchAustraliaIn the interests of transparency, eLife publishes the most substantive revision requests and the accompanying author responses.
Acceptance summary:
The editors and the reviewers recognised the novelty and the importance of your work describing new insights in NK development and the transcriptional program regulating T-bet in NK cell differentiation. Your data represent an interesting resource for the community to investigate and mine.
Decision letter after peer review:
Thank you for submitting your article "Single-cell transcriptome reveals the novel role of T-bet in suppressing the immature NK gene signature" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by Satyajit Rath as the Senior Editor, a Reviewing Editor, and two reviewers. The following individuals involved in review of your submission have agreed to reveal their identity: Nicholas Huntington (Reviewer #1).
The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.
Summary:
This manuscript provides new insights in NK development and the transcriptional program regulating T-bet in NK cell differentiation and represent an interesting resource for the community to investigate and mine. Aiming to understand better the role of T-bet in defining NK cell maturation and using single cell RNA-seq and bulk population RNA-seq of NK cells from Tbx21-/- mice, the authors identify concordance in expression between Rictor KO and Tbet KO NK cells. This allowed the identification of a novel role of mTorc2/FoxO1/Tbet axis in the maturation program of NK cells.
Essential revisions:
Below are the essential revision requirements to address:
1) We recommend the use of Tbx21 conditional mice to validate the essential observations made as complete knockout mice have been used for the T-bet-deficient analyses and indirect effect due the full KO context may have additional phenotypes that could impact on the data. For example, a recent paper in Cell described expression of Tbx21 in conventional type 2 dendritic cells. Alternatively mixed bone marrow chimeras (WT:Tbx21-/-) would resolve this issue.
2) How were the Bcl2 and BH3 only member impacted by loss of Rictor? Is Foxo1 rescuing this phenotype via regulation of Bcl2l11? Foxo1 has been shown to regulate Bcl2l11 in NK cells.
3) Only one mouse per condition was sequenced for the single-cell analysis. This should be consolidated. The authors should explain how they correct for batch effect as well as explain why a LogFC > 0.25 was used as a cutoff for differential gene expression as Typically 1.5 or 1.2 is used. They should also provide the average number of genes for samples.
[Editors' note: further revisions were suggested prior to acceptance, as described below.]
Thank you for sending your article entitled "Single-cell transcriptome reveals the novel role of T-bet in suppressing the immature NK gene signature" for peer review at eLife. Your article is being evaluated by peer reviewers, and the evaluation is being overseen by a Reviewing Editor and Satyajit Rath as the Senior Editor.
The consensus reached between us suggests that to reach a favourable decision, data from either the use of Tbx21-conditional mice, or mixed Tbx21 bone marrow chimeras, are needed to avoid any possible indirect and unforeseen effects.
Given the need for this essential revision, the editors and reviewers invite you to respond with an action plan and timetable for the completion of the additional work. We plan to share your responses with the reviewers and then issue a formal decision. Do please note that eLife understands the current difficult situation, so please do not hesitate to let us know realistic estimates.
10.7554/eLife.51339.sa2Author response
Summary:
This manuscript provides new insights in NK development and the transcriptional program regulating T-bet in NK cell differentiation and represent an interesting resource for the community to investigate and mine. Aiming to understand better the role of T-bet in defining NK cell maturation and using single cell RNA-seq and bulk population RNA-seq of NK cells from Tbx21-/- mice, the authors identify concordance in expression between Rictor KO and Tbet KO NK cells. This allowed the identification of a novel role of mTorc2/FoxO1/Tbet axis in the maturation program of NK cells.
Essential revisions:
Below are the essential revision requirements to address:
1) We recommend the use of Tbx21 conditional mice to validate the essential observations made as complete knockout mice have been used for the T-bet-deficient analyses and indirect effect due the full KO context may have additional phenotypes that could impact on the data. For example, a recent paper in Cell described expression of Tbx21 in conventional type 2 dendritic cells. Alternatively mixed bone marrow chimeras (WT:Tbx21-/-) would resolve this issue.
We appreciate the Reviewer’s suggestion. We utilized the global T-bet-deficient mice as this was commercially available to us. Our requests to obtain the conditional knockout mice are in the process and is taking more time than we expected. Meanwhile, we have obtained additional global knockout mice towards performing bone marrow chimeras as suggested by the Reviewer. Irrespective of this, we worry that: a) this delay may negatively affect the ability to publish our work in a timely manner and b) our work on this direction may only be validation and may not result in a different set of findings.
We request the Editor and the Reviewer to kindly assess our request. Thank you.
2) How were the Bcl2 and BH3 only member impacted by loss of Rictor? Is Foxo1 rescuing this phenotype via regulation of Bcl2l11? Foxo1 has been shown to regulate Bcl2l11 in NK cells.
We thank review’s comment. The expression of BH3 only member Bim (encoded by Bcl2l11) is increased in Rictor-deficient NK cells which may results from hyperactive FoxO1 (see Author response image 1). However, the expression of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2 is also proportionally increased in Rictor-deficient NK cells (see Author response image 1). We did not observe increased cell death in Rictor-deficient NK cells (Figure 2—figure supplement 1B in Yang, 2018). In addition, we did not observe changes in the mRNA level of other BH3 only member proteins (Bid/Bad) or other pro-apoptotic regulators (Bax/Bak1) in Rictor-deficient NK cells (see Author response image 1). Therefore, we conclude FoxO1 did not rescue this phenotype via regulation of Bim (encoded by Bcl2l11).
3) Only one mouse per condition was sequenced for the single-cell analysis. This should be consolidated. The authors should explain how they correct for batch effect as well as explain why a LogFC > 0.25 was used as a cutoff for differential gene expression as Typically 1.5 or 1.2 is used. They should also provide the average number of genes for samples.
We thank reviewer’s comment. When we performed single-cell RNA-seq experiments, we only used the WT and KO littermates which reduces the biological variation. About 2,000 cells from each genotype were sequenced which ensures the full representation of the population. More importantly, we have bulk RNA-seq analyses of Rictor- or T-bet-deficient NK cells with at least three biological replicates that strongly support our single-cell analysis.
Regarding the batch effect, there is no batch effect in comparison of each individual Rptor, Rictor or Tbx21 KO NK cells with the corresponding WT NK cells as the WT and KO is always done in the same experiments. When we analyze the WT NK cells only (Figure 1 and Figure 2), we combined cells from all three WT mice to increase the power of unsupervised clustering analysis. We scaled the sample variance among those three WT samples which in the same time scaled the batch variation.
The default LogFC threshold of scRNA-seq analysis in the Seurat package is 0.25. The typical 1.5 to 1.2 cut-off is used in bulk RNA-seq analysis.
In Figure 1—figure supplement 1C, we have showed the nUMI, nGene and percent.mito of all samples.
[Editors' note: further revisions were suggested prior to acceptance, as described below.]
The consensus reached between us suggests that to reach a favourable decision, data from either the use of Tbx21-conditional mice, or mixed Tbx21 bone marrow chimeras, are needed to avoid any possible indirect and unforeseen effects.
We have conducted mixed bone marrow chimera experiment using BM cells from CD45.1+ WT mice and CD45.2+Tbx21-/- mice with sublethally irradiated CD45.2+Rag1-/-Il2rg-/- as recipient mice. Eight weeks later, BM CD27+ NK cells from recipients were sorted and subject to bulk RNA-seq analysis (cells derived from the same donor were pooled.). Splenocytes were also collected for phenotypical analysis using flow cytometry. As shown in Figure 5—figure supplement 2A and 2B, we have confirmed the terminal maturation defects indicated by the loss of CD11b SP population and diminished expression of KLRG1 on NK cells derived from Tbx21-/- donors, consistent with previous report (Townsend, 2004).
The analysis of bulk RNA-seq data revealed up-regulation of immature NK signature genes and reduced expression of terminally mature NK signature genes as shown in heatmap from Figure 5-figure supplement 2C. The expression pattern is similar to what we observed in bulk RNA-seq data derived from global Tbx21 KO mice (Figure 5F). This data indicates that Tbet intrinsically suppresses the expression of immature NK genes.