445elsevierwtCell ReportsCell RepPMC7296351729635172963513252127310.1016/j.celrep.2020.107748Chromatin Priming Renders T Cell Tolerance-Associated Genes Sensitive to Activation below the Signaling Threshold for Immune Response Genes
BevingtonSarah L NgSky TH BrittonGraham J KeanePeter WraithDavid C CockerillPeter N 1Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK2Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK3Precision Immunology Institute and Icahn Institute for Data Science and Genomic Technology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA∗Corresponding author d.wraith@bham.ac.uk
∗∗Corresponding author p.n.cockerill@bham.ac.uk
4These authors contributed equally
5Lead Contact
96202031101077481077481962020© 2020 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Summary
Immunological homeostasis in T cells is maintained by a tightly regulated signaling and transcriptional network. Full engagement of effector T cells occurs only when signaling exceeds a critical threshold that enables induction of immune response genes carrying an epigenetic memory of prior activation. Here we investigate the underlying mechanisms causing the suppression of normal immune responses when T cells are rendered anergic by tolerance induction. By performing an integrated analysis of signaling, epigenetic modifications, and gene expression, we demonstrate that immunological tolerance is established when both signaling to and chromatin priming of immune response genes are weakened. In parallel, chromatin priming of immune-repressive genes becomes boosted, rendering them sensitive to low levels of signaling below the threshold needed to activate immune response genes. Our study reveals how repeated exposure to antigens causes an altered epigenetic state leading to T cell anergy and tolerance, representing a basis for treating auto-immune diseases.
Keywords: T cell, tolerance, chromatin, epigenetic, gene regulation, signaling, transcription factor, CTLA4, IL-10, Cbl-b

## Graphical Abstract
 

## Highlights
•Activation of immune response genes is suppressed in tolerant T cells
•Epigenetic priming of repressive genes is boosted when tolerance is established
•Inhibitory receptor genes have a lower threshold of activation in tolerant cells
•Induction of tolerance by peptides points toward a therapy for multiple sclerosis

Autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS) are caused by T cells reacting to host proteins. Bevington et al. use escalating doses of a MS auto-antigen to induce tolerance in T cells in mice, and define a mechanism whereby antigen activates repressive genes while silencing immune response genes.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfnois-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2019 Nov 26; Revised 2020 Feb 20; Accepted 2020 May 18; Collection date 2020 Jun 9.

## Introduction
The maintenance of immunological homeostasis requires T cell responses to antigen (Ag) to be both tightly regulated and receptive to negative feedback. The engagement of effector T cells is dependent on the activation of multiple parallel signaling pathways, thereby ensuring appropriate immune responses. The magnitude of the response to T cell receptor (TCR) signaling can also be suppressed by inducing an anergic state in response to: (1) repeated exposure to Ag, resulting in tolerance ( ); (2) lack of co-receptor stimulation ( ); or (3) negative feedback from inhibitory receptors, such as PD-1, CTLA4, LAG3, TIM3, and TIGIT, as seen in tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and exhausted T cells facing chronic exposure to viral Ags ( , , ). PD-1 reduces the strength of TCR signaling below the threshold for many immune response genes, but not for a subset of other inducible genes that have a lower activation threshold ( ). However, the molecular basis for this phenomenon is unknown.
During a normal immune response, the co-activation of TCR and CD28 signaling in effector T cells leads to the transcriptional activation of hundreds of genes via inducible transcription factors (TFs), such as NFAT, AP-1, nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), and EGR1 ( ; A). These same TFs are also strongly induced by the phorbol ester phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and the calcium ionophore A23187 (PI), which cooperate by activating diverging signaling pathways downstream of phospholipase C (PLC) and protein kinase C (PKC) ( A; ). The pathways then re-converge in the nucleus, where NFAT and AP-1 bind cooperatively to activate gene expression ( , ). Little is known about how inhibitory receptors suppress these signaling pathways and alter the T cell response. However, numerous studies point to a role for the ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b, which is activated by CTLA4 and PD-1 ( , , ). Cbl-b functions as a gatekeeper of T cell activation by antagonizing PLC, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), and PKC signaling ( , , ). Furthermore, Cbl-b expression is raised in T cells when anergy is induced by calcineurin signaling to NFAT in the absence of PKC activation ( ) or by tolerizing signals ( ).
 We previously showed that a single cycle of activation of TCR/CD28 signaling pathways was sufficient to epigenetically reprogram chromatin domains encompassing immune response genes in naive T cells, resulting in the stable maintenance of altered chromatin states regulating gene accessibility and expression ( , ). When activated by Ag for the first time, quiescent naive T cells undergo a slow transformation into rapidly dividing T blast (TB) cells, during which they remodel broad chromatin domains carrying activating histone modifications and encompassing inducible genes and their regulatory elements ( B). In response to TCR signaling, these regulatory elements form open chromatin regions detectable as DNase I hypersensitive sites (DHSs). Although inducible DHSs (iDHSs) are opened up transiently by factors such as AP-1 and NFAT, and typically function as inducible transcriptional enhancers or promoters, ∼3,000 of the DHSs formed during blast cell transformation are stably maintained as primed DHSs (pDHSs) in TB and in memory T cells without influencing steady-state transcription. Although these pDHSs are initially opened in response to transient activation of AP-1, they are then maintained by stable binding of constitutively expressed TFs such as ETS-1 and RUNX1, which introduce activating histone modifications into surrounding regions, thereby maintaining an epigenetic memory of TCR activation ( , ).
Several previous studies of anergy in the context of tolerance have investigated the roles and regulation of production of Tr1 cells, which are a Foxp3−ve subset of regulatory T cells, which limit damage resulting from responses to infection and suppress auto-immunity by secreting factors such as interleukin (IL)-10 ( , , ). Intra-nasal or subcutaneous administration of peptides can induce an anergic IL-10-secreting Tr1-like population in vivo ( , , ), and this treatment is effective in establishing tolerance ( ) and protecting against autoimmunity ( , , , ). Tr1-like cells can also be generated in vitro by culturing T cells in IL-27 ( ). The Tr1 gene expression signature resembles that of both exhausted TILs and exhausted T cells associated with chronic viral infections ( ). Tr1-like cells can also be induced by repeated anti-CD3ε antibody exposure ( ) or by nano-particles coated with peptide-bound major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II ( ). These studies show that TCR signaling is important in generating tolerance ( ). However, although there is a consensus surrounding the importance of Tr1-like cells in a variety of immunological contexts, the molecular mechanisms that lead to the generation of Tr1-like tolerant cells and their altered response to Ag remain obscure.
To investigate the underlying basis of T cell tolerance, we performed genome-wide profiling of gene-regulatory networks in T cells before and after induction of tolerance, and after reactivation of TCR signaling. For this, we employed a transgenic TCR model (Tg4) ( ) based on desensitization of mice in response to escalating doses of a tolerizing peptide Ag ( C; ). Tg4 mouse T cells recognize the Ac1-9 N-terminal peptide AcASQKRPSQR from myelin basic protein (MBP), an encephalitogenic auto-Ag associated with multiple sclerosis, and can be rendered tolerant by repeated exposure to the higher affinity, MHC-binding MBP Ac1-9[4Y] analog AcASQYRPSQR (4Y) ( ). This approach may form the basis of future therapies in auto-immune disease because we have established that it alleviates symptoms of multiple sclerosis in patients ( ). To define epigenetic mechanisms maintaining an anergic tolerant state in Tg4 T cells, we identified DHSs on a genome-wide scale, together with genome-wide RNA-seq. These integrated studies demonstrated that the tolerized state is associated with two distinct mechanisms. First, tolerized T cells specifically maintain chromatin priming at a subset of pDHSs within archetypal T cell tolerance signature genes, allowing them to be activated at a signaling threshold below that of immune response genes. Second, receptor signaling to AP-1 is suppressed, and tolerized T cells fail to activate classic immune response genes in vivo in response to TCR stimulation by peptide. Hence it is altered epigenetic states that shift the balance between immune response and immune repression following tolerization.

## Results

## T Cell Tolerization Reprograms Inducible Gene Expression Potential
In the Tg4 mouse model, tolerance induction correlates with the induction of anergic CD4+ T cells with a Tr1 phenotype ( ). To address the molecular basis of this phenomenon, we first undertook genome-wide analyses of changes in gene expression (RNA sequencing [RNA-seq]) associated with tolerance in both the steady state and following challenge with a specific Ag. Tg4 transgenic mice were tolerized by repeated subcutaneous injection of the 4Y MBP peptide according to the schedule outlined in C. To examine TCR responses in tolerized T cells (T) and in non-tolerant predominantly naive T cells (N) from control mice, we harvested cells 2 h after a final injection with 80 μg 4Y peptide (TAg and NAg) or PBS vehicle (T0 and N0). We also examined in vitro responses of T cells after a 2-h stimulation with 20 ng/mL PMA and 2 μM calcium ionophore A23187 (TPI and NPI) so as to distinguish between mechanisms acting at the level of TCR/CD28 signaling and transcriptional mechanisms involving inducible TFs downstream of PLC ( A). After normalization of the data, we defined 17,179 loci where the average RNA-seq value was at least 3 for at least one set of conditions ( ). Principle-component analysis of the 500 most variable genes using three biological replicates revealed substantial differences between naive and tolerized cells under all conditions (PC1 versus PC3; D) and robust responses to Ag in both naive and tolerant cells (PC1 versus PC2; A). Analysis of RNA-seq data for genes where values changed by at least 2-fold after tolerization ( B), and at least one value was above 50, revealed 475 loci higher and 107 loci lower in T0 than N0, ( ) and 568 loci higher and 381 loci lower in TAg than NAg ( ). Hierarchical clustering was performed for 637 of these genes where at least one of the T0:N0, TAg:NAg, TAg:T0, or NAg:N0 ratios showed at least a 10-fold difference ( C). The combined analyses revealed immune response genes, such as Il2, Il3, Tnf, Csf2, Ccl1, Cd40lg, Nr4a3, and Nfkb1, which were less inducible in tolerized cells treated with Ag ( E, C, and S1D), and anergy or tolerance-associated genes, which were more inducible, including the inhibitory receptors Ctla4, Tigit, Lag3, Havcr2 (TIM3), and Pdcd1 (PD1), the phosphatase Dusp6, the TFs Nfil3 and Maf, and the immune-suppressive cytokines Il10 and Il21 ( F, C, and S1E). For many immune response genes, this loss of responsiveness to TCR signaling could be bypassed by direct stimulation with PI ( E and D), suggesting that tolerance involves a membrane-proximal block in TCR signaling to inducible TFs. In contrast, the weak response to TCR signaling seen for many immuno-suppressive genes in naive cells could not be boosted by PI. Similar responses were seen over an extended time course of stimulation, demonstrating that it is not just the kinetics but the magnitude of activation that varies ( F and S1G). Some genes were also expressed at higher levels in tolerized cells even prior to stimulation ( F, C, and S1E; ). Many of the genes upregulated in T0 had also been previously shown to be upregulated in Tr1-like cells generated in vitro with IL-27, suggesting similarities between these two model systems ( ; ). These include Maf, Il10, Il21, Havcr2, Lag3, Nfil3, and Prdm1. These data suggest a potential model whereby tolerized T cells exhibit both: (1) suppression of TCR/CD28 signaling to a level below the threshold needed for activation of many immune response genes; and (2) a heightened sensitivity of immuno-regulatory genes that still allows activation at reduced levels of TCR signaling, consistent with the actions of inhibitory receptors such as PD-1 ( ). Significantly, TCR-inducible activation of Il2, Csf2, and Tnf is dependent on CD28 signaling ( ).

## Modification of the Epigenetic Landscape in Tolerant Cells
We next investigated whether the more efficient activation of a subset of genes in tolerant cells was due to epigenetic reprogramming at the level of chromatin modifications, as observed in TB cells ( ). To this end, we globally identified DHSs in N0 and T0 cells using DNase sequencing (DNase-seq). We ranked the DHSs based on the fold change of DNase-seq signal between N0 and T0 for two independent replicates ( A). We selected high-confidence subsets of DHSs that were at least 2-fold different in both experiments. These analyses identified 1,033 T0-specific DHSs (tDHSs) and 635 N0-specific DHSs ( A, 2B, and A; ). We also used DESeq2 as an alternative method of statistical analysis to screen for 2-fold changes and p < 0.05, and again identified the vast majority of the 1,033 tDHSs defined above (84%; B).
 We also investigated the stability of the tDHSs after a time interval sufficient for peak effector T cell responses to have subsided and for memory T cells to form (T0M, C). We performed DNase-seq on tolerized cells that had received the final dose of Ag 3 weeks prior to harvest, and we still reproducibly detected over half of the 1,033 tDHSs ( C) that maintained an elevated average DHS signal ( A and 2C). These data suggest that tolerization involves long-term maintenance of epigenetic reprograming of a specific subset of DHSs in the absence of sustained TCR signaling. To ascertain whether the changes in chromatin structure had any impact on the nearby genes, we measured the difference in mRNA expression for the genes closest to the ranked DHSs for replicate 1 ( C). We observed an increase in both steady-state (T0 compared with N0) and inducible (TAg compared with NAg) gene expression in parallel with the increase in DHS strength. This is consistent with a role for epigenetic priming in the imprinting of a transcriptional memory of TCR activation, thereby enabling both higher steady-state expression in T0 and more efficient re-activation in TAg compared with NAg.
To gain insight into transcriptional mechanisms underlying tolerization, we used HOMER to perform de novo identification of TF motifs in the different specific subsets of DHSs ( D, 2E, and B). The tDHSs were more highly enriched in AP-1 and NFAT motifs, whereas the pre-existing N0-specific DHSs contained a higher proportion of LEF/TCF motifs. Both subsets were enriched in RUNX, ETS, and CREB/ATF motifs. The distribution of AP-1, NFAT, MAF, and LEF/TCF motifs is depicted in C, where their direct correlation with the coordinates of the DHSs is shown. Published chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) data of TCF1 binding in thymocytes was consistent with these in silico observations ( ), with TCF1 binding concentrated in both the N0-specific and shared peaks but depleted in the tDHSs ( C and 2F). Conversely, MAF binding was more enriched in the tDHSs than the N0-specific DHSs ( ; C and 2F). MAF has been shown to be important in regulating Il10 expression ( ) and is implicated in repressing Il2 ( ). Maf is also upregulated in T0 and TAg cells ( F), and MAF can dimerize with other CREB/AP-1 family proteins to bind to AP-1 sites ( ), a motif that is enriched in the tDHSs ( C and 2D). The enrichment of NFAT motifs in tDHSs may also be functionally relevant because NFAT plays a role in T cell anergy ( ) and T cell exhaustion ( ). Indeed, when we aligned our DNase-seq data with ChIP-seq data generated using a constitutively active modified form of NFAT1/NFATC2 (CA-RIT-NFAT), which is known to promote exhaustion ( ), we observed that NFAT binding was more strongly enriched in the tDHSs ( C and 2F). Although it is unlikely/unknown whether NFAT is binding to these sites in T0 cells before stimulation, the presence of the motif at an open DHS should enable rapid binding when the cells are re-exposed to Ag.
Examples of tDHSs with binding sites for MAF and NFAT were found at the tolerance-associated Il10, Ctla4, Tigit, and Nrp1 loci ( G), where there are higher levels of either constitutive or inducible mRNA expression in tolerized cells ( F and G). At these loci, tDHSs were present in T0, but not in N0, and these sites were largely still maintained 3 weeks later in T0M. The tDHSs were more likely to bind CA-RIT-NFAT and/or c-MAF, but not TCF1. Furthermore, recently activated CD4 TB cells generated by in vitro activation exhibit many of the same DHSs as tolerant cells, and these regions are flanked by the active chromatin modifications H3K27ac and H3K4me2 in TB cells ( G). It is likely that the tDHSs in tolerant cells will be similarly embedded within extensive active chromatin domains that have been formed during the tolerization process.

## T0-Specific DHSs Are Proximal to T0- and TAg-Specific Genes
Previously activated T cells maintain transcriptional memory by employing pDHSs to establish active chromatin domains encompassing adjacent inducible regulatory elements ( B). To assess the roles of the equivalent tDHSs in the regulation of inducible gene expression in tolerant cells, we integrated the mRNA data for differentially expressed genes with the differential DHS peak data. Starting with the gene sets for mRNA values greater than 50 defined in B, we selected the annotated genes that have been assigned to a specific genomic locus, and further selected inducible genes on the basis that the TAg- and NAg-specific genes are also 2-fold inducible compared with T0 and N0, respectively. This allowed us to define genes expressed higher in T0 compared with N0 (460), N0 compared with T0 (80), and inducible genes expressed higher in TAg compared with NAg (138) and in NAg compared with TAg (226) ( ). We then measured the distances from the transcription start sites (TSSs) of differentially expressed genes to the closest of the 1,033 tDHSs ( H and 2I) and the closest of the 635 N0-specific DHSs ( D and S2E). These analyses revealed that the 1,033 tDHSs were preferentially located closer to the TSSs of T0- and TAg-specific genes, with approximately 25% of the TAg-specific genes located within 50 kb of a tDHS ( I). Hence these data suggest that tDHSs do indeed prime closely linked inducible loci for rapid re-activation in cells re-exposed to Ag. For example, tDHSs exist at the Il10, Ctla4, and Tigit genes, which are more strongly induced in TAg than in NAg ( G).
In contrast, priming seems to play little role in defining inducible responses in naive cells, with only 10% of the 226 NAg-specific gene TSSs within 50 kb of N0-specific DHSs ( D). Instead, the loss of DHSs in N0 correlates more closely with a loss of expression in N0, whereby 25% of the 80 N0-specific genes existed within 50 kb of N0-specific DHSs ( E). An example of this is shown at the naive T cell-specific gene Satb1 ( F), which has been implicated in repressing Pdcd1 (PD-1) expression in T cells ( ). Notably, the DHSs at Satb1 can bind TCF1, consistent with the enrichment of LEF/TCF motifs at the 635 N0-specific sites.

## Activation of Signaling Pathways Induces a Different DHS Profile in Tolerant Cells
To investigate whether epigenetic priming at tDHSs supports inducible chromatin remodeling in tolerant T cells, we performed DNase-seq on NAg and TAg, and identified the differential DHSs by ranking the regions based on the fold change of signal ( A and A). We confirmed that the formation of TAg-specific DHSs was generally correlated with increased gene expression by measuring the difference in mRNA expression in TAg compared with NAg for the genes that are adjacent to the corresponding DHSs ( A). To define high-confidence subsets of specific DHSs, we intersected the peaks that were at least 2-fold enriched in each sample for two independent pairs of replicates. This gave 2,680 NAg-specific peaks and 1,959 TAg-specific peaks ( A). As we were specifically interested in iDHSs, we filtered them further to include only peaks that were at least 3-fold higher in NAg compared with N0, or in TAg compared with T0 ( B and S3C). This revealed 1,824 NAg-specific iDHSs and 682 TAg-specific iDHSs ( ; B), which were highly specific for just naive or tolerant cells ( C). The same sets of specific DHSs were also defined by a parallel analysis using DESeq2 and the same fold change for each subset (p < 0.05), which identified 2,161 NAg-specific iDHSs and 923 TAg-specific iDHSs, including 88% of the 1,824 NAg sites and 90% of the 682 sites TAg ( D). Examples of TAg-specific iDHSs can be observed at the tolerance-associated Il10, Tigit, and Ctla4 loci ( D), where iDHS induction correlated with increased mRNA gene expression in TAg cells. Furthermore, 19% of the TAg-specific iDHSs were located within 50 kb of a tDHS ( E), consistent with locus priming enabling more efficient activation of closely linked enhancers residing in the same active chromatin domain ( B). Many of the same iDHSs that are induced in TAg are also induced in TB cells stimulated with PI ( D). In G and D, it is also evident that regions associated with iDHSs induced by PI in TB cells were already marked with H3K4me2 and H3K27ac modifications before Ag stimulation. In contrast with tolerant cells, naive T cells are not preferentially primed by pDHSs at the NAg-specific genes in N0 cells, but nevertheless still induce NAg-specific iDHSs ( F).
 

## NAg-Specific iDHSs Can Be Induced in Tolerant Cells by Bypassing TCR/CD28 Signaling
The treatment of tolerant cells with PI enabled the induction of many NAg-specific genes in tolerant cells, whereas the TAg-specific genes could not be induced by PI in naive cells ( E and 1F). To determine whether this same trend was observed at the chromatin level, we measured DNase I accessibility in naive and tolerant cells treated with PI. The mRNA induction correlated closely with the changes in chromatin structure whereby TAg-specific iDHSs could not be induced in naive cells, most likely due to the lack of epigenetic priming, whereas NAg-specific iDHSs were induced in tolerant cells treated with PI. This was observed at both the local level ( D and 3F) and globally at the 1,824 NAg and 682 TAg iDHSs ( G). The ability of PI to overcome the block in tolerant cells is consistent with suppression of TCR signaling upstream of PLC and PKC to inducible TFs, a block that could be bypassed by direct activation of PKC and RAS signaling by PI ( A).

## NAg- and TAg-Specific iDHSs Are Governed by Distinct Gene-Regulatory Networks
Tolerance involves the expression and activation of inhibitory receptors that antagonize TCR/CD28 signaling to the inducible TFs, which create iDHSs. To identify gene-regulatory signatures within the specific subsets of NAg and TAg DHSs, we performed HOMER de novo motif analyses of enriched TF motifs ( A and 4B) and plotted the positions of the identified motifs over the DHS coordinates, together with published ChIP-seq data for these same TFs ( C). The NAg-specific iDHSs had a complex TF motif signature reflecting the TCR/CD28-inducible TFs AP-1, NFAT, NF-κB, and NR4A, but not EGR or IRF family TFs ( A and 4C). The TAg-specific DHSs were enriched for EGR and IRF motifs, but not motifs for the TCR/CD28-induced TFs NF-κB and NR4A. The latter could be explained in part by reduced expression for Nr4a3 and Nfkb1 in TAg compared with NAg ( E) and the absence of NAg-specific iDHSs induced at these loci ( F). These analyses were also confirmed using DESeq2, which identified essentially the same subsets of NAg and TAg DHSs with the same motif composition as those identified by the above pairwise analysis ( A and S4B).
 

## Evidence for Distinct AP-1, NFAT, and IRF Complexes in TAg and NAg Cells
Although the TAg and NAg iDHSs both contained NFAT and AP-1 motifs, the TAg-specific iDHSs were more enriched for NFAT motifs, whereas the NAg iDHSs had a higher proportion of AP-1 binding motifs ( A–4C). Consistent with this, published ChIP-seq data reveal higher levels of binding of the constitutively active CA-RIT-NFAT ( ) at the TAg-specific iDHSs and higher levels of JunB AP-1 binding at the NAg-specific iDHSs in TB cells stimulated with PI ( ; C). Because CA-RIT-NFAT has modifications that prevent cooperative interactions with AP-1, these data may indicate that much of the NFAT binding seen at TAg-specific DHSs is independent of AP-1, as seen in other models of exhaustion and in TILs ( , , ). In contrast, published ChIP-seq data for endogenous NFAT1 (NFATc2) in CD8 T cells stimulated with PI, where AP-1 will be efficiently induced ( ), revealed NFAT binding to many NAg-specific iDHSs that are unable to bind CA-RIT-NFAT ( C), suggesting direct cooperation between NFAT and AP-1.
To investigate NFAT further, we identified all 44,441 ChIP peaks that could bind either CA-RIT-NFAT1 or wild-type (WT) NFAT1, and then intersected these with the 1,824 NAg and 682 TAg iDHSs ( D). This analysis revealed that 55% of the 682 TAg iDHSs (377 sites) were capable of binding at least one form of NFAT, whereas just 36% of the NAg-specific iDHSs could bind NFAT. The average level of binding of CA-RIT-NFAT1 detected at the NAg iDHSs was also weaker than endogenous NFAT1 binding ( E), again suggesting that cooperative binding with AP-1 is more important at NAg iDHSs. This concept was further supported by an enrichment of the composite NFAT/AP-1 element detected by HOMER in the NAg, but not the TAg, NFAT binding sites ( F). Examples of these patterns of binding were observed at the TAg-specific genes Tigit and Ctla4, where the TAg-specific iDHSs bind NFAT independently of AP-1 (CA-RIT NFAT) ( C). In contrast, the NAg-specific genes Fosl2 and Nfkb1 bind WT NFAT only when the cells are stimulated with PI and AP-1 is present (WT NFAT PI) ( D). Furthermore, consensus motifs for cooperative NFAT/AP-1 binding were found at the NAg-specific genes, whereas the TAg-specific iDHSs lacked the true composite element with correctly spaced NFAT and AP-1 motifs ( ). The above observations and conclusions were supported by a reduction in the total amount of the activating AP-1 proteins c-Fos, Fosb, c-Jun, and JunB in TAg compared with NAg, whereas levels of JunD were not reduced ( G). JunD has immuno-suppressive functions in lymphocytes ( ), suggesting that the ratio between JunD and other activating AP-1 proteins may influence the activity of AP-1 target genes in tolerized cells.
JunD has previously been detected in AP-1/IRF complexes in T cells ( ). This is significant here because IRF family proteins also play a role in anergy, in association with BATF/Jun AP-1-like complexes, whereby these factors can bind to composite IRF1/AP-1 motifs, including at the Il10 locus ( , ). Although the composite IRF/AP-1 motif was not initially detected in the 682 TAg iDHSs ( B), a direct search detected it in 12% of these sites, compared with less than 3% of the 1,824 NAg iDHSs, and the IRF/AP-1 motif was identified by HOMER within the specific subset of 377 NFAT-bound NAg iDHSs ( F). Furthermore, BATF has been identified in IRF/AP-1 complexes in anergic Tr1 cells ( ), and here we observed that published ChIP peaks for both BATF and IRF4 are enriched in TAg, but not NAg, DHSs ( C).

## TF Occupancy Differs in Tolerant and Naive Cells
To look for further evidence of differential TF occupancy, we generated higher read depth DNase-seq data for one sample from each group and performed digital DNase I footprinting of protected TF motifs. Using the Wellington footprinting algorithm ( ), we identified 1,490 protected sites in NAg-specific iDHSs and 1,038 protected sites in TAg-specific iDHSs ( A and 5B). Consistent with the results depicted in , more AP-1 sites were occupied in NAg compared with TAg, and more NFAT and EGR sites were protected in TAg compared with NAg, while NF-κB and IRF sites were protected only in NAg and TAg, respectively ( C and 5D). To further validate these results, we plotted the forward and reverse DNase I cuts surrounding all the NF-κB motifs that were present in the 1,824 NAg-iDHSs and 682 TAg-iDHSs ( E). NF-κB sites in the 1,824 iDHSs were more protected in the NAg sample, indicating that this TF is most likely bound here. Examples are shown in F and A, where publically available ChIP-seq data ( ) show NF-κB binding correlating with these footprints. Furthermore, in some cases where an NF-κB motif was present within an iDHS that was induced in both NAg and TAg, more efficient protection was observed in the NAg cells ( G and B). This further suggests a reduction in signaling to NF-κB in tolerized cells.
 We similarly investigated the occupancy of AP-1/IRF motifs and determined that these composite motifs had a greater level of protection in the 682 TAg-specific iDHSs than in the 1,824 NAg iDHSs ( H). The TAg-specific genes Il10, Ikzf2, and Nrp1 loci each encompass strongly protected AP-1/IRF motifs ( I and C). Furthermore, ChIP-seq data from previously published studies ( ) showed that these sites could bind both IRF4 and BATF ( I and C). At the Il10 −9 kb and Nrp1 +177 kb DHSs, in addition to IRF4 and BATF binding, NFAT peaks were identified in published ChIP data for CA-RIT-NFAT, at sites where NFAT motifs were footprinted in TAg cells, reinforcing the role of these three factors in gene-regulatory networks in tolerized T cells as has been shown in exhausted T cells ( ).

## TCR Signaling Complexes Are Disrupted in Tolerized T Cells
To look for direct evidence of defective signaling in tolerant cells, we used microscopy to investigate TCR signaling molecules at the immune synapse formed after engagement of antigen-presenting cells (APCs) with either in vitro-generated T helper 1 (Th1) cells or T cells tolerized by repeated intra-nasal delivery of the 4Y peptide ( ). We investigated the localization of Zap70 and PKCθ just downstream of TCR and PKC signaling ( A). These analyses revealed that although CD28 clustering at the TCR synapse occurs in both Th1 and tolerized T cells, Zap70 and PKCθ can no longer be efficiently recruited to the synapse in tolerized T cells ( A–6C). Quantitation of the proportion of signal at the synapse confirmed that there was a global decrease in the amount of Zap70 and PKCθ that migrates to the synapse upon engaging APCs in tolerized T cells compared with Th1 cells ( D). This breakdown of signaling from the synapse correlated with a reduction of PKCθ T538 phosphorylation in tolerized cells ( E). We also assessed the opposing roles played by PKCθ and Cbl-b, which functions as the gatekeeper of TCR/CD28 signaling ( , , ; F). Total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy revealed lower levels of Zap70 and PKCθ in the same plane as the TCR in tolerized T cells engaged with surface-bound CD3 Abs and higher levels of Cbl-b, compared with Th1 cells ( A–S6D). There was a negative correlation between PKCθ and Cbl-b co-localizing in activated T cells for Th1 and tolerized T cells ( G). Significantly, PKCθ is just downstream of signaling from CD28 and PI3K, and both PI3K and PKC are repressed by Cbl-b ( F). PKCθ is also a direct target of PMA, and Ras proteins are indirect targets of PMA, thereby accounting for the ability of PMA to overcome the block in signaling imposed by CTLA4, PD-1, and Cbl-b ( F). Furthermore, a previous study found that ubiquitination of the p85 subunit of PI3K by Cbl-b blocks co-association of CD28 and the TCR, and thereby suppresses TCR signaling ( ).
 

## Discussion

## A Two-Step Model Accounting for T Cell Tolerance
Increasing evidence shows that overactive immune responses in allergy and autoimmunity can be corrected by Ag-specific immunotherapy. We established that cells exposed to soluble peptide epitopes become anergic and switch from a pro-inflammatory phenotype to an anti-inflammatory Tr1-like phenotype ( , ). These Foxp3−ve T cells are anergic and capable of suppressing other immune cells through secretion of IL-10, which inhibits the Ag-presenting machinery of APCs such as dendritic cells ( ). In the current study, our genomic analyses utilized an in vivo model to answer many of the outstanding questions about the epigenetic mechanisms underlying and maintaining tolerance. Building upon published data, we propose a comprehensive inter-connected model explaining T cell tolerance: (1) the increased activity of inducible inhibitory receptors lowers TCR/CD28 signaling strength below the threshold required for induction of many immune response genes; and (2) epigenetic reprograming of inhibitory receptor genes allows them to be induced at a lower threshold of TCR/CD28 signaling than that required for immune response genes ( ). Therefore, immune response genes, such as Il2, Csf2, Tnf, Cd40lg, Nr4a3, and Ccl1, can be rapidly induced in naive T cells and in effector T cells, but not in tolerized T cells. The activation of TCR signaling in the absence of CD28 co-stimulation also leads to loss of activation of Il2, Csf2, and Tnf ( ), consistent with suppression of CD28 signaling in tolerized cells. Some of the immune response genes induced in naive T cells, such as Nr4a3 ( F), are not epigenetically primed, and thus require an elevated threshold of signaling for their induction. Conversely, epigenetic priming creates an accessible chromatin environment at immuno-suppressive genes such as Ctla4 and Il10, meaning that they can still be induced in tolerized cells in the presence of reduced levels of TCR/CD28 signaling ( ). However, these genes are not yet primed in naive T cells, meaning that their original epigenetic state was altered after the first round of activation by epigenetic priming at DHSs in close proximity to inducible enhancers and promoters, allowing more efficient induction as described by us previously for memory T cells and TB cells ( ).
 

## Inhibitory Receptors Suppress TCR/CD28 Signaling in Tolerized Cells
We demonstrated that tolerization leads to both high steady-state levels and higher inducible levels of inhibitory receptors. The nature of the suppressive pathways downstream of most inhibitory receptors, including TIM3, LAG3, and TIGIT, still remains poorly understood. However, it is known that both CTLA4 ( , ) and PD-1 ( ) mediate activation of the repressive ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b, and our data suggest a role for Cbl-b in limiting genomic responses in the tolerant state. Cbl-b functions in setting the threshold of T cell activation and is essential for both anergy ( , ) and the development of inducible regulatory T cells ( ). In its absence, the response to TCR signaling is uncoupled from co-receptor signaling, and mice develop spontaneous auto-immunity ( ). In the anergic state associated with tolerance and exhaustion, Cbl-b represses TCR/CD28 signaling by: (1) targeting the p85 subunit of PI3K for ubiquitination and blocking its association with CD28 ( ); (2) directing ubiquitination of PKCθ and targeting it for degradation ( ); and (3) directing the ubiquitination of PLCγ1, blocking its activation ( ; ). Conversely, CD28 signaling promotes ubiquitination and degradation of Cbl-b in effector T cells ( ). Furthermore, effector T cells normally express Satb1, which represses Pdcd1 (PD-1) expression ( ). Our data show that Pdcd1 activation in tolerized T cells occurs in parallel with repression of Satb1, and we confirmed that suppressive pathways involving Cbl-b have been triggered in tolerized cells. Others have also recently demonstrated that PD-1 engagement in T cells leads to loss of expression of genes that rely on a high threshold of signaling, such as Il2, Il3, Csf2, Ccl1, and Cd40lg ( ). Consistent with these findings, we demonstrate here that anergy in tolerized T cells involves a membrane-proximal block in cell signaling because Zap70 and PKCθ fail to localize efficiently at the immune synapse, thus failing to induce AP-1 proteins efficiently. Furthermore, we show that the block can be largely bypassed using PMA to directly activate DAG-inducible pathways downstream of PKCθ and Ras ( F).

## The Inducible Gene-Regulatory Network Is Rewired in Tolerized T Cells
Our data establish that activation of repressive pathways during tolerization leads to loss of both epigenetic priming and inducible activation of many immune response genes. Our genome-wide analyses demonstrate that the TCR/CD28-inducible gene-regulatory network is rewired compared with both naive T cells and normal effector T cells after tolerization. It is likely that much of the epigenetic reprogramming described for TB and memory T cells is either aborted or erased as part of the tolerization process. Indeed, tolerized cells successfully prime only 3% of the pDHSs defined by us previously in memory T cells.
The altered signaling network present in tolerized T cells activates different TF networks compared with the ones detected in naive T cells in both resting and activated cells. Maf and Prdm1 levels were elevated in resting tolerant cells, and we observed much higher inducible activation of Nfil3, Maf, and Prdm1 in tolerant cells than in naive T cells. Maf expression correlates directly with Il10 expression in tolerized cells ( ) and consistent with these findings, have shown that c-Maf controls IL-10 production in Th1, Th2, and Th17 subsets. Here we show that induction of tolerance involves the opening of chromatin at known c-Maf binding sites ( ), and that the tDHSs are enriched for AP-1 motifs where c-Maf is able to bind with other AP-1 proteins ( ). Furthermore, NFIL3, c-Maf, and Blimp1 are all likely to be important drivers of anergy and immunosuppression because they were previously identified as regulators of Il10, Havcr2, Tigit, and/or Pdcd1 expression in either T cells suppressed by IL-27 ( , ) or TILs derived from acute myeloid leukemia patients ( ). These observations were confirmed using regulatory T cells lacking Blimp1 ( ). Overexpression of c-Maf is partially sufficient to induce the exhausted T cell program, and Maf-deficient T cells are more efficient at targeting tumors in vivo ( ).
The gene-regulatory network that is activated in Ag-stimulated tolerant cells has diverged from that detected in naive T cells or TB cells. By integrating data identifying the TF motifs present within the NAg- or TAg-specific iDHSs with protein expression levels and foot-printing analyses, we have been able to infer a model of how signaling to TFs is de-regulated during tolerization. This includes: (1) a suppression of signaling to AP-1 and NF-κB, (2) an increased utilization of NFAT in the absence of AP-1, and (3) an increased occupancy of composite AP-1/IRF elements. Indeed, increased binding of AP-1/IRF may occur through the suppression of certain AP-1 family members. The AP-1/IRF complex has been shown to contain BATF, JunD, and/or JunB, but not c-Fos ( , ). Although we observed a reduction in c-Fos, FosB, and JunB protein levels in TAg cells, the level of JunD remained stable, which is of interest here because JunD can function to suppress T cell responses ( ). The data also imply redistribution of AP-1 proteins away from conventional NFAT/AP-1 sites, which are typically bound by Jun/Fos heterodimers ( ) and regulate immune response genes such as CSF2 ( ), to AP-1/IRF sites found at immune-modulatory genes, such as Il10 and Nrp1. By comparing our data with published data, we found that TAg-specific DHSs were associated with a gain of BATF and IRF4 binding and a loss of JunB, which is consistent with our model. Furthermore, these same sets of TFs have been implicated in rewiring gene-regulatory networks in exhausted CD8 T cells ,where BATF, IRF4, and NFAT bound at the same sites at the immuno-regulatory genes Lag3, Havcr2, Tigit, Ctla4, and Pdcd1 ( ), and in Tr1 cells, where IRF1 and BATF are key for preparing the chromatin landscape for induction of the Tr1 gene program ( ).

## The Tolerized State Shares Features with Anergic and Exhausted T Cells
Our previous genome-wide mRNA analyses ( ) and the data described here demonstrate that tolerized T cells have moved away from the normal effector T cell program and closer to that of the anergic state. For example, 43% of the 1,033 tDHSs identified here in tolerized CD4 cells were also reprogrammed in a chronic LCMV (lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus) infection model of CD8 T cell exhaustion, including the Ctla4 and Il10 loci, whereas most of the epigenetic priming seen in memory T cells is absent ( ). Tolerized cells resemble, but are not identical to, other anergic states, including exhausted T cells produced during chronic infections, exhausted TILs, T cells rendered anergic by unbalanced TCR/CD28 signaling, and in vitro-derived Tr1 cells ( ). In each case a concerted program of inhibitory receptor gene expression is activated, which typically includes Lag3, Havcr2 (TIM3), Tigit, Ctla4, and Prdm1 (Blimp1) ( , , ), which oppose the functions of co-activators such as CD28 ( ). These anergic states also involve activation of a gene regulation network driven by NFAT binding independently of AP-1 ( ), and we find that certain AP-1 family proteins are downregulated in tolerized cells.
We also observed some differences between our in vivo-generated tolerant T cells and some other models of anergy. Studies of exhausted T cells from TILs ( ) and in vitro-derived tolerant T cells ( ) found evidence that TCR signaling to NR4A family TFs is maintained, whereas we found that this pathway was suppressed in tolerized T cells. We also observed a loss of LEF/TCF consensus binding motifs in TAg DHSs, whereas TCF-1 plays an important role in controlling the differentiation of precursors that give rise to exhausted T cells during chronic infections ( ). A direct comparison of mRNA data described above with two independent studies of anergic T cells suggests that tolerized cells, Tr1 cells, and CD8+ve TILs all upregulate expression of TIM3, LAG3, Blimp1, and NFIL3. However, tolerant and Tr1 cells preferentially express Maf, IL-10, and IL-21, whereas tolerant T cells and TILs preferentially express PD-1 ( ).
The sum of these studies reveals that different anergic and regulatory T cell states do indeed share the common utilization of immuno-suppressive factors by virtue of preferential epigenetic priming of their genes, thereby rendering them more responsive. The deficiency of the immune response is a direct consequence of inhibitory receptors blocking induction of most inducible genes. These studies also give encouragement for the expanded use of Ag-inducible tolerization as a strategy for combatting auto-immune disorders, and give clues as to how immune responses might be boosted in cancer and chronic infections. Significantly, this is no longer a distant goal, because peptide therapy is already being tested in auto-immune diseases. Our recent phase 1 and 2 clinical trials show that the MBP peptide tolerization strategy described above is giving positive results as a therapy for multiple sclerosis ( ), and a similar protocol using thyrotropin receptor peptides has delivered improvements in patients with Graves’ hyperthyroidism ( ). The current study has now provided a comprehensive understanding of the molecular basis of this therapeutic approach, which may one day become common practice.

## STAR★Methods

## Key Resources Table
 

## Resource Availability

## Lead Contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact Peter Cockerill (p.n.cockerill@bham.ac.uk).

## Material Availability
This study did not generate any unique reagents.

## Data and Code Availability
The accession number for the data reported in this paper is GEO: GSE147268. The article also includes previously published datasets: TCF1 ChIP-Seq in thymocytes – GSE46662 ( ), c-MAF ChIP-seq in Th17 cells - GEO: GSM1004799 ( ), NFAT-CA-RIT-NFAT1, WT NFAT1, NFAT-CA-RIT-NFAT1 PI, WT NFAT1 PI in CD8 T cells - GEO: GSM1570758 ( ). IRF4 ChIP-seq in CD4 T cells and BATF in CD4 +IL-21 T cells GEO: GSE39756 ( ), JUNB ChIP-seq in CD4 TB PI cells, H3K4me2 and H3K27ac ChIP-seq in CD4 TB and TB PI cells, and DNase I in CD4 TB and CD4 TB PI, GEO: GSE67443 ( ) and p65 ChIP-seq in Tconv cells stimulated with CD3/CD28 - GEO: GSE99319 ( ).

## Experimental Model and Subject Details

## Tg4 transgenic Mice
Tg4-H2u mice expressing the αβ TCR (Vα4, Vβ8.2) of the MBP Ac1-9-specific hybridoma 1934.4, derived from an encephalitogenic T cell clone have been described previously ( ). Tg4 mice have a skewed CD4+ T cell repertoire where over 90% of the CD4+ T cells are Vβ8+. Male and female mice aged between 6-12 weeks were used. Animals were housed under specific pathogen-free conditions, and experiments were performed in accordance with the UK Home Office Project License held by D.C.W. and approved by the University of Birmingham ethical review committee. T cells from the peripheral blood of Tg4 mice were phenotyped for CD4 and Vβ8 by flow cytometry.

## Cells
Th1 effector cells were generated in vitro by culturing splenocytes, from which red blood cells were depleted, from Tg4 mice with 10 μg/ml MBP Ac1-9 [4K] and 5 ng/ml rmIL-12 (Peprotech) for 72 hours in complete RPMI. Cells were further expanded for 6-8 days in complete RPMI supplemented with 20 U/ml rhIL-2 (R&D) ( ). Splenocytes from tolerized mice were also expanded in vitro before analysis by culturing for 5 days in complete RPMI with 10 μg/ml MBP Ac1-9 [4K] and 20 U/ml rhIL-2 ( ). Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells were generated from B10.PL mice (B10.PL-H2u
H2-T18a/(73NS) SnJ originally from the Jackson Laboratory) by culturing the non-adherent fraction of disaggregated bone marrow with 10 ng/ml rmGM-CSF (Miltenyi Biotec) in complete RPMI for 10-12 days ( ). BM-DC were routinely > 85% MHC-II+ as measured by flow cytometry.

## Method Details

## Induction of tolerance by sub-cutaneous injection of peptides
For most of the tolerized T cell experiments described here (T0 and TAg), tolerance was induced by administering 200 μL doses of the MBP Ac1-9[4Y] subcutaneously in the flank of un-anaesthetized mice every 3-4 days for 7 doses. The amount of peptide was increased until the maximum dose was reached and maintained, as defined in C (0.08 μg, 0.8 μg, 8 μg, 80 μg peptide/0.2ml PBS). For N0, 200 μL of PBS was administered in the same dosing strategy. 2 hours prior to sacrifice a final dose of 200 μL of PBS (N0 and T0) or 200 μL of 400 μg/ml MBP Ac1-9 [4Y] (NAg and TAg) was given. For T0M, mice were sacrificed 3 weeks after the final dose.

## Induction of tolerance by intra-nasal peptides
In A–6G and , Tg4 mice were tolerized by intranasal administration of 10 doses of 80 μg MBP Ac1-9 [4Y]) at 3-4 day intervals ( , ).

## CD4+ T cell Selection
For most experiments CD4+ T cells were purified using the MagniSort Mouse CD4 T cell Enrichment Kit (8804-6821-74) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For the western blotting in E and microscopy experiments and , CD4+ T cells were purified by magnetic separation (Miltenyi Isolation Kit II) according to the manufacturer’s instruction.

## In vitro activation of T cells
For western blot analyses, CD4+ T cells were activated by incubating with 10 μg/ml biotinylated anti-CD3ε (clone 145-2C11, BD) and 10 μg/ml biotinylated anti-CD28 (clone 37.51, BD) for 30 minutes followed by crosslinking with 10 μg/ml streptavidin (Jackson Immunoresearch) at 37°C for the indicated times. For mRNA and DNase-Seq analyses, CD4+ T cells were re-suspended in complete RPMI with 20 ng/ml phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and 2 μM Calcium Ionophore A23187 (CaI) (NPI and TPI). For the mRNA time course cells were harvested at 30’, 60’, 120’, 240’ and 480’. For DNase-Seq and RNA-seq experiments cell were harvested at 120’.

## Western blot analyses of protein expression
Proteins were extracted in 50 mM Tris, 120 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA with 1% IGEPAL CA-630 and protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Thermo) before SDS-PAGE and western blotting. The antibodies used in this study were anti-PKCθ clone 27/PKCθ (BD Bioscience), anti-PKCθ pT538 ployclonal (Cell Signaling Technologies #9377) , anti-c-Jun Rabbit monoclonal (Cell Signaling Technologies #9165), anti-c-fos Rabbit monoclonal (Cell Signaling Technologies #2250), anti-fosB Rabbit monoclonal (Cell Signaling Technologies #2251), anti-JunB Rabbit polyclonal (Santa Cruz Biotehnology #sc-46X) anti-JunD Rabbit polyclonal (Santa Cruz Biotehnology #sc-74X) and anti-beta-2-microglobulin (Abcam #AB75853).

## Microscopy sample preparation
Before imaging, BM-DC were incubated with 1 μg/ml LPS (Sigma) for 16-18 hours, washed and then incubated for 2 hours with 1 μg/ml MBP Ac1-9[4Y]. DC-T cell couples for confocal microscopy were prepared by combining activated and peptide-loaded BM-DC and magnetically enriched CD4+ T cell at a ratio of 1:2 at 3x106 cells/ml. Coupling was synchronized by brief centrifugation (75 g) in a round bottom plate and the cells were allowed to interact for 5 minutes at 37°C before the cells were gently transferred to pre-warmed glass slides and incubated for a further 5 minutes. Cells were fixed in 4% buffered PFA before immune-labeling. For TIRF-M imaging, glass coverslips (Mat-Tek II) were pre-coated with 2 μg/ml anti-CD3ε clone 145-2C11, BD) and 1 μg/ml anti-CD28 (clone 37.51, BD). CD4+ T cells were allowed to interact with the antibody coated surface for 8 minutes at 37°C before fixation and immune-labeling. Primary antibodies used were anti-PKCθ clone 27/PKCθ (BD Bioscience) at 2.5 μg/ml, anti-Zap70 clone D1C10E (Cell Signaling Technologies) at 2.5 μg/ml, anti-CD28 clone PV.1 (Abcam) at 1 μg/ml and anti-Cbl-b polyclonal H121 (Santa Cruz - discontinued) at 5 μg/ml. Secondary antibodies, goat anti-rabbit IgG-DyLight488, donkey anti-mouse IgG-Cy3 and goat anti-Armenian hamster-Cy2. (Jackson Immunoresearch) were used at 2.5 μg/ml.

## Microscopy
Confocal laser scanning microscopy was performed on a DMI 6000 inverted epifluorescence microscope equipped with an SP5-AOBS confocal scanning system (Leica Microsystems). Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRF-M) was performed on a DMI 6000 inverted epifluorescence microscope attached to an AM TIRF MC system (Leica). An estimated penetration depth of 100 nm was used. Multi-color imaging was performed using sequential laser scanning. Conjugates between APC and T cells were identified using the bright field channel without reference to fluorescence channels and laser power, gain, offset and averaging/additive functions were kept constant between samples which were to be compared. Image analysis was performed with Volocity 5 (Perkin Elmer). Analysis of synaptic protein enrichment in DC-T cell couples were performed by measuring the fluorescence intensity of the T cell membrane-proximal region at areas of the interface and distal from the interface. The enrichment of a protein at the interface was represented as the ratio if these values. In TIRF-M experiments, protein accumulation at the interface was assessed by measuring the relative fluorescence intensity within the cell footprint, defined by bright field images. Where indicated, the ratio of two fluorescence channels is presented in pseudo color using the ‘Ratio’ tool in Volocity 5.

## mRNA isolation and quantitative PCR
Total RNA was isolated using PicoPure RNA Isolation Kit (KIT0204) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA was reverse transcribed using Superscript IV reverse transcriptase (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. qPCR was carried out using Applied Biosystems SYBR green master mix (Thermo Fisher). Primers used for qPCR are listed in .

## RNA-seq library preparation
Ribosomal RNA was depleted using NEBNext rRNA depletion kit (E6310L) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA-seq libraries were prepared from 30 ng RNA using the NEBNext Ultra II kit (E7760S) using the NEBNext oligonucleotides (E7335S) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were sequenced using the NextSeq® High Output kit v2.5 150 cycles (Illumina, 20024907).

## DNase I hypersensitive site analysis
DNase I digestions were carried out as described previously ( ). In brief, cells were re-suspended at 1x107 cells/ml in DNase I buffer (60 mM KCl, 15 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1 mM EGTA pH 7.4, 0.3 M sucrose, 0.2% NP40, 1 mM CaCl2 and DNase I). 1x106 cells were digested for 3′ at 22°C before the reaction was terminated by the addition of SDS (final concentration 0.5%). Samples were treated with 0.5 mg/ml Proteinase K at 37°C overnight followed by 0.2 mg/ml RNase A for 1 hour. DNA was purified by phenol/chloroform extraction and fragments were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis. Small DNA fragments (50-250 bp) were extracted and purified (QIAGEN Minelute Gel extraction Kit) before library preparation.

## Library preparation
DNase I libraries were prepared using the Kapa Hyper-Prep kit (KAPA Biosystems) according the manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries were amplified by PCR and fragments of 200-300bp were gel purified (QIAGEN Minelute Gel extraction Kit) before qPCR validation and quantification (KAPA Library Quantification Complete kit -ABI Prism®). Samples were pooled and sequenced using the NextSeq® 500/550 High Output kit v2 75 cycles (Illumina, FC 404-2005).

## Quantification and Statistical Analysis

## RNA-seq Analysis
Paired-end reads were aligned to the mouse genome (version mm9, build 37) using TopHat (version 2.1.1) ( , , , ). Transcript counts were calculated with HTSeq-count (version 0.9.1) ( ) using gene models from Ensembl as reference. Differential gene expression analysis was carried out using the DESeq2 (version 1.18) ( ) and EdgeR (version 3.24) ( , ) packages in R (version 3.4.3). Only genes that could be reproducibly identified as statistically significant by both DESeq2 (FDR < 0.05) and EdgeR (p < 0.05) were retained for further analysis. This was done to reduce the number of false positive results and ensure that the gene sets used in downstream analyses were robust. Genes that had a fold-change of at least 2 (as calculated by DESeq2) were deemed to be differentially expressed. PCA and heatmap plots were generated using ggplot in R.

## Definition of gene expression groups
The 460 T0 and 80 N0 specific gene mRNAs were defined as 2-fold upregulated between T0 and N0 and N0 and T0 respectively with a minimum read count of 50. The 138 TAg and 226 NAg specific genes were defined as 2 fold upregulated between TAg and NAg and NAg and TAg respectively with a minimum read count and 50. In addition these genes were filtered to only include genes which were 2 fold upregulated when T0 or N0 were stimulated with Ag.

## DNase-Seq - alignment, coverage and peak detection
Raw sequencing reads were aligned to mm9 using bowtie2 (Galaxy Version 2.3.2.2) ( ) with the preset –very-sensitive-local. Coverage files were generated using MACs version 1.4.2 using –g mm –keep-dup auto –w -S as parameters ( ).

## Normalization of DNase-Seq datasets
The BAM files from the duplicate samples of N0, T0, NAg and TAg were merged using BamTools (Galaxy Version 0.0.2). A master set of peaks were determined using MACS2 callpeak (Galaxy Version 2.1.1). 69743 summits were identified across all samples. The sequence tags ± 200bp from the peak summit were counted for the 69743 peaks for each individual sample using the annotatePeaks function of the HOMER package ( ). The samples were normalized using a correction factor based on the median of the top 25,000 peaks for each sample. Correction factors were then used to normalize genome browser scales, average sequence tag density plots and contrast levels in heatmaps.

## Unions of DNase-Seq data
For each sample the sequence tags were counted ± 200bp for the 69743 peaks and the significant peaks were determined using a cut off which excluded background and insignificant peaks. Two samples were compared by merging the peaks using the sort and merge function of the bedtools package ( )to give a union which included common and unique peaks. For the unions between T0 and N0 peaks were further filtered to eliminate sine elements. The sequence tags were counted ± 200bp from the summits of the peaks in the union, normalized using the correction factor and the fold change difference was calculated between the 2 samples. The data were visualized as sequence tag density profiles ordered according to the fold change difference in sequence tag density of one sample compared to the other.

## Sequence tag density profiles
Sequence tag density profiles were generated using the annotatePeaks function of the HOMER package using -hist 10 -ghist -size 2000 as parameters. Images were generated using Java Treeview v1.1 ( ).

## Average sequence tag density plots
Average sequence tag density plots ± 1 kb around the DHS summit were generated using the annotatePeaks function of the HOMER package using -hist 10 -size 2000 as parameters.

## Differential peak analysis using DESeq2
Only peaks which were present in both samples for each condition were used in analyses. Reads were counted using featurecounts and DESeq2 (Galaxy version 2.11.40.6) was used to determine differential peaks between 2 conditions. Only regions with p < 0.05 were included.

## RNA fold change heatmaps
Peaks were assigned to the closest gene within 100 kb of the transcription start site (TSS) using the annotatePeaks.pl function in Homer v4.9.1 ( ). The fold-change values for these genes were then plotted as a heatmap using Java TreeView v1.1 ( ).

## Distance analyses
The distance between the DHSs and the TSSs of upregulated genes was calculated using the BEDTools closestBed function (Galaxy Version 2.26.0.0). Genes were grouped according to distance from the DHSs to the TSSs of the genes in intervals.

## Motif discovery
De novo motif analysis was performed using the findMotifsGenome.pl function of the HOMER package. Motifs were identified ± 100 bp from the peak summit.

## Footprinting analysis
Raw sequencing data from high-depth DNase-Seq experiments were processed to remove low-quality reads and sequencing adaptors with Trimmomatic v0.32 ( ). The processed reads were then aligned to the mouse genome (version mm9) with Bowtie2 v2.2.3 ( ) using the option–very-sensitive-local. Footprints were identified using the Wellington method implemented in pyDNase 0.2.4 ( ). DNase I cut profiles were calculated using the in-built functions in pyDNase.

## Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the Medical Research Council (UK). We thank David Bending and Constanze Bonifer for their input into the manuscript. We thank Genomics Birmingham at the University of Birmingham for help with DNA sequencing.

## Author Contributions
S.L.B., S.T.H.N., and G.J.B. performed the experiments; S.L.B., S.T.H.N., and P.K. analyzed the data; and S.L.B., D.C.W., and P.N.C. conceived the study and wrote the manuscript.

## Declaration of Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Published: June 9, 2020

## Footnotes
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107748.

## Contributor Information
David C. Wraith, Email: d.wraith@bham.ac.uk.
Peter N. Cockerill, Email: p.n.cockerill@bham.ac.uk.

## Supplemental Information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Table S6

## Table S1. Normalized Read Counts for All Expressed Genes, Related to Figures 1 and S1

## Table S2. Differentially Regulated Genes between T0 and N0, Related to Figures 1 and S1

## Table S3. Differentially Regulated Genes between TAg and NAg, Related to Figures 1 and S1

## Table S4. T0-Specific Genes in Common with Tr1 Cells and CD+ve TILs, Related to Figures 1 and S7

## Table S5. T0-, N0-, TAg-, and NAg-Specific Gene Subsets, Related to Figures 2 and S2

## Data S1. DNA-Seq Data with Normalized Read Counts for All Peaks and for the T0-, N0-, TAg-, and NAg-Specific Peak Subsets, Related to Figures 2, 3, 4, and 5

## Document S2. Article plus Supplemental Information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Table S6

## Table S1. Normalized Read Counts for All Expressed Genes, Related to Figures 1 and S1

## Table S2. Differentially Regulated Genes between T0 and N0, Related to Figures 1 and S1

## Table S3. Differentially Regulated Genes between TAg and NAg, Related to Figures 1 and S1

## Table S4. T0-Specific Genes in Common with Tr1 Cells and CD+ve TILs, Related to Figures 1 and S7

## Table S5. T0-, N0-, TAg-, and NAg-Specific Gene Subsets, Related to Figures 2 and S2

## Data S1. DNA-Seq Data with Normalized Read Counts for All Peaks and for the T0-, N0-, TAg-, and NAg-Specific Peak Subsets, Related to Figures 2, 3, 4, and 5

## Document S2. Article plus Supplemental Information

## Data Availability Statement
The accession number for the data reported in this paper is GEO: GSE147268. The article also includes previously published datasets: TCF1 ChIP-Seq in thymocytes – GSE46662 ( ), c-MAF ChIP-seq in Th17 cells - GEO: GSM1004799 ( ), NFAT-CA-RIT-NFAT1, WT NFAT1, NFAT-CA-RIT-NFAT1 PI, WT NFAT1 PI in CD8 T cells - GEO: GSM1570758 ( ). IRF4 ChIP-seq in CD4 T cells and BATF in CD4 +IL-21 T cells GEO: GSE39756 ( ), JUNB ChIP-seq in CD4 TB PI cells, H3K4me2 and H3K27ac ChIP-seq in CD4 TB and TB PI cells, and DNase I in CD4 TB and CD4 TB PI, GEO: GSE67443 ( ) and p65 ChIP-seq in Tconv cells stimulated with CD3/CD28 - GEO: GSE99319 ( ).