pmcStem Cell Res TherStem Cell Res Ther1238stemcellres101527581Stem Cell Research & Therapy1757-6512BMCPMC12896112PMC12896112.112896112128961124151438410.1186/s13287-025-04861-x48611ReviewHuman pluripotent stem cell models of Friedreich’s ataxia: innovations, considerations, and future perspectives
NguyenHa Thi , ]. FRDA patients exhibit symptoms such as progressive limb and gait ataxia, loss of reflexes, dysarthria, cardiomyopathy, diabetes mellitus, and vision and hearing loss with varying penetrance [ , ]. The symptoms usually appear between the ages of 5 and 15 years, and most patients become wheelchair bound after 10–15 years of enduring the disease [ , ].
FRDA is caused by the expansion of a GAA trinucleotide repeat sequence in intron 1 of the frataxin (FXN) gene on chromosome 9 [ ]. The GAA tract of FXN is polymorphic with a range between 6 and 34 GAA repeats in healthy individuals, while in FRDA patients this tract can be expanded up to 1700 repeats [ , ]. The expanded GAA repeats impede transcription of FXN by promoting formation of non-B-DNA structures and heterochromatin, causing significantly reduced FXN levels in FRDA patients’ tissues [ – ]. Approximately 96% of FRDA patients carry biallelic GAA repeat expansions in FXN while the remaining 4% of FRDA patients are compound heterozygotes, with a GAA repeat expansion in one allele and a non-GAA expansion mutation (e.g. point mutation) in the other [ , , ]. The length of the repeat tract of the shorter allele (GAA1) correlates directly with disease severity and inversely with the age of onset [ , ].
Frataxin is a small, evolutionarily conserved protein that accelerates synthesis of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters, essential cofactors for the proper function of complexes I, II, and III of the electron transport chain, the citric acid cycle enzyme, aconitase, and many other enzymes [ – ]. Frataxin deficiency leads to impaired iron homeostasis, characterized by excessive intramitochondrial iron accumulation that aggravates oxidative stress [ ]. Frataxin is essential for life, as mouse embryos lacking Fxn fail to develop past embryonic day 6.5 (E6.5) [ ]. In FRDA cells and tissues, residual levels of FXN vary widely, ranging from 5% to 30% of the level detected across a control cohort. By mechanisms yet to be discovered, some cell types are significantly more sensitive to reduced FXN than others. Neurons within the peripheral and central nervous systems (PNS, CNS), cardiomyocytes and pancreatic β-cells appear to be affected the most [ , , ].
Despite significant advances in our understanding of the role of FXN in Fe-S cluster synthesis and general FRDA pathophysiology that have been achieved, effective therapies remain an urgent unmet need for the FRDA patient community [ ]. The inability to access cell types most vulnerable to FXN deficiency remains a major barrier to defining the pathological mechanisms driving the disease [ ]. Continuous advancements in culturing and differentiation methods for human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) along with improved gene editing technologies allow for generation of patient-derived and mutation-corrected isogenic disease-relevant cell types, organoids, and organs-on-chips systems. These human cell-based models allow for more refined disease modeling for drug discovery and serve as alternatives to animal models, which do not always accurately recapitulate human physiology or disease phenotypes [ , ]. Moreover, improving upon two- and three-dimensional (2D and 3D) cell-based disease models (with appropriate controls) aligns well with the latest version of the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Modernization Act, thus helping to ensure efficient advancement of drug candidates [ ]. To date, multiple FRDA and FRDA-isogenic hiPSC lines, as well as their corresponding terminally differentiated cell types, have been established and serve as effective platforms for disease modeling, drug discovery, and therapeutic development (reviewed in [ ]). In this review, we will provide an overview of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), including methods of derivation and intrinsic properties that underlie their potential for self-renewal and differentiation. We will then highlight specific characteristics of FRDA hiPSCs to be considered when they are used for disease modeling. We will also discuss the current progress and need to further refine and develop hiPSC-based models for pre-clinical advancement of therapeutic approaches for FRDA.

## Human PSCs - features and applications
Human PSCs are renowned for their unlimited capacity to propagate and potential to differentiate into any cell type of the human body, making them a unique resource for cell therapies and disease modeling (Fig. ). There are two types of hPSCs, namely human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and hiPSCs. Human ESCs are generally obtained from the inner cell mass of an embryo at the blastocyst stage (E6-7) that is surplus to assisted reproductive techniques [ ]. Derivation of new hESC lines has raised critical ethical controversies due to often involving the destruction of human embryos. Moreover, as hESCs are allogeneic to recipients, transplantation of hESC derivatives may pose a risk of immune rejection [ ]. Human iPSCs, on the other hand, are derived by reprogramming human somatic cells obtained following informed consent, therefore bypassing ethical concerns and circumventing risks of immunological rejection associated with transplantation [ ].

 

The first iPSC lines were generated from mouse and human fibroblasts and involved the use of retroviral vectors to deliver four transcription factors, OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and c-MYC (OSKM) to induce pluripotency [ , ]. Later, to address concerns regarding the use of oncogenes, other combinations of transcription factors were tested, whereby c-MYC and KLF4 were substituted by their close homologs [ , ] or removed altogether [ ]. Moreover, concern over unpredictable insertional mutagenesis associated with the use of integrating viruses for reprogramming led to developing improved methods for delivering reprogramming factors, including non-integrating, non-transmissible viral expression systems [ , ], non-viral approaches [ , ], or the use of synthetic modified mRNA [ ]. More recently, cocktails of only small molecules have also been used to induce pluripotency [ , ]. Clearly, each reprogramming method has its own advantages, and the method of choice should be considered based on the original somatic cell type, efficiency, feasibility, and cost [ ].
So far, numerous somatic cell types have been reprogrammed, however, fibroblasts remain the most common primary cell source due to their ease of handling, cost-effectiveness, and adequate proliferation and reprogramming capacity [ ]. According to European Bank for Induced pluripotent Stem Cells (EBiSC), as of July 2025, 629 out of 994 hiPSC lines available were derived from fibroblasts. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), such as T-cells and myeloid cells, are also favorable for their ease of sample collection and lower mutation loads [ ].
It is noteworthy that although very similar to hESCs in terms of cell morphology and proliferative capacity, hiPSCs retain the epigenetic memory of their somatic origin, resulting in some differences between these two pluripotent cell types regarding gene expression profiles [ ], epigenetic marks [ , ], and eventually their differentiation potential [ ]. It is also evident that hiPSCs have a higher efficiency of differentiation towards the cell lineages of their somatic origin [ ]. For example, β-cell-derived hiPSCs maintain epigenetic signatures of β-cells that distinguish them from hiPSCs of the other origins and are consequently more readily differentiated into insulin-producing cells as compared to ESCs and hiPSCs derived from other somatic cell sources [ ]. Similarly, hiPSCs derived from skin fibroblasts or keratinocytes are more prone to acquire neuroectodermal fates, while hiPSCs reprogrammed from cardiac somatic cells or bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells show enhanced differentiation potential toward hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (iCMs) [ , , ]. These differences, however, can diminish with time in culture, as late passage hiPSCs (p>20) reprogrammed from different somatic cell types exhibit more similar differentiation potential as compared to early passage hiPSCs (p<10), suggesting fluidity in the epigenetic landscape of hiPSCs [ , ].

## Genetic instabilities in hPSCs
It is well established that hPSCs can acquire chromosomal abnormalities during prolonged culture. The most frequent aberrations are whole or partial gains of chromosomes 1, 12, 17, 20, and X or partial loss of chromosomes 10 and 18 [ , ]. Gains of 20q11.21, for example, were detected in more than 20% of hPSC lines worldwide [ ] and are associated with a survival advantage due to overexpression of an anti-apoptotic isoform of BCL2L1 (Bcl-xL), a gene located in the minimal region of gain [ , ] (Fig. ). These recurrent aberrations often alter cell characteristics and skew their differentiation propensities, which eventually compromise experimental outcomes and therapeutic applications [ ]. Gains of 20q11.21 and losses of 18q, for example, both lead to impaired neurectoderm commitment of mutant hPSCs [ , ]. Gains of chromosome 12, on the other hand, increase the proliferation rate and tumorigenicity of hPSCs in vivo [ ].

 

The high proliferative nature of hPSCs combined with suboptimal culture conditions can also instigate substantial DNA damage in hPSCs and cause acquisition of different chromosomal aberrations in individual cells (reviewed in [ ]). Random mutations that adversely affect proliferation or survival are often eliminated from the culture due to negative selection, while neutral mutations might persist at a low rate resulting in mosaic cell populations [ ]. Mutations that offer cells selective advantages, on the other hand, will eventually take over the culture [ ]. Culturing conditions, such as passaging methods, oxygen tension, culture medium, density, etc., play critical roles in this process. Particularly, enzymatic single-cell passaging [ ], standard oxygen concentration (20–21% O2) [ ], and high-density culture [ ] have been associated with higher incidence of chromosomal instabilities. Besides culture-induced chromosomal changes, hiPSCs generated via reprogramming of somatic cells carry the risk of acquiring genomic alterations during reprogramming or inheriting pre-existing mutations in the parent somatic cells and subsequent clonal selection/expansion, explaining why point mutation rates are often higher in hiPSCs than hESCs [ , ].
Careful handling, extensive characterization, and regular monitoring of genome stability help to ensure the maintenance of high quality hPSC cultures over time. Derivation methods, culturing conditions, and differentiation protocols should be mindfully chosen, optimized and standardized to reduce technical variables that can adversely affect the genetic integrity of hPSC lines. Altogether, efforts should be made to align with Standards for Human Stem Cell Use in Research as suggested by the International Society for Stem Cell Research (ISSCR) [ ].

## Epigenetic profiles of hPSCs – stages and changes during differentiation
The states of the epigenome and 3D genome have been studied extensively during early stages of mammalian embryonic development, as well as in hESCs and somatic cell-reprogrammed hPSCs maintained in naïve, formative, and primed states of pluripotency. Pluripotent cells are defined by their flexible chromatin structure, which allows for high genome accessibility that is generally permissive for transcription. The pluripotent epigenome is typified by hyperdynamic nucleosomes enriched in histone post-translational modifications associated with active transcription, including histone H3 and H4 acetylation and histone H3K4 methylation, and depleted of repressive marks, such as histone H3K9 and H3K27 methylation (reviewed in [ ]). In hESCs and hiPSCs, many genes involved in embryonic development and lineage specification demonstrate a bivalent chromatin state marked by opposing transcriptional activating (H3K4me3) and repressing (H3K27me3) histone modifications. This unique feature of pluripotent cells allows for repression of genes that promote differentiation while leaving flexibility for transcriptional activation when needed [ ]. In fact, the degree of bivalency observed across developmental genes can be used to distinguish early and late states of pluripotency [ ].
DNA methylation, defined herein as 5-methylcytosine (5mC), is a highly conserved modification essential for genomic imprinting and for stable repression of gene transcription and transposon-derived repetitive elements that significantly contributes to cellular epigenetic memory (reviewed in [ ]). Global DNA methylation is erased after fertilization and patterns are re-established after implantation of the blastocyst, the developmental timepoint represented by OSKM-reprogrammed hiPSCs in a state of primed pluripotency. Donor-specific DNA methylation patterns are retained after reprogramming, highlighting the impact of genetic variation in specifying epigenetic memory of hiPSC lines [ , , ]. DNA methylation differences observed between hiPSC clones derived from the same donor reflect stochasticity within cell populations and the reprogramming process itself [ , ]. Genome-wide 5mC patterns are established and maintained by the opposing activities of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) and Ten-eleven translocase (TET) enzymes during embryonic development and in germ cells and somatic cells, (reviewed in [ ]).
Transitions between cell states depend on dynamic chromatin architecture, ultimately facilitating or restricting genome access to transcription factors and chromatin remodelers to direct lineage specification. For example, differentiating hESCs to cells of different developmental lineages revealed that lineage-restricted genes are regulated by distinct epigenetic mechanisms [ ]. Genes expressed early during differentiation (e.g. transcription factor and developmental genes) tended to have CpG-rich promoters devoid of 5mC and were enriched for histone H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, while genes expressed at later stages of differentiation (e.g. somatic tissue-specific genes) tended to be silenced by 5mC. This demonstrated that dynamic regulatory mechanisms control progenitor-associated genes, while expression of lineage-specific genes is controlled by a more restrictive and stable mechanism.
Hierarchical organization of the 3D human genome begins on the largest scale as chromosome territories, then sub-chromosomal compartments (A and B), then as topologically associating domains (TADs; and sub-TADs), and finally as long-range-interacting chromatin loops (e.g. enhancer-promoter interactions). Some differences exist between pluripotent and differentiated cells with respect chromosome territory positioning, for example, to promote expression of factors necessary to maintain pluripotency [ ]. Three-dimensional chromatin organization does not differ substantially between different somatic cell types, however, fewer and weaker long-range interactions are observed across the pluripotent genome [ , ], (reviewed in [ ]). Individual TADs and lamina associated domains (LADs) reposition during hESC differentiation, correlating with expression of genes necessary to promote lineage specification, then remain stable with similar distributions observed across different somatic cell types [ , ].
Many carefully conducted bulk-omics analyses have led to the hypothesis that the spatial organization of chromatin in a nucleus dictates accessibility and transcriptional activity in a way that promotes or represses gene expression according to the status of the cell (i.e. different stages of pluripotency or differentiation). However, with the advent of high-resolution single-cell sequencing technologies an alternative hypothesis of ‘function driving structure’ has emerged to explain heterogeneity in the organization of chromatin domains in individual cells, a phenomenon not easily detected from bulk analyses of non-synchronized cell populations (reviewed in [ ]). Nevertheless, features representing all scales of genome organization are clearly distinguishable between pluripotent and differentiated somatic cells.

## FRDA hiPSCs and derived cellular models for defining disease pathophysiology and hypothesis testing

## Mechanisms governing stability of expanded GAA repeat sequences
Germline instability of tandem repeat sequences is a feature affecting clinical presentation that is shared by many repeat expansion diseases, including FRDA. Nearly all analyzed parent-to-offspring transmissions show variability in inherited repeat sizes, with mostly contractions of the paternal allele and the maternal allele showing no bias toward expansion or contraction [ , ]. It remains unclear whether intergenerational GAA repeat instability is driven by pre- or post-zygotic events but perhaps advances in hPSC culturing techniques can help to provide in vitro models necessary to elucidate these mechanisms [ , ].
Derivation of hiPSCs from FRDA patient fibroblasts was first reported in 2010 [ ]. These FRDA hiPSC lines were pluripotent and exhibited full differentiation capacity in vitro while maintaining molecular hallmarks of FRDA cells, including FXN gene repression and repeat instability over time in culture. Since then, much effort has been made to establish additional FRDA hiPSC lines that represent the heterogeneity in GAA repeat sizes observed in the disease in order to allow flexibility in experimental design to study the mechanisms underlying GAA repeat instability [ – ] and regulation of FXN expression [ , ].
Instability of the expanded GAA repeat tract in hiPSCs was observed during the reprogramming process as well as during propagation in culture, resulting in mostly expansions, with occasional contractions [ – ] (Fig. ). Increased expression of mismatch repair (MMR) proteins, such as MSH2 and MSH6 in hiPSCs, is believed to be involved in promoting GAA repeat instability in FRDA cells [ ]. Interestingly, upregulation of MMR genes is consistently observed in hiPSC lines when compared to their parental fibroblast lines, suggesting an overall activation of MMR machinery upon reprogramming [ – ]. Silencing of MSH2 and/or MSH6 in FRDA hiPSC lines using shRNA, on the other hand, inhibited GAA repeat expansion, as also observed in FRDA hiPSCs treated with the GAA-targeting polyamide, FA1, which prevented MSH2 binding at the FXN locus [ ]. Complete knock-out of MSH2 similarly inhibited expansion of the pathogenic GAA repeat tracts in FRDA hiPSCs, while contractions occurred independently of MSH2 status, suggesting that MSH2 is not required for transcription-induced repeat contractions in FRDA cells [ ]. Importantly, DNA methylation of the FXN locus and FXN expression were unaffected by loss of MSH2, demonstrating a disconnect between minor to moderate contractions of the expanded repeat tract and reactivation of FXN expression [ ]. Together, these findings suggest a correlation between MMR protein expression levels and GAA repeat instability in FRDA hiPSCs, while the consequence of instability on FXN expression remains to be elucidated.

## Human iPSC models recapitulate FRDA biological phenotypes
The discovery of hiPSCs followed by the subsequent differentiation of disease-specific cell types has led to a boom of “disease-in-a-dish” models and brought opportunities to develop personalized therapies via autologous stem cell transplantation. For the FRDA field, progress in hiPSC-based differentiation and complex culturing methods has mostly applied to disease modeling and drug screening. Multiple, inaccessible cell types are affected by FXN deficiency and hiPSC-based cellular models have helped to meet the need for disease-relevant cell types necessary for research. Numerous hiPSC-based models including neurons, cardiomyocytes, pancreatic β-cells, and retinal cells have been derived to investigate FRDA biological phenotypes in cell-type specific contexts (Fig.  ) ([ , , reviewed in ]).
Subtle or inconsistent FRDA-associated molecular phenotypes observed in hiPSC-derived models can be due to technical variability, such as efficiency of differentiation (i.e. presence of cell types that are less sensitive to reduced FXN protein levels or the maturity level of the differentiated cells), or biological variability (i.e. GAA repeat lengths). There is notable heterogeneity in the choice of hPSC lines and culture conditions used across differentiation studies in the FRDA field published over the last 15 years (Fig. A). Differentiation efficiency can vary greatly between hiPSC lines and different batches (day-to-day) and depends greatly on intrinsic characteristics of individual hiPSC lines, including the cell type used for reprogramming (fibroblasts, PMBCs, etc.), as well as technical parameters, such as seeding density and culture conditions. Therefore, to reduce variability, differentiation experiments should include hiPSC lines reprogrammed from the same cell type, derived from at least three biological replicates (along with comparative control lines), and include multiple technical replicates. At minimum, within a study, comparisons should be made using patient and control hiPSC lines reprogrammed from the same tissue using the same method and cultured using the identical conditions. Moreover, caution should be taken when interpreting results from comparative studies of cells differentiated from either hESCs or hiPSCs within the same experiment (e.g. hESCs used as control source, hiPSCs used as patient source). These pluripotent cell types are similar in many ways, but key inherent differences in their cytoplasmic and mitochondrial protein expression profiles and metabolic activities must be considered when interpreting functional outcomes and cellular phenotypes [ ].

 

Neurodegeneration is a hallmark of FRDA, with impaired neurodevelopment also thought to contribute to some aspects of the disease. In FRDA patients, neurons of both the PNS and CNS are affected, involving hypoplasia of dorsal root ganglia (DRG), and degeneration of cortical spinal tracts and the dentate nucleus of the cerebellum [ , ]. As such, many studies are focused on developing and utilizing neuronal FRDA cellular models. To date, different neuronal cell types have been successfully generated from FRDA and healthy control hiPSCs, including mixed peripheral sensory neurons and CNS neurons, primarily cortical-like neurons (Fig. B).
FRDA hiPSC-derived neurons retain the expanded GAA repeat tract and repressed FXN expression as observed in their parental hiPSC lines [ , ]. Biological phenotypes associated with FXN deficiency and reduced Fe-S cluster synthesis, such as decreased cell survival, decreased activities of Fe-S and lipoic acid-containing proteins, and signs of mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress have been described, however, outcomes have varied amongst studies [ , – ]. Recently, FRDA and isogenic control hiPSC lines were edited using clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats-associated Cas9 nucleases (CRISPR/Cas9) to site-specifically integrate a doxycycline inducible Neurogenin-2 (NGN2) expression cassette into the CLYBL safe-harbor locus [ ]. The inducible expression of exogenous NGN2 in neural crest progenitors efficiently generates functional mature sensory neurons [ ], enabling robust and reproducible generation of FRDA and isogenic control sensory neurons in a controlled manner for mechanistic studies and drug screening [ ]. Although NGN2 expression is crucial for DRG sensory neuron differentiation, the specification of sensory neuron subtypes requires expression of additional transcription factors, such as BRN3A, KLF7, and RUNX1 [ ].
Cardiomyopathy affects approximately 60% of FRDA patients and is the primary cause of death [ ]. Most FRDA patients show signs of ventricular hypertrophy with subsequent cardiac failure [ ]. Hence, besides neurons, iCMs are a major cell type of focus for investigating FRDA pathology (Fig. B). FRDA iCMs exhibit mitochondrial dysfunction [ , ], iron overload [ , ], lipid droplet accumulation, cardiac hypertrophy gene expression signatures, and irregular beating rates [ , , ]. Moreover, the increased variation of beating rates observed in FRDA iCMs could be corrected following treatment with nifedipine, suggesting an impairment in calcium handling in these cells [ ]. Specific mitochondrial abnormalities observed in FRDA iCM cultures compared to control iCMs include a lower copy number of mitochondrial DNA, irregular mitochondrial networks, and disorganized actinin myofilaments, all of which are accelerated upon iron overload [ ]. Also, transcriptome profiling and differential gene expression analysis revealed that genes involved in extracellular matrix pathways are significantly upregulated in FRDA iCMs compared to control iCMs [ ]. Acute depletion of FXN mRNA by shRNA knock-down (kd) in control iCMs is another approach used to determine consequences of FXN deficiency. Transcriptomic analysis of FXN-depleted control iCMs demonstrated that mitochondrial dysfunction and type 1 interferon activation response were the pathways most affected by reduction of FXN. The activation of type 1 interferon response in FXN-kd cells might be caused by increased mitochondrial DNA in cytosol [ ].

## FRDA hiPSCs and derived cellular models for drug discovery and therapeutic development

## Screening/testing transcriptional activators
Molecules capable of targeting unusual DNA structures and repressive chromatin marks at the expanded GAA repeats, thereby elevating FXN transcription in FRDA cells, present potential therapeutic strategies for FRDA. Reprogramming of human FRDA fibroblasts in the presence of epigenetic regulators, including inhibitors of histone deacetylases, histone methyltransferases, and DNA methyltransferases, can temporarily abolish repressive marks at the FXN locus and elevate FXN expression [ ]. The effect, however, is eliminated during prolonged culture and progressive GAA repeat expansion accompanied by a decrease in FXN expression is observed. Therefore, inhibiting repressive chromatin modifying enzymes during OSKM-mediated reprogramming does not reactivate FXN expression or limit GAA repeat expansions in FRDA hiPSC lines [ ].
Most efforts to reverse repressive histone marks at the FXN locus have focused on the use of HDAC inhibitors (HDACis), including HDACi 109/RG2833 (reviewed in [ ]). Treatment of FRDA hiPSC-derived cortical-like neurons with HDACi was able to boost FXN expression at both mRNA and protein levels by inhibiting HDAC1 and/or HDAC3 and reversing the heterochromatin state at the FXN locus [ , – ]. Along with increased FXN levels, HDACi 109 treatment also alleviated oxidative stress-induced cell death in FRDA hiPSC-derived neurons [ ]. Neural progenitor cells (NPCs) differentiated from an engineered FRDA hiPSC line harboring a FXN-Nanoluciferase (FXN-NLuc) fusion reporter gene were used to screen 281 commercially available epigenetically active compounds. The results revealed HDACi, including HDACi 109, as the only class of compounds able to partially reactivate FXN expression [ ].
Treatment of FRDA cells with resveratrol and nicotinamide, compounds that regulate the metabolite pool needed for modifying chromatin, revealed differential effects on FXN expression across cell types [ ]. While resveratrol was able to elevate FXN mRNA levels in FRDA fibroblast lines by ~ 2.3 fold, its effect on hiPSC-derived cells was modest with an increase of ~ 1.5-fold in mesenchymal stem cells and ~ 1.3-fold in neurons at selected doses compared to mock-treated cells. Nicotinamide treatments, on the other hand, led to a decrease in FXN mRNA expression in fibroblasts and hiPSC-derived cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Similarly, cell type-specific effects were reported in FRDA cells treated with HDACi 109, where a significant increase was observed in hiPSC-differentiated neurons but not in fibroblasts or hiPSCs [ ]. These findings highlight the importance of utilizing relevant cell types for mechanistic studies and drug discovery [ ].
Transcription reactivation of FXN has also been reported utilizing the synthetic transcription elongation factor, Syn-TEF1 [ ]. Syn-TEF1 is comprised of the GAA-targeting PA1 polyamide linked to the small molecule JQ1, which recruits transcription elongation machinery to facilitate transcription across expanded GAA repeat tracts. Treatment of FRDA patient-derived cells, including hiPSC-derived neurons and iCMs, with Syn-TEF1 resulted in significant upregulation of FXN mRNA and protein expression [ ]. To date, DT-216P2, a small Gene-TAC™ molecule based on Syn-TEF1, has entered a Phase I clinical trial for evaluation of safety and pharmacokinetics (Design Therapeutics, Inc.; NCT06874010).

## Screening/testing antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) approaches
Utilization of chemically modified ASOs to increase FXN expression has been described in FRDA hiPSC-derived cell types [ – ]. Transfection of anti-AAG gapmers complementary to the expanded GAA repeat within FXN was able to increase FXN mRNA and protein expression in both FRDA fibroblasts and hiPSC-derived NPCs [ ]. Additionally, treatment of FRDA NPCs with oligonucleotides targeting the 5’- and 3’-ends of the FXN transcript significantly increased the FXN mRNA half-life, thereby upregulating FXN protein without altering the chromatin structure at FXN locus [ ]. These findings offered a novel therapeutic approach by using ASOs to stabilize and elevate FXN mRNA levels in FRDA cells and potentially other conditions resulting from transcription downregulation [ ].

## Screening/testing small molecules
Besides HDACis, other small molecules are being tested in FRDA hiPSC-derived cell models for their ability to alleviate pathological phenotypes, mostly compounds with antioxidant activities. For example, treatment with exenatide, a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) analog, increased FXN expression, alleviated oxidative stress, and improved mitochondrial function in FRDA hiPSC-derived sensory neurons [ ]. Reduction of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) protein levels and its nuclear translocation contribute to the defective antioxidant response in FRDA cells [ ]. Stabilizing NRF2 and inducing its expression, therefore, are strategies to alleviate oxidative stress in FRDA. Recently, FRDA hiPSC-derived sensory neurons were used to compare effects of the NRF2 activators sulforaphane, dimethyl fumarate, and omaveloxolone on the oxidative stress response and on inflammation. Treatment with either sulforaphane or omaveloxolone increased expression of factors involved in the oxidative stress response as well as the overall reducing capacity of the cells, while effects of dimethyl fumarate treatment were subtle and inconsistent [ ]. Of these, omaveloxolone, commercialized under the name Skyclarys®, received FDA approval in 2023 and European Medicines Agency approval in 2024 as the first treatment for FRDA patients over the age of 16 [ ].
FRDA iCMs have also been used to assess the efficacy of small molecules to mitigate consequences of unresolved oxidative stress. The antioxidant idebenone and the iron chelator deferiprone were tested for their effect on mitochondrial function, reactive oxidative species production, and calcium handling properties. Results showed that deferiprone, but not idebenone, was able to modulate iron homeostasis and improve cardiomyopathy-related phenotypes in FRDA iCMs [ ].

## Removal of expanded repeats
As gene editing technologies have become more efficient, reports of isogenic hiPSC lines being generated from FRDA cells by excision of the expanded GAA repeat tracts from FXN alleles (ΔGAA/ΔGAA) using zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) and CRISPR/Cas9 are increasing. This approach elevates FXN expression at the mRNA and protein levels while maintaining the genetic background of the parental line. Therefore, utilization of isogenic hiPSC lines as controls allows for distinguishing FRDA pathological phenotypes associated with reduced FXN expression or the pathological expanded GAA repeats from “noise”, such as cofounding genetic backgrounds and environmental factors. Thus far, several groups have reported generation of FRDA isogenic hiPSC lines and differentiation of the isogenic pairs into disease-relevant cell types, such as iNs and iCMs for mechanistic studies [ – , , , ] (Fig. ).
Excision of the expanded GAA repeat tracts increases FXN levels and partially mitigates disease phenotypes in the isogenic hiPSC-derived cells compared to the parental FRDA hiPSC-derived cells [ – ]. Dionisi and colleagues generated proprioceptive-enriched neuron cultures from healthy control, FRDA and ΔGAA/ΔGAA hiPSC lines. Impaired neurite extension, growth cone cytoskeleton, and synaptic plasticity were observed at later stages of maturation in FRDA iNs. Additionally, FRDA iNs exhibited reduced H3K9 acetylation and increased trimethylation of H3K9 and H3K27 in exon 1 and in the intronic region proximal to the expanded repeats compared to healthy control iNs. Removal of the expanded GAA tracts partially reverted the repressive histone modifications and was sufficient to restore FXN expression and alleviate irregular firing properties [ ]. In another study utilizing FRDA and isogenic ΔGAA/ΔGAA hiPSC models, Mishra and colleagues demonstrated that FRDA iNs exhibited non-homogenous microtube staining of neurites, impaired mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum interactions, and increased apoptosis compared to healthy control iNs. These defects, however, were fully prevented in isogenic ΔGAA/ΔGAA iNs, supporting GAA repeat tract removal as an effective strategy for therapeutic intervention in FRDA [ ].
In 2020, Mazzara and colleagues reported, for the first time, successful generation of DRG organoids (DRGOs) from FRDA and isogenic ΔGAA/ΔGAA hiPSC lines. Transcriptomic analysis revealed a similarity between DRGOs and primary DRGs, including significant upregulation of genes involved in sensory neuronal specification and the presence of all peripheral sensory neuronal subtypes. Furthermore, the FRDA DRGOs recapitulated several FRDA established phenotypes, including mitochondrial impairment, deficits in Fe-S protein biogenesis and altered anti-oxidant response that were fully rescued in isogenic ΔGAA/ΔGAA DRGOs, but only if most of intron 1 was excised [ ]. Elimination of intron 1 in entirety, however, raises concerns regarding FXN transcriptional regulation, as regulatory elements have been mapped within this region [ , – ]. An approach similar to excision is to replace the long pathological GAA repeats sequence with a short repeat sequence using homologous recombination [ ]. This method was shown to be efficient in restoring FXN levels and preventing associated phenotypes in hiPSC-derived neurons and could overcome potential negative effects of excising sequences flanking the expanded GAA repeats [ ].

## Understudied areas, unmet needs, and opportunities to develop complex cell model systems

## β-cell development and degeneration - pathophysiology to be explored in FRDA
Diabetes is a clinical manifestation observed in about 10% of FRDA patients. When compared to an aged-matched control group, FRDA patients appeared to be at higher risk for diabetes as they are more susceptible to both impaired insulin secretion and insulin resistance ( [ ], reviewed in [ ]). This could be at least partly explained by the fact that pancreatic β-cells are particularly sensitive to mitochondrial dysfunction and metabolic stress caused by FXN deficit.
Although significant progress has been achieved regarding differentiation of insulin-secreting cells from hPSCs, the generation of mature functional β-cells in vitro has proved to be challenging [ ]. In the last decade, progress has been made in generating 3D islet-like organoids from hPSCs that can secrete insulin in response to glucose challenge [ – ] and express multiple key β-cell maturation markers [ ]. Particularly, by mimicking the consequential events that naturally occurred during pancreatic islet organogenesis in vivo, Nair and colleagues were able to generate islet-sized enriched β-clusters that are similar to primary human β-cells [ ]. A combination recapitulating the human pancreatic microenvironment and utilizing stage-specific mesenchymal-epithelial (M-E) cells in a 2D co-culture system robustly promoted β-cell induction in vitro and their glucose responsiveness. A secreted factor of M-E cells, WNT5A, was believed to have the most vigorous effect on this cell fate decision process [ ].
Successful generation of β-cells within islet-like aggregates from FRDA hiPSCs was reported [ ]. The FRDA hiPSC differentiated β-like cells maintained low FXN levels and the differentiated aggregates were comprised of 58% β-like cells (insulin+), with the remaining cells being either α-like cells (glucagon+) or double positive (insulin+, glucagon+) islet cells. Functionally, the β-like cells were able to secrete insulin upon glucose challenge and the effect was potentiated when co-induced with glucose plus forskolin. Together, the results suggest that these FRDA hiPSC-derived β-cells can serve as an in vitro model to define molecular mechanisms that drive diabetes in FRDA patients [ ].

## Eye development and degeneration - pathophysiology to be explored in FRDA
Vision loss and retinal pathology have been described in a small proportion of FRDA patients, indicating that retinal cells may be affected in these patients [ , ]. Generation of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells, and even optic epithelial progenitors in vitro is now achievable to study mechanisms underlying vison loss and for replacement therapies ( [ , ], reviewed in [ ]). Recently, hiPSC-derived 3D retinal organoids have been successfully generated. These models closely mimic the spatial and temporal differentiation of the human retina and comprise multiple neural cell types including photoreceptors, RGCs, and RPEs [ , ]. As such, they represent highly relevant models to study ophthalmic pathology in FRDA patients. Thus far, one group has differentiated FRDA hiPSCs into RPE cells to study disease-associated phenotypes [ ]. Functional analyses showed no defects in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) activity and phagocytosis as compared to RPE cells differentiated from control hiPSCs. Despite no significant RPE pathology observed using this 2D system, the prospect of obtaining any mature retinal cell types from FRDA hiPSCs promises a better understanding of the retinal pathology needed to target vision loss in FRDA patients.

## Cerebellar development, degeneration, and glial activation - pathophysiology to be explored in FRDA
The cerebellum is recognized as the major affected brain site in FRDA patients [ , ], with loss of Purkinje cell (PC) integrity and function contributing to pathology. A study of 159 brain autopsy samples from a broad range of cerebellar degenerative disorders including essential tremor, FRDA, and spinocerebellar ataxia revealed dendritic swelling as a common feature of PCs across all these disorders [ ]. Moreover, several FRDA mouse models recapitulate aspects of cerebellar degeneration and dysfunction [ – ], with recent mechanistic studies focused on the role of PCs in these processes. In the Fxn knock in-knockout (KIKO) and the shRNA-frataxin (FRDAkd) mouse models, PC synaptic instability [ ] and glutamate receptor and transporter deficits [ ] appeared to be common features. Also, targeted analyses of PCs in a FRDA mouse model lacking Fxn in Pvalb-expressing neurons revealed their pathological involvement, including altered localization, reduced viability, and deficient Fe-S enzyme activity [ ].
The generation of PCs from hiPSCs is challenging, as traditional small molecule-based neuron differentiation methods have been inefficient. This is because although being among the first cell types to emerge during cerebellar development, the maturation of human PCs is not achieved until after birth and is granule cell-dependent [ ]. Therefore, development of appropriate 2D co-culture or 3D culture models is required. Fortunately, advancements on both fronts have been made [ , ]. Future work utilizing FRDA hiPSCs to generate functional PCs will shed light on the role of these cells in mechanisms causing cerebellar dysfunction in FRDA.
Evidence of significant regional atrophy [ , ] and signs of glial cell activation and inflammation in the brainstem and dentate nuclei of the cerebellum of FRDA patients [ , ] and in FRDA mouse models [ , ] strongly suggest contributing roles of glial cells to FRDA pathology and neuronal atrophy through non-cell autonomous mechanisms. Studies suggested that FXN-kd in human astrocytes might lead to astrocyte reactivation, which, in turn, produces a cytotoxic environment and induces neuronal cell death [ , ]. Moreover, FXN-kd in astrocytes can cause impaired Ca2+ responses and reduced antioxidant properties that might compromise neuronal function and accelerate neurotoxic impact and ultimately, disease progression [ ]. Consequently, controlling chronic proinflammation and oxidative stress by blocking maladaptive glial responses may abolish non-cell autonomous neuronal death in FRDA [ , ]. Together, these findings demonstrate a link between FXN deficiency and neuroinflammation and pinpoint glial cell reactivation as a novel potential therapeutic target for FRDA, making FRDA hiPSC-derived astrocytes and microglia crucial cellular models to address these unknown gaps.

## In vitro co-culture and 3D model systems
In the last two decades, using a specific hiPSC-derived cell type in a mono-culture system for autonomous molecular mechanism studies and high-throughput drug screening has become practically routine. In the FRDA field, these studies have mostly involved iNs and iCMs [ ] (Fig. ). Traditional mono-culture systems, however, lack the physiological interactions of different cell types present in tissues in vivo critical for studying non-cell autonomous mechanisms, such as those involving neurons and glia. Co-culture systems involving two or more cell types have been developed to enable such studies. These systems offer much flexibility in terms of user-defined experimental design when working with hiPSC-differentiated cell types. Moreover, co-cultures established from different combinations of patient-derived and healthy control cells can be used to delineate the specific contribution of each cell type to disease pathology [ , ]. For example, a neuron-astrocyte co-culture system could be employed to study non-cell autonomous mechanisms in FRDA by pairing healthy control iPSC-derived neurons with FRDA iPSC-derived astrocytes, and vice versa. If healthy neurons exhibit pathological features when co-cultured with FRDA astrocytes, this would suggest astrocyte-mediated toxicity, highlighting a role for glial dysfunction in FRDA neurodegeneration. Conversely, if FRDA neurons show improved phenotypes and function when co-cultured with healthy astrocytes, it would indicate a protective effect of healthy astrocytes in modulating neurodegeneration. Apart from advantages in investigating non-cell autonomous mechanisms, co-culturing may generally promote efficiency in cell differentiation and maturation. For example, healthy astrocytes in neuron-astrocyte co-cultures support the survival and maturation of neurons through cell-cell interactions and secretion of neurotrophic factors [ ].
Three-dimensional organoids, on the other hand, comprise several cell types and better recapitulate the architecture and essential biology of human tissues for studying human development and disease [ ]. Advancement in hiPSC differentiation techniques and recent insights into the developmental biology of the human brain have allowed the generation of 3D self-organizing organoids or organoid-like structures that more precisely recapitulate spatial organization and cell-to-cell interactions within specific tissues [ ]. In disease modeling, 3D organoids appear to be superior to 2D systems, especially in cases where multiple cell types are involved, and spatial organization and interaction are of interest. To date, brain, heart, and retinal organoids have been the most widely developed and studied [ ]. More recently, different types of organoids have been fused together or fused with different specialized cell types in self-organizing 3D cultures to form assembloids, such as cortical-spinal [ ] and blood brain barrier (BBB) assembloids [ ], to study tissue interactions. These 3D models are highly relevant to study conditions where multiple regions of an organ or multiple organs are affected, such as FRDA (Fig. ). However, it is important to note that the absence of vascularization in many current organoid models limits oxygen and nutrient supply, leading to necrotic cores in large organoids. Therefore, producing fully mature and functional organoids that accurately mimic in vivo conditions remains challenging. Ongoing efforts, including extended culture periods, refinement of supplement (e.g. morphogen) concentrations and timing, co-culture with vascular cells, and bioengineering approaches, such as organoids-on-a-chip technology, aim to enhance maturation and generate more functional and physiologically relevant organoid models [ , ].
In the FRDA field, so far, only a few groups have reported the successful generation and utilization of 3D models [ , ]. Several overt and established FRDA disease phenotypes were demonstrated in 3D DRGOs, however, detection of early neuronal markers in most of the clusters obtained from days in vitro 80 (DIV80) DRGOs indicates an immature state even at this late stage of the maturation protocol [ ]. The efforts described above to fundamentally improve hiPSC 3D modeling should help to overcome limitations with DRGO maturation. Derivation of 3D human ventricular cardiomyocyte models generated from FRDA hiPSCs was reported [ ]. FRDA or FXN-kd cardiac tissue models recapitulated electrophysiological and contractility defects observed for FRDA patients which could be rescued upon restoration of FXN expression [ ]. These efforts represent important steps forward for FRDA disease modeling, while highlighting the need to further optimize differentiation protocols to increase yield and to generate more pure and mature populations of desired cell types that better recapitulate specific disease phenotypes. In vitro disease modeling in 3D will enable better understanding of complex cell-cell interactions within affected tissues or organs and allow for more accurate preclinical drug screening [ ].

## Concluding remarks
Recent breakthroughs in hiPSC and gene editing technologies have provided opportunities in the fields of personalized and regenerative medicine with respect to disease modeling and drug discovery. These technologies have allowed generation of patient-specific, disease-relevant, 2D and 3D culture systems, along with isogenic controls for studying pathological mechanisms. Human iPSC-based models have been crucial for FRDA research, given that the most affected cell types in patients are inaccessible. However, it is noteworthy that differences in the somatic cell type of origin, reprogramming protocols, culture conditions, and differentiation protocols can introduce technical variability in hiPSC-derived cells and organoids, affecting reliability and reproducibility of study outcomes. Therefore, careful selection, validation and attentive maintenance of pluripotent hiPSC cultures are necessary. Also, despite the compelling advantages that organoids offer as models, lack of uniformity in size and morphology, complexity in high-throughput data analysis, and the time consuming and labor-intensive processes required to generate them has so far limited their use. Finally, while hiPSC-derived models are invaluable tools for studying FRDA tissue and cell-specific phenotypes, the systemic nature of the disease, for example with respect to iron metabolism, may require complementary frataxin-deficient animal models to comprehensively decipher disease mechanisms at the organismal level. As the utility of in vitro cellular models in pre-clinical studies is expanding, the need to further refine hiPSC-based models is essential to maximize their potential for FRDA therapeutic development.

## Abbreviations
2DTwo-dimensional
3DThree-dimensional
5caC5-carboxylcytosine
5fC5-formylcytosine
5mC5-methylcytosine
BBBBlood brain barrier
BCL2L1BCL2 Like 1
CNSCentral nervous system
CRISPR/Cas9Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats-associated Cas9 nucleases
DIVDays in vitro
DNMTDNA methyltransferase
DRGDorsal root ganglia
DRGODorsal root ganglia organoid
EBiSCEUROPEAN Bank for Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
EREndoplasmic reticulum
ESCsEmbryonic stem cells
FDAUnited States Food and Drug Administration
FRDAFriedreich’s ataxia
FRDA kdFriedreich’s ataxia knockdown
FXNFrataxin
H3K4me3Histone H3 trimethylated at lysine 4
H3K9me3Histone H3 trimethylated at lysine 9
H3K27me3Histone H3 trimethylated at lysine 27
HDACiHistone deacetylase inhibitor
hiPSCHuman induced pluripotent stem cell
hPSCHuman pluripotent stem cell
iCMiPSC-derived cardiomyocyte
iNiPSC-derived neuron
ISSCRInternational Society for Stem Cell Research
kdKnock-down
KIKOKnock in-knockout
LADLamina associated domain
M-EMesenchymal-epithelial
MMRMismatch repair
MSH2MutS Homolog 2
MSH6MutS Homolog 2
NGN1Neurogenin-1
NGN2Neurogenin-2
NPCNeural pluripotent stem cell
NRF2Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2
OSKMOCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and c-MYC
OXPHOSOxidative phosphorylation
PBMCPeripheral blood mononuclear cell
PCPurkinje cell
RGCRetinal ganglion cell
RPERetinal pigment epithelium
Syn-TEF1Synthetic transcription elongation factor
TADTopological associated domain
TETTen-eleven translocase
ZFNZinc finger nuclease
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Acknowledgements
Figure was created using BioRender (https://BioRender.com). Graphs in Figure were prepared using GraphPad Prism software (version 10.5.0). The authors thank Brandon Gerhart for his technical assistance in creating the gel image for visualizing GAA repeat sizes in Figure .

## Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
The authors declare that they have not use AI-generated work in this manuscript.

## Author contributions
HTN and JSN conceptualized the theme, performed the literature search, and co-wrote the manuscript. MN acquired funding and contributed to critical revision of the manuscript. All authors have reviewed and approved the final manuscript.

## Funding
This work was supported by Friedreich’s Ataxia Research Alliance (FARA) to JSN and by National Institutes of Health, Neurological Diseases and Stroke (NIH, NINDS; R01NS121038) to MN and by the Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs (CDMRP) under award number HT9425-23-1-0337 to MN.

## Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

## Declarations

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

## Consent for publication
Not applicable.

## Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.