3481taoTherapeutic Advances in OphthalmologyTher Adv OphthalmolSAGE PublicationsPMC9643766964376696437663638872710.1177/25158414221134602RNA-based therapies in inherited retinal diseases
GirachAnizConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing AudoIsabelleConceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing BirchDavid GConceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing HuckfeldtRachel MConceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing LamByron LConceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing LeroyBart PConceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing MichaelidesMichelConceptualization, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing RussellStephen RConceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing SallumJuliana MFConceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing StinglKatarinaConceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing TsangStephen HConceptualization, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing YangPaulConceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing 1ProQR Therapeutics, Zernikedreef 9, 2333 CK Leiden, the Netherlands2Centre Hospitalier National d’Ophtalmologie des Quinze-Vingts, Centre de référence maladies rares REFERET and INSERM-DHOS CIC 1423, CHNO des Quinze-Vingts, Paris, France3Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, UK4Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, Paris, France5Retina Foundation of the Southwest, Dallas, TX, USA6Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, MA, USA7Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA8Department of Ophthalmology & Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital & Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium9Division of Ophthalmology & Center for Cellular & Molecular Therapeutics, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA10UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London and Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK11The University of Iowa Institute for Vision Research, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA12Department of Ophthalmology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil13Instituto de Genética Ocular, São Paulo, Brazil14Center for Ophthalmology, University Eye Hospital, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany15Center for Rare Eye Diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany16Jonas Children’s Vision Care and Bernard and Shirlee Brown Glaucoma Laboratory, Columbia Stem Cell Initiative, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA17Edward S. Harkness Eye Institute, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA18Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA✉Email: agirach@proqr.com
411202214251584142211346022515841422113460215112022© The Author(s), 2022This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access page(https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) are a genetically and phenotypically
heterogeneous group of genetic eye disorders. There are more than 300 disease
entities, and together this group of disorders affects millions of people
globally and is a frequent cause of blindness or low-vision certification.
However, each type is rare or ultra-rare. Characteristically, the impaired
vision in IRDs is due to retinal photoreceptor dysfunction and loss resulting
from mutation in a gene that codes for a retinal protein. Historically, IRDs
have been considered incurable and individuals living with these blinding
conditions could be offered only supportive care. However, the treatment
landscape for IRDs is beginning to evolve. Progress is being made, driven by
improvements in understanding of genotype–phenotype relationships, through
advances in molecular genetic testing and retinal imaging. Alongside this
expanding knowledge of IRDs, the current era of precision medicine is fueling a
growth in targeted therapies. This has resulted in the first treatment for an
IRD being approved. Several other therapies are currently in development in the
IRD space, including RNA-based therapies, gene-based therapies (such as
augmentation therapy and gene editing), cell therapy, visual prosthetics, and
optogenetics. RNA-based therapies are a novel approach within precision medicine
that have demonstrated success, particularly in rare diseases. Three antisense
oligonucleotides (AONs) are currently in development for the treatment of
specific IRD subtypes. These RNA-based therapies bring several key advantages in
the setting of IRDs, and the potential to bring meaningful vision benefit to
individuals living with inherited blinding disorders. This review will examine
the increasing breadth and relevance of RNA-based therapies in clinical
medicine, explore the key features that make AONs suitable for treating genetic
eye diseases, and provide an overview of the three-leading investigational AONs
in clinical trials.
Keywords: antisense oligonucleotides, genetic eye diseases, inherited retinal diseases, QR-1123, RNA therapies, sepofarsen, ultevursen

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 May 9; Accepted 2022 Oct 5; Collection date 2022 Jan-Dec.

## Introduction
Globally, an estimated 43.4 million people are blind and another 295 million have
moderate-to-severe visual impairment. Around one-third of cases of
blindness or severe visual impairment have a genetic basis, either as part of a
multifactorial etiology, for example, as in age-related macular degeneration,
diabetic retinopathy, or glaucoma, or as the direct result of genetic mutations,
such as in inherited retinal diseases (IRDs), inherited corneal dystrophies, or
optic neuropathies. , 
IRDs are a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous group of genetic eye
disorders. There are more than 300 disease entities, and together this group of
disorders affects at least 1 in 1400 individuals, or around 5.5 million people
worldwide. – However, each type is rare or
ultra-rare. Despite the lack of global data documenting the overall disease burden
of IRDs in terms of loss of sight, studies in the United Kingdom and Australia show
that they account for around 6% of blindness or low-vision certifications, 12% among
children (making it the second most common diagnosis), and 20–23% among individuals
of working age (making it the most common diagnosis). Cost of illness (blindness)
studies in the Republic of Ireland and in the United Kingdom estimate total costs of
£42.6 and £523.3 million, respectively, in 2019. Well-being costs accounted
for approximately one-third of these sums, illustrating the significant impact sight
loss has on the individual with an IRD.
The impaired vision in IRDs is due to retinal photoreceptor dysfunction or loss
resulting from mutation in a gene that codes for a retinal protein. , , The precise phenotype of each
IRD depends on the role of the affected protein, which may include
phototransduction, photoreceptor morphogenesis and maintenance, photoreceptor
ciliary transport, or the retinoid cycle. Other body systems may also
be implicated if the aberrant protein synthesis impacts tissues other than the
retina: IRDs that affect other systems, such as hearing, are known as syndromic
disorders. 
Historically, IRDs have been considered incurable and individuals living with these
blinding conditions could only be offered supportive care to treat associated
complications, such as cataracts and macular edema, or in some cases with
nutritional adjustments. , However, the treatment landscape for IRDs is changing. Progress
is being made, driven by improvements in understanding of genotype–phenotype
relationships, through advances in molecular genetic testing and retinal
imaging. Alongside this expanding knowledge of IRDs, the current era of
precision medicine is fueling a growth in targeted therapies. This has resulted in
the first treatment for an IRD being approved in 2017 in the United States and in
2018 in Europe. , Voretigene neparvovec-rzyl (Luxturna®; Spark
Therapeutics Inc.) is a gene therapy for adult and pediatric patients with vision
loss due to IRD caused by biallelic mutations in the retinoid isomerohydrolase
(RPE65) gene. This approval represents a
landmark change for individuals living with an IRD. However, voretigene
neparvovec-rzyl is applicable only for patients with RPE65-related
IRD, and only in those with sufficient viable retinal cells. , Consequently,
there remains a pressing medical need for treatment options for people with a
genetic eye disease outside of this small subset of patients. Several other
therapies are in development in the IRD space, building on the success of voretigene
neparvovec-rzyl, including DNA-based therapies (such as augmentation therapy and
gene editing), RNA-based therapies, cell therapy, visual prosthetics, and
optogenetics. , 
RNA-based therapies are a novel approach within precision medicine that have
demonstrated success, particularly in rare diseases; and a number of therapies are
currently in development for the treatment of IRDs. This review will examine the
increasing breadth and relevance of RNA-based therapies in clinical medicine and,
more specifically, in ophthalmology, explore the key features that make such
therapies suitable for treating genetic eye diseases, and provide an overview of
investigational RNA-based therapies for IRDs that have reached clinical trials.

## RNA-based therapies
Ribonucleic acid (RNA) is produced from deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) via the
transcription process. There are different types of RNAs, some of them called coding
RNAs (e.g. mRNAs) are involved in protein synthesis while some others, the
non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), do not code for proteins but may modulate gene
expression. – The ncRNAs,
such as microRNAs (miRNAs), long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA), silencing RNAs (siRNAs),
etc., are involved in a variety of biological functions. For example, they regulate
gene expression and translation, RNA processing, and translation levels; they
protect genomes from foreign nucleic acids; and they can guide DNA synthesis or
genome rearrangement. – Within the
context of genetic diseases involving protein disruption, coding RNAs have been
considered a potential therapeutic target for more than four decades; the correction
at the RNA level of changes induced by a pathogenic variant in the DNA could restore
normal protein production or stop pathogenic protein production. , A class of
non-coding RNAs regrouped under a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) network can
target coding and non-coding RNA molecules and indirectly regulate each other by
competing for them. Thus, leading to an additional post-transcriptional regulatory
layer accomplished by non-coding RNAs. However, ceRNAs are also involved in the
pathogenesis of several diseases. Further understanding this
ceRNA network may provide a base to identify potential therapeutic targets or new
prognostic biomarkers. , 
There are several categories of RNA-based therapies, including single-stranded
antisense oligonucleotides (known as AONs or ASOs), double-stranded small
interfering RNAs, mRNAs, and aptamers. , , RNA-targeting small molecule
drugs are not considered RNA-based therapies per se because these
are not analogs of nucleic acid polymers. Not including vaccines, 13
RNA-based therapies have already been approved across several therapeutic areas, but
none of them for IRDs ( ). , , , These include one aptamer (pegaptanib; for age-related macular
degeneration) and three small interfering RNAs (patisiran, givosiran, and lumasiran;
all for hepatic conditions). However, the majority of approvals are among the family
of AONs; these comprise fomivirsen (to treat cytomegalovirus-induced retinitis) and
eight therapies for hereditary conditions, including familial hypercholesterolemia,
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, spinal muscular atrophy, hereditary transthyretin
amyloidosis, and familial chylomicronemia syndrome. , , , In addition, more than 400
drug development programs for RNA-based therapies are underway across a variety of
ocular and non-ocular areas, but predominantly for oncology. Within this
pipeline, several RNA-based therapies are being investigated for IRDs, all of which
are AONs. Because AONs can target a patient-specific mutation, there is also
precedent for ‘N-of-1’ use of patient-specific AONs. 
 AONs are short lengths of chemically stabilized single-stranded RNA or DNA that
modify the expression of a given nucleotide sequence by binding to target pre-mRNA
or mRNA via base pairing. , , , They act on the processing of the mutant RNAs to suppress the
defects that result in abnormal synthesis or function of proteins, and thereby slow
down or reverse the course of an associated disease. , The precise mechanism of
action depends on the AON; for example, they can be engineered for pre-mRNA splicing
correction, exon skipping, or mRNA knockdown. , , , 
Under normal circumstances, genes are transcribed into pre-mRNA transcripts,
comprising exons holding the genetic code required to synthesize a protein,
separated by non-coding introns. Splicing removes the introns from the pre-mRNA to
generate the mature mRNA that is then translated into the protein ( ). , Splicing
defects can arise, for example, due to deep-intronic mutations that generate a new
splice donor or acceptor site in the intron, which leads to retention of a part of
that intron during splicing, and thereby its inclusion in the mature mRNA (i.e.
insertion of a pseudoexon). , Such is the case in CEP290-associated IRD, as
described later in this article. The addition of this pseudoexon leads to either
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and therefore an absence of protein production, or
synthesis of an abnormal protein. By binding to the
deep-intronic mutant region, AONs can modulate splicing and prevent inclusion of the
pseudoexon and the resultant disruption of protein synthesis ( ). AONs can also be designed to
bind to splice sites or regulatory elements on a target exon to prevent recruitment
of splicing factors, causing skipping of that exon during RNA splicing. , This design
stops mutation-containing exons being incorporated into the mature mRNA ( ). This strategy
is relevant for USH2A mutations discussed below.
 In some autosomal-dominant conditions, such as autosomal-dominant retinitis
pigmentosa (adRP) detailed below, protein production from a single mutant allele is
sufficient to manifest disease (i.e. dominant negative effect), despite the presence
of a normal allele that produces normal protein. In these circumstances, AONs can be
used to trigger allele-selective degradation or ‘knockdown’ of mutant mRNA
transcripts, so that the wild-type allele can continue to produce wild-type protein
unhindered. In this approach, the AON is designed to recognize the
mutant allele and activate the enzyme RNase H (which is involved in the degradation
of transcripts) at the level of the (pre-)mRNA, to reduce the number of mutant mRNA
transcripts, and therefore the amount of mutant target protein ( ). Further applications of AONs
include base editing of the RNA to directly change individual sites (e.g. to correct
G > A mutations) and repeat-targeting to prevent the toxic effects caused by
expanded, non-coding trinucleotide sequences in RNA. , 

## Characteristics of AONs in genetic eye diseases
RNA therapies, such as AONs, can be considered a form of genetic therapy as they are
highly specific and target the underlying genetic cause of a disease. , , , RNA-based therapy and
DNA-based therapy (gene therapy), are two different approaches. They differ
in several ways including mechanism of action, permanency of effect, and delivery to
the target cells. , 
 summarizes the
key differences between AONs and DNA-based therapy in the setting of genetic eye
diseases and these are discussed below.
 

## Act at the RNA level and do not alter the genome
AONs make transient alterations to the RNA without altering the genome. At a
maximum, splice-modulating AONs restore normal levels of target mRNA and do not
bring a risk of overexpression of target protein that may cause cellular
toxicity. , DNA-based therapies act at gene level and could make
changes or additions to the DNA. The principal forms of
DNA-based therapy are gene augmentation therapy which uses vectors (such as
adeno-associated viruses; AAVs) to insert a normal, non-mutated cDNA copy of the
optimized coding sequence of the target gene into the host cells; and gene
editing therapy, which corrects defects in the genetic sequence of the mutated
gene using clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)
technology. , , Wild-type AAVs integrate into the host DNA. When
recombinant AAV vectors are used, the genomic DNA is not modified and the
introduced genetic sequence is very rarely integrated into the host DNA;
instead, it typically coexists as a so-called episome in the nucleus of the
target cell. , , This is the case with the gene augmentation therapy
voretigene neparvovec-rzyl, which uses AAV serotype 2 (AAV2) to carry a
functional cDNA copy of the RPE65 gene into the retinal pigment
epithelial cells in individuals who have reduced or absent RPE65 protein due to
biallelic RPE65 mutations. , With lentivirus vectors,
random integration into the genome can occur, which may be associated with a
risk of insertional mutagenesis potentially affecting a tumor suppressor gene,
leading to cancer. , However, the risk of malignant transformation is probably
low with insertion in non-dividing cells, such as the neurosensory retina. Gene
editing, by definition, makes changes directly to the genomic DNA of the mutated
gene. , , The risks associated with this approach have not yet
been fully elucidated.

## Long-lasting effect but non-permanent nature
AONs are similar to drug therapies in that their duration of effect depends on
their half-life and clearance rate. This means that repeated
administration is required, and this could have implications for patient safety
and convenience and for healthcare resource utilization costs. For AONs used in
the eye, repeat treatment is relatively infrequent; currently twice per
year. This is because, unlike other target cells, retinal cells
are post-mitotic, enabling AONs to have a long-lasting therapeutic
effect. Also, the chemical modification of the AONs, such as
the inclusion of phosphorothioate (PS) backbone, the attachment of the
2′-O-methoxyethyl or 2′-O-methyl group to the sugar residues of the PS backbone,
and the formulation of emulsification drops, ensures a long half-life, preserves
the AONs from early degradation, and therefore ensures prolonged
response. Conversely, the transient nature of both RNA and AONs
means the AON effects are somewhat reversible. , It may, therefore, be
possible to adjust the strength of the effects by modifying subsequent dosing
(if required), and potential side effects might be transient. , 
DNA-based therapies are assumed to be a one-time therapy. The durability of
DNA-based therapies in ophthalmological settings has not yet been categorically
shown; long-term data for voretigene neparvovec-rzyl extend only up to 4 years
post-treatment to date. Other DNA-based therapies aimed at
RPE65-associated Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) have
shown variable durability of effect, in some cases, reporting subsequent
declining visual efficacy alongside persisting degenerative loss of
photoreceptors. , , If these therapies prove to be permanent when targeting
non-dividing cells, this could represent an advantage in patient burden in terms
of requiring only one-off surgery, albeit with one eye treated at a time. This
single intervention will require thorough assessment to identify the appropriate
dosing prior to surgery, especially taking into account individual variation, to
achieve maximum benefit while avoiding any permanent side effects.

## Do not require vectors for delivery
AONs can be administered as naked molecules as the chemical modifications and the
optimized formulation ameliorate their cell uptake. As such, vectors are not
needed and this approach is not hampered by limitations of vector capacity or
vector-associated intraocular inflammation. , , Their relatively small
size means that AONs may provide therapeutic benefit and restore protein
function in diseases in which gene sequences are too large to be delivered via
AAV2 (e.g. ABCA4 for Stargardt disease and
MYO7A or USH2A associated with Usher
syndrome) or other acceptable viral vectors used in gene augmentation
therapy. , It should be noted that dual-vector strategies with the
potential to overcome this limitation are currently in preclinical
development. Both approaches offer alternatives and more potential
therapeutic options for the patients.

## Administered via intravitreal injection
AONs can be administered via an intravitreal injection. , This method is low-risk,
fast, and convenient and can be performed in a clinic or office setting with
topical anesthesia depending on patient age and acceptance. , 
Intravitreal administration is known to be less invasive than subretinal
delivery which is required for many AAV gene augmentation therapies. It has a
low rate of procedural complications, including intraocular inflammation which
could represent an advantage for the patients. , , , , , It must be noted that
cataracts occur with intravitreal treatments. Subretinal delivery
requires, in most cases, a general anesthetic and is relatively invasive,
entailing removal of vitreous via pars plana vitrectomy, retinotomy, temporary
retinal/macular detachment, and then injection of the therapy into the
subretinal space. , Attempts to deliver AAV gene augmentation through
intravitreal route have so far not proven successful and have led to intraocular
inflammation. Individuals receiving subretinal voretigene
neparvovec-rzyl require the retina to be > 100 microns thick at the posterior
pole. 

## Broad distribution within the retina
The optimal mode of delivery for an IRD treatment has not been fully defined.
Intravitreal administration of a treatment allows broad distribution within the
retina to reach a larger number of retinal cells. , Furthermore, preclinical
and early clinical data show that intravitreally administered AONs can be used
to target the peripheral and central regions of the retina and can
reach all layers of the retina. Therapies delivered to
the subretinal space target mainly the macular region of the total retinal
area. More research is needed to understand whether there are any
potential advantages of targeting the entire retina, and especially the
periphery, in terms of whether this confers any potential for early intervention
for AONs.

## Low risk of systemic side effects
AONs used to treat genetic eye diseases are associated with limited off-target
effects. , This low risk of systemic side effects also applies to
DNA-based therapies. This is due to several unique features of the eye. First,
the small size of the eye means that only small doses are needed. , , Local
delivery also enhances drug bioavailability which supports the use of low
doses. , Second, the eye is a closed compartment, so intravitreal
and subretinal delivery methods have a lower rate of systemic side effects
versus systemic administration, with blood–retinal barriers
helping to prevent systemic spread. , Third, the eye is highly
compartmentalized, so treatment can be targeted to specific regions (e.g.
subretinal space or vitreous cavity), thus reducing off-target
exposure. , , However, despite delivery into the vitreous cavity,
there is evidence of exposure of AONs anteriorly, even as far as the
cornea. Finally, as certain sub-compartments of the eye are the
sites of immune deviation (referred to as immune privileged), treatments can be
administered into the eye with reduced risk of provoking inflammation and
immune-mediated damage. , , 

## RNA-based therapies in development for IRDs
There are currently no approved RNA-based therapies for IRDs. Three investigational
RNA-based therapies for IRDs are in phase I/II and II/III clinical trials:
sepofarsen, ultevursen, and QR-1123 ( and ). All are AONs, developed by ProQR
Therapeutics and Ionis Pharmaceuticals [in the case of P23H autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa treatment (QR-1123), and which is licensed to ProQR
Therapeutics]. The ongoing studies will build on knowledge gained from both animal
and preclinical research including studies using retinal organoids and aim to
validate results from these translational models within the clinical trial setting
for each respective IRD.
 

## Sepofarsen (formerly named QR-110)
Sepofarsen is being developed as a treatment for
CEP290-associated IRD, also commonly referred to as LCA10. LCA
comprises a group of heterogeneous disease subtypes classified according to the
associated gene defect. At least 25 genes that code for a diverse range of
retinal functions have been linked to 17 phenotypes of LCA , and more
than 400 mutations have been implicated in these known phenotypes. 
Additional subtypes exist but the gene defects are yet to be
identified. Typically, CEP290-associated IRD is
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. , 
CEP290-associated IRD is the most common and severe subtype of
LCA; it accounts for 15–30% of cases , – and has an estimated
prevalence of < 1 patient per 100,000 individuals. This subtype is linked to
mutations in the centrosomal protein 290 (CEP290) gene, which
encodes the CEP290 protein localized in the transition zone of the connecting
cilium of photoreceptors , located between the inner
and outer segments of rods and cones. , This ciliary transition
zone transports proteins to and from the outer segment of the photoreceptor
where phototransduction occurs to convert light into electrical signals and
vision. , CEP290 is required for normal ciliary function and
photoreceptor survival. , , 
The most common disease-causing mutation in CEP290-associated
IRD is c.2991 + 1655A > G (also known as p.Cys998*). , , , , This is
present in at least one allele in 21–77% of individuals with
CEP290-associated IRD. – , The c.2991 + 1655A > G
point mutation activates a cryptic splice site in intron 26, resulting in the
inclusion of a pseudoexon between exons 26 and 27 in the CEP290
mRNA. Within this aberrant exon is a stop codon that prevents expression of a
functional protein, either by resulting in the degradation of the mRNA or in a
truncated CEP290 protein. , As a consequence of the
absence of functional CEP290 protein, protein transport through the cilium is
hampered and the outer segment of the photoreceptor degenerates and shortens in
length, the latter manifesting as a reduction in thickness in
the outer nuclear layer in the peripheral to perifoveal region of the retina.
Retained photoreceptor nuclei in the fovea with abnormal segments are also
observed on optical coherence tomography (OCT). Loss of integrity of the
retinal layers is correlated with reduced visual function. 
Electroretinography (ERG) responses are also undetectable, indicative of
photoreceptor dysfunction. , Interestingly, the
photoreceptor degeneration progresses gradually over several decades; in the
first decades of life despite widespread loss of rod photoreceptors, the foveal
outer nuclear layer may be preserved. , , This suggests that a
window of opportunity for early treatment may exist during which cone rescue
could be possible. , , 
Symptoms of CEP290-associated IRD (which are also common to all
LCA and EORD/EOSRD subtypes) include severe, congenital or early vision loss,
nystagmus, and sluggishly reactive pupils. Sight varies from bare
light perception to 20/200 in most of the cases, although there are also
subjects with milder progression and less dramatically reduced visual acuity
until adulthood. , , At presentation, 64% of individuals with
CEP290-associated IRD have vision classified as counting
fingers or worse in the better-seeing eye. 
Sepofarsen is a 17-mer single-stranded, fully phosphorothioated, and
2′-O-methyl-modified AON that has been designed to modulate RNA splicing by
blocking the cryptic splice site, thus restoring normal splicing and normal
CEP290 protein synthesis ( ). In preclinical studies,
sepofarsen restored normal CEP290 mRNA and protein expression
in fibroblasts and retinal organoids derived from individuals with
c.2991 + 1655A > G mutation in the CEP290 gene, and in
animal models, this AON was able to reach all retinal layers. The
positive preclinical data from optic cup studies with sepofarsen have been
substantiated by positive early clinical data, confirming these models to be a
good predictor of clinical outcomes.
 The first-in-human, 12-month, phase Ib/II dose-escalation study of sepofarsen
(PQ-110-001; NCT03140969) assessed the safety and efficacy of two doses of this
AON in 11 individuals with CEP290-associated IRD aged ⩾ 6 years
in the worse-seeing eye. , , Six participants received
loading/maintenance doses of 160 µg/80 µg and five received 320 µg/160 µg. The
final 12-month pooled data reported clinically meaningful improvements from
baseline to Month 12 in treated eyes versus untreated eyes in
best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) (p < 0.05), red
full-field stimulus test (FST) (p < 0.01), and blue FST
(p < 0.02). There were also signals of improvement in
functional vision as shown in composite mobility course score. , The most
common adverse events were cataracts; all participants who showed visual decline
during cataract development regained pre-cataract visual acuity after lens
replacement, with no procedural complications. There were two cases of
mild cystoid macular edema and two of retinal thinning (all with the
320 µg/160 µg regimen). No study discontinuations occurred, and no
inflammation was observed. Based on efficacy observations at the first two dose
levels, the 500 µg/270 µg dose was not initiated, and following safety
assessment, the 320 µg/160 µg dose was discontinued. , 
The Insight Study (PQ-110-002/NCT03913130) is an ongoing
extension of the above study in which the same participants are receiving
treatment of the contralateral eye and continued treatment of the first treated
eye with sepofarsen 160 µg/80 µg every 6 months. Initial results from four
patients showed the safety profile of sepofarsen dosed in the contralateral eye
to be consistent with that observed in the phase Ib/II trial. Improvements in
BCVA of ⩾ 0.8 logMAR were observed in two patients which was similar to the
efficacy in the first treated eye. All four patients showed similar improvements
in FST to those observed in the first treated eye. 
Additional ongoing clinical trials of sepofarsen in
CEP290-associated IRD include the phase II/III
Illuminate study (PQ-110-003/NCT03913143) in adults and
children aged ⩾ 8 years, and the phase II/III dose-escalation
Brighten study (PQ-110-005/NCT04855045) in children
aged < 8 years ( ). The phase II/III Illuminate study
(PQ-110-003/NCT03913143) did not meet the primary endpoint nor notable secondary
endpoints – and despite having good responders in the active treatment arms, no
additional benefit was observed in either treatment arm versus
sham in prespecified analyses. However, post hoc analyses
reveal multiple pointers of a beneficial effect when comparing sepofarsen
against sham group if the contralateral eyes of each group are adjusted
for. Sepofarsen showed to be generally well tolerated with a
consistent safety profile as observed in the phase Ib/II trial (PQ-110-001;
NCT03140969). Additional analyses are being conducted to understand the
conflicting data observed in the sepofarsen trials.

## Ultevursen (formerly named QR-421a)
Ultevursen is being developed for Usher syndrome and non-syndromic RP (nsRP)
associated with biallelic USH2A mutations.
USH2A mutations are the most common cause of autosomal
recessive RP (implicated in 7–23% of cases), and the two most frequent mutations
in USH2A are located in exon 13. 
There are three main clinical types of Usher syndrome (numbered 1–3) varying in
severity of vision and sensorineural hearing loss, age of onset, and involvement
of vestibular dysfunction. Usher syndrome has been linked to mutations in 15
genes, , and the pattern of inheritance is autosomal
recessive. 
USH2A mutations are linked to Usher syndrome type 2. , – In this subtype, hearing
impairment is moderate to severe and vision is affected from the second decade
of life. 
Mutations within the USH2A gene disrupt the production of
usherin protein which is localized in the connecting cilia of photoreceptors and
stereocilia of cochlear hair cells (the sensory cells of the auditory
system). This protein is thought to be important for the
structural maintenance of photoreceptors and normal development of cochlear hair
cells. Disrupted usherin protein production causes progressive
photoreceptor degeneration beginning with the rods and eventually also involving
the cones. , In USH2A-associated nsRP severe visual
impairment occurs by the age of 50 years. Patients with Usher
syndrome have an early decline in vision, beginning with night blindness and
constricted visual field, followed by the loss of central vision and severe
visual impairment. , Congenital hearing impairment is seen in this syndromic
form. , 
Ultevursen is a 21-mer single-stranded, fully phosphorothioated, and
2′-O-(2-methoxyethyl)-modified AON that binds to USH2A pre-mRNA
and modulates splicing by exon skipping to exclude exon 13 from the mature mRNA
( ). This mechanism restores synthesis of a shorter but
functional usherin protein. , 
Preclinical proof-of-concept in vitro and in
vivo studies have shown that the dose-dependent exon skipping
induced by ultevursen is sustained at least 3 months, resulting in the
restoration of usherin protein expression and functional ERG
responses. 
The Stellar study (PQ-421a-001/NCT03780257) is a first-in-human
phase Ib/II single-dose, dose-escalation trial assessing the safety and efficacy
of ultevursen by intravitreal injection in adults with biallelic
USH2A pathogenic variants, with at least one mutation
occurring in exon 13 ( ). Interim data from unilateral treatment in 20
participants showed ultevursen to be well tolerated. There were no serious
adverse events or inflammation, one case of worsening of pre-existing cataract,
and one case of progression of pre-existing cystoid macula edema. Ultevursen
demonstrated encouraging levels of BCVA stabilization (i.e. there was no decline
versus baseline), compared with a deterioration in the
control eyes, in keeping with the natural history of the disease. Treatment
led to clinically significant improvements in retinal sensitivity as measured by
the mean change from baseline in the number of loci that improved by ⩾ 7 dB on
static perimetry in treated versus untreated eyes. These
findings were supported by objective retinal structural optical coherence
tomography imaging. The response to ultevursen was similar in all dose
cohorts.
Participants from the Stellar study have been given the
opportunity to enroll into the Helia extension study
(PQ-421a-002/NCT05085964) for continued dosing and follow-up. This study will
provide long-term safety, tolerability, and efficacy data of ultevursen.
Following reported results in the Stellar study, a
double-masked, randomized, sham controlled, 24-month, multiple-dose study,
Sirius (PQ-421a-003; NCT05158296) has been initiated to
further evaluate efficacy and safety of ultevursen.

## QR-1123
QR-1123 is under evaluation as a treatment for adRP associated with the c.68
C > A mutation in RHO leading to a proline-to-histidine (P23 H; p.Pro23His)
substitution. Around 15–25% cases of RP are inherited in an autosomal-dominant
manner, , and there are several subtypes of adRP. At least
22 genes may be involved in adRP, although the most commonly
implicated is the RHO gene, which is responsible for 20–30% of
cases of adRP. , 
RHO codes for the rhodopsin protein, a photosensitive protein
when intimately bound to 11-cis-retinal, present in rods and essential for
rod-based phototransduction. In turn, the most common mutation in
RHO is c.68 C > A; p.Pro23His. , This mutation is seen
almost exclusively in the United States, affecting an estimated 2500–3000
individuals and results in a P23H substitution in rhodopsin
protein. The mutated protein is misfolded, leading to
progressive photoreceptor degeneration. Like other forms of RP,
adRP is characterized by rod–cone dystrophy with characteristic photoreceptor
degeneration and intraretinal pigment migration predominantly in the
mid-peripheral retina. Retinal degeneration progresses from the mid-periphery
to the macula and fovea, manifesting as night blindness, followed by
progressive, concentric constriction of the visual fields, leading to tunnel
vision and eventually blindness. 
QR-1123 is an allele-specific, RNase H1-activating AON designed to treat P23H
adRP by suppressing the formation of the toxic, mutant protein through knockdown
of P23H rhodopsin mRNA. This selective inhibition of the mutant protein with
dominant negative effect, while retaining the expression of the normal
variant, enables the restoration of photoreceptor function
( ). 
Preclinical proof-of-concept studies of QR-1123 have demonstrated selective
reduction of P23H rhodopsin expression and prevention of retinal degeneration in
adRP animal and human cell models. The first-in-human phase
I/II single-dose, dose-escalation study, Aurora (PQ-1123-001;
NCT04123626), is ongoing ( ). This study will examine the safety and target engagement
of QR-1123 intravitreal injection in adults with adRP due to P23H mutation in
RHO.

## Discussion
Genetic eye diseases are a leading cause of blindness and moderate-to-severe visual
impairment that have, to date, been considered untreatable. However, there has been
a surge in research interest in IRDs driven by advanced technologies and precision
medicine capabilities, bringing new hope for improved outcomes for individuals
living with IRD. This follows the approval of the first interventional therapy for
an IRD, and a growing number of innovative, investigational therapies following
behind. Among these pipeline products, three AONs targeting specific subtypes of
LCA, Usher syndrome, nsRP, and adRP are leading the way.
AONs are well suited for treating the eye, which is a relatively immune-privileged
closed compartment and have limited off-target effects. The most common adverse
events of sepofarsen are cataracts. , – Instances were manageable and
vision restored to pre-cataract levels after lens replacement surgery. The mechanism
behind these cataract events is as yet unknown, but cataracts are reported with
intravitreal treatments. They also feature in the natural course of
CEP290-associated IRD, occurring spontaneously in 18–63% of
cases in natural history studies, and such instances have been managed successfully
with lens removal or replacement. , , 
The AON platform shares a common technology that encompasses a variety of mechanisms,
potentially extending its use across multiple IRDs with different mechanisms (e.g.
splice correction, exon skipping, repeat-targeting, exon inclusion, and
allele-specific knockdown). These AONs could be useful in both peripheral and
central IRDs, and may have the potential to treat a disease at its early stages,
which may be particularly beneficial in diseases, such as
CEP290-associated IRD. There is also a potential to
broaden the application of this RNA platform technology to a range of genetic eye
disorders including macular dystrophies (e.g. Stargardt disease) and beyond IRDs
(e.g. Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy), and possibly other therapeutic areas, in
the future.
Generally, AONs are developed to be specific to one mutation in one gene or a defined
genetic sequence (such as the exon 13 of the USH2A gene).
Therefore, the complex array of genetic mutations within each type and subtype of
IRD brings an inherent challenge to the development of RNA-based therapies for
genetic eye diseases. There are more than 270 different genes known to cause
IRDs, 
and a large number of mutations may be involved within these genes. On this
backdrop of broad genetic heterogeneity, identification and subsequent clinical
development of AONs suitable for every individual with an IRD is a time and resource
intensive process. The future success of AONs will require more work to understand
the presence and significance of retinal-specific splice variants and alternative
transcripts for all IRD genes in the humans, which may differ from animal models and
non-retinal tissues. Observing clear signs of efficacy in preclinical testing does
not always translate to efficacy in human trials, for a variety of
reasons. The temporary nature of the therapeutic effect of AONs should
also be considered as an important factor for development, potentially bringing an
additional therapeutic burden versus a one-administration treatment
but also conferring additional flexibility in terms of adjusting the treatment
effects. Finally, as a novel therapy, the long-term efficacy and safety of AONs
remain to be fully understood, although this will be addressed through the planned
clinical research programs for these therapies.
Our understanding of the role of RNA-based therapies in relation to emerging
DNA-based therapies will need to be defined. Alongside the pipeline AONs, at least
12 investigational gene augmentation therapies are in development for IRDs and other
ophthalmic conditions, which currently include subtypes of LCA, RP, Bietti
crystalline dystrophy, and Leber hereditary optic neuropathy. In addition, gene
editing therapy is also being evaluated in the IRD space. EDIT-101 (AGN-151587;
Editas Medicine) is an in vivo gene editing therapy based on
CRISPR. An early-stage trial of this strategy is ongoing with preliminary data from
the initial cohorts showing a favorable safety profile, transient EDIT-101 shedding
in body fluids with low levels of detection, and signs suggesting biologic activity
in some participants. , As our knowledge of DNA- and RNA-based therapy approaches and
their side effects grows, we may better understand at which stages of disease each
may be applied. We anticipate that the future could bring a multimodal therapeutic
strategy to treating certain individuals with IRDs. For instance, definitive
DNA-based therapy risk reward may be appropriate for advanced stages of an IRD,
whereas RNA-based therapy may offer a better trade-off in early-stage disease due to
widespread accessibility to the peripheral retina and lower procedural risks.
Therefore, in early disease, as DNA-based therapy would typically not be applicable,
there may be a rationale for trialing RNA-based therapy soon after diagnosis. In
end-stage disease, combination of DNA-based and RNA-based therapies might be
applicable. However, more research is needed to better understand the roles of these
targeted therapies across the family of IRDs.
Overall, RNA-based therapies have the potential to become a standard of care for
genetic eye conditions. The close structure of oligonucleotides and the several
categories of RNA-based therapies targeting different type of mutations could help
accelerate the development of new therapies addressing unmet medical needs with
urgency. Furthermore, the inclusion of new chemical modifications could further
improve stability, half-life, biodisponibility and ultimately the efficacy, safety,
and patient comfort.
Of critical importance, to take full advantage of advances in therapy in genetic eye
diseases, it is important to improve genetic identification of eligible patients and
streamline patient referral pathways to ensure access to treatments or clinical
trials, as appropriate. This involves raising awareness of IRDs at every stage of
the care pathway with general ophthalmologists, healthcare professionals, genetic
counselors, and family practitioners. Improving access to, and use of, genetic
testing is fundamental to these objectives as more than one-third of individuals
with IRDs currently do not receive these critical investigations. 

## Conclusion
In summary, the treatment paradigm for genetic eye diseases is in the midst of great
change, driven by advances in knowledge of the diseases and innovations in
therapeutic technologies. RNA-based therapies are an innovative approach within
precision medicine that offers several key advantages in the setting of IRDs, and
the potential to bring meaningful vision benefit to individuals living with these
inherited blinding disorders. Three leading AONs are in clinical trials in specific
subtypes of IRDs. Early data from ongoing trials of these therapies are promising
and full results are eagerly awaited.

## Acknowledgments
Medical writing support for this article was provided by Lyndsey Wood, BSc, of
ApotheCom, and Janne Turunen, Luca Guerriero, and Agathe Plichta of ProQR
Therapeutics.

## Footnotes
ORCID iDs: Aniz Girach 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0641-3028
Katarina Stingl 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8132-911X

## Contributor Information
Aniz Girach, ProQR Therapeutics, Zernikedreef 9, 2333 CK Leiden, the Netherlands.
Isabelle Audo, Centre Hospitalier National d’Ophtalmologie des Quinze-Vingts, Centre de référence maladies rares REFERET and INSERM-DHOS CIC 1423, CHNO des Quinze-Vingts, Paris, France; Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, UK; Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision, Paris, France.
David G. Birch, Retina Foundation of the Southwest, Dallas, TX, USA
Rachel M. Huckfeldt, Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, MA, USA
Byron L. Lam, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA
Bart P. Leroy, Department of Ophthalmology & Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital & Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium Division of Ophthalmology & Center for Cellular & Molecular Therapeutics, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Michel Michaelides, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London and Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK.
Stephen R. Russell, The University of Iowa Institute for Vision Research, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
Juliana M.F. Sallum, Department of Ophthalmology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil Instituto de Genética Ocular, São Paulo, Brazil.
Katarina Stingl, Center for Ophthalmology, University Eye Hospital, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; Center for Rare Eye Diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
Stephen H. Tsang, Jonas Children’s Vision Care and Bernard and Shirlee Brown Glaucoma Laboratory, Columbia Stem Cell Initiative, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA Edward S. Harkness Eye Institute, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA.
Paul Yang, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA.

## Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate: Not applicable.
Consent for publication: Not applicable.
Author contributions:
Aniz Girach: Conceptualization; Data curation; Formal analysis;
Investigation; Methodology; Writing – original draft; Writing – review &
editing.
Isabelle Audo: Conceptualization; Data curation; Investigation;
Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.
David G. Birch: Conceptualization; Data curation; Investigation;
Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing
Rachel M. Huckfeldt: Conceptualization; Data curation;
Investigation; Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.
Byron L. Lam: Conceptualization; Data curation; Investigation;
Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.
Bart P. Leroy: Conceptualization; Data curation; Investigation;
Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.
Michel Michaelides: Conceptualization; Data curation; Writing –
original draft; Writing – review & editing.
Stephen R Russell: Conceptualization; Data curation;
Investigation; Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.
Juliana M.F. Sallum: Conceptualization; Data curation;
Investigation; Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.
Katarina Stingl: Conceptualization; Data curation;
Investigation; Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.
Stephen H. Tsang: Conceptualization; Data curation; Writing –
original draft; Writing – review & editing.
Paul Yang: Conceptualization; Data curation; Investigation;
Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.
Funding: The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Editorial support
for this article was funded by ProQR Therapeutics.
The authors declared the following potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article:
K.S., I.A., B.P.L., and M.M. are the members of ERN-EYE (www.ern-eye.eu). A.G. is an employee of ProQR Therapeutics.
I.A. is a consultant/advisor for Novartis, Sparing Vision, Janssen, Roche,
and ProQR Therapeutics; she is supported by the Foundation Fighting
Blindness, Retina France, and UNADEV. D.G.B. reports support from the
National Eye Institute EY09076 and Foundation Fighting Blindness; he has
served as a consultant for ProQR Therapeutics, AGTC, Nacuity, Editas, and
Biogen and has received clinical trial support from AGTC, ProQR
Therapeutics, NightstaRx, and 4D Therapeutics. R.M.H. is a consultant for
AGTC, Annexon, ProQR, Regeneron, and Vida Ventures and an advisor for
Intergalactic Therapeutics; she receives grant funding from FFB and clinical
trial support from AGTC, Biogen, MeiraGTx/Janssen, ProQR, and Spark. B.L.L.
reports grant funding from ProQR Therapeutics, Biogen, AGTC, Allergan, and
Spark Therapeutics; he has served as a consultant for ProQR Therapeutics,
Biogen, and Allergan. B.P.L. is a Senior Clinical Investigator of the
Research Foundation – Flanders, Belgium (Grant No. 1.8.038.11 N); he reports
trial support from Second Sight Medical Products, consultancy fees from
Bayer, REGENXBIO, and Vedere Bio, and trial support and consultancy fees and
travel support from GenSight Therapeutics, IVERIC Bio, Novartis Pharma,
Spark Therapeutics, and ProQR Therapeutics; he reports no personal financial
gain, with all consultancy fees paid into Ghent University Hospital research
accounts to support research. M.M. is supported by a grant from the National
Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre at Moorfields Eye
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and UCL Institute of Ophthalmology. S.R.R.
reports grant funding from Spark Therapeutics and ProQR Therapeutics, is a
consultant for Novartis and co-founded an artificial intelligence-based
retinal imaging company, Digital Diagnostics Incorporated (formerly IDx,
LLC). J.M.F.S. has nothing to disclose. K.S. is or has served as a
consultant for ProQR Therapeutics, ViGeneron, Novartis, Santen and Nayan,
with consultancy fees paid to the Center for Ophthalmology, University of
Tuebingen to support research. S.H.T. receives salary from the National
Institute of Health (Health U01 EY030580, U54OD020351, R24EY028758,
R24EY027285, R01EY018213, R01EY024698, R01EY026682), New York State
(SDHDOH01-C32590GG-3450000), Research to Prevent Blindness and Alcon
Research Institute, and serves as a consultant for SAB, EmendoBio,
Nanoscope, and Rejuvitas. P.Y. is supported by grant from the Foundation
Fighting Blindness TRAP1 Award (TA-NMT-0521-0803-OHSU-TRAP), the National
Institutes of Health (Bethesda, MD) (P30 EY010572), and by unrestricted
departmental funding from Research to Prevent Blindness (New York, NY); he
serves as a consultant for 4D Molecular Therapeutics, Adverum, AGTC, Annexon
Bio, EcoR1, ExpertConnect, Guidepoint, Janssen, MeiraGTx, Nanoscope
Therapeutics, Otonomy, ProQR and Vedere and receives research support from
4D Molecular Therapeutics, Acucela, AGTC, Biogen, Editas, Foundation
Fighting Blindness, Iveric bio, ProQR Therapeutics, Reneuron, Sanofi, and
Spark.
Availability of data and materials: Not applicable.

## References