pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11090349PMC11090349.111090349110903493873966610.1371/journal.pone.0302064PONE-D-23-270051Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyPandemicsMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19Research and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchSurveysMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsDisabilitiesMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareSocioeconomic Aspects of HealthMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthSocioeconomic Aspects of HealthComputer and Information SciencesComputer NetworksInternetEarth SciencesGeographyHuman GeographyHousingSocial SciencesHuman GeographyHousingMedicine and Health SciencesCritical Care and Emergency MedicineAn evaluation of the impact of social and structural determinants of health on forgone care during the COVID-19 pandemic in Baltimore, Maryland
Evaluation of forgone care during the COVID-19 pandemic in Baltimore, MDhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-4467-9169MeyerDianeConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing LowensenKellyInvestigationWriting – review & editing PerrinNancyConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – review & editing MooreAyanaConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – review & editing MehtaShruti H.MethodologyWriting – review & editing HimmelfarbCheryl R.ConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – review & editing InglesbyThomas V.ConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3789-5122JenningsJacky M.InvestigationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1130-6251MuellerAlexandra K.InvestigationWriting – review & editing LaRicciJessica N.InvestigationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0002-6828-3732GalloWoudaseInvestigationWriting – review & editing BocekAdam P.InvestigationWriting – review & editing FarleyJason E.ConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – review & editing 1
Center for Infectious Disease and Nursing Innovation, Johns Hopkins University, School of Nursing, Baltimore, MD, United States of America2
Center for Health Security, Johns Hopkins University, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, United States of America3
Johns Hopkins University, School of Nursing, Baltimore, MD, United States of America4
FHI 360, Durham, NC, United States of America5
Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, United States of America6
Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States of AmericaPakTae-YoungEditor files.OutbreaksCOVID-19

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
Evidence suggests that reductions in healthcare utilization during the Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic may be contributing towards excess morbidity and mortality [ – ]. Much of this evidence consists of studies describing changes in the volume of services rendered, such as trends in hospital admissions and emergency department usage [ , , ]. Fewer studies have evaluated COVID-19 related changes in healthcare utilization through the lens of patient-reported forgone care, which is defined as healthcare that is perceived as needed by the person but not received, and includes delayed, missed, or skipped visits with a healthcare provider [ , ].
Existing studies have identified several individual-level social and structural determinants of health (SSDoH) as important correlates of forgone care during the pandemic, although the findings have been at times contradictory, likely related to the heterogeneity of sampling [ – ]. Czeisler et al., using a nationally representative sample of US adults, found the prevalence ratio of forgone care in non-Hispanic Black adults to be 1.6 times that of non-Hispanic White adults in June 2020 [ ]. However, another nationally-representative survey of forgone care from March to July 2020 among adults did not identify any statistically significant difference in the frequency of forgone care by race/ethnicity [ ]. A separate study that evaluated forgone care among Medicare beneficiaries found a higher prevalence among non-Hispanic White beneficiaries (22.5%), compared to non-Hispanic Black beneficiaries (12.6%) in the summer of 2020, although these differences dissipated when looking at forgone care in the fall of 2020 and winter of 2021 [ ]. Other factors identified as being significantly correlated with forgone care, although at times with mixed results, include experiencing food or income insecurity; education level; having comorbid conditions, including mental health conditions and functional disabilities; both older and younger age; having health insurance; identifying as a member of the LGBTQ+ community; and experiencing racial discrimination [ – , – , ]. These studies may indicate that certain individuals and communities experienced disproportionate impacts on healthcare access and utilization during the pandemic, leading to forgone care.
Community-specific SSDoH, such as Area Deprivation Index, internet coverage, walkability, and ethnic segregation are related to health outcomes [ – ]. Studies have identified geographic inequities related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including COVID-19 case counts and mortality rates [ , ] and inequitable access to testing and treatment [ – ], but few have acknowledged these factors and their associations with forgone care. Similar geographic inequities may have occurred in who experienced forgone care, such as in communities with high rates of poverty, those with ethnic segregation, and those without resources such as internet coverage. For example, several community-level factors have been cited in the literature as reasons for forgoing care during the pandemic, including closures of local health facilities, transportation challenges, and lack of resources required for telemedicine [ , , , ]. Also concerning is that many of the communities that suffered higher rates of SARS-CoV-2 infection also likely needed additional healthcare services as a result.
Forgone care can have drastic consequences on individual and community health. Delayed and cancelled preventive care, including immunizations, dental cleanings, and cancer screenings, will have long-term health implications that go well beyond the end of the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, one study identified decreases in screenings for breast, lung, colon, cervical, and prostate cancer ranging from 60% to 82% at one large health center in Massachusetts [ ]. Delayed treatment for emergent conditions such as strokes, heart attacks, and orthopedic trauma likely have led to worse prognoses and more severe outcomes [ – ]. Furthermore, studies conducted prior to the pandemic found that those with chronic conditions are more likely to forgo care [ ]. Given that the pandemic introduced or exacerbated existing barriers to healthcare access, these individuals could be at higher risk for severe downstream consequences of interruptions in care. This is reflected in mortality data published by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which suggests a large increase in excess deaths from chronic conditions such as heart disease and diabetes, highlighting the importance of continued access to care and the potential consequences of forgone care [ ].
The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of individual and community-level SSDoH on healthcare utilization during the COVID-19 pandemic by specifically looking at forgone care among a sample of adults living in Baltimore, Maryland. The objective was to determine whether community-level correlates accounted for forgone care above and beyond any individual participant-level correlates. Understanding the intersections of forgone care during the COVID-19 pandemic with SSDoH is critical to providing a comprehensive view of the health impacts of the pandemic and to identifying which individuals and communities experienced the greatest interruptions in care.

## Methods

## Study design and data sources
This was a secondary data analysis using baseline data abstracted from two parent studies funded by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. The combined analytic sample leveraged the strengths of two robust sampling strategies used in the parent studies, increasing the overall sample size, and helping to ensure adequate representation of economically disadvantaged and historically excluded communities that may not be included in the current COVID-19 forgone care literature.
This nested study used a cross-sectional design to examine individual and community-level factors associated with forgone care during the COVID-19 pandemic in Baltimore, MD. Data abstracted from the parent studies included responses to survey questions regarding demographics, comorbidities, healthcare needs, and forgone care during the COVID-19 pandemic. For the purposes of this study, forgone care was defined as healthcare that was skipped, missed, or delayed during the COVID-19 pandemic. The two parent studies are described in more detail below.

## The Community Collaborative to Combat COVID-19 study
The Community Collaborative to Combat COVID-19 (C-Forward) parent study was a two-phased comparative effectiveness trial. Enrollment of participants occurred from February 2021 to December 2022. The study aimed to evaluate three different SARS-CoV-2 testing modalities (fixed site, mobile, and home-based) using a representative sample of Baltimore households. The study enrolled households (HH) using a multi-staged sampling approach, organized by census block groups that were stratified by socioeconomic status and race/ethnicity, with oversampling of historically excluded and under-resourced populations (e.g., Hispanic/LatinX populations, low-income whites).
Household recruitment was multi-modal and included doorhangers, mailings, telephone calls, and online methods. The study included enrollment of one eligible member per HH, 18 years of age or older, who was able to provide informed consent (designated as the “HH index member”). The HH index member completed a baseline survey that covered demographics; history of COVID-19 symptoms, testing and treatment; adoption of preventive behaviors; comorbidities and health care access and utilization (including forgone care); COVID-19 impact and pandemic stress; mental health and substance abuse; and knowledge and attitude towards COVID-19. This survey was completed electronically, by mail, or via telephone with a trained research assistant and entered into REDCap. HH index members also received SARS-CoV-2 antigen and antibody testing and other serum testing (e.g., chemistry profiles). A total of n = 1,978 HH index members were enrolled. Additional information about this study, including other study phases that were not included in this secondary data analysis, can be found on clinicaltrials.gov (clinical trial identifier # NCT04673292).

## The COVID-19 Prevention Network 5002 study
The COVID-19 Prevention Network 5002 (CoVPN 5002) parent study was a multi-site, cross-sectional SARS-CoV-2 prevalence study conducted from March to July 2021. The study used a venue-time sampling strategy, with random selection of venues and enrollment times. Venues included low-income housing, transitional housing, shelters, soup kitchens, places of worship, local federally qualified health centers, and rehabilitation centers, among others [ ].
All individuals accessing the selected venue during the randomly selected time/location slot were approached to assess interest and eligibility to enroll in the study. Adults and children greater than 2 months of age who were willing and able to provide consent (assent for those <18 years of age, with the consent of a guardian) were eligible. Participants completed a paper-based survey with a research assistant that included questions on demographics; medical history (including forgone care); COVID-19 history included exposure; knowledge, attitudes, and behavior about COVID-19; economic impacts of COVID-19; and willingness to take the COVID-19 vaccine. All survey responses were later entered into Medidata. Individuals also received SARS-CoV-2 antigen and antibody testing. A total of n = 1,022 individuals enrolled in the study at the Baltimore, Maryland site. Additional information about this study can be found on clinicaltrials.gov (clinical trial identifier # NCT04658121). The secondary data analysis presented in this manuscript describes only data collected from the Baltimore research site.

## Secondary data analysis

## Inclusion and exclusion criteria
All parent study participants who reported needing any care type during the COVID-19 pandemic in the parent study survey, including chronic, preventive, or emergent care or a major medical or dental procedure were included ( ); all other parent study participants were dropped (n = 888). Parent study questions can be located in Supplement 1. Participants under the age of 18 were also dropped regardless of whether or not they needed any type of care (n = 22), as C-Forward only included enrollment of HH index members who were ≥ 18 years of age.
 Individuals were also excluded if it could not be ascertained as to whether they needed any type of care during the pandemic (e.g., they left these survey questions blank or responses were discordant; n = 44) or it was unclear whether they had experienced the outcome of forgone care (n = 42). Surveys that had seven or more incomplete demographic questions were also dropped (n = 1).

## Measures

## Outcome variable
The outcome variable for this study was participant-reported forgone care on enrollment in either of the parent studies. This included any forgone care experienced since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, measured from March 1, 2020 until completion of the survey. Questions on forgone care assessed the need for and receipt of chronic or preventive care, emergent care, and major medical or dental procedures. All C-Forward participants responded to questions on needing/forgoing chronic, preventive, and emergent care and elective/dental procedures. For the CoVPN 5002 study, a supplemental survey on needing/forgoing emergent care and elective/dental procedures was added in April 2021 to the Baltimore, MD research site only. Prior to that date, participants only responded to survey questions on needing/forgoing chronic/preventive care.

## Independent variables—Individual level
The selection of individual-level variables was informed by the Gelberg Behavioral Model for Vulnerable Populations [ ]. This framework, a revision of the Andersen and Newman Model of Healthcare Utilization [ ], was chosen as it includes determinants of healthcare system access and utilization relevant to underserved populations living in Baltimore, which has higher rates of poverty, homelessness, crime, and drug use in comparison to other cities of its size as well as widespread disparities across the SSDoH [ – ]. Our adapted model included individual and community-level factors related to healthcare utilization and organizes them into three categories: predisposing—factors that may increase the propensity to seek care; enabling/impeding—factors that may enable or impede use of the health system; and need—factors that reflect perceived need for care [ , ]. For this study, predisposing factors included age, sex at birth, race, marital status, employment status, disability status, and education level. Enabling/impeding factors included income, loss of housing during the pandemic, and worrying about paying rent/mortgage during the pandemic. Need factors included number of comorbidities, presence of functional limitations, mental illness, and alcohol/substance and injection drug use. Each of these variables were measured using survey data from the two parent studies (see supplement 1 for parent surveys). Responses were consolidated across the two surveys by sociodemographic topic (e.g., sex, age) and sub-categories (e.g., female, male) were created to be inclusive of the wording of the parent studies.

## Independent variables—Community level
Participants were assigned community-level factors based on their community statistical area (CSA) of residence. CSA’s are clusters of neighborhoods that were developed by Baltimore City’s Planning Department and are based on city neighborhoods [ ]. There are 55 CSA’s in the city of Baltimore, with boundaries that align directly to census tracts (46). The population of a given CSA ranges from 5,000 to 20,000 people and consist of anywhere from 1–8 Census Tracts [ ]. C-Forward participants were matched to a CSA based on their census block group at enrollment. CoVPN 5002 participants were matched to a CSA based on the address of the venue in which they enrolled, as their actual physical address was not collected for the study.
Seven continuous CSA-level variables that have previously been associated with forgone care (prior to the COVID-19 pandemic) were included in the community-level analysis of forgone care. All CSA-level data was acquired from the Baltimore Neighborhood Indicators Alliance (BNIA) [ ]. These variables included the below (year of data collection according to BNIA is notated in parenthesis):
Percent of households with no internet at home (2020): individuals living in communities with poor internet coverage have been found to be less likely to utilize telehealth services offered during the COVID-19 pandemic [ , ].
Walkability score (2017): individuals living in communities with poor walkability have been found to be associated with decreased healthcare access [ ]. Challenges associated with poor walkability were likely compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic with closures of public transportation and other nearby resources.
Percent of population that is Hispanic (2020): segregation of ethnic minorities are associated with “place” disparities, including access to healthcare [ ].
Components of the Area Deprivation Index (ADI): ADI is a census-based index that tracks community socioeconomic status across 17 indicators, including measures of education, employment, quality of housing, and poverty [ ]. Higher ADI scores have been previously associated with poorer health outcomes [ , ]. Unfortunately, ADI scores were unavailable by Baltimore CSA, so 4 related indicators were selected for this analysis that had data available at the CSA-level. These included:
○ Percentage of households that pay more than 30% of their total household income on rent and related expenses (2020).
○ Percentage of 12th graders in a school year that successfully completed high school (2020/2021).
○ Percentage of households whose income fell below the poverty threshold (2020).
○ Percentage of population who are not in the labor force (age 16–64 years) (2020).

## Covariates
Two “pandemic wave” binary variables were added to the models to help account for the different enrollment periods of the parent studies and what waves of the pandemic each participant experienced that may have impacted their ability or desire to seek healthcare. All participants who enrolled on or after August 1, 2021 were coded as having experienced the delta COVID-19 wave; those who enrolled on or after December 1, 2021 were coded as having experienced the omicron COVID-19 wave. A binary variable was also created to account for which parent study the data were acquired from.

## Statistical analyses

## Imputation of missing data
Patterns of missingness were explored to determine whether data were missing at random. Multiple imputation was then used to impute missing data [ ] using Stata version 16.0 (StatCorp, College Station, TX). The sequential imputation using chained equations method was employed for this study, using the individual-level independent variables, the outcome of forgone care, and “study” variable as predictors of missing values. Five total imputed datasets were created. A sensitivity analysis was conducted at the completion of the model-building process to check for biases introduced during multiple imputation. For the sensitivity analysis, the final model was run using only participants with complete data. The magnitude of the resulting coefficients was then compared with those obtained from running the same model using the imputed dataset.

## Model building—Level-one model
Weighted bivariate logistic regressions were conducted for each individual-level independent variable, with the binary outcome of any type of forgone care. Each observation was weighted in the regression model for the total amount of years the individual had experienced in the pandemic, measured from March 1, 2020 until the date of survey completion. Any individual-level variable significant at p≤0.10 was carried over to the final level-one multivariable model. The multivariable weighted level-one model also included the “study” and “pandemic wave” variables. Collinearity of independent variables was also checked using variation inflation factor, with none noted.

## Model building—Level-two multi-level model
The level-two model included weighted random effects logistic regressions with participants clustered within Baltimore CSAs. The model contained all significant level-one variables, and the level-two continuous community-level variables were tested one at a time. Any CSA-level variables significant at p ≤0.10 were incorporated into the final multivariable model. The significance of variables in this final model were set a p≤0.05.

## Power analysis
A power analysis based on preliminary data assumed an event rate of 0.41 [ , ], an alpha of 0.05, 80% power, an estimated sample size of n = 1,662, and 30 Baltimore CSAs. Assuming these parameters and an intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) of 0.010, the study was powered to detect odds ratios that ranged from 1.34 to 1.45, as the distribution of the predictor variable ranged from 20/80 split to a 50/50 split.

## Ethical considerations
This study was approved by the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine (JHU SOM) Institutional Review Board (IRB) on December 19, 2022 (IRB# 00348695). The C-Forward parent study was approved by the JHU SOM IRB on June 2, 2020 (IRB# 00250298). The CoVPN 5002 parent study was approved by the JHU SOM IRB on January 28, 2021 (IRB#00262004) through a reliance agreement with Advarra IRB, which was the IRB of record for the larger CoVPN 5002 network study. This secondary data analysis was granted a consent waiver as participants who enrolled in either parent study completed consent forms that covered the conduct of this research. During data analysis, authors of this article had access to a limited dataset provided by the parent study data management teams.

## Results

## Participant characteristics
Seventy-one percent of C-Forward participants (1,405 of 1,978) met inclusion criteria for this secondary analysis. A slightly smaller percentage of those enrolled in the CoVPN 5002 study (598 of 1,022; 59%) met inclusion criteria. This yielded a total sample size of n = 2,003 (see ). Nearly 65% of the sample reported their sex at birth as female. Most (87.6%) reported not being of Hispanic or Latino origin and 52.7% reported their race as Black or African American. Nearly 40% of the sample reported being married or partnered, slightly less than half (45.1%) were employed part or full-time, and 15.5% reported being on disability status. Twenty percent of participants reported being worried about their ability to pay or being unable to pay their rent or mortgage during the pandemic, nearly 8% reported losing their housing during the pandemic, and 30% reported making less than $25,000 per year. Nearly 65% reported having at least one co-morbidity, including a cancer diagnoses, diabetes, renal disease, sickle cell anemia, respiratory disease, cardiac disease, or immune disease ( ).
 In total, 567 participants reported experiencing any type of forgone care. This included 495 participants who reported forgoing chronic or preventive care, 33 participants who reported forgoing emergent care, and 94 participants who reported delaying an elective surgery or dental procedure. Nearly 57% of those who reported forgone care were over the age of 50 years, 67.9% were female, and over half (50.3%) reported being Black of African American.

## CSA characteristics
The sample included participants from 48 of the 55 CSAs in Baltimore. The number of participants per CSA ranged from 2 to 174. The calculated ICC was 0.09. summarizes the mean and standard deviation values for each of the seven CSA-level variables for those who did and did not report forgone care.
 

## Correlates of forgone care

## Results—Individual-level correlates of forgone care
 presents the results from the level-one weighted bivariate analyses examining the association of each individual level variable with forgone care. Several pre-disposing factors were found to be associated with forgone care. Those in the age group 35–49 years were found to have a 1.48 higher odds of forgone care, compared to the age group 18–34 (p = 0.001); conversely, those in the ≥65 age group were found to have a 25% lower odds of forgone care, compared to individuals 18–34 years (p = 0.020). The odds of forgone care were also higher in those reporting female sex at birth (OR 1.24, p = 0.010) and those on disability status (OR 1.43, p = 0.001). Individuals reporting Black or African American race had a 15% lower odds of forgone care (p = 0.047).
 Two enabling factors were found to be associated with higher odds of forgone care, including those who reported losing their housing during the COVID-19 pandemic (OR 1.90, p = <0.001) and those who reported being worried about paying their rent or mortgage (OR 1.69, p = <0.001). Finally, significant need level factors with higher odds of forgone care included those with functional limitations (OR 1.66, p<0.001), those with mental illness (OR 1.87, p<0.001), those who reported using substances (OR 1.43, p = 0.004), and those with two or more comorbidities, compared to no comorbidities (OR 1.24, p = 0.023).

## Results—Final multivariable model
The results of the final weighted multivariable model can be found in , adjusted for the pandemic wave and study variables and age category, sex, race, disability status, loss of housing, worrying about rent/mortgage, presence of functional limitations, mental illness, substance abuse, and comorbidity number. Predisposing factors that were statistically significant in the final model included those who reported being ages 35–49 years, who were found to have a higher odds of forgone care compared to those in the 18–34 years age group (OR 1.51, p = 0.001). Individuals who reported their sex at birth as female were also found to have higher odds of forgone care, compared to those who reported their sex at birth as male (OR 1.21, p = 0.028). Individuals who reported their race as Black/African American had a 32% reduction in their odds of forgone care, compared to individuals of any other race (OR 0.68, p = ≤0.001). Significant enabling factors included those who reported losing their house during COVID-19, compared to those who did not (OR 1.47, p = 0.014) and those who reported being worried about paying their rent or mortgage, compared to those who were not (OR 1.37, p = 0.005). Need level factors that remained significant in the final model included those with functional limitations, compared to those without (OR 1.46, p = ≤0.001) and those who reported having a mental illness, compared to those without (OR 1.44, p = ≤0.001).

## Results—Community-level correlates of forgone care
None of the continuous CSA-level variables were found to be significant at the p≤0.10 level after controlling for the individual level variables of age category, sex, race, disability status, loss of housing, worrying about rent/mortgage, presence of functional limitations, mental illness, substance abuse, and comorbidity number. Thus, none of the CSA-level variables were added to the model with the individual level factors.

## Discussion
Several studies published during the COVID-19 pandemic on forgone care indicate that economically disadvantaged and historically excluded populations experienced a greater prevalence of forgone care [ – , , , ]. However, few studies have investigated correlates of forgone care that go beyond social and economic factors, such as examining the influence of the local community in which people live. Given the widespread impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on both individuals and communities, it is important to explore the myriad, multilevel SSDoH that may influence forgone care [ ]. However, our study found that none of the community-level determinants were significantly associated with forgone care in the multilevel model. This finding differs from previously published literature that has identified community-level disparities in COVID-19-related outcomes, although the geographic unit of analyses used in these studies differ from what was used in our study [ – ].
In this racially and economically diverse sample, we found that Black/African Americans living in Baltimore were less likely to experience forgone care, which is in opposition to some previously published work on forgone care during the COVID-19 pandemic [ , , ]. However, this finding was consistent with Tsuzaki & Taira, who found that non-Hispanic/LatinX Black Medicare beneficiaries were less likely to forgo care in the summer of 2020 compared to White beneficiaries [ ]. These findings warrant additional exploration, including comparisons of healthcare utilization practices prior to versus during the pandemic. There are long-standing, systemic inequities in healthcare access and utilization within the Black/African American community that were further exacerbated during the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, a 2016 report by the University of Maryland found that Black/African American Maryland residents were 1.9 times more likely to be unable to afford a visit with a healthcare provider than White residents and were much more likely to die from heart disease, diabetes, stroke, and asthma [ ]. Black/African American individuals included in our study sample may have reported less episodes of forgone care because they have historically experienced systemic barriers to access within the healthcare system. Therefore, they may have been less likely to use the healthcare system even prior to the pandemic, and thus less likely to report forgone care.
In our analysis of individual-level correlates of forgone care, we identified those who have experienced housing insecurity during the pandemic, as evidenced by loss of housing or worrying about paying for housing, as having higher odds of forgone care. Income inequities and financial instability have previously been identified as critical determinants of an individual’s healthcare utilization practices and the experience of forgone care [ ]. Unfortunately, the pandemic impacted the economic stability of millions of American households, particularly lower-income families, and many lost jobs as a result [ ]. This may have drove increased rates of forgone care within individuals experiencing financial hardship and housing instability. Anderson et al., for example, found that 52% of respondents who reported missing medical care did so due to “financial repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic” [ ]. Notably, several safety net programs, such as the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, which provided unemployment benefits and additional financial support to American families, and the continuous Medicaid enrollment provision under the Families First Coronavirus Response Act, were available to qualifying individuals early in the pandemic [ , ]. However, a study published in 2020 on access and enrollment in safety net programs during the pandemic found gaps in awareness for several programs, including health insurance exchanges [ ]. Our study also found that individuals reporting female sex at birth had higher odds of forgone care compared to those reporting male sex at birth. During the pandemic, many women had to take on additional caretaking roles, including homeschooling children and caring for ill family members [ ]. These additional responsibilities may have impacted their ability to seek healthcare when needed. Further, it was well established prior to the pandemic that men seek healthcare less than women [ ], and it is possible this was carried forward in this sample.
The odds of forgone care were also higher in individuals reporting functional limitations. These individuals likely have a higher reliance on support services such as accessible transportation, and interruptions in these services may have disproportionately impacted their ability to access the health system. Those reporting a mental illness also reported an increased odds of forgone care, a finding that aligns with other published COVID-19 forgone care literature [ ]. Individuals suffering from mental illness have previously been shown to be at higher risk for forgone care [ ], and exacerbations in mental health crises during the pandemic may have disproportionately led to the increased risk of forgone care within this population.
In a world where pandemics and other humanitarian emergencies are increasingly likely due to population growth, interactions at the human-animal interface, climate change, and global travel, it is critical that we strengthen models of care so that health systems can continue to support individual and community health during future public health emergencies. One potential strategy is to increase the use of mobile-based healthcare services. Mobile health clinics have previously been shown to be effective in providing urgent care, preventive health, and chronic disease management and have been shown to increase healthcare access for underserved communities, including the economically disadvantaged [ ]. Some of the benefits of mobile health clinics include the elimination of barriers such as lack of transportation, inconvenient operating hours, and long wait times and the ability to form trusting relationships within communities, particularly those who experience stigma such as people living with mental illness [ ]. Furthermore, leveraging mobile clinics in the midst of an emergency have been shown to reduce disruptions in care, as they are already well-integrated into the community and can be effectively and quickly deployed [ ]. Leveraging of mobile clinics during COVID-19 have been captured in the literature to-date. For example, co-location of COVID-19 vaccines within existing harm reduction mobile services has been demonstrated to be an effective way to deliver vaccines to underserved populations [ ]. More widespread use of these types of clinics now and in the future could help reduce forgone care, particularly among those who already experience barriers to healthcare access.
Another strategy that could help address inequities in forgone care during COVID-19 and future health emergencies would be adoption of programs that could extend telehealth services to those who currently lack access. This should include not only the resources required for telehealth, such as internet coverage and smartphones, but also changes in insurance policies that increase coverage and better education for consumers on how to utilize this technology [ ]. For example, participants in one study reported that a major disadvantage of telehealth was their “unfamiliarity” with the platform and distrust that their information was secure and private [ ]. Healthcare providers also expressed gaps in knowledge on how to use telemedicine and what services were covered by insurance [ ], indicating additional opportunities for education to ensure more consistent and widespread use. Additionally, while important policy changes have been implemented to expand telehealth during COVID-19, permanent adoption of some of these changes, such as compensation for primary healthcare services, could help ensure continued access and would already be in place in the event of a new health emergency [ ].

## Limitations
This study has several limitations. First, missing data for participants across several independent variables necessitated imputation of missing values for the model-building process, which may have led to biased results. However, a sensitivity analysis using only participants with complete data revealed similar magnitudes of odds ratios for all variables found to have significance at p≤0.05 in the final, imputed dataset. Second, low sample size amongst participants reporting Hispanic/LatinX origin prohibited incorporation into the final model. Third, the different enrollment periods of the parent studies covered different time periods within the pandemic that may have led to forgone care. We have addressed this limitation by using models weighted by years in the pandemic at time of parent study enrollment. Fourth, because the CoVPN 5002 study did not collect participant’s address, we had to assume their residence was within the venue of enrollment. While most venues included low-income housing developments, their assigned CSA may not have been accurately reflected in the data. Fifth, because this study is based upon participant-reported survey data, it may be subject to recall bias. Finally, there is the potential for selection bias which may impact the representativeness of the Baltimore population—for example, the unemployment rate within our sample (52.3%) was higher than that of Baltimore City (29.0%), according to 2021 BNIA data [ ], which may be due to greater representation of individuals from CSAs with higher unemployment rates. However, our final study sample was relatively similar across other characteristics, including sex (study sample-54.5% female; Baltimore-53.1% female), race (study sample-52.7% Black/African American; Baltimore-61.6% Black/African American), ethnicity (study sample-3.7% Hispanic; Baltimore-5.6% Hispanic), and poverty (study sample-30% with income <%25,000 per year; Balitmore-20.3% live below the federal poverty level), when comparing our study sample to 2022 Baltimore census data [ ]. Additionally, the CoVPN 5002 parent study did not collect data on participant’s health insurance status, which likely impacted healthcare utilization. However, it could be inferred to be similar to the 2022 census data (approximately 6.4% of population under age 65 years is uninsured in Baltimore) [ ].

## Conclusions
Despite these limitations, this study has important implications for addressing unmet healthcare needs that have occurred during the pandemic. However, additional research will be critical to further understanding how healthcare access and utilization practices differed during versus before the pandemic and to more clearly identify those who are at highest risk of the downstream consequences of forgone care. It is also critical that the health system identify ways to address any new barriers to care that under-resourced populations might be experiencing, such as the increased use of mobile health services or telemedicine platforms. Additionally, moving forward, public health emergency preparedness planning efforts must account for the unique needs of these communities during crises, to ensure that their health needs can continue to be met. This will require additional studies that seek to better understand the perspectives and experiences of these populations during the pandemic, and how models of care can be adapted to serve them better in the future.

## Supporting information
S1 File

## Parent study survey questions.
(DOCX)

We would like to acknowledge the participants of the C-Forward and CoVPN 5002 studies for their participation. We would also like to acknowledge the team at the Center for Infectious Disease and Nursing Innovation for their tireless work in recruitment of participants in both of the parent protocols.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0302064.r001Decision Letter 0
PakTae-YoungAcademic Editor© 2024 Tae-Young Pak2024Tae-Young Pakhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
30 Oct 2023

PONE-D-23-27005Rate of forgone care during the COVID-19 pandemic in Baltimore, MDPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Meyer,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 14 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Tae-Young Pak, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: 
 "Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute of Nursing Research (award number 1F31NR080834-01, DM; nih.gov) and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the National Institutes of Health under award numbers P30AI094189-09S1 and UM1AI068619 (JF; nih.gov). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health."
  
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: ""The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."" 
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section: 
"I have read the journal's policy and the authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: S. Mehta receives material support from Abbott Diagnostics. The authors do not have any other conflicts of interest to disclose."
Please confirm that this does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, by including the following statement: ""This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests).  If there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared. 
Please include your updated Competing Interests statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for allowing me to review this paper. I have major issues with the paper in general, in particular with the methods and analytical pieces of it. I am also not convinced about the novelty and contribution of this study the way the authors frame it. Below are some of my comments:
L41: Studies using data from the Urban Institute capture exactly this question; ie Giannouchos TV, Brooks JM, Andreyeva E, Ukert B. Frequency and factors associated with foregone and delayed medical care due to COVID‐19 among nonelderly US adults from August to December 2020. Journal of evaluation in clinical practice. 2022 Feb;28(1):33-42.
L42: Or choice due to less urgent need – some rate of foregone care might actually be a good thing when patients overutilize the healthcare system. So this statement is partially true and should be revised
L38-46: There are more US studies looking into foregone/delayed care thus the authors should review the literature more careful or at least acknowledge that there is more than “limited” evidence (L43)
A short search revealed the following:
Giannouchos TV, Brooks JM, Andreyeva E, Ukert B. Frequency and factors associated with foregone and delayed medical care due to COVID‐19 among nonelderly US adults from August to December 2020. Journal of evaluation in clinical practice. 2022 Feb;28(1):33-42.
Findling MG, Blendon RJ, Benson JM. Delayed care with harmfulhealth consequences—reported experiences from national surveysduring Coronavirus Disease 2019.JAMA Health Forum. 2020;1(12):e201463
Birkmeyer JD, Barnato A, Birkmeyer N, Bessler R, Skinner J. TheImpact of the COVID‐19 pandemic on hospital admissions in theUnited States: study examines trends in US hospital admissionsduring the COVID‐19 pandemic.HealthAff. 2020;39(11):2010‐2017
Jeffery MM, D'onofrio G, Paek H, et al. Trends in emergency de-partment visits and hospital admissions in health care systems in 5states in the first months of the CoViD‐19 pandemic in the US.JAMA Intern Med. 2020;180(10):1328‐1333
L46: what was the estimated rate of foregone care and how higher was it in marginalized communities?
L53: You only cite 1 study here; how is the data mixed if 6-7 find the same thing and only one does not? In addition, the cited study that did not find similar association analyzed only Medicare beneficiaries who are different anyway. I would suggest reviewing these more carefully and updating the text
L53-55: This sentence should either be excluded or mentioned way earlier in the document (ie 1st paragraph)
L63: During the pandemic?
L69-71: The authors make an argument that nationally representative survey data do not employ robust sampling strategies and lack representation of such population. Please review this and rephrase. Also, add references so that the reader can judge which studies you are referring to. The study by Giannouchos et al use UI HPS data which are among the most comprehensive nationwide surveys – which the authors have missed in their search. Same throughout L71-73.
L75-79: Similar with the previous comment, I am not sure how under-resourced communities in Baltimore are nationally representative of other similar communities in New Mexico for example. I would suggest the authors rethink their contribution to the literature and the advantage of their study compared to previous work. Maybe the use of a survey with more recent data relative to what is published is a stronger argument.
L83: Adults as 18+ or 18-64?
L84 & 134: What was the rationale for using person-years? I am still not convinced by this. The question / outcome is dichotomous, they weren’t asked how many times – in which case enrollment length would matter. Did the authors consider or do a robustness check on this?
L86: Where these data collected for different studies? If so, your study is retrospective and secondary and you pulled your data from these studies. This should be made more explicit.
TABLE 1 should be an appendix; it is not a finding nor something that the researchers did for this study
L119: So how many were excluded? My understanding is that around 30% were excluded. If so, did the authors check on missingness? Was it at random?
L120: How many in each exclusion?
I see that this addressed in Figure 1 and the first section of the results. Maybe this should be moved in the methods.
L125: Is it possible to identify who skipped, missed, or delayed as separate outcomes? Skip is very different than delay.
L139-140: I don’t understand this. Do you mean stratified analyses?
L145-147: This is very problematic. The study N should be robust and justified, not change throughout.
L149: Why not chi2 or Fisher’s exact?
L139-151: The standard would be to conduct some sort of multivariable regression model to assess variation in foregone rate by various characteristics/factors. I am surprised that the authors did not do this, so I would encourage them to do so. Otherwise, descriptive findings and significances reported can be misleading. This is a serious issue.
L168: To my comment on representation above, 96% are not Hispanic – so your sample has external validity issues. Hence, I would encourage rethinking the strength and contribution of your work in the Introduction
Table2: I would suggest adding 2 columns and comparing those with and without reported foregone care and their p-values here which is how most studies present their findings as in this field
L185-188: I am concerned about this; see my comment above
TABLE 3: The Ns of Total Events are not consistent. This needs to be fixed. This table is confusing as well and suggest updating it as mentioned above
Lack of multivariable regression is a problem here. There is a need for this to explore which associations hold once adjusted for.
L219: An N of 2,000 is not large
L220-227: This might be a strength but is not suitable here. The first paragraph in the discussion should wrap up the findings and provide a comprehensive summary of the main findings. If the authors would like to highlight the strengths of the two samples, this should be mentioned later and more succinctly.
L229: First, how does the identified rate align with the available literature? That is the first big finding.
L238: I am not sure that his result will hold in a regression model
L243 & 251: Reference?
L251: Could this finding be sample specific?
L261: But you didn’t study immunocompromised nor present evidence about those. In addition, among the finding, are any of those at increased risk of mortality? Otherwise, this is a true comment, but not backed up but the study and irrelevant
L275: Isnt that shown in Table 3? If not, what are these numbers?
Limitations: Also, its not nationally representative and lacks external validity
L287: This is an assumption and cant be validated nor justified and thus must be excluded
L229-230 & 241: Were these factors associated with foregone care also before the pandemic? What have pre-pandemic studies found? If these were, then the findings are not novel.
Reviewer #2: This study examines forgone health care during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. This is a well-written manuscript that addresses a relevant topic, but I have several concerns, which are listed below.
First, I think the findings are not novel enough. Consequences of the pandemic on foregone care and subgroups more likely to forego care have been well described in the literature. I am not sure that a cross-sectional study can improve our knowledge on this topic.
Second, I am not sure that it is relevant to use "person-years" in a cross-sectional study. If the interest is in the pandemic period, then the study should be limited to the relevant periods. In addition, both studies missed the beginning of the pandemic, when the worst levels of missed care were likely to have occurred.
Third, recommendations on strategies to reduce the spread of the virus do not seem useful more than 3 years after the start of the pandemic and while restrictive measures are still in place.
Finally, the conclusions discuss the results, but given the design and results of the study, this should be removed from the paper.
Please include a description of covariates in the methods section.
Reviewer #3: This paper evaluates whether COVID-19 pandemic was associated with increased forgone care. The authors use two surveys on forgone care conducted among the population of adults residing in Baltimore, MD. They find that the rate of forgone care was highest among individuals with disabilities, functional limitations, financial stress, and multiple comorbidities.
Overall, I think this paper is nicely written and utilizes some novel data. I think a few additions to the analysis will strengthen the implications of this study.
1. The authors mention that they drop individuals with missing data for the key outcomes (forgone care) or inclusion criteria (did they need care during COVID). While I understand the need to remove these observations, it raises the possibility of selection bias. Can the authors say something about individuals with missing outcomes? Were they more likely to be from specific demographic groups? Perhaps this can be mentioned in the Limitations.
2. The authors mention that the study participants were sampled from across Baltimore, with oversampling for underrepresented demographic and socio-economic groups. How did the study population compare to Baltimore overall socio-economic and demographic population composition? Can the authors use Census data for Baltimore to compare their study population to Census Baltimore population? This would greatly help with interpreting the results and external validity implications.
3. The number of individuals reporting not being employed in Table 2 is really high (52.3%). This number is not explained by other characteristics reported in Table 2, such as % with disability (15.5), % with college degree (63.2), % lost housing during the pandemic (7.6), % with financial limitations (30.7), etc. Was the employment so low because it was COVID period, or was it so low for some other reason? How does this number compare to the overall unemployment rate in Baltimore in 2020, 2021, 2022? I think this goes back to my previous comment about comparing study population to the overall Baltimore population using an external data source.
4. Can functional limitations be broken down by % physical, mental, or emotional? Is this group overrepresented by physical or emotional limitations, which have different implications on the need for medical care?
5. The authors use certain diseases to calculate the number of comorbidities in Table 3 (footnote 3). Why were these comorbidities selected? Is it because of the study design? Or were these diseases more common among the study participants? How does the list of comorbidities used in the paper compare to comorbidities used to construct the typical comorbidities indices (Charlson, Elixhauser).
6. The Limitations section mentions absence of insurance status in the study. While it will be impossible to know the insurance status of study participants if it was not recorded in the survey, the authors can say something about the overall insurance rate in Baltimore using Census data. This will give the audience at least some clue into potential distribution of insured/uninsured population in Baltimore.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0302064.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
8 Jan 2024

We would like to thank the reviewers for their time and insightful comments. As a result of their suggestions, we have opted to include in this manuscript our multilevel logistic regression analysis, which was done as part of a broader study. Thus, the manuscript has changed significantly, as it now focuses on the findings of our regression analysis. Notably, we believe this to be the most “novel” contribution of this work, as we looked at both individual and community level correlates of forgone care. The purpose of our paper was to explore whether there were any community-level correlates (such as internet access) that accounted for forgone care above and beyond any individual level correlates (e.g., age, comorbidity status). To our knowledge, there exist no published manuscripts on the community-level corelates of forgone care during the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that the addition of this analysis to our paper greatly increases its value to the existing literature. We would also like to note the addition of one author, Dr. Thomas Inglesby, who helped with refining the study design and methodology for the regression analysis as well as helped to edit this revised manuscript.
Please see our comments to the reviewers below.
Reviewer #1: Thank you for allowing me to review this paper. I have major issues with the paper in general, in particular with the methods and analytical pieces of it. I am also not convinced about the novelty and contribution of this study the way the authors frame it. 
Below are some of my comments:
L41: Studies using data from the Urban Institute capture exactly this question; ie Giannouchos TV, Brooks JM, Andreyeva E, Ukert B. Frequency and factors associated with foregone and delayed medical care due to COVID‐19 among nonelderly US adults from August to December 2020. Journal of evaluation in clinical practice. 2022 Feb;28(1):33-42.
-We have added this citation, along with several others that were inadvertently omitted from this manuscript (see citations 8-19). 
L42: Or choice due to less urgent need – some rate of foregone care might actually be a good thing when patients overutilize the healthcare system. So this statement is partially true and should be revised
-This line has been removed from the revised manuscript.
L38-46: There are more US studies looking into foregone/delayed care thus the authors should review the literature more careful or at least acknowledge that there is more than “limited” evidence (L43)
A short search revealed the following:
• Giannouchos TV, Brooks JM, Andreyeva E, Ukert B. Frequency and factors associated with foregone and delayed medical care due to COVID‐19 among nonelderly US adults from August to December 2020. Journal of evaluation in clinical practice. 2022 Feb;28(1):33-42.
• Findling MG, Blendon RJ, Benson JM. Delayed care with harmfulhealth consequences—reported experiences from national surveysduring Coronavirus Disease 2019.JAMA Health Forum. 2020;1(12):e201463 
• Birkmeyer JD, Barnato A, Birkmeyer N, Bessler R, Skinner J. TheImpact of the COVID‐19 pandemic on hospital admissions in theUnited States: study examines trends in US hospital admissionsduring the COVID‐19 pandemic.HealthAff. 2020;39(11):2010‐2017 
• Jeffery MM, D'onofrio G, Paek H, et al. Trends in emergency de-partment visits and hospital admissions in health care systems in 5states in the first months of the CoViD‐19 pandemic in the US.JAMA Intern Med. 2020;180(10):1328‐1333 
-The Giannouchos and Findling studies are now referenced in our paper. However, the Birkmeyer and Jeffery articles look at hospital trends rather than patient reported forgone care. We agree that there are many articles published on health system trends during the pandemic (e.g., hospital admissions, etc.) but less has been published about patient reported delayed or forgone care. However, we have added the Birkmeyer and Jeffery article as citations for the sentence “Much of this evidence consists of studies describing changes in the volume of services rendered, such trends in hospital admissions and emergency department usage” (lines 42-44) as we do note the preponderance of evidence on this topic in our paper.
L46: what was the estimated rate of foregone care and how higher was it in marginalized communities?
-We have added a few exemplars from existing studies to highlight how some studies have found higher rates/odds of forgone care in marginalized communities, but also that the data have at times been contradictory. Please see lines 48-62.
L53: You only cite 1 study here; how is the data mixed if 6-7 find the same thing and only one does not? In addition, the cited study that did not find similar association analyzed only Medicare beneficiaries who are different anyway. I would suggest reviewing these more carefully and updating the text
-This text has been updated to more clearly reflect the existing literature, including clarifying the population sampled for the exemplar studies (see lines 48-62).
L53-55: This sentence should either be excluded or mentioned way earlier in the document (ie 1st paragraph)
-This sentence has been removed.
L63: During the pandemic?
-No, this was evidence published prior to the pandemic. This has been clarified (see lines 82-83).
L69-71: The authors make an argument that nationally representative survey data do not employ robust sampling strategies and lack representation of such population. Please review this and rephrase. Also, add references so that the reader can judge which studies you are referring to. The study by Giannouchos et al use UI HPS data which are among the most comprehensive nationwide surveys – which the authors have missed in their search. Same throughout L71-73.
-This last paragraph has been completely revised. Please see lines 89-95.
L75-79: Similar with the previous comment, I am not sure how under-resourced communities in Baltimore are nationally representative of other similar communities in New Mexico for example. I would suggest the authors rethink their contribution to the literature and the advantage of their study compared to previous work. Maybe the use of a survey with more recent data relative to what is published is a stronger argument.
-This sentence has been removed.
L83: Adults as 18+ or 18-64?
-Adults 18+. This has been clarified (see line 155-157).
L84 & 134: What was the rationale for using person-years? I am still not convinced by this. The question / outcome is dichotomous, they weren’t asked how many times – in which case enrollment length would matter. Did the authors consider or do a robustness check on this?
-People were asked about experiencing forgone care when they completed the survey. However not everyone completed the survey at the same time so had varying amount of time to have experienced forgone care (surveys were completed from Feb. 2021 to Dec. 2022). Those who have longer exposure to the pandemic would have a greater opportunity to experience forgone care at some point compared to those with short pandemic exposure. However, as suggested by the reviewers we have dropped the reporting of rates and now focus on the association of experience of forgone care and individual and community level factors.
L86: Where these data collected for different studies? If so, your study is retrospective and secondary and you pulled your data from these studies. This should be made more explicit.
-We have more explicitly stated that this is a secondary data analysis using parent study data in the revised draft (see lines 99-109)
TABLE 1 should be an appendix; it is not a finding nor something that the researchers did for this study.
-In the revised draft, we have removed this table and have instead chosen to describe the parent studies in a few short paragraphs (see lines111-148). We believe having this information in the text (vs. an appendix) is critical as it provides context for the parent studies, including sampling strategies.
L119: So how many were excluded? My understanding is that around 30% were excluded. If so, did the authors check on missingness? Was it at random?
-In total, 888 individuals were excluded based on our inclusion criteria (e.g., they did not require care). The others that were excluded (n=87 total) because the participant had discordant answers (n=44), data on the outcome of forgone care were missing (n=42), or because they were missing data on ≥7 covariates (n=1). We compared these 87 individuals who were dropped from the dataset to those who remained in the dataset across all demographic covariates to assess for any systemic differences and there were none.
L120: How many in each exclusion? I see that this addressed in Figure 1 and the first section of the results. Maybe this should be moved in the methods.
-This has been added to the methods section (see lines 152-161).
L125: Is it possible to identify who skipped, missed, or delayed as separate outcomes? Skip is very different than delay.
-Unfortunately, given the way both parent surveys were worded, it cannot be further clarified whether the visit was skipped or delayed. We agree it would have been preferable to have data on both skipped and delayed visits separately.
L139-140: I don’t understand this. Do you mean stratified analyses?
-This sentence has been removed in the revised manuscript.
L145-147: This is very problematic. The study N should be robust and justified, not change throughout.
-Thank you for this comment. In the revised draft, we present the results of our multilevel regression, which used an imputed dataset so that a full, robust dataset was used for all analyses.
L149: Why not chi2 or Fisher’s exact?
-We no longer included these analyses in the revised draft based on reviewer feedback.
L139-151: The standard would be to conduct some sort of multivariable regression model to assess variation in foregone rate by various characteristics/factors. I am surprised that the authors did not do this, so I would encourage them to do so. Otherwise, descriptive findings and significances reported can be misleading. This is a serious issue.
-Please see our comment at the beginning of our reviewer response.
L168: To my comment on representation above, 96% are not Hispanic – so your sample has external validity issues. Hence, I would encourage rethinking the strength and contribution of your work in the Introduction
-We agree that lack of representation of the Hispanic population is a limitation of our study. We have noted this in our limitations section, including that we were unable to incorporate this variable into our final model because of lack of power.
Table2: I would suggest adding 2 columns and comparing those with and without reported foregone care and their p-values here which is how most studies present their findings as in this field
-Table 2 now includes a column for those who reported any type of forgone care and a column for those who did not report forgone care. We did not include p-values in this table, as the significance of each of these variables are tested in the regression analyses using the imputed dataset.
L185-188: I am concerned about this; see my comment above
-We are not quite sure what the reviewer is referencing here…perhaps the description of person-years. We have now changed the focus of our paper to a multilevel regression (vs. person-years using rates) so we hope we have addressed this comment. 
TABLE 3: The Ns of Total Events are not consistent. This needs to be fixed. This table is confusing as well and suggest updating it as mentioned above
-This table has been removed.
Lack of multivariable regression is a problem here. There is a need for this to explore which associations hold once adjusted for.
-This revised draft now focuses on our multilevel regression analysis.
L219: An N of 2,000 is not large
-This sentence has been removed.
L220-227: This might be a strength but is not suitable here. The first paragraph in the discussion should wrap up the findings and provide a comprehensive summary of the main findings. If the authors would like to highlight the strengths of the two samples, this should be mentioned later and more succinctly.
-The discussion section has been revised and the first paragraph now focuses on our primary finding, which was that none of the community-level factors was found to be significantly correlated with forgone care.
L229: First, how does the identified rate align with the available literature? That is the first big finding.
-The discussion section has been revised and we compare some of our findings to the existing literature (see lines 374-378, lines 389-397, lines 411-412).
L238: I am not sure that his result will hold in a regression model
-Our analysis now describes our regression analysis.
L243 & 251: Reference?
-These sentences have been removed.
L251: Could this finding be sample specific?
-These sentences have been removed.
L261: But you didn’t study immunocompromised nor present evidence about those. In addition, among the finding, are any of those at increased risk of mortality? Otherwise, this is a true comment, but not backed up but the study and irrelevant
-These sentences have been removed.
L275: Isnt that shown in Table 3? If not, what are these numbers?
-These sentences have been removed.
Limitations: Also, its not nationally representative and lacks external validity
-This has been added to the limitations (see lines 457-463).
L287: This is an assumption and cant be validated nor justified and thus must be excluded
-These sentences have been removed.
L229-230 & 241: Were these factors associated with foregone care also before the pandemic? What have pre-pandemic studies found? If these were, then the findings are not novel.
-Please see prior comments.
Reviewer #2: This study examines forgone health care during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. This is a well-written manuscript that addresses a relevant topic, but I have several concerns, which are listed below.
First, I think the findings are not novel enough. Consequences of the pandemic on foregone care and subgroups more likely to forego care have been well described in the literature. I am not sure that a cross-sectional study can improve our knowledge on this topic.
-Please see our comment at the introduction to our response to reviewers.
Second, I am not sure that it is relevant to use "person-years" in a cross-sectional study. If the interest is in the pandemic period, then the study should be limited to the relevant periods. In addition, both studies missed the beginning of the pandemic, when the worst levels of missed care were likely to have occurred.
-This study now focuses on our regression analysis and not on the rate of forgone care by person-years.
Third, recommendations on strategies to reduce the spread of the virus do not seem useful more than 3 years after the start of the pandemic and while restrictive measures are still in place.
-Thank you for this comment. We have completely re-written the discussion section and have included two paragraphs that discuss strategies for addressing forgone care during future public health crises.
Finally, the conclusions discuss the results, but given the design and results of the study, this should be removed from the paper.
-The conclusions have been re-written.
Please include a description of covariates in the methods section.
-This has been added.
Reviewer #3: This paper evaluates whether COVID-19 pandemic was associated with increased forgone care. The authors use two surveys on forgone care conducted among the population of adults residing in Baltimore, MD. They find that the rate of forgone care was highest among individuals with disabilities, functional limitations, financial stress, and multiple comorbidities.
Overall, I think this paper is nicely written and utilizes some novel data. I think a few additions to the analysis will strengthen the implications of this study.
1. The authors mention that they drop individuals with missing data for the key outcomes (forgone care) or inclusion criteria (did they need care during COVID). While I understand the need to remove these observations, it raises the possibility of selectio
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0302064.r003Decision Letter 1
PakTae-YoungAcademic Editor© 2024 Tae-Young Pak2024Tae-Young Pakhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
16 Feb 2024

PONE-D-23-27005R1An Evaluation of the Impact of Social and Structural Determinants of Health on Forgone Care during the COVID-19 Pandemic in Baltimore, MarylandPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Meyer,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 01 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Tae-Young Pak, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #3: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #3: Thank you for addressing my comments. I would like to push back on authors’ claim that they cannot use Census data to compare the unemployment rate in their population with the overall Baltimore unemployment rate during the same time period. First, the authors can use both the civilian labor force participation rate and unemployment rate. Census also provides numbers for percent of individuals who might not be in the labor force because they are students or retirees. While, it is true that Census numbers include population 16 years and older, the authors do not provide evidence why the numbers for population of 16 years and older should be significantly different from the numbers for population of 18 years and older. Overall, I think a more careful look at Census numbers will allow the authors to compare their (very high) unemployment rate with Baltimore unemployment rate. There is about 20 percentage points difference between the unemployment rate in their sample and the CSA-level unemployment rate. This should be mentioned in the limitations.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0302064.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
11 Mar 2024

We would like to thank Reviewer 3 for taking the time to review our revised manuscript. Please see our response to their comment below. We would also like to note the addition of two authors, whom were inadvertently left off the previous submission. These authors assisted with data acquisition and logistics for the C-Forward parent study. We regret this omission and appreciate the opportunity to add them as authors to the manuscript.
Reviewer #3: Thank you for addressing my comments. I would like to push back on authors’ claim that they cannot use Census data to compare the unemployment rate in their population with the overall Baltimore unemployment rate during the same time period. First, the authors can use both the civilian labor force participation rate and unemployment rate. Census also provides numbers for percent of individuals who might not be in the labor force because they are students or retirees. While, it is true that Census numbers include population 16 years and older, the authors do not provide evidence why the numbers for population of 16 years and older should be significantly different from the numbers for population of 18 years and older. Overall, I think a more careful look at Census numbers will allow the authors to compare their (very high) unemployment rate with Baltimore unemployment rate. There is about 20 percentage points difference between the unemployment rate in their sample and the CSA-level unemployment rate. This should be mentioned in the limitations.
Thank you for this comment. 52.3% of our sample (age 18 years +) reported not being employed full or part-time, meaning they fit into one of these other categories: retired, keeping house, student, laid off, looking for work, or disabled. As you noted, the overall unemployment rate for Baltimore City (age 16 years+) is 29.0%, per the Baltimore Neighborhood Indicators Alliance (note, this data is from 2021). Census data from 2022 indicates that 62.0% of the Baltimore City population was in the civilian labor force (age 16 years+), so we can approximate that 38% were not in the labor force. We suspect that our unemployment rate in our sample was higher due to greater representation of individuals from CSAs with higher unemployment rates. In particular, the CoVPN parent study recruitment methodology included a greater emphasis on persons in lower SES neighborhoods. We have added a sentence addressing this in the limitations section.
10.1371/journal.pone.0302064.r005Decision Letter 2
PakTae-YoungAcademic Editor© 2024 Tae-Young Pak2024Tae-Young Pakhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
27 Mar 2024

An Evaluation of the Impact of Social and Structural Determinants of Health on Forgone Care during the COVID-19 Pandemic in Baltimore, Maryland
PONE-D-23-27005R2
Dear Dr. Meyer,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Tae-Young Pak, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0302064.r006Acceptance letter
PakTae-YoungAcademic Editor© 2024 Tae-Young Pak2024Tae-Young Pakhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
30 Apr 2024

PONE-D-23-27005R2 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Meyer, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Tae-Young Pak 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE