pmcPLoS BiolPLoS Biol212plosbiol101183755plosPLOS Biology1544-91731545-7885PLOSPMC12931767PMC12931767.112931767129317674173415210.1371/journal.pbio.3003650PBIOLOGY-D-25-028031Meta-Research ArticleResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentPeer ReviewResearch and Analysis MethodsScientific PublishingSocial SciencesEconomicsLabor EconomicsSalariesResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesMathematical ModelsScience PolicyScience and Technology WorkforceCareers in ResearchScientistsPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsScientistsPhysical SciencesPhysicsRelaxation (Physics)Social SciencesEconomicsCommercePaymentResearch and Analysis MethodsSimulation and ModelingAgent-Based ModelingComputer and Information SciencesSystems ScienceAgent-Based ModelingPhysical SciencesMathematicsSystems ScienceAgent-Based ModelingScreening, sorting, and the feedback cycles that imperil peer review
The meltdown of peer review and how to stop ithttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2070-385XBergstromCarl T.ConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5612-7519GrossKevinConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America2
Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, United States of AmericaDirnaglUlrichEditor – ].
However, this service depends on a massive supply of free labor, namely the unpaid and largely uncredited efforts of peer reviewers [ ]. But the pool of peer-review labor has become stretched thin, and the problem seems to be worsening. Editors report increasing difficulty in finding reviewers for the manuscripts that they handle. Bibliometric studies in a range of fields support their assertions: reviewers are more likely to decline review invitations and thus the average number of solicitations per acceptance has increased ([ – ], though see [ ] for an exception). We appear to be in the midst of a “peer-review meltdown” in which the peer-review system is becoming woefully overtaxed by the volume of manuscript submissions [ – ].
As peer review teeters, scientists have begun experimenting with new ideas to reduce the review load or increase review supply. For example, venues such as Publons and Elsevier’s Reviewer Recognition Platform attempt to make reviewing more prestigious by awarding accolades to top reviewers [ , ]. Brokerage services tried charging authors to secure peer reviews that could be forwarded to prospective publication outlets [ , ]. These foundered, but a new generation of journal-independent review initiatives such as Review Commons and Peer Community In have emerged in their stead. Some computer science conferences such as NeurIPS [ ] keep review loads down by disallowing revision and re-review. Elsewhere, some journals—including PLOS Biology [ ]—offer portable peer review, where initial reviews follow a manuscript if it is resubmitted to other venues. Others have suggested tying the opportunity to submit a paper as an author to one’s contributions as a reviewer [ ], and some journals have experimented with cash payments for reviews [ – ]. Yet others have studied whether machine review using AI [ ] and large language models [ ] can complement peer review. While debate about the propriety of machine review remains unsettled [ , ], some reviewers are using LLMs for assistance even when journal or conference guidelines forbid doing so [ – ]. Some critics have even proposed eliminating prepublication peer-review altogether [ ]. The breadth of these endeavors testifies to scientists’ eagerness to place scientific publishing on more stable footing.
Yet all these initiatives are hampered by the fact that a rigorous theory of the structure and function of peer review has yet to coalesce [ ]. This article aims to begin to fill that gap. While the literature is dotted with mathematical models of peer review, many of these efforts use detailed, agent-based simulation models that embrace the richness of the scientific ecosystem (e.g., [ – ]). In this paper, we take a different approach by developing low-dimensional models that isolate how peer review shifts the burden of identifying the best science among among authors, reviewers, and readers of the scientific literature. (Zhang et al. [ ] have recently presented a model of computer-science conferences that also examines how self-screening by authors affects the peer-review burden.) These models reveal a set of hidden pressures on peer review, and bringing them to light helps us to understand the tensions that threaten the entire institution as science changes. In particular, these models highlight a pernicious feedback loop: increasing submissions to top journals exhausts the pool of suitable peer reviewers, resulting in lower quality peer reviews that encourage yet more authors to take a chance on submitting their paper to a prestigious venue ( ). We also show how other systemic factors—increasing emphasis on high-impact publications, the proliferation of journals, and competition among these journals for unpaid peer-review labor—propel this cycle. Finally, we consider possible solutions that could interrupt the meltdown of peer review, or even reverse it.
 

## Model and welfare

## Adda-Ottaviani model
Our model builds from the base model in Adda & Ottaviani (2024; henceforth AO) [ ]. AO use their model to study grant competitions, but their model adapts naturally to scientific publication. Our analysis differs substantially from AO, as suits the different aims of the papers. The provides mathematical proofs of several of the key claims and some additional results.
Consider a scientific community served by two journals: an elite journal that seeks to publish top manuscripts and a mega-journal that publishes everything else. We consider only two journals for the sake of simplicity, although our model applies in any setting with several vertically differentiated journals. Suppose that the elite journal has the capacity to publish a proportion of the manuscripts that the community produces. We assume that the journal’s capacity k is determined exogeneously, perhaps by limits imposed by the publisher or by constraints on readers’ attention [ ]. Henceforth, we focus on the behavior of the elite journal and place the mega-journal in the background. Thus we refer to the elite journal as simply “the journal”; we say that authors who publish their manuscripts in the elite journal are “published”, and so on.
Suppose that this community contains a unit mass of authors and that each author is endowed with a manuscript with quality θ. (By a “unit mass”, we mean that the community is large enough that we can describe the model in terms of continuously varying proportions of authors. This allows us to sidestep complications that would arise from accounting for the exact size of the community.) For mathematical convenience, assume that θ has a standard Gaussian distribution across authors, . Authors have their own sense of whether their work is any good. We instantiate this by assuming that an author with a manuscript of quality θ obtains a private sense of their manuscript’s quality X that is drawn from a normal distribution with mean θ and variance . Across authors, X is marginally distributed as . We refer to the quantile q = FX(x) as the author’s type (here and throughout, F denotes a cumulative distribution function, or cdf), and identify authors with their type, e.g. “author q".
Authors can submit their manuscript to the journal, or not. Authors who submit their manuscript pay a disutility cost c > 0 [ ], which includes the opportunity cost of foregoing immediate publication in the mega-journal. Authors whose manuscripts are published receive kudos, prestige, professional rewards, etc. with value v > c. More precisely, v gives the additional reward that the author receives from publishing in the elite journal right away relative to the time-discounted reward of publishing in the mega-journal later. We ignore any other actions that authors may take (e.g., cover letters) that could communicate information about their type to the journal.
Because the journal cannot directly observe manuscript quality θ, it solicits reviews in the usual way. For now, assume that journals send out every manuscript they receive for review; desk rejection will be considered later. Let Y be the review score for a submitted manuscript, and assume that for a manuscript of quality θ, Y is drawn from a Gaussian distribution with mean θ and variance . Higher review scores Y provide evidence of higher article quality θ, and thus the journal rationally publishes those papers whose review score exceeds some acceptance threshold y.
Two conditions determine the model equilibrium. First, authors submit their paper if and only if their payoff from doing so is positive. We call this the author-rationality condition. (Authors on the razor’s edge of indifference—those for whom the benefit from submitting their manuscript exactly matches the cost—are rare enough that their behavior does not affect the model equilibrium.) Second, the journal fills its capacity, a condition we call the capacity-filling condition. The capacity-filling condition can be motivated by assuming that the journal editor prefers to publish as many papers as possible without exceeding the journal’s capacity [ ]. See ref. [ ] for a related model in which the elite journal is not capacity-limited but instead seeks to publish all papers with a quality above a particular threshold.
Write author q’s probability of having their manuscript accepted when facing journal threshold y as 
 . (The conditional distribution of Y given X = x is Gaussian with mean and variance .) Because an author’s acceptance probability strictly increases with q, there is a marginal author such that only authors with type submit their manuscript. A model equilibrium is described by a marginal author and a journal cutoff at which the author-rationality and capacity-filling conditions hold. Writing equilibrium acceptance probabilities as , the equilibrium solves the author-rationality condition

 va^(q^)=c
(AR)
and the capacity-filling condition

 ∫q^1a^(q)dq=k.
(CF)
Note that v and c affect the model only through their ratio. AO show that the model equilibrium exists, is unique, and is stable. illustrates the equilibrium’s construction.
 

## Welfare
The scientific literature serves (at least) three different constituencies. Authors wish to have their work read. Readers—and by extension, publishers who market journals to those readers—want to read about the best and most interesting science, and to do so in a timely fashion. Reviewers contribute the volunteer labor that supports the peer-review process. These constituencies represent roles rather than distinct groups; a given researcher may submit a paper on Monday, read several articles on Tuesday, and write a peer review on Wednesday. But by treating each role as a constituency, we obtain a finer-grained view of how peer review trades off benefits across these activities. We define payoffs for each group as follows.

## Authors.
Author q’s payoff is if , and 0 otherwise. To measure the authors’ welfare, we first sum payoffs across authors to give , where gives the volume of papers submitted to the journal, or (in the absence of desk-rejection) the review load. This aggregate payoff simply equals the total rewards from publication, , minus the total disutility cost paid by authors, . To obtain a scale-free measure of welfare, we standardize this aggregate payoff by , the total payoff available to authors when manuscript quality θ is public knowledge. This yields

 vk−cLvk=1−cLvk
as a measure of the authors’ welfare.

## Readers.
Readers want to read—and journals want to publish—the best manuscripts. To this extent, readers’ welfare and the journal’s payoff are the same, and we measure them by the average quality θ of published manuscripts (which can be written as ) standardized by the average quality of the best k manuscripts ( ). This measure captures how reliably the journal is able to fill its pages with the best science. As a measure of reader welfare, it is admittedly incomplete because it ignores the speed with which journals disseminate results; all else equal, readers prefer to learn about new discoveries promptly. We lack a metric for reader welfare that incorporates timeliness.

## Reviewers.
While reviewing a manuscript brings a reviewer both benefits and costs, we assume here that the costs of reviewing exceed the benefits. Thus the burden on the review community scales with L, the review load.
Author and reviewer welfare can be understood graphically ( ). The black curve of gives authors’ benefit (for the same parameter values as ), , and the area under this curve, shaded in gray, equals the authors’ total benefit, . The green hatched region has height c and width L, and thus its area equals the authors’ total cost, . Author welfare equals the proportion of the gray shaded area that lies outside the hatched green box. The load on reviewers equals the area of the green box divided by c. Reader and journal welfare depends on the actual article quality θ and thus is determined by the combined action of screening and sorting ( ). In , we show that the optimal strength of screening for the journal and its readers depends on authors’ and reviewers’ accuracy in assessing manuscript quality. These results are intuitive: journals and their readers are better off with more stringent screening and more selective submissions when authors are well-informed about their paper’s quality, and conversely are better off with looser screening and more submissions when referees are better informed.
 

## Analysis
We begin by analyzing the model with a single elite journal, and then consider a model with several elite journals. Numerical analysis was conducted using R [ ].

## A single journal
A central result of AO is that more authors submit their paper when reviewing is less accurate, and vice versa ( ). The intuition is that less accurate peer review introduces more stochasticity into the journal’s sorting. This loosens the relationship between the author’s acceptance probability and their type, thus encouraging more authors to submit their manuscripts and relaxing screening. As a result, less accurate reviewing makes both authors and reviewers worse off by increasing the review load L. The effect on readers’ welfare is ambiguous.
If increasing the review load also decreases the accuracy of peer review, then author screening and journal sorting participate in a feedback loop [ ]. It is easy to see how an increase in the review load might cause peer review to become less accurate. Suppose that reviewers differ in their review accuracy and that editors preferentially invite more accurate reviewers. As the review load increases, editors must either ask their favored reviewers to do more work or they must reach further into the pool of reviewers. In either case, peer reviews become less accurate, making the journal’s sorting less precise. Thus, review noise and review load L reinforce each other: more accurate journal sorting compels authors to screen more selectively, and tighter screening results in fewer submitted manuscripts and more accurate peer review. In the other direction, less accurate journal sorting results in looser screening, which in turn creates more work for reviewers, leading to even noisier reviewing. (A formal mathematical statement of a model with this feedback loop appears in the .)
The feedback between screening and sorting affects how the equilibrium changes when the environment is perturbed. For example, in recent decades the career rewards from publishing in top-tier journals have increased dramatically [ , ]. It is easy to show that when publishing in top journals brings greater rewards—that is, increases—more authors throw their hat in the ring and the review load increases ( ). The intuition is obvious: when publication is worth more, authors are willing to take a chance on a lower probability of success.
The increase in the review load caused by an increase in is exacerbated by the feedback loop between screening and sorting. ,B illustrates by showing how the review load L (determined by the strength of screening) and the review noise (which determines the accuracy of sorting) shape each other. ( will be considered later.) In each panel of , the red, blue, and black curves show how the review load L responds to a change in the review noise , for different values of . The dashed green curve shows how might respond to L. The equilibrium for a particular value of is found at the intersection of the green curve with the respective red, blue, or black curves. When review accuracy declines with increasing L ( ), an increase in increases the review load more than it would if reviewer accuracy was independent of L ( ). In other words, not only does an increase in compel more authors to submit their paper, the resulting pressure on the review pool decreases the accuracy of review, resulting in yet more authors submitting their manuscripts.
 The feedback loop between screening and sorting also prolongs transient perturbations to the equilibrium caused by one-time shocks. Although a formal dynamical model is outside the present scope, the intuition for the effect is easily seen. Suppose there is a one-time shock that relaxes screening and increases the review load to a value above its equilibrium level. If the review noise depends on L, then the review noise will increase in response to the surge in submissions to a value . After the shock is over, the submission load does not immediately return to its pre-shock value; instead, it adjusts to the value induced by review noise . The review noise then adjusts to the value induced by , and so on. Eventually, L and will return to their pre-shock equilibrium, but these transients will take longer to relax if the review noise temporarily increases in response to the one-time surge in submissions. This suggests one plausible explanation for why a reported change in reviewer behavior following the COVID-19 pandemic [ ] may be surprisingly persistent.

## Several competing journals
So far, the model considers a simplified environment with one elite journal and one mega-journal. Of course, the actual scholarly publishing landscape is much richer. As science has grown, the number of journals has increased while (mega-journals aside) the proportion of the community’s output published by any single journal has declined [ ].
Here, we consider how the shift from a few large journals to several smaller ones has impacted scientists’ welfare. We focus on “horizontal” proliferation of journals within a prestige tier. “Vertical” proliferation, in which journals more densely occupy niches along a prestige spectrum, is more difficult to handle because it introduces greater richness into the author’s possible actions and consequently lies outside the present scope (but see ref. [ ]). We also abstract away from ways in which journals within a prestige tier may specialize to particular subsets of scholarship.
To study the effects of having several elite journals, we embed our previous model in a richer, multi-journal model. Instead of a single elite journal with capacity k, now suppose there are J elite journals that are identical in all regards and that each have capacity k/J. Extend the model to include an implicit temporal component in which time is divided into discrete periods, and use the previous model to capture authors’ and journals’ actions within a single period. In each period, the community (though not necessarily the same authors) generates a unit mass of manuscripts with qualities distributed as . At each period, authors who have been rejected fewer than J times can resubmit their manuscript to a different journal. Because the journals are equivalent, authors randomize the order of journals to which they submit their manuscript. Each time an author submits a manuscript, they pay a cost c, and they receive a reward v if the manuscript is published. Each time an author is rejected, they rationally become more pessimistic about their manuscript’s chances at other, not-yet-tried journals. To keep the math tractable, we assume that authors only update their beliefs based upon how many times their manuscript has been rejected; they don’t observe, or at least don’t update their beliefs based upon, the actual review scores Y. Journals do not know the submission history of incoming manuscripts and must treat all manuscripts identically.
To develop notation, write the conditional probability that author q’s manuscript is accepted on the j-th attempt when facing review-score threshold y as

 aj(q;y)=Pr{Yj≥y|FX(X)=q,Y1<y,…,Yj−1<y}j=1,…,J.
While aj(q;y) does not depend directly on J, the equilibrium review cut-off will depend on J, and thus will as well. Write the marginal probability that author q’s manuscript is accepted on the j-th attempt as

 bj(q;y)=Pr{Y1<y,…,Yj−1<y,Yj≥y|FX(X)=q}j=1,…,J.
where bj(q;y) = 0 if it is not worthwhile for author q to submit their manuscript a j-th time. Write the probability that author q’s manuscript is eventually accepted as . The total volume of published manuscripts at each period is then . An equilibrium consists of a review-score cutoff at which the journals exactly fill their aggregate capacity and a set of marginal authors for which author is indifferent about submitting their manuscript for the j-th time. The marginal authors satisfy the author-rationality conditions

 vaj(q^j,y^J)=c
(AR-J)
while the capacity-filling condition is given by

 ∫01mJ(q;y^J)dq=k.
(CF-J)
To calculate the review load, write the average number of times that author q submits their manuscript as , given by

 μJ(q)=1q≥q^1+1q≥q^2×(1−a1(q,y^J))+…+1q≥q^J×∏j=1J−1(1−aj(q,y^J)).
where is an indicator function that equals 1 if and equals 0 otherwise. (Note that also gives the aggregate density of incoming submissions across all J journals from type-q authors at each period.) The total volume of submissions, and hence the review load, at each period is then

 LJ=∫01μJ(q)dq.
Welfare measures extend naturally. Reader welfare is given by the average quality of published papers standardized by the quality of the top k papers (a formal expression appears in the ). The burden on reviewers is proportional to the review load LJ. Author q’s payoff equals − ; integrating over authors again gives ; thus standardized author welfare is still .
The feedback loop between screening and sorting carries forward to this multi-journal model, and the underlying logic remains the same. We focus here on new phenomena caused by the presence of several journals and study a numerical example. This example suggests that increasing the number of journals results in journals publishing better papers while also increasing the review load and the volume of rejected manuscripts. shows how this happens. More journals create more opportunities for authors to have their work considered afresh. More such opportunities increase the volume of recirculated manuscripts, which in turn forces journals to be more selective. Increased selectivity results in higher rejection rates which increases the volume of recirculated manuscripts, and so on. Thus, giving authors more bites at the apple strengthens screening in the sense that fewer authors find it worthwhile to submit their paper in the first place ( increases with J), but because those authors can submit their work several times, the sorting burden grows, and the overall volume of submitted (and rejected) manuscripts rises ( ).
 Moreover, increasing the number of journals has a bigger effect on the review load when reviews are noisy ( ). The intuition here is that authors learn less about their manuscript’s quality from journal decisions when reviews are noisy than they do when reviews are accurate. Thus, when reviews are noisy, more authors rationally continue to submit the same manuscript despite previous rejections. Combined with the feedback loop between screening and sorting, this identifies yet another feedback cycle by which the burden on peer reviewers grows: as the number of journals proliferates, authors have more opportunities to have their work considered afresh; more such opportunities increase the load on the review community; an increased review load results in less accurate reviews; declining review accuracy diminishes authors’ ability to learn, leading more authors to recycle previously rejected manuscripts, and so on. illustrates how an increase in the number of journals amplifies the feedback loop between screening and sorting.
To see the effect of journal proliferation starkly, consider the extreme case in which authors know their manuscript’s quality exactly ( ; a similar analysis of this extreme case appears in ref. [ ]). In this case, an author’s acceptance probability at any given attempt is independent of the number of times the manuscript has already been rejected (aj(q;y) = a(q;y) for all j). Thus there is a single marginal author, and an author’s eventual probability of acceptance is . In the limit as J grows large, any paper that worth submitting gets published eventually ( ). Writing the limiting marginal author as , the capacity-filling condition becomes

 k=∫q^∞1dq=1−q^∞.
Thus .
In other words, when perfectly informed authors have an unlimited number of attempts to submit their work, screening is perfect: only the top k authors ever submit their manuscript, and they keep submitting until their manuscript is published ( ). The entire function of peer review in this case is to drive the marginal author’s probability of acceptance down to so that no other authors find it worthwhile to submit. The sorting function of peer review is just necessary waste, because every submitted manuscript is published eventually. Further, the equilibrium rejection rate increases with both and . If rises, the acceptance threshold must be pushed even higher to discourage non-submitting authors, leading to more superfluous rejection and resubmission of top papers. If increases, the acceptance probabilities of all authors above the marginal author decrease, forcing them to submit their paper more often before it is finally accepted.

## Desk rejection
As screening and sorting weaken, eventually a journal is bound to receive more manuscripts than it can review. Of course, journals are not obligated to send every manuscript out for review. Instead, journals can and do counter a surge in submissions by desk-rejecting some manuscripts, thus preserving their available review labor for the most promising submissions [ ]. Yet anticipating the net effect of desk-rejection is complicated, because, as we have observed, authors choose whether or not to submit their manuscript in anticipation of the sorting process to follow. Presumably, even an informed journal editor will make less accurate decisions without peer reviews than with them, and so it is unclear on its face how desk rejection will affect screening, and how this will in turn affect the quality of a journal’s published articles. Here, we add desk-rejection to the one-journal model to formalize this idea and briefly explore its potency. A formal model of desk-rejection with competing peer journals is beyond the scope of the present article, but we informally discuss how competition impinges on desk rejection later.

## A single journal.
To add desk-review to the model with a single elite journal, suppose that the journal editor observes a noisy signal D of the manuscript’s quality, with . Journals rationally use a threshold rule to decide which papers to reject immediately and which to send out for peer review, with papers sent out for peer-review if for some threshold d. To keep matters simple, we assume that manuscripts sent out for review are accepted or rejected based on their review score Y alone. Write author q’s acceptance probability when facing desk-rejection threshold d and review threshold y as .
For any possible desk-rejection threshold d, there is a corresponding marginal author and review score threshold that satisfy the author-rationality and capacity-filling conditions. The journal’s utility u(d) is the average quality of accepted manuscripts, which is given by the expression

 u(d)=1k∫q^(d)1⋿[θ|FX(X)=q,D≥d,Y≥y^(d)]a(q;d,y^(d))dq.
At equilibrium the journal sets the desk-rejection cut-off to maximize its utility:

 d^∈argmaxdu(d).
(JR)
We call this the journal-rationality condition. An equilibrium is given by a triple that solves the AR, CF, and JR conditions.
With desk rejection in play, use S = 1 − to denote the volume of submitted manuscripts, and continue to use L to denote the volume of manuscripts sent out for review. Author welfare is now given by 1 − , while the burden on reviewers continues to scale with L.
 shows how desk-rejection affects the welfare of authors, readers, and reviewers of a single elite journal. These results show that, at least under the settings explored here, judicious desk-rejection benefits all parties. Readers (and the journal) benefit because the journal ultimately publishes better papers. Authors have fewer manuscript rejected and thus recoup more of the available surplus. Reviewers are faced with fewer manuscripts to review. Of course, the extent of these benefits depends on the accuracy of the editors’ decisions, as captured by . As the accuracy of desk-review declines, its usefulness diminishes accordingly.
 

## Several competing journals.
A formal model that includes desk rejection with several competing journals lies outside the present scope, since it would require modeling how authors behave when they face journals with different desk-rejection cutoffs. However, intuition suggests that when competing journals rely on a common pool of reviewers, a “tragedy of the reviewer commons” [ ] makes desk rejection less useful for managing the review load. The logic goes as follows. When a journal has its own private community of reviewers, it fully internalizes the cost of sending a manuscript our for review. At equilibrium, such a journal sets its desk-rejection policy to optimally trade off the cost of depleting its available review labor against the benefit of using peer review to learn more about a manuscript’s quality. But when several competing journals rely on the same common pool of reviewers, then a journal does not fully internalize the cost of requesting a review, because the cost of depleting the available review labor is borne by all journals. Yet the requesting journal still captures the full benefit of obtaining a review and learning more about the manuscript under consideration. Thus, because journals that rely on a shared reviewer pool do not fully internalize the cost of requesting reviews, they will set a desk-rejection policy that desk-rejects manuscripts less often than would be socially optimal.
In the , we formalize this idea with a simple mathematical model whose structure and logic parallel the classic Cournot oligopoly model in economics [ ].

## Discussion
Some of the drivers of the peer-review crisis are straightforward and need little elaboration. The number of papers published has been growing about 5% annually since 1952 [ , ], a rate that exceeds the concomitant growth in the number of university faculty [ ]. Of those faculty, a growing proportion are employed in short-term contingent positions and may be less able to devote time to unpaid and unrecognized review service. Rapid growth of scientific productivity in non-Western countries has outpaced the fraction of review invitations going to authors located in these regions [ ], presumably because of mismatches in the composition of editorial boards. These trends have caused peer-review effort to become imbalanced, with a comparably small fraction of researchers providing most of the review labor [ , ].
Meanwhile, both the intrinsic rewards of reviewing and the cost of declining review invitations have shifted. Pre-print servers and their ilk have eliminated what used to be one of reviewing’s major perks, namely the opportunity to obtain an early look at important unpublished work. Scientific communities are larger and looser knit, making the professional networks that bind editors and reviewers more diffuse. The universal reliance on e-mail for communication between journals and reviewers has made editors’ invitations weaker signals of genuine interest in a reviewer’s opinion compared to the manila envelopes and hand-written notes of yesteryear, while evolving social norms reduce the psychic cost to reviewers of ignoring e-mailed invitations altogether.
Other forces driving the peer-review crisis are subtle and more complex. We have argued here that the peer-review crisis is partially driven by a pernicious feedback loop in which a growing burden on the reviewer community leads to less accurate reviewing, which in turn compels authors to take more chances with regard to where they submit their work, which exacerbates the burden on the reviewer community further, and so on. Moreover, the decentralized nature of scientific publishing and the need for journals to compete for authors, readers, and reviewers short-circuits many of the most obvious paths towards halting or reversing this cycle. While we have presented our model in the context of elite journals, that focus is merely a simplification to streamline the exposition. Similar forces buffet journals across the scientific spectrum.
Like all models, our model makes simplifications that provide scope for future work. Perhaps the most substantively, we treat manuscript quality as exogenous. Of course, authors are not endowed with fully formed manuscripts, but instead they decide how much effort to invest to developing manuscripts based on their anticipation of the journal’s scrutiny. For example, the rise of revise-and-resubmit as an author’s likely best outcome may perversely encourage authors to submit manuscripts that are less than polished, both because revision seems inevitable and because journals can no longer expect polished submissions if unpolished submissions become the norm [ ]. A model of journal and author behavior that endogenizes manuscript quality would provide more satisfying insight on this count.
If contemporary science has reached a point in which the demand for review labor outstrips the available supply, what (besides increasing desk rejection) might journals do to reconcile the two? Journals might consider tightening screening by increasing the cost of preparing a manuscript, c, thus discouraging more authors from submitting their manuscripts in the first place [ ]. But monetary fees—whether charged upon submission or acceptance—are more likely to screen for authors with the institutional resources to pay [ ], and costs generated by onerous submission requirements postpone the dissemination of results, thus making journals less marketable.
Moreover, competition for authors forces journals to keep their costs to authors low. Competing journals must simultaneously screen authors and compete for them, creating a complex set of incentives. While a proper treatment of the interaction between competition and screening behavior lies outside the present scope (but see ref. [ ]), intuition suggests that competition for authors interferes with a journal’s ability to screen. For example, if a journal increases its costs c, authors will face a trade off between the additional cost of submitting to the now costlier journal vs. the better odds of acceptance at that journal resulting from thinner competition for publication slots. We conjecture that this trade-off will drive top authors who are insulated from the cost of thicker competition away from the costlier journal while attracting bottom authors to it. This adverse selection impels journals to keep their cost of submission low, as we observe throughout the current publishing environment.
If raising submission costs is off the table, journals might instead try to increase the supply of high-quality review labor. But journals that seek to recruit more high-quality reviewing are handcuffed by the tradition of peer review as a volunteer activity. In a typical labor market, employers can attract more labor by increasing wages. Journals operate without this basic market mechanism when reviewers are unpaid. If publishers were able to recruit more high-quality review labor by paying appropriate wages, they could maintain constant review quality in the face of an increase in submissions, breaking the feedback loop between screening and sorting.
To be sure, paying reviewers brings risks. Non-profit journals would need to pass the cost of reviewer pay on to authors or subscribers, although perhaps society journals could maintain a base of volunteer reviewers by cultivating a sense of shared responsibility for the journal. Paying reviewers also commodifies review labor, likely irreversibly [ ]. This commodification could perversely decrease the availability of high-quality review labor if reviewers operating under the honor system perceive their effort to be worth more than the wages that the journal offers [ , , ]. Nevertheless, recent experiments with modest payments to reviewers have succeeded in accelerating the pace of peer review, at least in the short run [ , , ]. Wages needn’t be simple direct payments, either. An intriguing alternative idea is to offer monetary prizes for top reviews, which could sweeten the pot for reviewers while motivating reviewer effort [ ]. While substantial trial and error should be expected in establishing a plan that adequately compensates reviewers, once such a plan is established, it could give publishers a lever to recruit reviewers that they currently lack.
Are there other options that might salvage the institution of (voluntary) peer review? We highlight a few options here, all of which echo the suggestions of others. First, journals can reduce re-review of revised manuscripts [ , ]. Re-review is currently commonplace: accepted papers frequently go through at least two [ ] or more [ ] rounds of review prior to acceptance. But routinely sending revised manuscripts back out for review only burdens the reviewer community further while encouraging both authors and reviewers to modulate their effort in anticipation of the revision and re-review process to follow [ ]. Journals can reduce re-review by empowering, or even encouraging, academic editors to be more proactive in their decision-making, especially when evaluating revised manuscripts. A more radical step to reducing re-review is to take revise-and-resubmit decisions off the table altogether [ ]. Second, the scientific community can continue to explore ways of sharing reviews of rejected manuscripts, so that the associated review effort is not wasted. As our model with several journals suggests, much of the burden on the peer-review community flows from serial re-review of already rejected manuscripts when those manuscripts are sent to new journals. Cascading review and open-review platforms represent promising moves in this direction.
Finally, one last lever that our model suggests for salvaging peer review is to decrease v, the reward that authors reap for publishing in selective journals. In this model, we have taken the view that v is set exogeneously by the scientific community and, unlike the other solutions we have considered, cannot be changed unilaterally by any single actor. Further, the forces that determine v are varied and complex because the rewards attached to publication serve a variety of economic and sociological functions in science. For example, we [ ] and others [ ] have argued that rewarding publication constitutes a rational if imperfect scheme for motivating researchers to work hard and to take scientific risks while also protecting researchers’ livelihoods from the vicissitudes of scientific chance. But this work does not consider the pressure that publication rewards place on peer review. Perhaps a more holistic view would suggest that the scientific endeavor would be better off if fewer rewards flowed to authors who publish in top outlets. Or perhaps it wouldn’t; the answer remains far from clear. Regardless, whether science would be better off if the rewards to publication were reduced, and if so, how the scientific community might coordinate to change the prestige associated with publication seem to be rich and increasingly urgent topics to contemplate.

## Supporting information
S1 Appendix

## Mathematical proofs and additional results
(PDF)
S1 Fig

## Optimal screening for maximizing reader welfare.
(PDF)

## LLM use statement
We used ChatGPT for coding assistance, spot-checking of numerical results, and to find some of the references herein. All of the text and mathematical results are our own human outputs.

Having written a paper about the demise of peer review, we were heartened to receive three thoughtful, detailed, and on-point reviews of this manuscript. We thank the reviewers for their careful attention and constructive feedback, and for demonstrating that all is not yet lost. We also thank Kyle Myers and Nihar Shah for bringing AO’s and Zhang et al.’s papers to our attention. KG thanks both the Department of Biology at the University of Washington and the Institute for Advanced Study in Toulouse for visitor support.
 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003650.r001Decision Letter 0
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2026 Roland G Roberts2026Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
15 Sep 2025

Dear Dr Gross,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Will anyone review this paper? Screening, sorting, and the feedback cycles that imperil peer review" for consideration as a Meta-Research Article by PLOS Biology. Please accept my apologies for the very slow response.
Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editorial staff, and I'm writing to let you know that we would like to send your submission out for external peer review. I should tell you that we were unable to obtain advice from an Academic Editor in time, so we will be looking for some enthusiasm from the reviewers.
However, before we can send your manuscript to reviewers, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks in preparation for peer review. After your manuscript has passed the checks it will be sent out for review. To provide the metadata for your submission, please Login to Editorial Manager (https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology) within two working days, i.e. by Sep 17 2025 11:59PM.
If your manuscript has been previously peer-reviewed at another journal, PLOS Biology is willing to work with those reviews in order to avoid re-starting the process. Submission of the previous reviews is entirely optional and our ability to use them effectively will depend on the willingness of the previous journal to confirm the content of the reports and share the reviewer identities. Please note that we reserve the right to invite additional reviewers if we consider that additional/independent reviewers are needed, although we aim to avoid this as far as possible. In our experience, working with previous reviews does save time.
If you would like us to consider previous reviewer reports, please edit your cover letter to let us know and include the name of the journal where the work was previously considered and the manuscript ID it was given. In addition, please upload a response to the reviews as a 'Prior Peer Review' file type, which should include the reports in full and a point-by-point reply detailing how you have or plan to address the reviewers' concerns.
During the process of completing your manuscript submission, you will be invited to opt-in to posting your pre-review manuscript as a bioRxiv preprint. Visit http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/preprints for full details. If you consent to posting your current manuscript as a preprint, please upload a single Preprint PDF.
Feel free to email us at plosbiology@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Roli Roberts
Roland Roberts, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology
rroberts@plos.org
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003650.r002Decision Letter 1
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2026 Roland G Roberts2026Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
3 Nov 2025

Dear Kevin,
Thank you for your patience while your manuscript "Will anyone review this paper? Screening, sorting, and the feedback cycles that imperil peer review" went through peer-review at PLOS Biology. Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, an Academic Editor with relevant expertise, and by three independent reviewers.
You'll see that reviewer #1 is broadly very positive about the study, but ends up wondering whether, for publication in PLOS Biology, you should do some further exploration around desk rejection behaviour. Reviewer #2 is also very positive, but asks about sensitivity to non-Gaussian distributions and the possibility of examining non-equilibrium scenarios; he also has a discussion point. Reviewer #3 is also enthusiastic, but thinks that you need to improve the accessibility of the paper for the typical PLOS Biology reader, making a number of helpful suggestions as to how this might be achieved.
IMPORTANT: I discussed the reviews and cross-comments between the reviewers with the Academic Editor. As a result, while the additional analyses requested by reviewers #1 and #2 would undoubtedly strengthen the study, we won't insist on them. I should also say that before review the Academic Editor had expressed some concerns somewhat similar to reviewer #3's final point: "Among possible remedies, they fail to mention the most obvious one: reducing the weight given to the number of publications and their JIF in assessing researchers. Nor do they discuss distributed review. The paper is elegantly written, and I agree the topic is of great interest to both researchers and publishers. But it offers neither group a practical way forward—especially if the arguments for particular remedies rest on equations that few people understand and even fewer could test." We think further consideration should be given to this.
In light of the reviews, which you will find at the end of this email, we are pleased to offer you the opportunity to address the comments from the reviewers in a revision that we anticipate should not take you very long. We will then assess your revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments with our Academic Editor aiming to avoid further rounds of peer-review, although we might need to consult with the reviewers, depending on the nature of the revisions.
In addition to these revisions, you may need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests shortly. If you do not receive a separate email within a few days, please assume that checks have been completed, and no additional changes are required.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within 1 month. Please email us (plosbiology@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns, or would like to request an extension.
At this stage, your manuscript remains formally under active consideration at our journal; please notify us by email if you do not intend to submit a revision so that we withdraw the manuscript.
**IMPORTANT - SUBMITTING YOUR REVISION**
Your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. Please submit the following files along with your revised manuscript:
1. A 'Response to Reviewers' file - this should detail your responses to the editorial requests, present a point-by-point response to all of the reviewers' comments, and indicate the changes made to the manuscript.
*NOTE: In your point-by-point response to the reviewers, please provide the full context of each review. Do not selectively quote paragraphs or sentences to reply to. The entire set of reviewer comments should be present in full and each specific point should be responded to individually.
You should also cite any additional relevant literature that has been published since the original submission and mention any additional citations in your response.
2. In addition to a clean copy of the manuscript, please also upload a 'track-changes' version of your manuscript that specifies the edits made. This should be uploaded as a "Revised Article with Changes Highlighted " file type.
*Resubmission Checklist*
When you are ready to resubmit your revised manuscript, please refer to this resubmission checklist: https://plos.io/Biology_Checklist
To submit a revised version of your manuscript, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' where you will find your submission record.
Please make sure to read the following important policies and guidelines while preparing your revision:
*Published Peer Review*
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/

*PLOS Data Policy*
Please note that as a condition of publication PLOS' data policy (http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability) requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions arrived at in your manuscript. If you have not already done so, you must include any data used in your manuscript either in appropriate repositories, within the body of the manuscript, or as supporting information (N.B. this includes any numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.). For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5
*Blot and Gel Data Policy*
We require the original, uncropped and minimally adjusted images supporting all blot and gel results reported in an article's figures or Supporting Information files. We will require these files before a manuscript can be accepted so please prepare them now, if you have not already uploaded them. Please carefully read our guidelines for how to prepare and upload this data: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive thus far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Roli
Roland Roberts, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology
rroberts@plos.org
----------------------------------------------------------------
REVIEWERS' COMMENTS:
Reviewer #1:
[identifies himself as Luis A. Nunes Amaral]
Bergstrom and Gross study the vicious feedback cycles of increased submission rates and less qualified peer review of manuscript. Their work follows along the lines of work by Adda and Ottaviani (2023) on grant awarding and Zhang et al (2023) on CS conference peer review but provides a clear improvement on those works in terms of both readability and parsimony.
The basic idea of the study, as I see it, is that the existence of highly-selective journals with a disproportionally high reward $v$ compared to publication in other venues (in the study modeled as a mega journal) leads to a peer-review pressure on the selective journal that results in reviewer scarcity, lower quality reviews, and incentives for submission of less worthy manuscripts to the selective journal in a vicious cycle of overburdened reviewers and editors.
Interestingly, the study also shows that the feedback loop between review load (L) and review quality ($\sigma_Y$) leads to prolonged transient perturbation away from equilibrium due to external shocks.
Importantly, the study also shows that the existence of multiple selective journals aggravates this issue by contributing to the lowering of the quality of peer review (measured by increased $\sigma_Y$).
Finally, the authors explore the impact of desk rejection on reviewer load and submission rate. The focus on a single selective journal and assume, reasonably, that editor review quality is likely lower than author's or peer reviewers'. Despite this, they show that desk rejection increases everyone's welfare: reviewers, authors and readers. This has to be somewhat reassuring for all of us involved in the business of science.
Nonetheless, Bergstrom and Gross note that when there are multiple selective journals, the editors will tend to set desk-rejection rates that are lower than what would be socially optimal.
This is clearly a manuscript on a very important matters. It is also a very readable manuscript that will almost certainly be more impactful that the 2023 studies mentioned earlier. The question, however, is whether it should be published in PLOS Biology, itself an elite journal?
This is a difficult question for me to answer. My inclination is to suggest that the manuscript needs more analyses is order to justify publication in PLOS Biology.
The authors explicitly state that: "Vertical" proliferation, in which journals more densely occupy niches along a prestige spectrum, is outside the present scope (but see ref. [38]).
I accept this choice even though my lab's research demonstrated the existence of such vertical integration (Stringer et al PLOS One and JASIST).
Nonetheless there is an interesting mechanism that is not explored but is definitely important. Again, this is inspired by my lab's research (Moreira et al PLOS One). It seems plausible that authors have a specific $\bar{q}$. That is, a manuscript $i$ produced by author j does not have $q_j^i$ drawn from $N(0, \sigma_x)$ but instead from $N(\bar{q_j}, f*\sigma_x$ where $f < 1$. This fact may not appear to be important for the default case but I think it is important for the desk review case. While the editor's $\sigma_D$ may be large, one could imagine that over time an editor will learn to recognize high $\bar{q_j}$ authors and be guided by it for deciding on desk rejection.
I believe that an exploration of the impact of such a mechanism on desk rejections in terms of societal welfare would be important, especially in terms of exclusion of high $\bar{q_j}$ authors early in their career and slacking of high $\bar{q_j}$ authors late in their career.
Reviewer #2:
[identifies himself as Stefano Allesina]
First of all, I would like to respond to the manuscript title in the affirmative. This is a very interesting and thought-provoking manuscript: the Authors adapt and extend a previously-published model for peer-review and use it to illustrate some of the problems that plague the system. The manuscript is well-written (I found only one typo, l486) and easy to follow. I have to offer only two somewhat technical comments, and some reflections.
The model is deeply rooted in normal distributions: the manuscript quality, the errors in evaluating the quality by both authors and reviewers are all Gaussian. While this makes a lot of sense when modeling errors, other quantities (esp. manuscript quality) could have very skewed distributions. For example, the number of citations, which can be considered a first-order estimate of readership, tends to be lognormally distributed. If I am not mistaken, changing the distribution of manuscript quality would have absolutely no effect on the conclusions (because only the percentile of quality matters). If this is the case, and whenever this is the case, the Authors could add a line saying that these assumptions do not matter (at least qualitatively). In a similar vein, one drawback of Gaussians is that the error functions cannot be expressed algebraically, and as such for example the existence of an equilibrium can be proven, but cannot be written explicitly in closed-form using the model parameters. Would the choice of different distributions alleviate this issue? If one had an explicit formula for \hat{q} and \hat{y} in terms of v/c and the various standard deviation, it would be very easy to show the effect on welfare etc by taking derivatives.
The analysis is very much based on equilibria: the existence of critical values \hat{q} and \hat{y} is proven, and then these values determine the welfare for authors, readers and reviewers. While reading the manuscript I kept thinking that a) authors have but a vague idea of \hat{y}, and b) journals also have only a rough estimate of \hat{q}. In reality, both authors and journals constantly adjust their submission/acceptance criteria based on a rapidly-shifting landscape, the birth/death of journals, etc. The analysis, as it stands, reminds me of classic game theory: the authors try to maximize their payoff, and journals to fill their pages with the best manuscripts, all seen as a "static game". I imagine that the same could be turned into an "evolutionary game", in which journals and authors correct their course in time, as a result of previous outcomes. A dynamic version of the model would also allow to study the relaxation to equilibrium following a perturbation (e.g., the cited increase in submissions following the pandemic), as well as the study of "interventions" on the parameters of the game. Right now, a dynamic version is mentioned in passing (l236), but in my opinion it would be an exciting avenue for the future.
In terms of reflections, I appreciated the thoughtful discussion, which is very much centered on the cost-side (c) and on increasing the supply of reviewers (for example by paying them). One aspect that I did not find discussed, but that greatly impressed me over the past 20 years, is the rise of bean-counting institutions (funding agencies, tenure committees etc) that want to measure the value (v) discussed in the manuscript directly (as impact factor, classification of journals into tiers, etc), and use it for real-world decisions. Even though we know that all Deans can count, but few can read, scientists have a role to play in reducing the differential value of publication venues for careers, and increase the weight attributed to the quality of the work (as opposed the impact factor of the journal in which it was published). For example, my institution limits the number of publications that can be submitted in a tenure/promotion package to five, thereby incentivizing researchers to concentrate on the quality of their work, rather than the number of papers published.
In summary, I very much appreciated the focus on a bare-bone, tractable model of peer-review that, by removing some of the complications and focusing on the main processes, can recapitulate the sorry state of the peer-review system and shed light on the major levers one can act upon to improve it.
Reviewer #3:
[identifies himself as Stephen Curry]
This is a very interesting paper which offers a mathematical model of the widely appreciated problem of the increasing burden of peer review. The primary model explored considers a world in which there is just one elite journal and one 'mega-journal' and is, by the authors' own admission, relatively simplistic. This model is later elaborated to consider publishing landscape in which there are multiple 'elite' journals (of equal standing), and then also considers the impact of desk rejection. Although I would judge myself reasonably well versed in mathematics, I cannot claim sufficient understanding to pronounce confidently on the rigour of the mathematical models developed here. I made a decent fist of following the derivation of the single elite journal model, but I struggled with the more elaborate attempts to incorporate multiple elite journals and desk rejection. I trust that other reviewers will bring greater expertise to this task.
That said, I guess I might reasonably be considered a not untypical reader of PLoS Biology. It seemed to me that the single elite journal model, which forms the bulk of the manuscript, was reasonable despite its simplicity and provided insights on the feedback effects between author screening and journal sorting that comprise a rational explanation of the growing burden of journal peer review. I am left wondering, nevertheless, if my positive impression of this part of the paper is an example of confirmation bias. This feeling is more acute for the more elaborate models that I understand less well mathematically.
Nevertheless, in my view the paper is an interesting contribution to an important discussion. I would like to see it published so that readers can judge for themselves the merit and power of the approach taken by the authors. In its present state, I think there is a danger that many readers seeing the simplifying assumptions of the models might too quickly disregard the insights they have to offer, so some additional effort should be made in the presentation of the work, both to explain the workings of the model to those less conversant with the mathematical techniques used and to emphasise how, despite the simplifying assumptions, the model relates to the real world of modern day scholarly publishing. I have some specific comments along these lines that, if addressed, may give the paper greater impact with its intended audience. They are a mixture of major and minor comments. I will lay them out in the order that they occur in the manuscript.
Line 2 - a minor point but the claim that publishers rely on peer review to identify 'the best science' is over-simplistic and starts the paper off, if not on the wrong foot, then with a stumble. There are countless mid and lower tier journals where manuscripts reporting perfectly decent science are submitted but which neither the authors not the reviewers would consider 'the best science'. The best submissions for a given journal might be a better description; or perhaps it could be claimed that peer review strives to provide a valuable quality check on submitted manuscripts (its well-known weaknesses notwithstanding).
Line 27 - another minor point but I doubt that many authors have 'full awareness' of the evaluation to follow. I would qualify slightly - probably they have a reasonable idea of the standard expected of their journal of choice.
Line 62 - this reader (as I suspect many other readers of PLoS Biology) is not familiar with the literature on agent-based models. It would be helpful to have a brief explanation of what these are and how they differ from the approach taken by the authors. I was left wondering why agent-based models were unable to unearth the feedback mechanisms that are a key - novel? - feature of Bergstrom & Gross's model.
Page 4 - Fig 1 - The legend refers to screening but not sorting. While these terms are defined implicitly in the body text, it would be useful to give an explicit definition and use the terms consistently throughout.
Pages 4-6 - the description of the mathematical model is reasonably clear but would benefit from some additional explanation for a wider readership. Line 88 - 'journal capacity' is pretty self-evident but the reader will have to work less hard if it is also stated that this means the total number of articles published (per issue or per year). Line 93 - explain why it helps to suppose that there is a 'unit mass of authors'. Line 94 - why 'is endowed with'; why not the simpler 'has'? Lines 96 and 98 mention the authors "own sense of whether their work is any good" and "their private signal X" of their manuscript's quality; wouldn't it be better not to have two different descriptions of the same thing? Line 100 - explain what is meant by 'quantile'.
Line 120 - I did not understand the sentence in parenthesis about indifferent authors.
Page 7 - Fig. 2 - I think these graphs would be clearer if they had more annotation (to reduce the need to consult the legend); e.g. add the values of sigma or v/c to the plot ((e.g. in panel A, add v/c = 5 etc). If panels B & C could be side by side, that would facilitate the comparison discussed in the text.
Line 159 - In addition to presenting the expression for authors' welfare, I would suggest saying in words that the welfare diminishes with c and L, and increases with c and k - just for maximum explicitness.
Line 165 - the statement "The readers' welfare measures how reliably publication indicates scientific quality" is indicative of the simplicity of the model since, arguably, the quality of the manuscripts in any given journal takes a range of values. Perhaps some qualification of the statement could be offered or a less definitive verb than "measures" could be used? "Estimates"?
Line 172 - typo? "costs of reviewing" rather than "costs to"?
Line 196 - typo? "analyses" plural?
Page 10 - Fig.3 - It is difficult to discern the red-blue gradations of the points in the plot. Might a graded, multi-colour scheme be easier to discern?
Line 214 - replace (or supplement) "reviewing" with "sorting" for greater consistency?
Line 224 - "Figure 4A, B illustrates" is not a sentence since there is no object.
Lines 229-234 - The explanation given is not very clear. Some tweaks are needed; e.g. "when reviewer accuracy declines as L increases" is better than "when reviewer accuracy declines with L" in this reader's opinion.
Lines 254-256 - why is vertical proliferation outside the scope of the paper? It strikes me as a more interesting question than horizontal proliferation? Can the authors explain?
Line 298 - I struggled to understand mathematically what "proportional to (the opposite of)" means. Presumably the relationship is not an inverse proportionality, but can the authors explain? Might it simpler and clearer to reframe things in terms of reviewer burden rather than reviewer welfare?
Line 334 - "writes neatly as"? Would "can be written neatly as" be more grammatically correct?
Line 435 - the authors may well be correct, but the use of the word "psychic" conjured for me a group gathered around a table in a darkened room for a séance! Might "psychological" be a good substitute?
Line 450 - revise-and-resubmit options might encourage authors to submit less polished manuscript but in my experience the rise of preprints opposes this tendency since any manuscript defects are on public display from the get-go.
Line 477 - "Top authors benefit from accurate reviewing and thus prefer to submit their work to journals that offer it." strikes me as a not unreasonable statement given the simplifying assumptions of the model, but what do authors know about the quality of review at different journals in reality (beyond, obviously, the extremes). Attempts to relate the model to reality would benefit from a more informed consideration of this point and citation of studies that have attempted to evaluate variation in the quality of peer review at different journals.
Discussion section - A major weakness of the discussion of the peer review problems that are the focus of this manuscript is the fact that the authors only consider what journals might do. This narrowness of perspective arises naturally from the construction of the model which centres on the triad of authors, reviewers and readers brought together by the journal. But to give the paper greater relevance, the discussion should be widened out. How might other stakeholders - e.g. universities, learned societies, funders- contribute to solving the problem? What about the capture of peer review by commercial publishers, who have sought to increase market share through journal proliferation? I appreciate that the authors will not want to provide a review of all the woes of academic publishing, but some discussion of how their model might help prompt action from stakeholders beyond journals or publishers, or might justify new or more radical approaches to scholarly communication, would be valuable.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003650.r003Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
5 Jan 2026

AttachmentSubmitted filename: BergstromGross_Responses.pdf
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003650.r004Decision Letter 2
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2026 Roland G Roberts2026Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
22 Jan 2026

Dear Dr Gross,
Thank you for your patience while we considered your revised manuscript "Will anyone review this paper? Screening, sorting, and the feedback cycles that imperil peer review" for publication as a Meta-Research Article at PLOS Biology. This revised version of your manuscript has been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors and the Academic Editor.
Based on our Academic Editor's assessment of your revision, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, provided you satisfactorily address the following data and other policy-related requests.
a) We need your Title to be more explicit and to lack punctuation. We suggest changing it to something like, "Identification of the threats to the sustainability of the peer-review system and possible mitigation strategies" (ideally we'd also want an active verb, but we can live without that...)
b) Many thanks for providing the underlying R code. Please cite the location of the data clearly in all relevant main and supplementary Figure legends (i.e. Figs 2-5, S1), e.g. “The code underlying this Figure can be found in https://zenodo.org/records/15866736”
As you address these items, please take this last chance to review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the cover letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.
In addition to these revisions, you may need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests shortly. If you do not receive a separate email within a few days, please assume that checks have been completed, and no additional changes are required.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within two weeks.
To submit your revision, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' to find your submission record. Your revised submission must include the following:
- a cover letter that should detail your responses to any editorial requests, if applicable, and whether changes have been made to the reference list
- a Response to Reviewers file that provides a detailed response to the reviewers' comments (if applicable, if not applicable please do not delete your existing 'Response to Reviewers' file.)
- a track-changes file indicating any changes that you have made to the manuscript.
NOTE: If Supporting Information files are included with your article, note that these are not copyedited and will be published as they are submitted. Please ensure that these files are legible and of high quality (at least 300 dpi) in an easily accessible file format. For this reason, please be aware that any references listed in an SI file will not be indexed. For more information, see our Supporting Information guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/supporting-information

*Published Peer Review History*
Please note that you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://plos.org/published-peer-review-history/

*Press*
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, please ensure you have opted out of Early Article Posting on the submission form. We ask that you notify us as soon as possible if you or your institution is planning to press release the article.
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please do not hesitate to contact me should you have any questions.
Sincerely,
Roli Roberts
Roland Roberts, PhD
Senior Editor
rroberts@plos.org
PLOS Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003650.r005Decision Letter 3
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2026 Roland G Roberts2026Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
28 Jan 2026

Dear Kevin,
Thank you for the submission of your revised Meta-Research Article "Screening, sorting, and the feedback cycles that imperil peer review" for publication in PLOS Biology. On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Ulrich Dirnagl, I'm pleased to say that we can in principle accept your manuscript for publication, provided you address any remaining formatting and reporting issues. These will be detailed in an email you should receive within 2-3 business days from our colleagues in the journal operations team; no action is required from you until then. Please note that we will not be able to formally accept your manuscript and schedule it for publication until you have completed any requested changes.
Please take a minute to log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process.
PRESS: We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with biologypress@plos.org. If you have previously opted in to the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may opt out on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
Thank you again for choosing PLOS Biology for publication and supporting Open Access publishing. We look forward to publishing your study.
Sincerely,
Roli
Roland G Roberts, PhD, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology
rroberts@plos.org