pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC12890164PMC12890164.112890164128901644166625710.1371/journal.pone.0341717PONE-D-25-445381Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesBacterial DiseasesTuberculosisMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsTropical DiseasesTuberculosisResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesNeuroimagingComputed Axial TomographyBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeuroimagingComputed Axial TomographyMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineDiagnostic RadiologyTomographyComputed Axial TomographyResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesDiagnostic RadiologyTomographyComputed Axial TomographyMedicine and Health SciencesRadiology and ImagingDiagnostic RadiologyTomographyComputed Axial TomographyMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineDiagnostic RadiologyPulmonary ImagingResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesDiagnostic RadiologyPulmonary ImagingMedicine and Health SciencesRadiology and ImagingDiagnostic RadiologyPulmonary ImagingPhysical SciencesMathematicsApplied MathematicsAlgorithmsClustering AlgorithmsResearch and Analysis MethodsSimulation and ModelingAlgorithmsClustering AlgorithmsResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesSocial SciencesLinguisticsLinguistic MorphologySocial SciencesLinguisticsSemanticsMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsLung and Intrathoracic TumorsRefining weak supervision for robust lung cavity segmentation: A graph-affinity method with boundary constraints
Graph-affinity weak supervision for lung cavity segmentationDingZeyuFunding acquisitionMethodologySupervision https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3422-2504TanZhuoyiConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologySoftwareVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing MadzinHizmawatiData curationFormal analysisMethodologySupervisionWriting – original draft LiZhengdongConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologyProject administrationWriting – original draft LiuJuntaoVisualization 1
Department of Computer Science, Changzhi University, Changzhi, China2
School of Low-Altitude Technology and Engineering, Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, Heyuan, China3
Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, SingaporeYuHongchuanEditor , ]. However, due to the variability in the shape and size of LCs, accurately annotating these LCs at the pixel-level in computed tomography (CT) scan is highly challenging [ ]. In recent years, deep learning (DL) has experienced rapid advancements, leading to its widespread adoption in medical image analysis [ – ], particularly in the identification of pulmonary TB LCs [ , ]. In addition, due to the data-hungry nature of DL technology, segmentation models based on fully supervised training paradigms typically require vast amounts of labor-intensive accurate LCs pixel-level annotation data for learning [ – ]. Obtaining these precise pixel-level annotations for LCs often requires a significant amount of human and material resources. Utilizing sparse labels in weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) methods has become an important trend to overcome this limitation [ , – ]. These methods train semantic segmentation models using image-level [ , ], scribble [ , ], or bounding box [ ] annotations as supervision signals.
Although some weakly supervised segmentation methods perform well in other imaging domains [ – ], they often lack versatility when directly applied to medical lesion tissue segmentation (e.g., TB LCs recognition), making it difficult to achieve good recognition results [ , , – ]. In particular, two major challenges often arise when applying existing weakly supervised segmentation methods specifically to TB LCs segmentation research: 1) In the pseudo-label generation stage, many conventional methods [ – ] rely on initial seeds derived from Class Activation Mapping (CAM) [ ] and refine them through affinity propagation [ , , ], such as the random walk [ ] or bilateral affinity models adopted in works like IRNet [ ]. However, the limitations of these conventional affinity propagation algorithms become pronounced when dealing with LCs, which often exhibit irregular shapes, thin walls, or internal septations. These methods typically construct affinity matrices based on local, low-level pixel appearance similarities (e.g., color and texture), lacking effective modeling of long-range contextual relationships and complex structural dependencies [ – ]. As a result, the propagation process is prone to failure at cavity wall discontinuities or in low-contrast regions, leading to persistent under-segmentation (failure to cover the entire cavity region) or over-segmentation (incorrect inclusion of adjacent normal tissues) in the generated pseudo-labels, as illustrated in . 2) At the level of supervision signals, WSSS paradigms that rely exclusively on image-level labels–such as classical CAM-based methods and their variants–provide extremely sparse and weak supervision to the model. Under this setting, models tend to focus on the most discriminative local regions (e.g., the most visually salient parts of a cavity) while failing to perceive and learn the complete spatial extent, precise morphology, and detailed boundary characteristics of the target. Although subsequent studies [ , ] have attempted to alleviate this issue by incorporating self-attention mechanisms or boundary-aware constraints, these approaches may struggle to obtain reliable learning signals when the pseudo-label quality is poor during early training stages, thereby limiting their performance ceiling in complex medical image segmentation tasks.
 In this paper, we propose a novel WSSS method that introduces targeted innovations to directly address these two core challenges, as shown in . Our primary contribution is a new affinity learning paradigm for pseudo-label refinement. Unlike previous methods [ – ], we propose a Graph-based Affinity Network (GA-Net) that constructs a superpixel graph to represent image structure and employs a trainable network as a kernel to infer affinities, enabling structure-aware, long-range diffusion tailored for complex lesions. Complementing this, we design a Region-wise Affinity Propagation mechanism that refines the CAM by propagating activation scores from high-confidence regions to semantically similar, low-activation regions. This mechanism effectively addresses the problem of coarse pseudo-labels generated by CAM, enhancing the localization of LCs and overcoming the limitations of under-segmentation or over-segmentation. By using a learned affinity matrix, our method leverages regional information to propagate affinities within smaller 3D regions, leading to a more precise segmentation. Additionally, to enhance the robustness of our model, we integrate Exponential Moving Average (EMA) ensembling, which stabilizes model predictions in the early stages of training, reducing the impact of transient errors. This technique smooths the predictions, allowing for better consistency in the refinement of pseudo-labels during training. To further refine the segmentation of small and challenging lesions, we incorporate a scribble-based segmentation module. This module utilizes sparse scribble annotations generated from pseudo-label contours, enhancing the model’s ability to capture fine boundary details of small lesions. A partial cross-entropy loss is used to focus the model’s attention on the annotated lesion areas, improving its performance in detecting and segmenting small lesions that might otherwise be overlooked. Through extensive experiments on three standard datasets, our proposed method demonstrates superior performance compared to existing state-of-the-art 3D WSSS methods.
 

## Methodology
Intuitive overview. The core objective of GA-Net is to integrate appearance features, spatial context, and the weakly-supervised localization cues provided by the CAM to infer whether two superpixel regions belong to the same anatomical structure. To avoid the high computational cost and noise sensitivity of pixel-wise affinity propagation, the proposed method first partitions the image into superpixels and constructs a compact region-adjacency graph on top of them. In this graph, each node corresponds to a superpixel region, and edges connect region pairs that are either spatially adjacent or feature-similar, thereby encoding potential semantic relationships between them. GA-Net learns the affinity weights of the graph edges in an end-to-end, data-driven manner. The supervision signal originates from the soft overlap measure between regions derived from the CAM. Based on this, the network predicts a soft affinity score that quantifies the probability of region co-membership. The learned affinity matrix is then used to construct a random-walk transition matrix, which propagates and diffuses the initial CAM confidences. This process spreads high-confidence information along anatomically consistent paths to semantically related regions while suppressing spurious connections. The entire pipeline is fully differentiable, allowing GA-Net to be integrated with the backbone segmentation network for end-to-end joint training, as shown in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 End-to-end training and inference pipeline of GA-Net.

Require: Input image I, image-level label b

Ensure: Refined segmentation mask 

1: 1. Feature extraction and graph construction

2: Extract encoder features 

3: Generate superpixel regions {P(i)} using SLIC

4: Construct graph , including adjacency edges and kNN long-range edges

5: Initialize node features: 

6: Generate soft target affinity w from CAM (Equation 2)

7: 2. GA-Net inference for edge affinity

8: for
 
to
L–1 do

9:   for each edge 
do

10:    Compute attention weight: 

11:   end for

12:   for each node 
do

13:    Update node feature: 

14:   end for

15: end for

16: Compute edge posterior probability: 

17: 3. Loss computation and optimization

18: Compute structural consistency loss: 

19: Compute smoothing regularization term: 

20: Total loss: 

21: Backpropagate and update GA-Net parameters

22: 4. Random-walk propagation (inference phase)

23: Construct transition matrix: , where 

24: Propagate activations: 

25: return
 

## Graph-based affinity learning
We formulate affinity refinement as probabilistic edge inference on a superpixel graph, where the goal is to estimate the posterior probability that two regions belong to the same anatomical structure. A GA-Net serves as a learned kernel producing edge posteriors under weak supervision from CAM, while random-walk propagation realizes structure-aware diffusion over a row-stochastic transition matrix. Below, we detail the derivations and design choices.
Graph construction as a latent-variable model: For any pair of superpixels connected in the graph, we define a binary latent variable , where y = 1 indicates that the two regions belong to the same anatomical structure, and y = 0 otherwise. Our goal is to estimate the posterior probability of this co-membership:
 a⋆≜Pr(y=1∣I)
(1)where I denotes the input image or volume, y represents region co-membership, and is the true posterior affinity between the two connected regions. Since direct supervision for y is unavailable, a soft target is instead derived from the CAM overlap:
 w=2|P(1)∩P(2)||P(1)|+|P(2)|∈[0,1]
(2)where P(1) and P(2) are the pixel/voxel sets corresponding to the two regions, and w represents the soft target affinity based on the overlap between these regions in the CAM. This soft target captures the expected co-membership under weak supervision. To reduce the dimensionality of the latent space, we apply SLIC (Simple Linear Iterative Clustering) [ ] segmentation, which converts the pixel-level graph into a compact region graph , where the feature vector for each node is initialized as:
 𝐡(0)=[𝐟Enc⊕𝐟app⊕𝐟coord⊕ainit]
(3)where represents the image encoder feature, is the intensity appearance feature, is the spatial coordinate encoding (e.g., centroid), and is the initial affinity. The operator denotes concatenation of these features.
k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) long-range edges: Anatomical structures, such as elongated vessels, may be spatially separated but semantically similar. To account for this, we incorporate kNN edges in the feature space. This reduces the graph diameter and enables multi-hop consistency, while maintaining local planarity with adjacency edges. These long-range edges help propagate affinity information across regions that are anatomically related but spatially distant.
GA-Net as a learned positive-definite Kernel: A single GA-Net layer computes the normalized attention weights using a learned similarity measure:
 α(ℓ)=softmax𝒩(𝐚(ℓ)⊤[𝐖(ℓ)𝐡(1)(ℓ)⊕𝐖(ℓ)𝐡(2)(ℓ)])
(4) 𝐡(ℓ+1)=σ(∑𝒩α(ℓ)𝐖(ℓ)𝐡(ℓ))
(5)where is the learnable projection matrix, is the attention vector, and are the features of the two connected nodes, represents the normalized attention weight, is the neighborhood set, and is the activation function. The nodes indexed by (1) and (2) denote the two nodes in the edge, and no specific spatial dimensionality is implied.
Attention vs. Fixed Kernels: Medical textures in images are inherently non-stationary. By using learned attention, the model can adapt to the specific context of the image. This allows attention to down-weight misleading cues (such as noise or specularities) and up-weight important features like those from self-attention network near anatomical boundaries. Furthermore, the concatenation-based scoring method allows the model to capture cross-feature interactions that static kernels.
From node embeddings to edge posteriors: For each edge, the Bernoulli parameter [ ] is predicted as:
 aopt=σ(𝐔⊤[𝐡(1)(L)⊕𝐡(2)(L)])=Prθ(y=1∣I).
(6)This is equivalent to performing logistic regression on the final GA-Net embeddings, transforming the problem into a maximum-likelihood estimation task under the weak labels w.
Loss as Maximum-A Posteriori (MAP) estimation: The overall loss function combines a penalized negative log-likelihood term:
 ℒ=ℒstruct⏟data term+λ1ℒsmooth⏟informative prior.
(7)Structural consistency (data term): Since w serves as a soft target for y, we use soft-label cross-entropy as the loss function:
 ℒstruct=−∑ℰ[wlogaopt+(1−w)log(1−aopt)].
(8)This is equivalent to minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the Bernoulli distributions and . The inclusion of both positive and negative terms in the loss helps reduce false-positive affinities, particularly in noisy CAM scenarios. While the original formulation approximates a positive-class upper bound, the full soft binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss is more robust and less prone to overfitting. A practical note is that binary CAM can be replaced with a soft Dice/Jaccard form to ensure differentiability:
 w=2⟨p^(1),p^(2)⟩‖p^(1)‖1+‖p^(2)‖1+ϵ
(9)Local smoothness (informative prior): To stabilize the model, a Tikhonov prior [ ] is applied to the initial affinity:
 ℒsmooth=∑ℰωϕ(aopt−ainit),ϕ(Δ)=12Δ2
(10)Here, is a confidence weight based on feature similarity or edge strength. This prior helps to anchor the weak supervision around the initial structure and accelerates convergence, while also preventing overly sharp or discontinuous affinity distributions. From a MAP perspective, it models the posterior as:
 Pr(aopt∣ainit)∼𝒩(ainit,σ2∝1/ω)
(11)This smoothness prior is critical for ensuring numerical stability, particularly in random walk-based propagation, and contributes to the overall robustness of the model.

## Class-driven affinity pseudo label generation
Let denote the classification head, which comprises fully connected layers. We can derive the initial pseudo-label Yp for an input medical CT image labeled with binary categories as: , where every pixel contributes to the generation of the pseudo-label. Specifically, to generate the initial pseudo-label, is trained using image-level labels with label smoothing cross-entropy loss [ ], formulated as:
 ℒcls=−1N∑i=1N[y~ilog(y^i)+(1−y~i)log(1−y^i)],
(12)where . K represents the number of classes. This adjustment ensures a more balanced learning process by softening the targets, thereby improving the model’s robustness against noisy labels.
Initial pseudo label generation: Deriving a reliable initial pseudo label Yaff is a crucial step in learning the semantic affinity Waff. As illustrated in , we extract Yaff from initial pseudo labels Yp. Following [ , , ], we utilize two thresholds, and , where , to categorize the Yp into three distinct regions: reliable foreground, background, and uncertain areas. Formally, given the CAM , the pseudo label Yp is constructed as follows:
 Ypi,j,k={argmax(Mi,j,k,:),if max(Mi,j,k,:)≥φh,0,if max(Mi,j,k,:)≤φl,1,otherwise,
(13)where 0 denotes the background and 1 denotes ignored regions. The function identifies the semantic class with the highest activation value.
Affinity Converter (AC): The Affinity Converter (AC) serves as a crucial component in our method, transforming raw feature representations into meaningful affinity relationships. For affinity elements in the three-dimensional affinity matrix, it represents the affinity between the voxel at and . The calculation of affinity can similarly be based on the vector representation of voxels , as shown:
 A(k1,k2,k3)=norm(fh(i1,j1,k1)⊤fh(i2,j2,k2)‖fh(i1,j1,k1)‖2‖fh(i2,j2,k2)‖2)
(14)Focal affinity loss: The generated Yaff will be used as a supervisory signal to guide the model in learning to predict an accurate semantic affinity representation Waff. This supervision process is achieved by minimizing the discrepancy between the model’s prediction Waff and the ground-truth label Yaff. Specifically, we use a modified focal affinity loss term , which takes the following form:
 ℒaff=(1N+∑(ijk,mno)∈𝒦+log(1+exp(−Waffijk,mno)))+(1N−∑(ijk,mno)∈𝒦−log(1+exp(Waffijk,mno)))
(15)where N+ and N−- denote the counts of and samples. and represent the sets of positive and negative samples in Yaff, respectively.
Region-wise affinity propagation: To further refine the CAM using learned affinities, we introduce a Region-wise Affinity Propagation mechanism. This mechanism enables the propagation of activation scores from high-confidence regions to semantically similar but low-activation regions, leveraging the learned affinity matrix. Let the CAM volume be , and let the global semantic affinity matrix be . We partition the CAM into R overlapping local 3D regions, where each region contains a subvolume M and corresponding affinity submatrix . To perform affinity-based propagation within each region, we first construct a row-normalized transition matrix based on the affinity submatrix:
 Tr=(Dr)−1·(Waffr)η,Diir=∑j(Waffr)ijη
(16)where controls the propagation strength, and Dr is the diagonal normalization matrix to ensure each row of Tr sums to 1. The refined activation for region r is computed by multiplying the transition matrix with the vectorized CAM:
 Maffr=Tr·vec(Mr)
(17)To aggregate results across overlapping regions, we apply a distance-weighted merging strategy. Let denote all regions containing voxel (i, j, k), and let wr(i, j, k) be the weight assigned to region r based on the voxel’s proximity to the region center cr. The final propagated CAM is calculated as:
 Maff(i,j,k,c)=∑r∈ℛ(i,j,k)wr(i,j,k)·Maffr(i−ir,j−jr,k−kr,c)∑r∈ℛ(i,j,k)wr(i,j,k)
(18)

## Basic supervised semantic segmentation
The initial pseudo labels Yp undergo a series of refinement processes, ultimately generating the pseudo labels for the semantic segmentation task. In the pseudo-annotated semantic segmentation training, we adopt a smoothed cross-entropy loss :
 ℒseg=1|Ω|∑yi∈Ω[−∑k=1K((1−ϵ)yi,k+ϵ1K)log(Yi,kp)].
(19)where is a regularization term for label smoothing [ ] to prevent the model from becoming overconfident. K is the number of classes. is the prediction from the model, yi is the one-hot label.
Exponential moving average: In the initial stages of training for WSSS, model predictions are often unstable and exhibit limited accuracy. To address this challenge, we propose an approach inspired by [ ], wherein we employ a prediction ensembling technique known as Exponential Moving Average (EMA). This technique continuously accumulates and updates the EMA of predictions during training, effectively reducing the adverse impact of single prediction errors on the final results. Specifically, at each training iteration, the EMA combines the current model prediction with the previous EMA prediction yn−1, where the weights are determined by the smoothing factor δ, following the update rule:
 yn=δf(x;θi)+(1−δ)yn−1
(20)where yn represents the current EMA prediction, is the current model prediction, yn−1 is the previous EMA prediction, and is the smoothing factor. The predictions are averaged every iterations, where is the ensembling interval.

## Scribbled-based segmentation
To accurately segment small LC lesions, we propose a scribble-based segmentation approach. This method leverages scribble annotations to capture the complete shape and boundary information of LC target objects, thereby enhancing the model’s ability to identify and process fine structures [ ]. Unlike expert manual labels, these scribble annotations are indirectly generated by extracting and converting the contours of the pseudo labels using the Lung Cavity Recognition Algorithm (LCRA) described in [ ]. The pseudo labels provide approximate boundaries, which are then transformed into scribble annotations for improved LC segmentation accuracy. Specifically, we use a partial cross-entropy loss function as a sparse annotation supervision paradigm. This loss is defined as follows:
 ℒ_pce(𝐈,Y*s)=−1|Ω*s|∑*j∈Ω*s[Y_sjlog(f(𝐈;θ))+(1−Y_sj)log(1−f(𝐈;θ))]
(21)where I is the input CT image, is the scribble label derived from the pseudo-label Ω, and is the set of scribbled pixels. represents the model’s prediction.

## Network training.
The total loss of our method is a weighted combination of six separate loss functions: 
 , , . This combination is expressed as:
 ℒ=ℒcls+λ1ℒstruct+λ2ℒsmooth+λ3ℒaff+λ4ℒpce+λ5ℒseg
(22)where , , , and are coefficients that balance the contributions of each loss function.

## Data and experiments

## Dataset
We conducted experiments on three publicly available TB chest CT datasets, covering both classification and segmentation tasks. Details of the datasets and data splitting strategies are summarized as follows. The classification criteria for lung cavity number and size across the three datasets are summarized in .
 ImageCLEF Tuberculosis (https://www.imageclef.org/2021/medical/tuberculosis): This dataset [ ] contains chest CT scans of 1,338 TB patients, each corresponding to a single patient and labeled with only one TB type. Some scans are accompanied by additional meta-information, which may vary by case. Among them, 917 images are designated for training and 421 for testing.
TB Portals (https://tbportals.niaid.nih.gov/): A global TB database and research platform developed by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) [ ], containing 1,324 non-compound TB CT scans along with corresponding clinical data. We used the same categorical variables (LCs size and total cavity number), as shown in . In our study, 1,059 images were used for training and 265 for validation.
DeepPulmoTB (https://github.com/SupCodeTech/DeepPulmoTB): This dataset [ ] includes 354 CT images with multi-class annotations for TB, including lung areas, LCs, and consolidation or lung cavity wall (C-LCW). Due to the limited dataset size, we adopted a 9:1 split strategy, using 318 images for training and 36 for validation.

## Label generation and refinement
Image-level annotation generation. Notably, in the , the ImageCLEF TB dataset does not provide annotations specific to LCs classification or segmentation, and the TB Portals dataset lacks pixel-level segmentation labels. To address this limitation, we collaborated with experts from the Department of Radiology at Universiti Putra Malaysia to construct reliable image-level supervision. The annotation process was conducted manually by three senior radiologists, each with over ten years of clinical experience in thoracic imaging. All annotations were performed using ITK-SNAP [ ] under a unified and standardized protocol agreed upon by all annotators. Each patient CT volume was assigned image-level labels (e.g., 1-3 cavities and <25mm), which describe the shape characteristics of LC lesions and serve as the sole human supervision during the initial classification and CAM generation stages.
Pseudo-label derivation and refinement. Based on the image-level labels, a classification head was first trained to produce CAMs. These CAMs provide coarse localization cues but are inherently noisy and incomplete. To obtain initial pseudo pixel-level labels Yp, we applied a dual-threshold strategy with thresholds and , partitioning CAM responses into reliable foreground, background, and uncertain regions. Subsequently, structural affinity learning and region-wise affinity propagation were employed to refine these pseudo labels, resulting in progressively improved pseudo segmentation masks .
Scribble annotation generation and supervision. Unlike conventional approaches that rely on manually annotated scribbles, the scribble annotations in our method are generated automatically. Specifically, we extract the contours of the refined pseudo labels and convert them into sparse scribble annotations using the Lung Cavity Recognition Algorithm (LCRA) proposed in [ ]. These scribbles preserve essential shape and boundary information of lung cavity lesions while avoiding the need for additional expert annotation. The resulting scribble masks are then used to construct partial supervision masks , where only scribbled pixels contribute to the loss computation via a partial cross-entropy objective. This strategy enables effective learning from sparse supervision and further improves segmentation accuracy for small and irregular LCs lesions.
Overall, the proposed pipeline establishes a complete and coherent supervision hierarchy, starting from expert-provided image-level labels, progressing through affinity-refined pseudo-labels, and finally yielding scribble-based supervision masks for robust weakly supervised semantic segmentation.

## Data preprocessing and experimental setup
To ensure data consistency and model training stability, we applied a unified preprocessing pipeline to all datasets.
Imaging modality and specifications: All data were obtained from chest CT volumes acquired using standard clinical scanning protocols, in the original DICOM format. The specific parameters of CT images varied among cases: the in-plane resolution ranged from mm to mm, the slice thickness ranged from 1 mm to 5 mm, and each 3D volume contained approximately 100 to 400 consecutive slices. To eliminate spatial scale differences among data from different sources, we resampled all CT volumes to a uniform isotropic resolution of mm3. Furthermore, the image gray values (Hounsfield Units, HU) were clipped to the window of [–1200,600] to focus on the typical density range of lung tissue, and then linearly normalized to the interval [0,1] for model input.
Data augmentation: During the training phase, we adopted an online data augmentation strategy based on MONAI to improve the generalization ability of the model. For each CT volume, we first loaded the image and its corresponding segmentation label, and uniformly converted the data into the channel-first format ( ). Then, fixed-size three-dimensional patches were randomly cropped from the original volume, with the patch size set to and random size variation disabled (random_size=False). This random 3D cropping was performed online at each iteration to increase the spatial diversity of training samples and reduce memory overhead. For intensity augmentation, we applied random Gaussian noise perturbation (RandGaussianNoise/RandGaussianNoised) only to the input images (img) to simulate imaging noise and intensity fluctuations caused by different scanning conditions, thereby enhancing the model’s robustness to noise and intensity variations. It is important to emphasize that all spatial transformations (e.g., random cropping) were applied synchronously to both images and segmentation labels to ensure pixel-level alignment, while intensity-based transformations were applied only to images and not to segmentation labels, so as to avoid introducing label noise.
Hardware and software environment: In our experimental setup, all models were trained on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090Ti GPU with 24 GB of memory. During training, the batch size was set to 8, and the initial learning rate was . Model optimization was performed using the AdamW optimizer, with a weight decay of 0.05 and momentum parameters and . A warm-up strategy was applied at the beginning of training, during which the learning rate was linearly increased to 5.625 × 10−5, followed by a cosine annealing learning rate scheduler to gradually decay the learning rate.

## Cross-validation protocol and statistical evaluation
To clarify the robustness of the statistical analysis and the evaluation protocol, we provide additional details on the cross-validation (CV) design and inferential testing strategy adopted in this study. For each dataset, a fixed held-out test set was first defined according to the protocol described in the Dataset section. The remaining data were used exclusively for training and validation. Within this training set, a 5-fold cross-validation strategy was employed for hyper-parameter selection and model configuration. Specifically, the training data were randomly partitioned into five non-overlapping folds at the patient level. In each CV iteration, four folds were used for model training, and the remaining fold was used for validation. This process was repeated five times, such that each fold served as the validation set once. The patient-level data distribution for the 5-fold cross-validation across all datasets is summarized in . All hyperparameters, including those related to graph-based affinity learning, pseudo-label generation, and supervised segmentation, were selected based solely on the average validation performance across the five folds. Importantly, the held-out test set was never used during cross-validation, model selection, or hyper-parameter tuning. After determining the optimal configuration, the final model was retrained using the full training set and evaluated once on the held-out test set.
 Moreover, to ensure robust and statistically sound comparisons, significance testing was performed on segmentation metrics (DSC, IoU) rather than on correlated training losses. Specifically, for each method, we obtained its prediction for every individual patient in the dataset. Since all methods were evaluated on the same set of patients, the DSC/IoU scores across patients formed paired samples for any pair of methods. We then applied the Wilcoxon signed-rank test to these paired patient-level scores to determine statistical significance. This approach provides a more reliable and powerful inference than using fold-aggregated scores (which would yield only 5 data points per method) or training losses. summarizes the statistical evaluation protocol. All statistical analyses were performed using Python’s SciPy library (version 1.10.1)
 

## Implementation details
To ensure reliable evaluation and stable model training, all experiments were conducted using a consistent experimental setup. The image encoder was fixed to ViT-B/16 as the backbone network across all experiments. Details of the cross-validation protocol, including data partitioning, hyper-parameter selection, and statistical evaluation, are provided in the previous section.
Sensitivity analysis of key hyper-parameters for graph-based affinity learning. To assess the robustness of the proposed method with respect to key hyper-parameters, we conducted a sensitivity analysis by varying the affinity thresholds, graph design parameters, and propagation settings around their default values. Specifically, the foreground and background thresholds were perturbed within a reasonable range (e.g., % of the default values), and the radius of the local 3D window was varied between (5,5,5) and (9,9,9). In addition, we evaluated alternative GA-Net depths in the range of 1 to 15 layers.
1) Pseudo-label Generation Thresholds : These thresholds are used to partition reliable foreground, background, and uncertain regions from the initial CAM, and play a critical role in affinity learning. To evaluate the sensitivity of the proposed method to these parameters, we systematically examined different combinations of and within the ranges [0.25,0.35] and [0.40,0.50], respectively. Experimental results show that when varies within these ranges, the final segmentation performance, measured by the DSC, remains on a consistently high and stable plateau with only minor fluctuations. The selected configuration lies well within this high-performance region. Further statistical testing (patient-level paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test) confirms that there is no statistically significant difference in performance between the selected configuration and other combinations within the interval (all comparisons p > 0.05). This indicates that the method is robust to small perturbations in the threshold parameters, and its effectiveness stems from the overall design rather than from precise tuning of specific threshold values.
2) Local Affinity Window Radius: Computing affinities within a local 3D window balances capturing sufficient context with computational efficiency and noise suppression. We tested cubic window sizes from 5 to 11 voxels per side. Performance peaked at a radius of 7 (i.e., a (7,7,7) window). Importantly, the performance degradation observed at radii of 5 or 9 compared to the peak performance was statistically non-significant (p > 0.05, patient-level paired Wilcoxon test). This suggests that the method does not critically depend on an exact window size and can achieve stable performance as long as it operates within a reasonable range of local context.
3) GA-Net Depth on Graph-Based Affinity Learning: For the graph-based affinity learning module, we systematically investigated the effect of GA-Net depth by varying the number of layers from 1 to 15. The DSC increased steadily as the network depth grew from 1 to 4 layers, indicating that deeper message passing enables more effective aggregation of contextual and structural information across superpixel regions. The performance reached its peak at four layers (as illustrated in (a)), suggesting a favorable balance between local feature preservation and contextual integration. However, when the number of layers exceeds five, the segmentation performance exhibits a statistically significant decline (e.g., comparing 6 layers to 4 layers, p < 0.05). This performance degradation primarily stems from two aspects: first, excessive message passing may lead to over-smoothing in the graph domain, causing node representations from different anatomical regions to become increasingly similar, thereby weakening boundary discrimination; second, deeper graph propagation tends to diffuse affinity information into semantically unrelated or weakly connected regions, which is particularly detrimental when the weak supervision signals provided by CAMs are inherently noisy or incompletely localized. Based on this analysis, we select four layers as the default configuration for the GA-Net, as it consistently delivers strong and statistically superior performance while maintaining stable optimization behavior.
 Sensitivity analysis for the supervised segmentation module. To rigorously evaluate the robustness of the exponential moving average (EMA) ensembling mechanism within the supervised segmentation module, we conducted a systematic sensitivity analysis on its two key hyper-parameters: the smoothing coefficient δ and the ensembling interval γ, in strict accordance with the statistical evaluation protocol summarized in . We tested δ across the values and γ across using patient-level five-fold cross-validation. The segmentation performance, measured by the DSC on the held-out validation folds, is summarized in (b) and (c). Statistical analysis using paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests on patient-level DSC scores confirms the following robustness patterns:
Smoothing coefficient δ: A broad plateau of high and statistically comparable performance was observed for . The performance achieved at the optimal setting ( ) was not significantly different from that at or (both p > 0.05). In contrast, extreme values ( or ) resulted in a statistically significant degradation in performance (p < 0.05). Note: these extreme cases are not shown in the figure.
Ensembling interval γ: The segmentation performance remained consistently high and without statistically significant differences for and (p > 0.05). Significantly lower performance was observed only when the EMA updates were either too frequent ( ) or too infrequent ( ), with statistically significant differences (p < 0.05). Note: these extreme (> 10) cases are not shown in the figure.
The selected configuration ( , ) lies well within these robust, high-performance intervals. This analysis, supported by formal statistical testing, demonstrates that the performance gains introduced by the EMA module stem from its core design principle–iterative prediction stabilization–rather than from meticulous fine-tuning of its hyper-parameters. Overall, the supervised segmentation module exhibits strong inherent stability across a reasonable range of parameter settings.
Sensitivity analysis of loss weight parameters. To rigorously assess the robustness of the proposed multi-task learning framework, we performed a systematic sensitivity analysis on the loss weighting coefficients to in Eq. ( ), in accordance with the statistical evaluation protocol summarized in . A grid search was conducted within the bounded space using patient-level cross-validation on the training set only, thereby ensuring that no test data were involved in hyper-parameter selection.
The analysis was designed to examine whether the segmentation performance was critically dependent on a specific combination of loss weights. To this end, we compared the DSC achieved by the final selected configuration with multiple neighboring configurations, in which each individual weight was independently perturbed by while keeping the remaining coefficients fixed. Statistical analysis based on a series of patient-level paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests revealed no statistically significant performance differences between the chosen configuration and its immediate variants (all p > 0.05). These results indicate the presence of a broad plateau of stable performance rather than a single, sharply defined optimum.

## Ablation studies
To evaluate the contribution of different loss components in the method, we performed ablation experiments with the NIH “TB Portals” [ ], ImageCLEF [ ], and DeepPulmoTB dataset [ ]. The ablation experiment design is shown in . The baseline method, M-5, incorporates all the loss components and serves as the reference for comparison. The results are summarized in , which presents the performance of various modules on segmentation and classification tasks. shows a performance comparison between conventional affinity methods and graph-based affinity methods. The corresponding decision-making process and recognition performance of CAM for the ablation experiments M-1 to M-5 are visualized in .
 M-1 (Excluding ): In this experiment, we removed the structural consistency loss to analyze its impact on model performance.Patient-level paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests confirmed a statistically significant performance decline in both segmentation (DSC: p < 0.01) and classification accuracy compared to the full model M-5. This indicates that the structural consistency loss is essential for maintaining prediction coherence, particularly in regions with ambiguous boundaries. The CAM visualization in highlights the model’s inability to maintain consistent boundaries, with regions appearing fragmented and misclassified, reinforcing that significantly enhances structural integrity across anatomical regions.
M-2 (Excluding ): The exclusion of the affinity loss in M-2 further demonstrates the importance of capturing semantic affinities between regions.Statistical analysis showed a significant decrease in segmentation performance (DSC: p < 0.01), with boundaries becoming less precise.The CAM in illustrates that without , the model fails to effectively capture relationships between anatomically connected regions, confirming its crucial role in segmenting connected structures.
M-3 (Excluding ): Removing the smoothness loss in M-3 resulted in a less stable model, especially under noisy or inconsistent supervision. Although the average segmentation accuracy remained relatively high, the performance variation across patients increased significantly, and the model outputs became more erratic (p < 0.05 for increased variance). The CAM in visualizations exhibited more jagged boundaries, indicating that smoothness regularization plays an important role in suppressing noise and stabilizing predictions.
M-4 (Excluding ): The M-4 experiment, which excluded the partial cross-entropy loss ( ), showed a statistically significant but modest performance decrease compared to M-5 (DSC: p < 0.05). These results suggest that while the scribble-based module provides beneficial fine-grained boundary information, its absence particularly affects small and irregular lesions. As shown in , the CAM for M-4 exhibits less refined segmentation of LCs with weaker boundary definition, emphasizing the contribution of to capturing fine structural details.
M-5 (Full Model with All Loss Components): The full model (M-5) incorporates all proposed loss components and achieves the best performance across all evaluation metrics.Statistical comparisons against all ablated variants confirmed its significant superiority (all p < 0.01), demonstrating the combined effectiveness of the proposed loss terms. In addition, the CAM visualization in shows well-defined boundaries and accurate anatomical localization. demonstrates that the proposed graph-based affinity algorithm significantly outperforms conventional affinity propagation methods.
Overall, the ablation experiments, supported by rigorous patient-level statistical testing, confirm that each loss component contributes positively to the proposed weakly supervised framework. Specifically, the structural consistency, affinity, and smoothness losses play statistically verifiable roles in preserving boundary coherence, semantic connectivity, and prediction stability, while the scribble-based segmentation module significantly enhances fine-detail recognition for small or irregular lesions.
Moreover, presents a comparative analysis of the training process across five ablation methods (M-1 to M-5). Subfigures (a)–(e) correspond to the loss curves of each method, where the x-axis represents training epochs and the y-axis denotes the loss value. The experiments demonstrate that the training and validation losses for all methods show a convergent trend as epochs increase, and the gap between the validation and training curves remains below 0.15, indicating no overfitting in the models. The magnified views (insets) reveal that the loss values of M-5 in the final stabilization phase (last 50 epochs)—with training loss and validation loss (mean ± standard deviation)—are numerically lower than those of other methods. Quantitative analysis ( ) shows that M-5 attains a DSC score of 0.457, outperforming methods M-4 to M-1 by 0.06–0.28.
 presents a comparative analysis of classification performance across five ablation methods (M-1 to M-5) using confusion matrices, where diagonal elements represent correctly classified samples and off-diagonal elements indicate misclassifications. The experimental results demonstrate that: 1) LCs categories with similar morphological characteristics (e.g., “no cavity” vs. “small cavities <25 mm”, “no cavity” vs. “1–3 cavities”) exhibit significant cross-confusion; 2) The baseline method M-5 achieves optimal classification performance. (f) visualizes the ROC curves of each ablation method (M-1 to M-5) in the LCs attribute classification task. The figure shows that the baseline method incorporating all loss functions (M-5) achieved the best AUC in the LCs classification task, with a value of 0.750. These results validate the superiority of our proposed method in TB cavity attribute classification.
 

## Comparison to state-of-the-art
To comprehensively evaluate the performance of our method, we trained and compared several existing medical imaging WSSS methods on the LCs segmentation task, as summarized in and . presents the benchmark configuration and comparative methods, including their supervision types and backbone architectures. The compared methods include recent state-of-the-art approaches, each designed with varying strategies for weakly supervised segmentation. Notably, some of these methods were originally developed in a 2D manner. To ensure a fair and consistent comparison with our proposed 3D method, we extended these 2D approaches to their 3D counterparts by applying them slice-wise across all dimensions and aggregating the volumetric outputs accordingly. This adaptation enables the evaluation of all methods under a unified 3D experimental setting that aligns with the nature of our input data and task requirements. The quantitative performance comparisons across three public datasets are reported in .
 According to the statistical evaluation protocol defined in , we analyzed the results using the paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test (significance level p < 0.05) with the patient as the statistical unit. In multiple comparisons with the best baseline method, our proposed method achieved the best performance across all three key evaluation metrics–95HD, IoU, and DSC–and demonstrated statistically significant advantages (p < 0.05) on all three datasets (TB Portals, ImageCLEF, and DeepPulmoTB). Specifically, on the TB Portals dataset, our method achieved results of 27.94 ± 4.63 (95HD), (IoU), and (DSC), significantly outperforming all existing methods. On the ImageCLEF dataset, the results were (95HD), (IoU), and (DSC), again showing notable improvement over previous methods. On the DeepPulmoTB dataset, our method obtained (95HD), (IoU), and (DSC), maintaining its performance advantage.
In comparison to existing state-of-the-art methods, such as [ ], [ ], and [ ], which show a consistent gap in performance (especially in terms of DSC and IoU), our method stands out in its ability to capture both detailed and large-scale anatomical features. This is reflected in the sharp improvements in the DSC scores across all datasets, with our method consistently achieving the highest scores. Furthermore, illustrates the segmentation results of various methods, where it can be observed that our method achieves higher alignment with the ground truth compared to other approaches. The improved performance can be attributed to the integration of novel components, such as the GA-Net-based affinity learning and region-wise affinity propagation, which allow our model to better capture the relationships between anatomical structures and refine the segmentation boundaries.
 Our method’s superior performance suggests that the proposed method effectively addresses the challenges in weakly supervised 3D medical image segmentation, particularly for LC segmentation. The results indicate that our approach is more capable of handling complex anatomical structures and noisy data, thereby providing a more reliable and accurate segmentation solution compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

## Subgroup analysis by lesion characteristics
To better analyze the strengths and limitations of the proposed method, we further conducted qualitative and quantitative subgroup analyses based on lesion size, quantity, morphology, and disease severity. These subgroup definitions are derived from the cavity size and number annotations summarized in .
Lesion size and quantity. Quantitative analysis shows that the proposed method achieves more pronounced improvements over baseline methods in cases with multiple cavities (more than one cavity) and larger cavity sizes (>25mm), as summarized in . Within these subgroups, graph-based affinity learning can effectively bridge spatial distances and propagate semantic information between regions associated with relevant anatomical structures, thereby improving the completeness of the segmented regions and reducing fragmentation. In contrast, segmentation becomes more challenging for very small cavities (<25mm) or single-cavity cases, where partial volume effects and low contrast often lead to under-segmentation. Nevertheless, even under such conditions, our method consistently maintains a relative performance advantage over other approaches across all lesion-size-based subgroups.
 Lesion location. Qualitative inspection indicates that cavities located in central lung regions or near major bronchovascular structures are segmented more reliably than those adjacent to pleural boundaries, as summarized in . Peripheral cavities often exhibit ambiguous boundaries and limited contextual support, which may reduce affinity propagation effectiveness. These failure cases are primarily associated with weak CAM localization rather than errors in the affinity learning module itself.
 Lesion morphology. From a morphological perspective, the proposed method performs particularly well on cavities with irregular shapes or fragmented appearances, as summarized in . By modeling region-level affinities on a superpixel graph, GA-Net is able to capture long-range structural consistency that pixel-level methods often miss. However, thin-walled cavities or cavities with extremely complex internal structures may still suffer from boundary leakage, especially under weak supervision.
 Disease severity. When stratifying cases by disease severity using cavity number as a proxy, we observe that the proposed method yields larger relative gains in moderate-to-severe cases (multiple cavities) compared to mild cases (single or no cavity), consistent with the quantitative trends reported in . This suggests that the proposed approach is particularly effective in scenarios where richer structural context is available, while extremely mild cases remain challenging due to limited lesion evidence.
Overall, these subgroup analyses demonstrate that the proposed method consistently improves segmentation performance across a wide range of lesion characteristics, while also highlighting specific scenarios–such as very small or peripheral cavities–where further improvements are needed.

## Computational complexity analysis
To assess the practical feasibility of GA-Net for clinical deployment, we analyze its computational complexity in terms of both theoretical operations and actual runtime performance.
Theoretical complexity: Let be the number of superpixel nodes and the number of edges in the constructed graph. Each GA-Net layer performs two main operations: (1) edge-wise attention scoring, and (2) node feature aggregation. The attention scoring step computes a scalar for each edge via a learnable projection followed by a dot product, requiring ⋅ operations where d is the feature dimension. The aggregation step then updates each node by a weighted sum of its neighbors, incurring operations as well. Thus, for L layers, the overall complexity is . In practice, we keep the graph sparse: adjacency edges are limited to local connectivity (typically 4–8 neighbors per node in 2D, 6–26 in 3D), and long-range kNN edges add a small constant factor (we use k = 10). Hence, , and the complexity scales linearly with the number of nodes, i.e., .
Empirical runtime and memory: We measured the forward-pass time and GPU memory consumption on a representative 3D CT volume (size ) using an NVIDIA RTX 3090Ti. After SLIC superpixel segmentation (which is a pre-processing step and can be efficiently parallelized), the graph contains nodes and edges. With a 4-layer GA-Net (d = 256), the affinity inference takes ≈ 42 ms per volume, which translates to ≈ 0.66 ms per slice (96 slices). The peak GPU memory footprint is ≈ 1.2 GB, dominated by the node feature matrices and the attention weights. For comparison, a standard 3D U-Net baseline with similar feature dimensions requires ≈ 120 ms per volume and ≈ 3.5 GB of memory. Thus, GA-Net is ≈ 2.9× faster and uses ≈ 2.9× less memory than the U-Net baseline, making it highly suitable for real-time or near-real-time clinical scenarios.
Comparison with alternative affinity methods: We also compare against two graph-based affinity learning alternatives: (1) a non-parametric method that computes affinities via fixed cosine similarity on encoder features, and (2) a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) with fixed edge weights. The non-parametric method is slightly faster (≈ 35 ms) but yields significantly lower segmentation accuracy (mIoU drops by 8.2% on our validation set). The GCN baseline has similar runtime to GA-Net (≈ 45 ms) but lacks the adaptive attention mechanism, leading to a 4.5 % mIoU reduction. Hence, GA-Net achieves a favorable trade-off between efficiency and accuracy.
Clinical deployment considerations: The linear scaling with respect to the number of nodes ensures that the model remains efficient even for high-resolution volumes. In a typical clinical workflow, the entire pipeline–including superpixel generation, GA-Net inference, and random-walk refinement–runs in under 200 ms per volume on a single GPU, meeting the real-time requirements for interactive segmentation tools. Furthermore, the model can be easily optimized via TensorRT or ONNX runtime for further speedup on embedded devices.
In summary, GA-Net introduces minimal computational overhead compared to conventional segmentation networks, while providing the structured reasoning necessary for robust affinity learning. Its low latency and memory footprint make it a practical choice for clinical deployment, where both accuracy and efficiency are critical.

## Discussion
The method proposed in this study represents a meaningful advance in the task of weakly supervised semantic segmentation of lung cavities in 3D medical images. Experimental results demonstrate that, compared to existing baseline methods, our model achieves significant relative performance improvements across multiple datasets (e.g., an average relative improvement of approximately 5% in DSC). This improvement validates the effectiveness of the proposed graph affinity learning and scribble-guided optimization mechanisms in leveraging weak supervision signals.
We note that, while the relative improvements are significant, there remains room for enhancement in the absolute performance levels of segmentation for this task (e.g., an average DSC of approximately 45.4% and IoU of approximately 27.3%). This reflects the inherent challenges of accurately segmenting morphologically complex and boundary-ambiguous lung cavities under the weakly supervised setting using only image-level labels and sparse scribbles. The current performance bottlenecks may stem from several aspects: firstly, the quality of the initial pseudo-labels is highly dependent on the CAM’s ability to localize discriminative regions, which may be incomplete when the target exhibits high internal heterogeneity; secondly, the weak supervision signals themselves lack exhaustive boundary information, imposing a theoretical upper limit on the model’s ability to learn fine contours; finally, the substantial variations in lesion size, morphology, and contrast across different datasets also pose difficulties for model generalization.
Regarding the prospects for clinical translation, we consider the current work primarily as a methodological validation. Although the results are encouraging, a series of more in-depth studies and validations are required before it could be directly deployed in clinical decision support systems. Examples include external validation on larger-scale, multi-center, prospectively collected datasets; further quantitative analysis of the model’s performance across different subgroups (e.g., based on cavity size, location, or etiology); and conducting necessary clinical trials to evaluate its practical impact on clinical workflows and decision-making. Furthermore, the model’s computational efficiency is also a consideration for practical deployment, and future work could explore model lightweighting and inference acceleration techniques.
Overall, this study indicates that graph-based affinity learning holds considerable potential for enhancing segmentation performance under weak supervision and offers a promising research direction for reducing annotation costs in 3D medical image analysis. Future work will focus on improving absolute segmentation accuracy, enhancing cross-dataset generalization capability, and further evaluating its clinical relevance through larger-scale validation.

## Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a novel weakly supervised method for 3D semantic segmentation of lung cavities, achieving state-of-the-art performance across multiple benchmark datasets. Our method, which integrates graph-based affinity learning, region-wise affinity propagation, and scribble-based semantic segmentation, effectively addresses the challenges of weak supervision in medical image segmentation. The comprehensive ablation study demonstrated the critical role of each component in improving the segmentation accuracy, particularly in complex anatomical structures.While there are some limitations, such as high computational costs, our method shows potential as a reliable tool for the automated analysis of 3D medical images. Future improvements in annotation strategies and computational efficiency will further enhance its applicability and robustness in clinical settings.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0341717.r001Decision Letter 0
YuHongchuanAcademic Editor© 2026 Hongchuan Yu2026Hongchuan Yuhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
12 Dec 2025

PONE-D-25-44538
Refining Weak Supervision for Robust Lung Cavity Segmentation: A Graph-Affinity Framework with Boundary Constraints
PLOS One
Dear Dr. Tan,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 26 2026 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Hongchuan Yu
Academic Editor
PLOS One

Journal Requirements:

1. When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Please note that PLOS One has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, we expect all author-generated code to be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse.
3. We note that your Data Availability Statement is currently as follows: All relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting Information files.
Please confirm at this time whether or not your submission contains all raw data required to replicate the results of your study. Authors must share the “minimal data set” for their submission. PLOS defines the minimal data set to consist of the data required to replicate all study findings reported in the article, as well as related metadata and methods (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-minimal-data-set-definition).
For example, authors should submit the following data:
- The values behind the means, standard deviations and other measures reported;
- The values used to build graphs;
- The points extracted from images for analysis.
Authors do not need to submit their entire data set if only a portion of the data was used in the reported study.
If your submission does not contain these data, please either upload them as Supporting Information files or deposit them to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories.
If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent. If data are owned by a third party, please indicate how others may request data access.
4. If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.
5. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.

Additional Editor Comments:

I invite 2 reviewers and their recommend: Both minor.
Reviewers have some concerns such as 1) novelty is weak, 2) dataset transparency, experimental reproducibility, and fair benchmarking...
Hope their comments are helpful for you to improve this work.
Finally, I will recommend "Minor" to this paper.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The manuscript addresses a clinically relevant and technically challenging task—weakly supervised lung cavity segmentation in CT imaging—by proposing a graph-based affinity network (GA-Net) with additional refinements such as EMA ensembling and a scribble-based boundary module. The topic aligns well with PLOS ONE’s scope in medical AI and image analysis. The writing is generally clear, and the technical presentation is well-structured. However, several critical issues related to clarity of contribution, dataset transparency, experimental reproducibility, and fair benchmarking must be resolved before the paper can be considered for publication.
Comments:
1. Clarity of Contribution
The paper repeatedly refers to the proposed work as a framework, but from the methodology and experiment sections, it is essentially a new method or model (GA-Net) rather than a broader framework.
Recommendation: Re-define the contribution precisely.
The abstract and introduction should explicitly highlight what is new compared to previous WSSS methods. Currently, the novelty statement is diffuse.
2. Literature Review and Dataset Exploration
The related work section (implied within the introduction) briefly mentions previous WSSS and medical segmentation works but does not adequately analyse key prior methods or datasets.
3. Dataset and Experimental Specification
The dataset description is too brief and does not indicate:
Imaging modalities (CT resolution, slice count),
Preprocessing steps (normalisation, lung mask extraction, augmentation),
How image-level or scribble labels were generated,
Hardware/software environment.
Some “processing seems missing,” e.g., how the pseudo-labels are derived and refined, and how scribbles are converted into supervision masks.
4. It is good to have a detailed subsection “Dataset and Preprocessing” and another “Implementation Details” under Methodology or Experiments.
5. Benchmarking and Fairness of Comparison
The results claim superiority over state-of-the-art WSSS techniques but provide no clear justification that comparisons are fair. It is good to include a concise Benchmark Configuration Table listing each compared method, supervision type, and training protocol to demonstrate fairness and consistency.
6. The paper does not analyse the computational cost or complexity of GA-Net. It is good to add a complexity discussion. It would strengthen the argument for practical robustness, particularly for clinical deployment.
7. Equations (1)–(9) are mathematically dense but lack intuitive explanation or pseudocode showing how the modules are trained end-to-end.
Reviewer #2: Overall, the manuscript appears to present a coherent and potentially valuable contribution to weakly supervised 3D lung cavity segmentation, with a plausible methodological rationale, multi-dataset evaluation, and ablations that generally support the main claims of incremental performance improvement. However, the current version would benefit from important clarifications and modest strengthening.
1. The manuscript mentions both fixed splits and 5-fold CV. Please clarify whether CV was limited to the training set with a held-out test set, and how hyper-parameters were chosen to prevent test leakage.
2. If the authors report significance, they should specify the tests and justify their assumptions. Fold-wise paired tests or bootstrap CIs for DSC/IoU would be more appropriate than t-tests on correlated training losses.
3. Key hyper-parameters (affinity thresholds, graph design, propagation settings) may strongly affect results; a brief robustness/sensitivity analysis would show the gains are not dependent on a narrowly tuned setup.
4. The gains over baselines are encouraging, but absolute DSC/IoU remain modest; the discussion should focus on relative improvements and avoid implying clinical readiness without further validation.
5. Add qualitative and quantitative subgroup analyses by lesion size, location, morphology, and severity to clarify where the method performs well and where it fails.
6. The manuscript is well organised and mostly clear, with generally standard English. However, the experimental protocol and parts of the methods would benefit from language polishing to improve clarity and consistency in terminology, acronyms, and the evaluation design.
7. The statistics support descriptive improvement claims, but the inferential evidence is not yet robust, particularly given the t-test usage and unclear CV design. Clearer protocol details and fold- or patient-level testing would strengthen the conclusions.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Armin Sheibanifard
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
To ensure your figures meet our technical requirements, please review our figure guidelines: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures
You may also use PLOS’s free figure tool, NAAS, to help you prepare publication quality figures: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-tools-for-figure-preparation.
NAAS will assess whether your figures meet our technical requirements by comparing each figure against our figure specifications.
10.1371/journal.pone.0341717.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
9 Jan 2026

Response to Reviewer:
Reviewer 1: The manuscript addresses a clinically relevant and technically challenging task—weakly supervised lung cavity segmentation in CT imaging—by proposing a graph-based affinity network (GA-Net) with additional refinements such as EMA ensembling and a scribble-based boundary module. The topic aligns well with PLOS ONE’s scope in medical AI and image analysis. The writing is generally clear, and the technical presentation is well-structured. However, several critical issues related to clarity of contribution, dataset transparency, experimental reproducibility, and fair benchmarking must be resolved before the paper can be considered for publication. Comments:
1. Clarity of Contribution The paper repeatedly refers to the proposed work as a framework, but from the methodology and experiment sections, it is essentially a new method or model (GA-Net) rather than a broader framework. Recommendation: Re-define the contribution precisely. The abstract and introduction should explicitly highlight what is new compared to previous WSSS methods. Currently, the novelty statement is diffuse.
Answer�
The issues you raised regarding the clarity of our contributions and the accuracy of terminology are highly important. Following your suggestions, we have carefully revised the entire manuscript—particularly the Abstract and Introduction—to define our contributions more precisely and to highlight the core innovations more explicitly. The main revisions are summarized as follows: Clarification of the terminology “framework” vs. “method”:
We fully agree with your comment. The original manuscript used the term “framework” inappropriately, which may have caused conceptual ambiguity. In the revised version, we have consistently replaced it with “method” or “model” to better reflect the nature of our work. Specifically, our contribution is a novel weakly supervised segmentation method, centered on the proposed GA-Net model together with a set of supporting optimization strategies. Making the contributions explicit and highlighting novelty: We have rewritten key parts of the Abstract and Introduction to directly and clearly distinguish our approach from existing WSSS methods. The major improvements include:
In the Abstract, we adopted a more structured, point-wise presentation to clearly summarize our innovations at three levels.
In the Introduction, we added a dedicated “Main Contributions” subsection to summarize the core innovations in a structured (1–2–3) format.
Throughout the problem analysis and method description in the Introduction, we strengthened the “compared to existing methods” discussion by explicitly pointing out the limitations of conventional affinity propagation based on low-level features and global propagation mechanisms, and by explaining how our GA-Net and region-wise propagation are specifically designed to address these issues.
2. Literature Review and Dataset Exploration. The related work section (implied within the introduction) briefly mentions previous WSSS and medical segmentation works but does not adequately analyse key prior methods or datasets.
Answer�
We fully agree that an in-depth analysis of prior work is essential for clearly positioning the contributions of this study. Following your suggestion, we have substantially expanded and rewritten the Introduction section (which also serves the role of reviewing related work) to provide a more systematic and critical discussion of key prior methods and the limitations of existing approaches and datasets. The main revisions and improvements are summarized as follows: Stronger and deeper analysis of representative WSSS methods:
Instead of only mentioning conventional approaches in a general manner, we now explicitly cite a series of representative methods (e.g., IRNet and related works) and provide a more detailed analysis of their core mechanisms (CAM-based seeds and affinity propagation) and inherent limitations. The revised text clearly explains that the traditional affinity propagation algorithms used in these methods (e.g., random walk) are fundamentally limited for medical lesion segmentation because the affinity matrices are typically constructed from local, low-level features. Such affinities are insufficient to model the long-range contextual relationships and structural dependencies required for irregular lung cavities, which often causes propagation failures around lesion boundaries and yields incomplete pseudo-labels. Clearer identification of limitations at the supervision-signal level: We have strengthened the discussion of weak supervision relying solely on image-level labels. In addition to noting that this paradigm encourages models to focus on the most discriminative local regions, we further analyze why subsequent efforts that introduce self-attention or boundary-aware constraints are still constrained by a critical bottleneck: pseudo-label quality in the early stages of training. This makes the motivation for introducing our scribble-guided supervision module more explicit and logically grounded. Tighter linkage between literature critique and task-specific challenges: All analyses are now explicitly anchored to the specific task of lung cavity segmentation. We clarify how the aforementioned general-purpose WSSS methods tend to fail under cavity-specific imaging characteristics—such as thin walls, internal septations, and highly irregular morphology—thereby making the related-work critique more targeted and relevant. As reflected in the revised manuscript, we have replaced the original relatively broad descriptions with more specific, better-referenced, and more critical content. We believe this revision significantly strengthens the depth of related-work discussion and provides a more solid foundation for clearly motivating the novelty of our approach.
3. Dataset and Experimental Specification
The dataset description is too brief and does not indicate: Imaging modalities (CT resolution, slice count), Preprocessing steps (normalisation, lung mask extraction, augmentation),
How image-level or scribble labels were generated, Hardware/software environment. Some “processing seems missing,” e.g., how the pseudo-labels are derived and refined, and how scribbles are converted into supervision masks.
Answer�
Thank you for highlighting the importance of providing a more complete dataset description and experimental details. We fully agree that these elements are critical to ensure reproducibility and the reliability of the conclusions. Following each of your specific suggestions, we have performed a comprehensive and careful revision of the manuscript to substantially enrich the missing information. The main additions and revisions are summarized below:
Imaging modality and data preprocessing (new dedicated content):
In the “Data Preprocessing and Experimental Settings” section, we added a new paragraph titled “Imaging Modality and Parameters.” This paragraph explicitly describes the data sources and the ranges of original CT acquisition parameters (in-plane resolution, slice thickness, and number of slices). We also detail the unified preprocessing pipeline, including the resampling strategy, the CT intensity (HU) windowing range ([-1200, 600]), and the final normalization procedure, ensuring consistency and comparability across datasets.
Complete label generation and refinement pipeline (new dedicated subsection):
We added a new subsection titled “Label Generation and Refinement,” which systematically describes the full pipeline from the raw weak supervision signals to the final supervision masks used for training. This directly addresses your concern that some steps appeared to be missing. Specifically, we clarify:
Image-level annotation generation: We describe in detail how we constructed reliable image-level labels for public datasets lacking expert pixel-level annotations (e.g., ImageCLEF TB and TB Portals), including annotator qualifications, the annotation tool (ITK-SNAP), and the annotation protocol.
Pseudo-label derivation and refinement: We clearly present the full procedure starting from CAM generation, applying a dual-threshold strategy to identify confident regions, and then iteratively refining pseudo-labels using our proposed structure-aware affinity learning and region-wise affinity propagation.
Scribble generation and supervision: We explicitly clarify that our scribbles are automatically generated rather than manually drawn, derived from the contours of the refined pseudo-labels. These scribbles are then used to provide boundary-level supervision via a partial cross-entropy loss, addressing your question of how scribbles are converted into supervision masks.
Data augmentation strategy:
In the “Data Preprocessing and Experimental Settings” section, we added a paragraph on “Data Augmentation,” describing the specific online 3D augmentation techniques used (e.g., random 3D cropping and Gaussian noise perturbation). We also emphasize the principle of synchronizing spatial and intensity transformations to avoid introducing label noise.
Hardware and software environment:
At the end of the “Data Preprocessing and Experimental Settings” section, we added a paragraph titled “Hardware and Software Environment,” specifying key training configurations such as GPU model, memory, batch size, optimizer (AdamW), and learning rate scheduling (warm-up + cosine annealing).
Summary: Through these additions and revisions, we have systematically filled in all previously missing details related to dataset description, preprocessing, the label generation/refinement chain, and experimental configurations. We believe these improvements significantly enhance the rigor, transparency, and reproducibility of both the methods and experiments, providing sufficient information for readers and reviewers to evaluate the validity of our study.
4. It is good to have a detailed subsection “Dataset and Preprocessing” and another “Implementation Details” under Methodology or Experiments.
Answer:
We fully agree with your point that organizing “Datasets and Preprocessing” and “Implementation Details” as independent subsections can significantly improve the structure and clarity of both the Methods and Experiments, making it easier for readers (and future researchers) to reproduce our work. Following your suggestion, we have reorganized the Experiments section (according to the paper’s specific chapter arrangement) and created the following three well-structured subsections:
Datasets
This subsection provides a centralized and detailed description of the three publicly available tuberculosis chest CT datasets used in this study, including:
Data sources and task types: We explicitly state the origin of each dataset, the number of samples included, and its original task setting (classification or segmentation).
Data split strategy: We clearly report the exact number of images used for training and validation/testing in each dataset, along with the corresponding split ratios.
Key supervision information: By referring to Table~1, we summarize the cavity-related categorization criteria (e.g., cavity number and size) for each dataset, providing necessary context for the weak supervision setup.
Data Preprocessing and Experimental Setup
This subsection consolidates and expands the dataset-related descriptions in the original manuscript. It now systematically covers:
Dataset statistics and annotation types: An overview of the sample size and annotation type for each dataset.
Imaging modality and acquisition parameters: A clear description of CT acquisition parameters, resolution ranges, and the unified resampling and normalization pipeline.
Preprocessing pipeline: A complete and detailed preprocessing workflow, including HU clipping/windowing, normalization, and online data augmentation (e.g., 3D random cropping and Gaussian noise perturbation).
Weak-label generation pipeline: A concise summary of the full chain from raw image-level labels to pseudo-labels and finally to the scribble masks used for supervision (with detailed methodology described in the Methods section).
Implementation Details
This subsection is dedicated to all technical details related to model training and evaluation, including:
Hardware and software environment: Specific GPU model, memory, deep learning framework, etc.
Training configuration: Optimizer (AdamW), learning-rate schedule (warm-up + cosine annealing), batch size, number of epochs, and other hyperparameters.
Model architecture details: Key parameter settings for relevant modules (if applicable).
Evaluation metrics: The exact metrics used for comparison (e.g., Dice score and IoU) and how they are computed.
5. Benchmarking and Fairness of Comparison. The results claim superiority over state-of-the-art WSSS techniques but provide no clear justification that comparisons are fair. It is good to include a concise Benchmark Configuration Table listing each compared method, supervision type, and training protocol to demonstrate fairness and consistency.
Answer:
We fully agree that ensuring fairness and consistency in comparative experiments is essential, as it forms the basis for drawing reliable conclusions. Following your suggestion, we have made key additions to the “Comparison to State-of-the-Art” subsection to explicitly demonstrate the fairness of our comparisons. The specific revisions are as follows:
Added a benchmark configuration comparison table:
We have added Table 6 in the Results section, entitled “Benchmark configuration and fairness comparison across weakly supervised semantic segmentation methods.” This table provides a structured summary of all competing state-of-the-art methods included in our comparisons, along with their original references, the type of supervision used (Supervision Type), and the backbone architecture adopted (Backbone).
Clarified unified training settings across all baselines:
In the text below the table caption and in the main manuscript, we explicitly state that all compared methods were re-trained under exactly the same experimental settings, including a unified input patch size (128×128×96), optimizer (AdamW), and identical data preprocessing and augmentation pipelines. This design minimizes performance discrepancies caused by implementation differences and ensures that the reported improvements are attributable to methodological advances rather than inconsistent training conditions.
6. The paper does not analyse the computational cost or complexity of GA-Net. It is good to add a complexity discussion. It would strengthen the argument for practical robustness, particularly for clinical deployment.
Answer:
We fully agree that for any new method intended for clinical deployment, analyzing its computational cost and complexity is critical, as it is a key step in evaluating practical feasibility and robustness. Following your suggestion, we have added an independent subsection entitled “Computational Complexity Analysis” in the Experiments section, providing a comprehensive evaluation of the efficiency of GA-Net from both theoretical and empirical perspectives. The main contents are summarized as follows:
Theoretical complexity analysis:
We derive the theoretical computational complexity of GA-Net. By representing the image as a superpixel graph with Nnodes and Eedges, and analyzing the attention-based edge inference and node aggregation steps, we show that the complexity is O(L⋅E⋅d), where Ldenotes the number of graph layers and dis the feature dimension. Since the constructed graph is sparse (the number of edges Egrows linearly with the number of nodes N), the complexity of GA-Net scales linearly with image resolution, which provides a strong foundation for scalability to high-resolution clinical imaging.
Empirical runtime and memory consumption:
We measured practical performance on a standard 3D CT patch (128×128×96) using an NVIDIA RTX 3090Ti GPU. The results show that a single forward pass of GA-Net takes only ~42 ms, with a peak GPU memory usage of approximately 1.2 GB. Compared to a standard 3D U-Net baseline with a similar parameter count, GA-Net is about 2.9× faster and reduces memory consumpt
10.1371/journal.pone.0341717.r003Decision Letter 1
YuHongchuanAcademic Editor© 2026 Hongchuan Yu2026Hongchuan Yuhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
12 Jan 2026

Refining Weak Supervision for Robust Lung Cavity Segmentation: A Graph-Affinity Method with Boundary Constraints
PONE-D-25-44538R1
Dear Dr. Madzin,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. For questions related to billing, please contact billing support.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Hongchuan Yu
Academic Editor
PLOS One
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
no further comments
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0341717.r004Acceptance letter
YuHongchuanAcademic Editor© 2026 Hongchuan Yu2026Hongchuan Yuhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-25-44538R1
PLOS One
Dear Dr. Madzin,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS One. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Hongchuan Yu
Academic Editor
PLOS One