pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10889651PMC10889651.110889651108896513839405210.1371/journal.pone.0297170PONE-D-23-030451Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthObstetrics and GynecologyTermination of PregnancyPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsMedical PersonnelNursesMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Care ProvidersNursesMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Care ProvidersPhysiciansPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsMedical PersonnelPhysiciansPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsMedical PersonnelPharmacistsPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsMedical PersonnelMidwivesMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Care ProvidersAllied Health Care ProfessionalsPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyEmotionsSocial SciencesPsychologyEmotionsUnderstanding the extent of and limitations to conscientious objection to abortion by health care practitioners: A hermeneutic study
Conscientious objection to abortion by health care practitionershttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4672-4843FlemingValerieConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8506-0699FrithLucyConceptualizationData curationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing MaxwellClareData curationFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Faculty of Health School of Public and Allied Health, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, United Kingdom2
Centre for Social Ethics and Policy, School of Law, University of Manchester, Manchester, United KingdomCioffiAndreaEditor ]. Abortion is now widely available through the National Health Service (NHS). There was substantial controversy around the introduction of the Act, and it had the power to be socially-divisive within families and communities [ ]. One of the main questions that now generates social, professional, and academic controversy is the scope of the right to conscientiously object to participating in abortion under section 4 of the Act [ – ]. There is little scholarly consensus on whether and to what extent conscientious objection should be permitted. Under the Abortion Act, anyone (not only health professionals) is permitted to exercise conscientious objection, while some of the more recently enacted laws restrict the personnel, for example in the Republic of Ireland, which limits conscientious objection to medical practitioners, nurses and midwives [ ]. Other countries e.g. Croatia have laws that are specific to each profession [ ].
The issue of conscientious objection derives from the ethical controversy over abortion itself. It was recognised when the Act was passed in 1967 that there was not a societal consensus on the ethical acceptability of abortion, and some people would still consider abortion to be immoral and therefore provision was made to allow those who did not agree with the practice to ‘opt out’, conscientiously object. And the more recent Council of Europe’s Resolution 1763 reiterating the right to conscientious objection to abortion in Resolution 1763 “No person, hospital or institution shall be coerced, held liable or discriminated against in any manner because of a refusal to perform, accommodate, assist or submit to an abortion, the performance of a human miscarriage, or euthanasia or any act which could cause the death of a human foetus or embryo, for any reason” [ ]. Conscientious objection gives the ethical position of not wanting to participate in abortion practices a legal basis. Fleming et al ‘s (2018) analysis of reasons for conscientious objection by midwives and nurses noted that the highest number of reasons was grounded in moral, rather than religious reasons [ ].
Wicclair has debated the key ethical issues of conscience and integrity in medicine for almost three decades, concluding that there is a need for a more nuanced understanding and analysis of the relevant morals and values and conscientious objection should only be supported if it is underpinned by the core values of medicine. He reiterates this stance in his critique of a proposed rule to protect health professionals’ conscience objection in the USA. He argues that legislators should have incorporated a clause to ban invidious discrimination of patients by healthcare professionals that can occur in the name of conscientious objection [ ]. Wicclair’s position has been supported by writers who suggest that the various rules permitting conscientious objection on the grounds of human rights may have compromised women’s right to abortions [ ]. Taking note of such problems, it has been argued that in some European countries’ laws need to be amended to ensure conscientious objection is not being utilised to undermine women’s access to abortion [ ]. However, a case study report on four European countries concludes that, although complex, it is possible to accommodate individuals who object to providing abortion-related care, while still ensuring that women have access to legal health care services [ ].
At the time of the 1967 Act, abortion was primarily a short surgical procedure in which the primary participant, other than the woman herself, was the surgeon. Nowadays, however, the process is mainly medical, involving many other health professionals such as pharmacists, nurses and, in mid to late term abortions, midwives. Nevertheless, the literature remains focused on doctors. One major study for example surveyed 2000 practising doctors in the United States out of which 1144 (63%) responded [ ]. Its results showed that most doctors believe that it is ethically permissible for doctors to explain their moral objections to patients (63%). A qualitative study of 18 US based doctors, however, suggested that application of conscience objection could only be context dependent thus an overall policy could never be possible [ ].
Although some published literature is now reporting studies concerning non-medical health professionals’ views or experiences of conscientious objection [ , ], in Europe there is a death of such studies despite recent legal challenges to laws in Scotland, Croatia and Sweden by midwives who objected to abortion provision on grounds of conscience [ ]. A systematic review assessing nurses’ and midwives’ reasons for conscientious objection showed only nine articles that had discussed the topic, none of which provided empirical evidence [ ]. Since the publication of this review, a Canadian study of eight nurses in Canada showed that ethical meaning, whereby their practice was underpinned by moral integrity, ethical knowledge and, when required, courage were important factors when considering conscience‐based objections [ ]. The main message from a qualitative study carried out in the UK of 20 pharmacists was that, despite differing personal views, pharmacists believed that they should have the right to be able to conscientiously object to abortion [ ]. One further US study’s researchers interviewed 19 nurses and 31 doctors who worked in labour wards and encountered abortion in the course of their practice about their views on conscientious objection [ ]. They concluded that conscience objection is an emerging, iterative process influenced not only by background beliefs of their participants but also by personal and work experiences and the workplace contexts. The aim of the present study, therefore, was to study a range of healthcare professionals’ understandings of conscientious objection and its limitations.

## Methods
As the study is concerned with understanding, the hermeneutic philosophy of Hans-Georg Gadamer was utilised throughout this project [ ].
A five stage method was applied noting that, in keeping with Gadamer’s hermeneutic, these are not consecutive but cyclical, and the final stage of rigour permeates throughout [ ]. Stage one of this study resulted in the formulation of two initial questions:
What do health professionals understand as constituting ‘participation in abortion’?
On what grounds should health professionals be permitted to withdraw from provision of abortion services?

## Pre-understandings of the researchers and the reflexive process adopted
Stage two of the research was rooted in Gadamer’s notion that every kind of interpretation has roots in a “fore structure of understanding” [ ]. Our perceptions were informed by available literature, as well as reports from the popular press and social media. It was thus vital that before and during the study we undertook an examination of our own pre-understandings surrounding conscientious objection to abortion [ ].
It was recognised by the research team that the study questions we sought to answer were emotionally and ethically charged and had the potential to be further complicated by the differing views and experiences each individual researcher brought to the project. Prior to our data collection, the research team members audio-recorded a discussion of our own pre-understandings surrounding the subject of conscientious objection to abortion. After several months of data collection we undertook a second audio-recorded discussion, particularly to examine whether any biases, conscious or otherwise, had influenced our questions or initial analysis. Finally, six months after commencing data analysis, we came together and explored how our pre and altered understandings contributed to and influenced our project, recognising that as Gadamer notes, it is only by consciously assimilating pre-understandings that we can avoid “the tyranny of hidden prejudices that make us deaf to the language that speaks to us in tradition” [ ]. While we noted some changes to the pre-understandings of one of the team, these did not affect the rigorous analysis process we adopted.

## Recruitment and participants
Ethical approval was granted by the university (anonymised) and ratified by the Health Research Authority (IRAS 246528). Our study was carried out in two large urban areas with specialised women’s reproductive health services. The study participants comprised nurses, doctors, midwives and pharmacists. Inclusion criteria required them to be UK registered and currently in one of the two study centres. Participants could be at any career stage, including being newly qualified. The broad nature of the inclusion criteria was a deliberate attempt to capture data, that represented a diversity of views, experiences and perspectives held by the participants.
Participants were recruited via gatekeepers, snowballing and posting information on a local health professional Facebook page. Recruitment was undertaken over one year from February 2019 to February 2020. Health professionals expressing an interest in being interviewed were contacted by the research team to set a date, time and venue of their choice for the interview. Written consent was gained and hard copies stored securely at the university. Participants’ data could be withdrawn until integration of the data had commenced. In total we interviewed 18 pharmacists (six objectors, 12 non-objectors), 17 midwives (six objectors, 11 non-objectors), 12 nurses (seven objectors, five non-objectors) and nine doctors (two objectors, six non-objectors and one partial objector).

## Data collection
Dialogue with participants is the third stage in the Gadamerian hermeneutic method. We developed a semi-structured interview schedule comprising open-ended questions and prompts. Interviews lasted from 35 minutes to 1.5 hours.
All interviews were undertaken face to face either in participants’ homes, their workplaces, or a neutral venue. Face to face semi-structured interviews were employed to collect data owing to their flexibility [ ], ability to explore context [ ] and their conversational and dialogical nature, which can be seen as a natural extension of the research participants’ world [ ]. Four members of the research team undertook the interviews and met regularly to review and reflect upon the data collected. Interviews were transcribed verbatim at which stage potential identifiers were removed.

## Data analysis
Our data analysis was multi-faceted and aligned with Gadamer’s hermeneutic, moving from the parts to the whole, the whole expanding as the number of interviews increased. The main strategies we adopted was a thematic analysis of the interviews and their integration into a single “whole”, developing mind maps to link various concepts between themes, the derivation of continua to reflect the range of answers to each question with key quotes as evidence and finally deriving a hermeneutic model that painted the picture of the “whole” at the point we stopped analysis. With each strategy we were constantly increasing the dimensions of the hermeneutic “whole” and building up the greater picture, while working within individual parts of the model so deepening our rigorous and reflexive approach.
The findings presented below reflect each of these strategies.

## Results and discussion
The thematic analysis process led to the development of 23 codes relating to six initial themes: participation, dilemmas, effects of conscientious objection, power, rights and stigma/taboo.

## Development of mind maps
As part of the hermeneutic process of going from the parts to the whole and back, we decided to use mind maps as a tool towards reaching the main hermeneutic themes. Four of them formed the bases of our subsequent discussions. These showed the complexity of the data but ultimately enabled us to see the relationships, not only between our major themes, but also amongst individual concepts. It also facilitated the development of continua, by using the quotes supporting each concept to answer the two main research questions in a two-dimensional way as described below.

## Development of continua
Concurrently with the generation and discussion of the mind maps we embarked upon a process of answering each of the research questions by reflecting on what had been emphasised most strongly by individual participants, rather than considering the whole picture. Out of this we formed a continuum of actions responding to each question and agreed by the research team as well as the advisory group for the study. These continua address the range of opinions presented in relation to each of the questions (see Tables and ).
 

## Development of hermeneutic themes
From the above continua, we developed a final question: what are the main influences on balancing rights of women having abortions with rights of health professionals to invoke conscientious objection. By moving backwards and forwards between the different ways of analysing the data, keeping Gadamer’s philosophy to the fore and returning to the verbatim words of the participants, we were ultimately able to generate hermeneutic themes, which brought together the key elements of all the above ways of developing a hermeneutic understanding of the data. This is summarised in . The main themes are centrally placed with the sub themes surrounding them.
 The data obtained were subjected to a rigorous process of analysis as articulated above and included a high level of reflexivity throughout the research process. It resulted in a core theme and four major themes. Each theme is supported by a number of subthemes, which in turn have a firm foundation in the data. Because some subthemes can relate to more than one theme, we included them on each occasion. In the next section we present each of the four surrounding themes leading up to the core theme of respecting self and others, a theme that embraced all of the others. In line with Gadamerian hermeneutics, we have presented each of the main themes in the form of gerunds. We have presented the participants’ narratives before discussing each of them in relation to other relevant research.

## Findings and integration with literature
Respecting self and others 1: Doing the job. This theme encompassed some of poignant emotions that health professionals felt when they managed and balanced their own opinions with the necessity of providing a legal, safe and accessible service to women. Both objecting and non-objecting participants commented that working with women having abortions was not a physically pleasant duty but in today’s society it was necessary.
A nurse described her view:
I don’t like doing it [abortion]. I don’t know anybody who does like doing it. I don’t know anybody who likes being involved in it. But, we do it because it’s part of our job and because it’s lawful and because we take care of people, regardless of what they come in for (nurse, non-objector).
Her view was supported by another participant who commented:
…. they will ask you, “Are you okay to go in Room X?” or “Are you okay to go in Room Y?” But I think it’s usually because they see whether you can cope with it on that day. Because it is draining, isn’t it? It’s a different type of work. It’s mentally draining (midwife, objector)
Another participant took a different approach, linking service provision to the needs of the women:
it’s a very selfless and difficult decision that these women are making, and it’s incredibly important that we offer that to them (doctor, non-objector).
Another participant agreed and expanded on this view:
What I’m trying to do is improve the patient experience. We’re trying to do things like with supply of medication, so that when patients do come from a medication point of view their experience is good through what is a very, very emotional thing that they’re going to go through. We need to try and make sure there are no bumps in the road for them. (pharmacist, non-objector).
A doctor summed it up as follows:
in some ways I struggle with overall because I can see the reasons a woman would choose to have an abortion and why I should not have any say in that but by the same token in respecting that woman’s autonomy, I think she has to in some ways respect my autonomy in that I’ve given things a lot of thought and unfortunately, this is the best way at present that I can reconcile my moral stances and moral difficulties. (doctor, objector).
Each of these quotes illustrates the complexities of the job of providing abortion related services. It also shows that while some health professionals did not like doing so, they put their personal feelings to one side and simply did the job. This is the first time that empirical evidence has demonstrated this key characteristic of health professionals’ ability concurrently to support their patients, their colleagues and themselves in the situation of abortion and backs up what has been reported in the end of life care context [ ]. One study outlines the role of health professionals as primarily one of arbitrator between the law and women’s requests suggesting that they have to smooth the path for the woman [ ]. However, in the present study, although we did not set out to distinguish between different professionals, we found that doctors see themselves in the role of arbitrators while nurses, by contrast, despite the law and whether or not they liked it, felt that they had no choice but to do what they were told [ ]. Both objectors and non-objectors in our study acknowledged the primacy of the patient and the need to get the job done but also, for the most part, attempted to accommodate personal beliefs held both by themselves or their colleagues. There were others, however, who held such strong convictions that they could not participate in abortion. This is discussed next.
Respecting self and others 2: Entrusting to others. The second theme of “entrusting to others” developed directly from health professionals’ thoughts on their rights to opt out of providing care but acknowledging that in some cases they were uncertain about the requirement to find a colleague to take over from them, and the extent of this requirement.
One participant stated blandly:
As long as they’re still seen to, you’ve done your part in putting that patient’s needs first but you’ve not compromised your beliefs (pharmacist, objector).
Some participants seemed to be developing their ideas and thoughts during the interview, with one midwife acknowledging:
I think people should have the right themselves to decide what level of involvement they want. Something that I deem acceptable to be involved while someone else might think, “I wouldn’t even want to be involved in that level, and I wouldn’t want to care for them post-procedure.” So I think it is an individual’s right as a human being, even though you are a health professional, that you should still have your own choice and decision-making process whether you do or don’t want to be involved in something (midwife, objector).
A nurse however, did not offer solutions but felt that as a profession their own wellbeing had somehow been neglected:
…like nursing is stressful anyway and if you have your conscientious objection overruled then I think that can have a long-term impact on you as a professional and your emotional wellbeing as well, because I think sometimes nurses and that get forgotten in the mix. You know, you’ve got to care for the carers basically, and that’s physically, spiritually and emotionally (nurse, non-objector).
A doctor suggested:
I think the way the health system is set up at the minute, that there is enough scope to protect healthcare providers who are not comfortable to be involved in termination of pregnancy and there are enough systems in place that designated teams can look after patients who are willing to provide the care (doctor, non-objector).
Conversely a midwife stated:
And you don’t have to say, “I’m not doing that,” in handover, but you could, even if you get handed it, go and speak to the shift leader quietly, to say, “I don’t agree with it and I don’t want to do that, can we swap, I will take somebody else’s caseload?” I just think that is probably the only way it could be managed. (midwife, non-objector).
The above data show that whether or not participants had identified themselves as “objectors”, they were generally accommodating of colleagues’ wishes not to be involved. A sense of respect also permeated participants’ expressions of willingness to refer women for whom they could not provide a service, to others. Both the General Medical Council and General Pharmaceutical Council provide explicit guidelines for their members in which they outline the duty of their registrants who have a conscientious objection to refer to other practitioners who will provide the service [ , ]. The Nursing and Midwifery Council (2020) obliges its registrants to do likewise. In practice [ ], however, this is not so easy for nurses and midwives, who work together in teams, sometimes with varying degrees of experience. It therefore becomes more difficult for practitioners to simply swap allocated workloads with colleagues, so they are obliged to speak quietly to their managers. For the doctors in the study, this did not seen to be an issue at all. Those who voice an objection during their specialist training can opt out of completing a (normally compulsory) module on termination of pregnancy. Only one participant, who was an objector, felt that their objection could impose burdens on colleagues. This was not supported by other doctors in the study most of whom were non-objectors and were comfortable providing support for their objecting colleagues. Others suggest that reasonable accommodation is possible, or argue that conscientious objection should be accommodated [ , ]. Both of them, however, only argue only on behalf of doctors. In our study, however, some pharmacists who worked in community settings also felt able to make autonomous decisions and were able to object, although referral to a colleague or another practice had to be made by objectors in accordance with their regulatory body [ ]. While the law affords the same protection to other health professionals, as mentioned throughout, we have shown this to be somewhat more difficult to actualise, and often is not fully accommodated.
Respecting self and others 3: Acknowledging institutional power. The third theme deals with some of the issues concerning resourcing in a large organisation such as National Health Service hospitals while coming down to the micro level that deals with individual employees’ preferences. Balancing the needs of the organisation with those of the individual is something that was considered by participants from each profession.
A midwife who was seriously considering her future in providing intrapartum care noted:
I probably wouldn’t be senior enough on shift, when I worked as a midwife, to be asked to do that room [with late abortions] but the more senior you got, you knew that was going to become something that you would have to participate in, but that I wouldn’t have participated in (midwife, objector).
A nurse added:
a person needs to have a lot of strength to be able to stand up and say no to certain things and they are afraid of the outcome afterwards and if they participate in that against their own emotions then they’re going to pay the price because it’s going to be on their mind and in their hearts and it can cause illness for them as-well (nurse, non-objector).
Another nurse recounts: I had to go down to the pharmacy and collect this medication….a phial, which I refused to do and I was the ordered to go….I refused again….they got the phial; the surgeon who did the procedure then threatened me ….he physically threatened me (nurse, objector).
A midwife, however, stated:
[they are] agreeing so they’ll get a job. A lot of people do that….you’re not guaranteed a job at the end of the first three years, so it makes it easier if you agree with what they want you to do to get that job. (midwife, non-objector).
A doctor described the hierarchy in a pre-abortion clinic:
whilst I’m seeing the next one, the nurses would have to try and walk around and find somebody that would do a second signature. And, again, if we’re thin on the ground of people to find, and those people that are in are… We had nobody to sign the document (doctor, non-objector).
A pharmacist was able to hide in the hierarchical structure:
We don’t actually see the prescriptions. It’s very rare that a prescription would ever come via pharmacy. We’re just ensuring the ward areas have the stock for someone else to have to make that decision (pharmacist, objector).
The NHS was thus acknowledged by all as a hierarchy in which some people seemed to have more rights than others. Nurses and midwives juggled the act of conscientiously objecting with the consequences of putting their heads above the parapet. Many of them are employed on short-term contracts, and while abortion care remains a small part of the work of gynaecology departments, some felt by refusing to participate in it, they might forfeit their chances of a permanent post or of internal promotion. Such was the case in Sweden, with a nurse, who, on completion of a post graduate midwifery course, was refused a post at three hospitals because of her stance on conscientious objection to abortion and eventually brought a case to the European Court of Human Rights which declined to admit it [ ]. Another researcher noted that if nurses do not have the freedom to exercise their consciences by refusing to participate in practices they believe to be seriously wrong, they risk fracturing their fundamental moral well‐being [ , ]. Objectors, however, found ways in which they could quietly voice this but for nurses in particular it was difficult without upsetting the shift pattern of the day.
Participants also observed that a certain degree of strength may be required for objectors to stand up against a system in which they could be stigmatised. Sawicki, however, notes that at times a person’s conscience is so powerful that it compels them to act against the dominant trends by feeling bound by volitional necessity [ ]. The nurse who reported being physically threatened for objecting and the midwife who felt that their days in intrapartum care were numbered, believed that this was due to their stated objection to providing abortion care. This is in direct contrast to other research, which maintains that negative attitudes prevail towards health professionals who do provide abortion services rather than toward those who refuse to provide it [ ].
Respecting self and others 4: Being selective. The final theme involved discussion around the elements of the process which health professionals could object and amongst participants there was general agreement, as one midwife put it, about the elements to which objectors could opt out:
One midwife said:
If you don’t want to answer a buzzer in that room, that’s fine, don’t. I suppose, because we work in such a big unit, that’s okay. There are 12 of us. If one person chooses to not answer a buzzer, it’s not a big deal, that’s fine, someone else will (midwife, non-objector)
Another participant noted that objecting was sometimes a case of “shifting sands”:
I don’t think you object to it all or accept it all….I mean I know people who are at varying degrees of where they sit on things in terms of gestations and I get that. I get that different things happen in your life and you just mightn’t be able to do that at that point (doctor, non-objector).
A pharmacist made a similar point, saying:
I just think it just depends on the healthcare professional on how they want to deal with it. I mean, they should have the right to say I do not want to talk to you, I do not want to answer any more questions you have (pharmacist).
One participant was adamant that the only thing to which doctors should be allowed to object was signing the form to permit abortions to take place:
I’ve often been asked to sign the medication to induce the abortion. I’ve said that I would prefer not to sign, I would prefer not to prescribe the medication, and there are often other doctors that are available. But I am sometimes concerned that my refusal may put other people not under pressure, but I do find it difficult every time I’m asked to have to justify myself and there are undertones (doctor, objector).
A midwife brought a different perspective:
I personally would object to anything that involved being involved in the foeticide [injecting a lethal substance into the foetus before inducing labour] side of things, so actually ending the life. But the actual care post, once that has happened, and the delivery and postnatal support, is something that I would happily provide to women (midwife, objector).
The final theme has shown the broad range of participants’ views as to what aspects of the abortion process to which they could object. Additionally for some the situation might vary from day to day or case to case. “Being selective” generated negative feelings amongst participants but no consistency as to the way forward. For example, some participants felt uncomfortable in being involved with so called social abortions. Many more, however, were less relaxed about providing services as gestation increased and still more when foeticide was required. Some participants reported that objection should be “all or nothing”, although most took a more nuanced approach, with some arguing that they should be at liberty make an individual judgement on each occasion they were required to. Our continua also showed that there were several shades of grey in between the extremes of “all or nothing”. Commenting in this area have also suggested that by applying the law, doctors should be afforded the discretionary space to participate or not and to the degree to which they are comfortable [ ]. Sepper argued from a different perspective, proposing that conscience “may be experienced retrospectively, generating guilt or regret, or prospectively, generating a sense that failure to resolve these conflicting demands will risk one’s sense of self” [ ]. By this she means that one’s conscience may come to the fore only following the actions rather than preceding them and so people’s own positions may change evolve over time.

## Conclusions, limitations and recommendations
Our research has offered the first in-depth analysis of the beliefs about conscientious objection of health professionals from disciplines which have previously has previously received little scholarly attention. It represents is the largest qualitative empirical study, and the first in Europe, on four different professional groups’ perceptions of conscientious objection to abortion. Throughout our research, we have been true to the Gadamerian principle that understanding can never be complete and this is reflected by in our use of the gerund as we named each theme. Additionally, by constantly addressing our own pre-understandings, coming from different standpoints, and using them to challenge our findings at all stages during the analysis process we ensured rigour thereby achieving the fifth and final stage of the method we adopted. As such this study offers new insights into practising health professionals’ understandings of the multi-faceted and complex nature of conscientious objection to abortion.
While not seeking to differentiate between the four health professional disciplines, it became obvious that nurses in particular felt that they were not in a position to make conscientiously such objections in the way doctors were. Additionally, it seemed that the law was not fully understood by all participants, some of whom intimated that it was not possible to exercise their legal right to conscientiously object to participate in abortions.
The complexity of the responses also indicates that there is little consistency within each profession although generally participants who were objectors were accepted by their colleagues and accommodated without detriment to the service and that in larger hospitals, such as those where our work was carried out, it is possible to be employed in the service areas that include abortion while still being an objector.
Our findings also indicated very divergent views as to what constitutes conscientious objection and in some cases showed uncertainty and confusion such as how to go about notifying employers and colleagues of a conscientious objection. Our research questions therefore did not yield definitive answers and so merit further research with a larger sample, taking our results and developing a questionnaire with which to quantify responses.
Although this was a large qualitative study, the results cannot be generalised but they may be applicable to health professionals working in similar settings, such as end of life care. The proposed questionnaire could also be used to assess the situation in smaller district general hospitals.
Finally, our results indicate that, by respecting of self and others, health professionals should be able to accommodate conscience-based objections where this is sought by individual practitioners. Objectors as well as non-objectors have something to contribute to the ongoing development of maternity and gynaecological services, as abortion is only a small part of the work of these services.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0297170.r001Decision Letter 0
LandenmarkHannaStaff Editor© 2024 Hanna Landenmark2024Hanna Landenmarkhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
27 Mar 2023

PONE-D-23-03045Understanding the extent of and limitations to conscientious objection to abortion by health care practitioners: a hermeneutic studyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Fleming,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please see the comments from two reviewers below. Please note that there are no word limits for PLOS ONE, but we encourage you to consider the reviewer's suggestions for length and content of different sections. In the interest of reproducibility, if you choose to abbreviate the Methods section, please ensure that the full methodology is included as a Supplementary file. You may also consider presenting the full Methods at the end of the manuscript, as PLOS ONE does not require the Methods to be presented before the Results section.
Please submit your revised manuscript by May 08 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Hanna Landenmark
Staff Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. We noticed you have some minor occurrence of overlapping text with the following previous publication(s), which needs to be addressed:

https://bmcmedethics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12910-018-0268-3

In your revision ensure you cite all your sources (including your own works), and quote or rephrase any duplicated text outside the methods section. Further consideration is dependent on these concerns being addressed.
3. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match. 
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: I Don't Know
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This is very interesting empirical research that addresses an important topic. However, the paper reads as a rough first draft rather than a final, polished article.
While methodology is important, I don’t think that the detailed description of the methodology is necessary. It should not take until page 8 to get to the substance of the article. I recommend condensing the content of the article up to page 8 which is essentially an overly detailed description of the methodology.
While the researchers have clearly engaged in a lot of work figuring out what are the themes of the data, these themes are presented as a series of quotes from the interviews and are lacking in analysis. Presenting the quotes is step 1, but the authors then need to go on to discuss and analyse those quotes and how they relate to the identified theme.
I think it would make sense to restructure the article so that the discussion is included in the analysis of the themes, rather than being presented separately. Otherwise the setting out of the themes is just a series of quotes. Alternatively, the authors may wish to present a more traditional version of a results section followed by discussion.
The way that the views of the authors is presented is problematic. On the one hand, the authors frame the research as being about 2 questions:
1. What do health professionals understand as constituting ‘participation in abortion’?
2. On what grounds should health professionals be permitted to withdraw from provision of
abortion services?
But the article does not clearly address these two questions. Further, the authors seem to adopt a position on whether conscientious objection should be allowed and in what circumstances. It is not in and of itself problematic for the authors to adopt a position, but they don’t admit to doing so in the article – their position is presented as fact rather than opinion and is not clearly based on the data.
Reviewer #2: Overall, the manuscript contributes much-needed empirical data on the topic of health practitioners' CO to abortion. More background context is needed to understand the results of the study, and the authors should demonstrate more rigour in places (particularly given the ethically controversial nature of abortion, and CO).
Background:
More context is needed about the current UK legal framework as it relates to CO to abortion. Is CO to abortion protected in legislation? If so, which health practitioners does the clause apply to? What are the legal requirements for claiming CO? And what are the objecting practitioner’s obligations e.g. declaring the CO to the patient, referring on etc?
If CO is legally protected, then this would surely have implications for whether health services are required to accommodate it?
Also, further detail is needed about the context of abortion provision in the UK. For example, are abortions all publicly funded? Or does the private sector play a role? What is the pathway for having an abortion e.g. explanation of the form requiring two signatures?
p. 4:
“Little has been written about other health professionals’ views or experiences of conscientious
objection , despite recent legal challenges to laws in Scotland, Croatia and Sweden by midwives who
objected to abortion provision on grounds of conscience”
There are other empirical studies that focus on or include non-doctor CO to abortion such as:
• Awonoor-Williams et al Exploring conscientious objection to abortion among health providers in Ghana. International Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 2020 Vol. 46 Pages 51-59
• Davidson et al. Religion and conscientious objection: A survey of pharmacists’ willingness to dispense medications. Social Science&Medicine71(2010)161e165
• Harries et al 2014 Conscientious objection and its impact on abortion service provision in South Africa: a qualitative study. Harries et al. Reproductive Health 2014, 11:16 http://www.reproductive-health-journal.com/content/11/1/16
• Ko et al et al An ethical issue: nurses’ conscientious objection regarding induced abortion in South Korea.
• Lee et al. Mifepristone (RU486) in Australian pharmacies: the ethical and practical challenges. Contraception 91 (2015) 25–30.
Methods:
p. 5: “Finally, six months after commencing data analysis, we came together and explored how our pre and altered understandings contributed to and influenced our project, recognising that as Gadamer notes, it is only by consciously assimilating preunderstandings that we can avoid “the tyranny of hidden prejudices that make us deaf to the language that speaks to us in tradition” (Gadamer, 2006, p. 239).”
It’s good you have formally reflected on your understandings of CO and how they have contributed and influenced the project. Please provide some description about these understandings and how they influenced your data collection and analysis.
Recruitment and participants: Good sample size with both objectors and non-objectors. Range of health practitioners included.
Data collection: Please provide the interview guide as an appendix or supplemental material.
Tables 1 and 2 are not integrated with the main body of the text. How did you ensure rigour in developing the continua?
P. 13 – information about referral requirements should be part of the Background
Referencing software needs attention – incorrect bracketing of in-text citations throughout
Conclusions:
“Our research represents the largest qualitative empirical study and the first in Europe on the subject of health professionals’ conscientious objection to abortion.”
Agree it is a large qualitative, empirical study. But I’m not sure that it’s the first in Europe? What about these?
• De Zordo (2018) From women’s ‘irresponsibility’ to foetal ‘patienthood’:
Obstetricians-gynaecologists’ perspectives on abortion and its stigmatisation in Italy and Cataluña. GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH, 2018 VOL. 13, NO. 6, 711–723
• Nordberg (2014) Conscientious objection to referrals for abortion:pragmatic solution or threat to women’s rights? Medical Ethics 2014, 15:15 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/15
• Toro-Flores (2019) Opinions of nurses regarding conscientious objection. Nursing Ethics, 2019, Vol. 26(4) 1027–1038
Conclusion
Respecting self and others shows that participants who were objectors were accepted by
their colleagues and accommodated without detriment to the service, and that in larger hospitals…
The result below sounds like a detriment to the service?
A doctor described the hierarchy in a pre-abortion clinic:
whilst I’m seeing the next one, the nurses would have to try and walk around and find somebody that
would do a second signature. And, again, if we’re thin on the ground of people to find, and those
people that are in are… We had nobody to sign the document (doctor, non-objector). P. 11
“Our study was carried out in two large urban areas with specialised women’s reproductive health
services.” This context would be useful in the methods section. Also, perhaps this could be a reason that difficulties with abortion access stemming from CO did not feature in this study?
Conclusion could be more concise.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0297170.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
21 Apr 2023

Dear editor and reviewers
Thank you so much for your sharp eyes and critical comments. On behalf of the team, I enclose a response to your comments as well as the revised manuscript. For ease of reading, this is in a word doc...file 7. 
Kind regards
Valerie
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. Thank you, done 
2. We noticed you have some minor occurrence of overlapping text with the following previous publication(s), which needs to be addressed. In your revision ensure you cite all your sources (including your own works), and quote or rephrase any duplicated text outside the methods section. Further consideration is dependent on these concerns being addressed. We’ve been through this and cannot find anything that has not been cited including team members’ previous publications. Please advise is we’ve overlooked something. 
3. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match. When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
 Sorry, sorted. The mistake came about because additional funding was received during the pandemic.
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified. 
Reviewer #1: Yes 
Reviewer #2: No All data is available on the link listed. We fail to see why “partly” has been written here. 
Reviewer #1: This is very interesting empirical research that addresses an important topic. However, the paper reads as a rough first draft rather than a final, polished article.
 Sorry, that is how you feel. A lot of consultation and work went into the presentation. It was definitely NOT a rough first draft. However, there is always room for improvement and we have gone through it again making subtle and not so subtle changes. 
While methodology is important, I don’t think that the detailed description of the methodology is necessary. It should not take until page 8 to get to the substance of the article. I recommend condensing the content of the article up to page 8 which is essentially an overly detailed description of the methodology. This was difficult because the other reviewer wanted more detail. In fact the results began on page 5 (commencing on page 2) not page 8 of the Pdf submitted. We have, however, trimmed the methodology back a bit. 
While the researchers have clearly engaged in a lot of work figuring out what are the themes of the data, these themes are presented as a series of quotes from the interviews and are lacking in analysis. Presenting the quotes is step 1, but the authors then need to go on to discuss and analyse those quotes and how they relate to the identified theme.
I think it would make sense to restructure the article so that the discussion is included in the analysis of the themes, rather than being presented separately. Otherwise the setting out of the themes is just a series of quotes. Alternatively, the authors may wish to present a more traditional version of a results section followed by discussion.
 Yes, we agree. We have integrated the findings and discussion as it seems to read better that way. 
The way that the views of the authors is presented is problematic. On the one hand, the authors frame the research as being about 2 questions:
1. What do health professionals understand as constituting ‘participation in abortion’?
2. On what grounds should health professionals be permitted to withdraw from provision of abortion services? But the article does not clearly address these two questions. 
 Again, food for thought. You are right. We have amended our conclusions to reflect this. 
Further, the authors seem to adopt a position on whether conscientious objection should be allowed and in what circumstances. It is not in and of itself problematic for the authors to adopt a position, but they don’t admit to doing so in the article – their position is presented as fact rather than opinion and is not clearly based on the data. We can’t see where we have presented our own positions. In fact we all held different ones. We have updated the detailed section on our own pre-understandings. 
Reviewer #2: Overall, the manuscript contributes much-needed empirical data on the topic of health practitioners' CO to abortion. More background context is needed to understand the results of the study, and the authors should demonstrate more rigour in places (particularly given the ethically controversial nature of abortion, and CO).
Background:
More context is needed about the current UK legal framework as it relates to CO to abortion. Is CO to abortion protected in legislation? If so, which health practitioners does the clause apply to? What are the legal requirements for claiming CO? And what are the objecting practitioner’s obligations e.g. declaring the CO to the patient, referring on etc?
If CO is legally protected, then this would surely have implications for whether health services are required to accommodate it?
Also, further detail is needed about the context of abortion provision in the UK. For example, are abortions all publicly funded? Or does the private sector play a role? What is the pathway for having an abortion e.g. explanation of the form requiring two signatures?
p. 4:
“Little has been written about other health professionals’ views or experiences of conscientious
objection , despite recent legal challenges to laws in Scotland, Croatia and Sweden by midwives who
objected to abortion provision on grounds of conscience”
There are other empirical studies that focus on or include non-doctor CO to abortion such as:
• Awonoor-Williams et al Exploring conscientious objection to abortion among health providers in Ghana. International Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 2020 Vol. 46 Pages 51-59
• Davidson et al. Religion and conscientious objection: A survey of pharmacists’ willingness to dispense medications. Social Science&Medicine71(2010)161e165
• Harries et al 2014 Conscientious objection and its impact on abortion service provision in South Africa: a qualitative study. Harries et al. Reproductive Health 2014, 11:16 https://ddec1-0-en-ctp.trendmicro.com:443/wis/clicktime/v1/query?url=http:%2f%2fwww.reproductive%2dhealth%2djournal.com%2fcontent%2f11%2f1%2f16&umid=396fdfda-2ba2-44f8-8ab6-8053d1f379e8&auth=6b639a990a359ff1d6cc8761081d57748ce3c81e-2664dc5e8bc258c533ca3f73418ec6a8cb368adf
• Ko et al et al An ethical issue: nurses’ conscientious objection regarding induced abortion in South Korea.
• Lee et al. Mifepristone (RU486) in Australian pharmacies: the ethical and practical challenges. Contraception 91 (2015) 25–30.
. See comments above to the other reviewer. We have added some and removed some and we hope it is now satisfactory to you both. 
Methods:
p. 5: “Finally, six months after commencing data analysis, we came together and explored how our pre and altered understandings contributed to and influenced our project, recognising that as Gadamer notes, it is only by consciously assimilating preunderstandings that we can avoid “the tyranny of hidden prejudices that make us deaf to the language that speaks to us in tradition” (Gadamer, 2006, p. 239).”
It’s good you have formally reflected on your understandings of CO and how they have contributed and influenced the project. Please provide some description about these understandings and how they influenced your data collection and analysis. See comments to other reviewer. I think we’ve now addressed this. 
Recruitment and participants: Good sample size with both objectors and non-objectors. Range of health practitioners included.
 Thank you
Data collection: Please provide the interview guide as an appendix or supplemental material.
Tables 1 and 2 are not integrated with the main body of the text. 
 Done, thanks.
How did you ensure rigour in developing the continua?
 Sentence added, thank you. 
P. 13 – information about referral requirements should be part of the Background
Referencing software needs attention – incorrect bracketing of in-text citations throughout
 Both these done
Conclusions:
“Our research represents the largest qualitative empirical study and the first in Europe on the subject of health professionals’ conscientious objection to abortion.”
Agree it is a large qualitative, empirical study. But I’m not sure that it’s the first in Europe? What about these?
• De Zordo (2018) From women’s ‘irresponsibility’ to foetal ‘patienthood’:
Obstetricians-gynaecologists’ perspectives on abortion and its stigmatisation in Italy and Cataluña. GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH, 2018 VOL. 13, NO. 6, 711–723
• Nordberg (2014) Conscientious objection to referrals for abortion:pragmatic solution or threat to women’s rights? Medical Ethics 2014, 15:15 https://ddec1-0-en-ctp.trendmicro.com:443/wis/clicktime/v1/query?url=http:%2f%2fwww.biomedcentral.com%2f1472%2d6939%2f15%2f15&umid=396fdfda-2ba2-44f8-8ab6-8053d1f379e8&auth=6b639a990a359ff1d6cc8761081d57748ce3c81e-7030e6466c730d252a18813d7ba0d805b0ff6b11
• Toro-Flores (2019) Opinions of nurses regarding conscientious objection. Nursing Ethics, 2019, Vol. 26(4) 1027–1038
 You are right. Sentence has been amended. 
Thanks for the references. Most of them we already had but the de Zordo was new and really interesting. It’s a shame it was only on drs! 
Conclusion
Respecting self and others shows that participants who were objectors were accepted by
their colleagues and accommodated without detriment to the service, and that in larger hospitals…
The result below sounds like a detriment to the service?
A doctor described the hierarchy in a pre-abortion clinic:
whilst I’m seeing the next one, the nurses would have to try and walk around and find somebody that
would do a second signature. And, again, if we’re thin on the ground of people to find, and those
people that are in are… We had nobody to sign the document (doctor, non-objector). P. 11
“ You have a good point. Thank you. Amended. We are going to create another article specifically about nurses in this regard.
Our study was carried out in two large urban areas with specialised women’s reproductive health
services.” This context would be useful in the methods section. Also, perhaps this could be a reason that difficulties with abortion access stemming from CO did not feature in this study?
 Possibly but it’s these hospitals that offer the range of abortion services.
Conclusion could be more concise Thank you. Done.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PONE response.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0297170.r003Decision Letter 1
CioffiAndreaAcademic Editor© 2024 Andrea Cioffi2024Andrea Cioffihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
25 Oct 2023

PONE-D-23-03045R1Understanding the extent of and limitations to conscientious objection to abortion by health care practitioners: a hermeneutic studyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Fleming,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. The article is implemented, however further important insights are needed and clarity implementation is also needed through copyediting, typos fix and grammar check.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 09 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Andrea Cioffi
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: I Don't Know
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: Revisions have improved the manuscript. Given members of the author team held different personal positions on CO, I think this should be stated explicitly in the paper. It is a strength of the author team and of the paper.
Reviewer #3: The authors deal with a particularly hot topic and very much addressed in literature from various points of view. Therefore, it is inevitable that my opinions and comments consider the originality of the content.
Firstly, in my opinion, there is one key point missing from the introduction, namely an argument on bioethical issues of conscientious objection. On which rights does conscientious objection rest? what does it aim to protect? Why is this right granted even in circumstances where it concerns the psychophysical health of patients?
I find that such a premise is fundamental to give substance to the introduction which, at present, is too superficial and is far from taking stock of the real issue. In addressing issues of this nature, we should start from a solid bioethical argument, indispensable to be able to effectively argue the answers provided by health professionals interviewed.
In fact, even on such occasions, the authors' arguments are rather hasty. Yet the results of the questionnaires are quite interesting so it would be a shame if they were lost.
I invite the authors to review these aspects trying to unbalance themselves a little more in the discussions and giving a more critical imprint to the article, also considering the great experience of the authors on the subject.
I hope that authors can find my comment motivating, as I do myself with other reviewers when I am in their position.
Many thanks to the Editor for the opportunity to review this article for such a prestigious journal.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0297170.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
21 Nov 2023

Reviewer #2: Revisions have improved the manuscript. Given members of the author team held different personal positions on CO
I think this should be stated explicitly in the paper. It is a strength of the author team and of the paper. 
Thank you, we have strengthened this. It’s difficult at times to differentiate what is necessary to say and what should not be said but I certainly do not want to be accused by readers or being a “CO club”!
Reviewer #3: The authors deal with a particularly hot topic and very much addressed in literature from various points of view. Therefore it is inevitable that my opinions and comments consider the originality of the content.
Firstly in my opinion there is one key point missing from the introduction namely an argument on bioethical issues of conscientious objection. On which rights does conscientious objection rest? what does it aim to protect? Why is this right granted even in circumstances where it concerns the psychophysical health of patients?
I find that such a premise is fundamental to give substance to the introduction which at present is too superficial and is far from taking stock of the real issue. In addressing issues of this nature we should start from a solid bioethical argument indispensable to be able to effectively argue the answers provided by health professionals interviewed.
In fact even on such occasions the authors' arguments are rather hasty. 
It is indeed a hot topic and thank you for the critique. We all appreciate it. We have each had a go at this and our ethicist on the authors has particularly strengthened it. The simple answer perhaps is in your own question re the health of patients. I think the objectors felt that they had two patients….one who couldn’t speak for themselves. However, that’s just FYI as we could go down a whole different pathway. It’s really great that we have an ethicist on the team who is able to move into empirical research and we hope this article will have some “punch” with clinical practitioners.
Yet the results of the questionnaires are quite interesting so it would be a shame if they were lost. 
Just a bit of puzzlement here…we didn’t use questionnaires. 
I invite the authors to review these aspects trying to unbalance themselves a little more in the discussions and giving a more critical imprint to the article also considering the great experience of the authors on the subject. 
Thank you, we’ve tried our best!
I hope that authors can find my comment motivating as I do myself with other reviewers when I am in their position.
Indeed we do and it would be good to be able to have more debate in the future. Thank you for coming on board as a last minute substitution in the reviewers.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Reviewers response.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0297170.r005Decision Letter 2
CioffiAndreaAcademic Editor© 2024 Andrea Cioffi2024Andrea Cioffihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
2 Jan 2024

Understanding the extent of and limitations to conscientious objection to abortion by health care practitioners: a hermeneutic study
PONE-D-23-03045R2
Dear Dr. Fleming,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Andrea Cioffi
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
No further revisions are necessary.
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #3: I apologize for the accidental oversight with which I called the interviews "questionnaires".
The questions I asked the authors did not require a personal answer, but were intended as examples, ideas to introduce critical reflections into the manuscript.
I still think that the interesting results could have been better argued by the authors.
I would like to stress that adding something new to scientific literature, especially in this area, does not just mean proposing a type of study with an innovative design. It can also mean doing a study quite similar to those already in the literature, but with a brilliant and new critical approach.
Having said that, I believe that the revisions have sufficiently implemented the article, which, in my opinion, is publishable because of its originality.
I thank the authors for the debate and the Editor for the opportunity and the confidence shown in me.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #3: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0297170.r006Acceptance letter
CioffiAndreaAcademic Editor© 2024 Andrea Cioffi2024Andrea Cioffihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
14 Feb 2024

PONE-D-23-03045R2 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Fleming, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Andrea Cioffi 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE