pmcJ PhycolJ Phycol379blackwellopenJPYJournal of Phycology0022-36461529-8817pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleWiley Open Access CollectionPMC11670268PMC11670268.111670268116702683936468110.1111/jpy.13507JPY13507JPY-24-177-P1PerspectivePerspectiveThe importance of integrating phycological research, teaching, outreach, and engagement in a changing world
Preparing phycologists for a changing worldStancheva et al.StanchevaRosalinahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0562-4026 CantonatiMarcohttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0179-3842 marco.cantonati@unibo.itManoylovKalinahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2599-2301 FureyPaula C.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2352-4427 CahoonA. Brucehttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1313-9223 JonesR. Christianhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3313-2646 GillevetPathttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7734-5566 AmslerCharles D.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4843-3759 WehrJohn D.https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4203-0921 SalernoJennifer L.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0898-6316 Krueger‐HadfieldStacy A.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7324-7448 sakh@vims.edu

1

Department of Environmental Science and Policy
George Mason University
Fairfax
Virginia
USA

2

Potomac Environmental Research and Education Center
Woodbridge
Virginia
USA

3

BIOME Lab, Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, BiGeA
Alma Mater Studiorum‐University of Bologna
Bologna
Italy

4

Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences
Georgia College and State University
Milledgeville
Georgia
USA

5

Department of Biology
St. Catherine University
St. Paul
Minnesota
USA

6

Department of Natural Sciences
The University of Virginia's College at Wise
Wise
Virginia
USA

7

Department of Biology
George Mason University
Fairfax
Virginia
USA

8

Department of Biology
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Birmingham
Alabama
USA

9

Louis Calder Center – Biological Field Station and Department of Biological Sciences
Fordham University
Armonk
New York
USA

10

Virginia Institute of Marine Science Eastern Shore Laboratory
Wachapreague
Virginia
USA

11

William & Mary's Batten School of Coastal and Marine Science at VIMS
Gloucester Point
Virginia
USA

*
Correspondence
Marco Cantonati, BIOME Lab, Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, BiGeA, Alma Mater Studiorum‐University of Bologna, Via Selma 3, Bologna 40126, Italy.Email: marco.cantonati@unibo.it
 Stacy A. Krueger‐Hadfield, Virginia Institute of Marine Science Eastern Shore Laboratory, Wachapreague, VA 23480, USA.Email: sakh@vims.edu

0410202412202460647771110.1111/jpy.v60.613351348
2582024
0692024
261220242712202426032026© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Phycology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Phycological Society of America.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.

## Abstract
The ecological, evolutionary, economic, and cultural importance of algae necessitates a continued integration of phycological research, education, outreach, and engagement. Here, we comment on several topics discussed during a networking workshop—Algae and the Environment—that brought together phycological researchers from a variety of institutions and career stages. We share some of our perspectives on the state of phycology by examining gaps in teaching and research. We identify action areas where we urge the phycological community to prepare itself to embrace the rapidly changing world. We emphasize the need for more trained taxonomists as well as integration with molecular techniques, which may be expensive and complicated but are important. An essential benefit of these integrative studies is the creation of high‐quality algal reference barcoding libraries augmented with morphological, physiological, and ecological data that are important for studies of systematics and crucial for the accuracy of the metabarcoding bioassessment. We highlight different teaching approaches for engaging undergraduate students in algal studies and the importance of algal field courses, forays, and professional phycological societies in supporting the algal training of students, professionals, and citizen scientists.

algaefield coursegeneticsmorphologynetworkingphycologyseaweedNational Science Foundation
10.13039/100000001DEB‐2141971DEB‐2436117 

## CURRENT STATE OF ALGAL TAXONOMIC RESEARCH: AVOID ALGAE LANDING IN A BLACK BOX DURING ASSESSMENTS AND MONITORING—FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEMS AS A CASE STUDY
Assigning a name to an organism is ancestral and likely spontaneously originated from necessity in the context of hunter‐gatherer societies because visually identifying and naming is how humans start relating with other organisms (De Clerck et al.,  ). Though sometimes questioned, stable biological nomenclatural systems enable universal unambiguous scientific communication (Jiménez‐Mejías et al.,  ). If we are trying to protect natural habitats, including their microbial communities, for ethical reasons, it is critical to know what a species is. Red Lists from the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) use Latin names for their conservation efforts (De Clerck et al.,  ). Not surprisingly, the proportion of diatom species included in threat categories of the IUCN Red List is limited (Hofmann et al.,  ), yet diatoms have been shown to be a sensitive metric in fragile aquatic habitats. There is only one established diatom Red List, and few countries include diatoms in their algae red lists (Cantonati et al.,  ).
Species are testable hypotheses about biodiversity rather than immutable facts (Pante et al.,  ). Yet, species inventories are incomplete for many organismal groups, including algae (Guiry,  ), compounding the understanding of endangered taxa (Brodie et al.,  ). Algal taxonomy is critical for ecology (Kociolek & Stoermer,  ; Stevenson,  ), applied phycology and aquaculture (Vieira et al.,  ), and specifically bioassessment (Manoylov,  ). Algal assemblages comprise hundreds of species with unique morphologies, physiologies, resource needs, and tolerances. Translating the complexity of algal shapes and other phenotypic adaptations into a DNA sequence is often a complicated process because changes in genome expression may, in part, be dependent on local environmental conditions (Manoylov,  ). For more than 250 years, Linnaean binomials have served as a standard in biological nomenclature and an anchor for biological information about a species. The Linnaean system needs to be implemented to embrace modern knowledge, possibly combined with the PhyloCode (Kuntner & Agnarsson,  ). Still, it remains an effective way to link the result of an identification process to broader knowledge.
In freshwater environments, as an example, we need a better understanding of the ecological niche of species, particularly keystone species, which can facilitate the generation of predictions for ecosystem function (Lowe,  ). Kelly ( ) noted the focus of environmental regulators on metric‐value interpretation of classifications. This has implications for catchment management in which the intricacies of organismal groups may be lost. It may therefore become attractive to replace taxonomic analyses with molecular tools. However, the molecular methods are arguably expensive and complex, limiting the development of standardized and convenient bioassessment procedures for routine freshwater monitoring (Tapolczai et al.,  ). Nevertheless, assessments based on “taxonomy‐free” approaches (e.g., Gregersen et al.,  ) may result in the link with wider scientific knowledge being lost.
In the recent era of traditional, morphologically based taxonomic assessments in the United Kingdom (Kelly,  ) as well as in many other European countries and several states in the United States, biologists in environmental agencies had identification skills for most or all the biological quality elements (diatoms, invertebrates, macrophytes, fishe, etc.) and studied defined geographical areas. Thus, they could develop a holistic awareness of freshwater ecosystems in their area. We believe that this is the gist of environmental biology. Total reliance on “taxonomy‐free” metabarcoding seriously compromises a holistic view of the health of ecosystems and limits our understanding about the ecological requirements and indicator value of algal species. This is, of course, a provocative statement that points to the fact that treating the organisms used as monitors as “black boxes” does not allow access to the wider knowledge base, which includes the ecology, distribution, and physiology of algae that is the essence of environmental biology. Boero ( ) stated that the demise of traditional, phenotype‐based taxonomy in a time where the conservation of biodiversity is a central goal is a result of an unwise policy, mainly fostered by exacerbated competition for the funds devoted to biodiversity research.
The transition to genotype‐based taxonomy in assessments and monitoring is often justified by the fact that a biological assessment of the quality of aquatic environments is possible with molecular methods. However, when compared with phenotype‐based taxonomic methods that require identification at the species level, the gap in the type of information provided by the two approaches is often reported (e.g., Gelis et al.,  ) but may be overlooked by decision‐makers. In the case of DNA metabarcoding algal bioassessment, the final output is often directly to operational taxonomic units (OTU) with assigned ecological quality class (e.g., Smucker et al.,  ), although organisms can be theoretically identified to species level, but it is often cost prohibitive. The current lack of DNA reference sequences for algae is a common limitation for species‐level taxonomic assignments of DNA metabarcoding data (Apothéloz‐Perret‐Gentil et al.,  ; Gelis et al.,  ). For example, Simons et al. ( ) reported that many of the California stream algae species currently lack DNA reference sequences, and therefore, molecular taxonomic assignment is constrained to genus or higher levels of taxonomy. This also further points to the need for obtaining pure cultures of algae for genomic sequencing.
In contrast, when using traditional morphologically based taxonomic approaches, an accurate species list provides access to a large amount of information on the autecology of the species and allows the calculation and development of effective metrics that require knowledge of the identity of the species involved. This latter approach with species‐level identification can also serve the purpose of biodiversity documentation very well (such as the United States National Science Foundation National Ecological Observatory Network, NEON). However, some suggest focusing on the development of tools (e.g., functional measurements) specifically targeted at assessments and monitoring and advocating for the decoupling of funding for assessments from that for biodiversity inventorying (Poikane et al.,  ). The argument is that specific funding should be made available for the latter, but in practice, in most countries, this would simply result in a collapse of funding capable of supporting studies on the diversity, distribution, and ecology of algae.
Increasingly, modern climate‐ and human‐derived pressures are altering watershed attributes to significantly impact water health, often resulting in declines in water quality (Winter et al.,  ; Yuan et al.,  ), changes to freshwater and marine food web connections (Chapman et al.,  ; Merz et al.,  ), or shifts in biogeochemical cycles (Woodward et al.,  ). For example, climate warming and nutrient pollution, major factors that drive ecological changes in freshwaters, can lead to shifts in algal and cyanobacterial species composition and abundance to less desirable taxa (Environmental Protection Agency,  ). These warm, nutrient‐rich conditions can promote the growth of nuisance (Higgins et al.,  ) and harmful cyanobacteria that produce toxins (Chorus & Welker,  ), posing risks to humans, wildlife, and economic activities (Carmichael,  ; Paerl et al.,  ). With respect to biodiversity, climate change effects have been predicted (Tornés et al.,  ), and climate change has been shown (Cantonati et al.,  ), for instance, to cause a homogenization of diatom assemblages in Mediterranean streams, with widespread, tolerant, and opportunistic species replacing characteristic and sensitive ones. Addressing these challenges to aquatic ecosystems and biodiversity requires interdisciplinary approaches that comprehensively assess their impacts and develop effective policies promoting freshwater health. However, gaps in understanding and training, combined with time or budgetary constraints, often lead to algae being given limited bandwidth and assessed in limited ways (for example, based only on biomass and chlorophyll a concentration), leaving out key information such as taxonomic composition.
Algal characterization often ends up compressed into a single dimension or single point estimate. Although chlorophyll a estimates capture large changes in algal biomass, they can be altogether misleading as the amount of chlorophyll a changes based on algal assemblage, physiological state, or time of day and in response to other environmental factors, such as light levels (Behrenfeld & Boss,  ). Moreover, these estimates can be compromised by vascular plant tissue. Different groups of algae and cyanobacteria also vary in their nutritional value or digestibility, such that estimates via biomass or chlorophyll a do not accurately describe the potential fate of these algae. Who is there shapes how nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, cycle through an aquatic ecosystem and how and if they enter an aquatic or terrestrial food web, or if they are transported downstream (Power et al.,  ). We urge interdisciplinary collaborations in science to continue but add that it is key to support efforts to assess “who is there” in terms of algae and cyanobacteria: species matter (Lowe,  ). Thus, knowledge of the who allows researchers to go beyond general estimates of algae and cyanobacteria to build more robust models to predict changes to aquatic ecosystems in response to complex environmental problems and to help better inform government agencies, policymakers, and scientific research (Kotamäki et al.,  ; Sutherland,  ). In addition, there is a need for developing illustrated identification field guides of regional algal floras for recording biodiversity and potentially invasive species. These guides will be beneficial for field crews and citizen scientists interested in protecting these habitats. There is also a need for more resources, like the Diatoms of North America (DONA, https://diatoms.org) project, that maintain high levels of accessibility, are kept up to date with taxonomic changes, and link taxonomic, ecological, and imaging data (Spaulding et al.,  ). We note that this transcends biomes and is necessary for micro‐ to macroscopic algal floras.
We currently use morphological and phylogenetic concepts when defining algal species (Graham et al.,  ). In the lab, both methods are disconnected because researchers with different skills and training apply them, necessitating more communication and collaboration. However, integrative (e.g., holistic) species characterizations can be achieved only if both methods are implemented harmoniously, as the algal morphology is an expression of genes under different environmental conditions. Integrative classification approaches to algal species are important because they lead to defining morphological structures as taxonomically important synapomorphies and reduce the number of cryptic species, which are separated genetically but not morphologically. For example, the diatom species complex of Cocconeis placentula is virtually impossible to classify based on the gross valve morphology traditionally studied by light and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). However, recent integrative studies, combining sequence data of the nuclear‐encoded 18S rRNA and the plastid rbcL genes with detailed SEM observation of monoclonal Cocconeis strains, have shown that there is a taxonomically important frustule ultrastructural element—the connecting girdle band (Mora et al.,  , ). This morphological feature was not previously considered yet now can be successfully used for morphological species identifications. Similar integrative taxonomic studies of the charophyte genus Zygnema from monoclonal strains (Stancheva et al.,  ) have provided barcoding gene data for species identification of sterile filaments, which are more common in the environment than the reproducing stages needed for morphological identifications. Cyanobacterial taxonomy currently also requires molecular support, preferably complete genome data obtained from monoclonal cultures (e.g., Conklin et al.,  ).
Due to the high algal species diversity, the reference libraries currently include only a small number of existing species, and therefore, metabarcoding bioassessment overcomes this limitation by reference‐free approaches of classifying sequences and organizing them into assemblages (Apothéloz‐Perret‐Gentil et al.,  ; Gelis et al.,  ; Simons et al.,  ). Metagenomic studies, besides revealing algal community composition, can provide valuable data for community function and processes that can hardly be obtained with observational methods (Tee et al.,  ). Ecosystem function is difficult to infer from community composition data, although some structural features, such as the presence of heterocytes in cyanobacteria, which are places of N2‐fixation, or the formation of long apical hairs with external phosphatases in some algae, are indicative of nutrient limitation and water stoichiometry (Stancheva et al.,  ). Comparative genomic studies have the advantage of elucidating genetic mechanisms, such as differentiating non‐toxic and toxic strains of the mat‐forming cyanobacterium Microcoleus. Tee et al. ( ) suggested toxic strains may be less tolerant to salt stress and nutrient fluctuations, possibly due to expendable loss of the genes for sucrose synthesis and differences in nitrogen and carbon uptake and storage. However, lab experiments with toxic Microcoleus strains can test the tolerance ranges and thresholds to variable stressors and their effect on filament growth and toxin production (Stancheva, Brown, et al.,  ).
We call upon the water quality management funding authorities and the phycology community to create conditions for rigorous research focused on the urgent development of extensive curated algal barcoding and morphological libraries from various geographical areas worldwide, such as the French algal database (Rimet et al.,  ). An essential benefit of these integrative studies is the creation of high‐quality algal reference barcoding libraries augmented with morphological data that are important for theoretical systematics studies and crucial for the accuracy of “taxonomy‐integrating” metabarcoding bioassessment (Simons et al.,  ).

## TEACHING AND OUTREACH: WE NEED A NEW GENERATION OF TRAINED PHYCOLOGISTS
A decade ago, Drew ( ) warned that the number of taxonomists had decreased while the need for taxonomic expertise for bioassessment, monitoring harmful algal blooms (HABs), and other ecological and evolutionary studies had grown. As a reaction to the insect biodiversity crisis, the European Union supported an initiative (European Red List of Insect Taxonomists) to provide the first assessment of the status of insect taxonomic expertise capacity in Europe, with worrying results—taxonomic capacity was threatened or eroded for 41.4% of the insect orders in Europe (Hochkirch et al.,  ). A similar assessment for the algae would likely produce an even worse outcome. We emphasize the need for more trianed taxnomists and the integration with molecular techniques, which may be expensive and complicated. A recent piece in The New York Times emphasized the need to bring back taxonomy (Langellier,  ). This collaborative effort will produce solid, high‐quality barcoding libraries of well‐described algal species for reliable and defendable output of algal bioassessment.
Yet, it seems education and instruction in biology has pivoted to molecular methods in organismal biology as an alternative to morphological studies. Student interest and academic positions for instructors have seemed to be focused on molecular approaches, which has led to a “silent extinction of species and taxonomists” (Löbl et al.,  ). Molecular methods, including environmental DNA (eDNA) metabarcoding, show enormous promise, but some of the most widely used methods are limited in their capacities to provide important spatial and ecological context or species‐level detection. Moreover, the diversity of several algal groups, such as the diatoms, are vast, while other groups are very poorly known, such as the cyanobacteria, xanthophytes, and eustigmatophytes, such that traditional taxonomic and molecular approaches are not at a stage where they can be reconciled.
Meanwhile, large‐scale, effective bioassessment and inventory projects (e.g., NEON) rely on taxonomists to create algal databases, eventually connecting the morphological species lists with eDNA metabarcoding results. Therefore, it is necessary for phenotype‐ and genotype‐based taxonomists to work together to obtain genetic sequences for identified morphospecies to build a more robust reference database, allowing the genetics to be paired with the biology and morphology of the organisms. Therefore, trained taxonomists are essential for aquatic ecological studies. This is a major challenge given the current focus in many biology programs, which primarily support the pre‐medical professions or aim to meet the needs of biotechnology, placing interest in algal courses low within academic curriculum priorities. Current and future challenges also encompass the “demographic cliff” in which there will be fewer students available to attend college. Consequently, institutions will offer fewer, larger classes to stay afloat at the expense of more specialized courses. Due to the sporadic offerings of phycology courses, students lack exposure to the fascinating world of algae, including at large research‐oriented universities.
In Italy, for instance, the number of phycology courses offered can probably be counted on two hands. These courses are mainly provided by universities located at the coast and are focused mainly on marine algae, with courses on freshwater phycology being extremely rare. The traditional mandatory systematic botany courses often start with ferns, leaving out most “cryptogams.” Just by inserting cyanobacteria, algae, and bryophytes in the systematic botany courses and modules he taught, Cantonati (University of Bologna) motivated BSc and MSc students to undertake theses in diatom ecology (requiring extensive use of morphotaxonomy for community composition assessment).

## Importance of classroom teaching of phycology
Academic institutions that support undergraduate phycology courses provide key training, funneling well‐prepared student researchers into graduate programs, government positions, or industry. Indeed, the long process of training algal taxonomists may require conducting a research project on algal diversity and ecology where knowledge is learned through field collections and observations. Projects that engage students in scientific research and hands‐on classroom experiences around algae and cyanobacteria will be a key to generating modern solutions to global environmental problems, such as nutrient pollution. Furthermore, as a visual discipline, phycology requires infrastructural enhancements that support the acquisition of high‐quality educational microscopes needed to properly train students and maintain interests in phycology. Teaching phycology requires constant updates in teaching materials to reflect current research and changes in systematics (e.g., Bowles et al.,  ). Moreover, the taxonomic breadth of algae is impressive with multiple lineages of eukaryotes and cyanobacteria. Students must be taught and prepared to use this traditional literature, as well as taught how to “wade through” the phycological jargon unique to each group of algae (see, e.g., Krueger‐Hadfield,  on the jargon associated with algal reproduction). Today, publishing a list of taxa with original line drawings (Prescott,  ; Tiffany,  ) must be complemented with ecology, applied issues, and original images (Wehr et al.,  ).
Phycologists often find themselves alone at their academic institutions and departments, which can make it difficult to start and maintain a research program, especially if they do not have well‐developed ties to larger phycological communities through societies such as the Phycological Society of America (PSA) or regional groups such as the Northeastern Algal Society (NEAS). This can be particularly true of those who join smaller universities or primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) where heavy teaching loads can make establishing a research program, however small, very challenging. These challenges may be exacerbated if new faculty members have only experienced research in large R1 environments, and these new faculty members may need guidance in how to establish a successful research program with undergraduates. Those of us at these types of institutions have found that collaborating with other faculty who have similar challenges and time constraints can lead to the completion of projects that may have otherwise been impossible. For example, a taxonomist, ecologist, and/or molecular geneticist who would naturally complement each other's skills may find it difficult to find one another when working at small institutions. However, once such fruitful collaboration between morphological and molecular phycologists is established, it creates many opportunities for undergraduate research. Krueger‐Hadfield and Stancheva have mentored undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in algal research, supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program, which had led to students publishing in the primary literature (e.g., Sethuraman et al.,  ; Sotka et al.,  ; Stancheva, Sethuraman, et al.,  ). We believe there should be networking opportunities for individuals at PUIs through the PSA and other societies—both among potential collaborators and as networking for graduate students. For example, at the annual PSA meeting in July 2024, early career researchers organized a career panel that included two of the co‐authors of this perspective—one is at a PUI (Cahoon) and the other at an R1 research institute (Krueger‐Hadfield). The inclusion of a mechanism to identify phycologists at these institutions could let them know that help and collaboration are available.
There are several pedagogical approaches that can strengthen and build the necessary knowledge base in the next generation of phycologists, aquatic scientists, and water management technicians, and some recent teaching experiences are described below. Rather than offering a one‐off, stand‐alone phycology course and hoping for enrollment, the phycologist Stancheva (Christova) and aquatic ecologist Jones at GMU tried a new model that embedded phycology into a curricular sequence, allowing for scaffolded learning and research experiences. The goal of this approach was to inspire and nurture a group of undergrads who would embrace algal research as a natural outcome of their studies. George Mason University started involving environmental science students enrolled in the aquatic ecology concentration with a required course called Freshwater ecosystems. In the Fall of 2023, 25 undergraduate students enrolled in this lecture‐lab course. The course included a survey of both stream and lake ecosystems, then students focused on a particular topic within these systems, such as phytoplankton, zooplankton, periphyton, benthic invertebrates, or water quality. Students assigned to the two algal topic areas were exposed to algal taxonomy and ecology. Following this, students were then encouraged to take a spring offering of phycology. Each student who had taken both courses could then participate in a summer internship in a study of stream periphyton emphasizing harmful benthic algal blooms in the Shenandoah River in Virginia. This enticed six of the undergrads to join the phycology course, which also included three graduate students. Through algal cultures and field collections, students gained exposure to the full breadth of the wonderful world of algae. That students made the choice to enroll in a phycology course after the first, semester‐length environmental course suggests the effectiveness of this approach. The three graduate students in the course selected thesis topics on algal taxonomy and/or ecology. One of the undergrads immediately began a MS degree focused on algae in one of our labs. Two of the undergraduates continued their algal research through the summer. One undergrad and one grad student, both with interests in chemistry, joined the harmful algal bloom team by participating in the toxin analysis protocols.
By creating a clear pipeline for students to proceed from a general, required course to a specialized course in phycology to undergraduate and graduate research, GMU created a vertically integrated intellectual community of phycologists where none had existed before. As in all vibrant academic communities, the different levels contributed to the sustenance and resilience of the whole, with undergrads being mentored by grad students and both sharing knowledge with the leadership of the professors. Thus, phycology came to be seen not as an odd and esoteric discipline only obliquely related to environmental concerns but as a fascinating and dynamic subject closely related to ecosystem processes.
Other creative pedagogical approaches can strengthen student interest in phycology. For example, at St. Catherine University, another PUI institution, Furey is reworking her freshwater ecology class and lab to incorporate a community engaged learning component, in which each student works with a community partner on an environmental project that involves a freshwater system or water‐related issue, such as a biodiversity inventory, water quality assessment, or the examination of a HAB‐prone waterbody. By helping respond to a community‐based need or a real‐world issue, student engagement increases, thereby fueling their investment in learning and inspiring them to dig deeper with their knowledge, in this case around algae and cyanobacteria. Students then share their findings with their community partners, which results in even broader training around phycology as the community partners learn from the students and vice versa. These types of approaches not only increase phycological training but can also inspire students to attend phycology classes at field‐stations, where their breadth and depth of knowledge can be further developed.

## Importance of field and lab phycology courses
Currently, the most comprehensive training in algal diversity is provided at several field stations in the USA as intense summer courses where students collect algae from different habitats and identify and observe them from fresh living specimens. The National Science Foundation recognizes the importance of “such field stations and laboratories which play a critical role in: providing access to study areas and organisms; providing facilities and equipment close to study areas; and fostering an atmosphere of mutual scientific interest and collaboration in biological research and education” (National Science Foundation,  , Synopsis section). However, the summer phycology courses should be more affordable for those undergraduate students who will become the next generation of phycologists; currently, these courses are attended chiefly by federal, state, or city employees charged with monitoring water quality or by students with sufficient resources to cover the costs of travel, tuition, and other fees. Fortunately, the Hannah T. Croasdale Fellowship, offered by the PSA, supports graduate students to attend algal‐focused courses at biological field stations (https://www.psaalgae.org/croasdale‐award). These courses facilitate place‐based research in micro‐ and macroalgal floras, critical data for establishing and maintaining baseline trends. Developing regional affordable summer field courses in marine and freshwater algal taxonomy and ecology will help develop the next generation of phycologists by emphasizing algal diversity, ecology, field appearance, and importance for their respective ecosystems.
Several of the authors offer or have offered algal training courses with a goal of strengthening the taxonomic and ecological training of technicians employed in governmental and private sector agencies, whose responsibility is—at least in part—to assess the health of aquatic ecosystems based on a solid grounding in algal identification. For example, the two‐week Freshwater algae identification intensive summer workshop at the Calder Center (Fordham University: http://www.fordham.edu/FWalgaeID) in New York regularly attracts a diverse group of individuals aiming to get hands‐on field and laboratory experience and training. Notably, attendees include graduate and undergraduate students, government scientists, and university faculty, often from locations around the world. The strong and broad interest in this course, as well as its ongoing waitlist, suggest that many more such courses are needed. The combination of sampling experiences across a wide range of habitats, including oligotrophic and eutrophic lakes, various streams, rivers, and bog habitats, helps to build a link between ecological properties of these systems and the algal taxa attendees encounter in the lab. The field‐based structure is critical, given that many laboratory technicians are provided with samples collected by separate field teams and rarely see the environments from which the samples were collected. This is the case even though many taxonomic keys emphasize critical habitat conditions in the diagnoses of algal genera and species. It is, therefore, not surprising that the needs of students in field courses are also broad, from strengthening skills in the use of diagnostic keys to learning habitat‐specific sampling methods and gaining better experience with microscopy and digital imaging, including counting methods.
Upper division field and laboratory courses that foster immersive, experiential learning have been shown to increase scientific literacy, eliminate achievement gaps, and promote equity in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM), particularly for people of color, first‐generation college students, and women (Beltran et al.,  ; Theobald et al.,  ). Krueger‐Hadfield was funded by an NSF CAREER award (DEB‐2141971; now DEB‐2436117) to develop a “Maymester” phycology course that provided undergraduate students at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) the opportunities to (i) collect data contributing directly to the main research foci of the award and more generally her research group; (ii) “own” a question, ultimately enabling them to see how their contributions advance scientific inquiry; and (iii) gain and implement field and bench skills (Jeon et al.,  ; Round & Campbell,  ). At many universities, retention and engagement with underrepresented groups, and particularly those in STEM disciplines, remain challenging. Discipline‐based pedagogical research has found that successful methods for teaching biology blend broad conceptual foundations with inquiry‐based, discovery‐led approaches (Slater et al.,  ). The Maymester course by Krueger‐Hadfield integrated undergraduate education with training in collaborative skills, mentoring, and research. The synergism between research and educational activities as part of the CAREER award fostered the building of a strong research and education program in evolutionary ecology. There is an established culture of undergraduate research engagement at UAB but a limited number of places for laboratory research experiences. This course introduced students to phycology and has been given the feasible support and enthusiasm of UAB collaborators. Students were introduced to freshwater and marine phycology with an emphasis on evolutionary ecology (see the need for this in phycology in Krueger‐Hadfield,  , ) through listening to lectures, reading the scientific literature, and engaging in field and bench work. Students spent the first week learning basic phycology and field and lab skills. In the second week, the class traveled to the Virginia Institute of Marine Science Eastern Shore Laboratory (VIMS ESL) where they participated in on‐going research on marine biofilms, ecological monitoring, and the invasion of the red alga Gracilaria vermiculophylla. In the third week, students sampled freshwater red macroalgae throughout northern Alabama. Students sampled macroscopic gametophytes and scrubbed biofilms to search for the microscopic diploid phase called the chantransia (see Schoenrock et al.,  ; Wolf & Vis,  ). In the final week, students enhanced their science communication skills by presenting their research. Three of the students presented data at the annual UAB Student Expo, one went on to present the same poster at the PSA meeting in Rhode Island in 2023, and one wrote a blog post for The AGA Blog (see Walts,  ). Under the auspices of the NSF CAREER award, the course was fully funded for five students with the idea that in the future, the costs would be low (~1500 USD inclusive of tuition) and be considerably less expensive than other offerings that include travel to the Bahamas or Costa Rica. The ethos and spirit of this course will be adapted now that Krueger‐Hadfield is based at VIMS ESL, whereby students will contribute to expanding micro‐ and macroalgal biological knowledge in the mid‐Atlantic region of North America. The absence of macroalgal expertise in soft sediment habitats as compared to rocky shores is an acute issue in the Chesapeake, where the last macroalgal species list was published more than 40 years ago (e.g., Orris,  ). These gaps not only restrict the responsible development and management of algal resources but also exacerbate our ability to forecast the consequences of climate change in important primary producers in this region.
Other model field‐based classes have been offered at the Iowa Lakeside Lab, owned by the State of Iowa and operated by the University Board of Regents (https://iowalakesidelab.org/courses). Manoylov has been invited to offer a freshwater algae class annually since 2006, while a diatom class, also taught by experts in the field, has been offered for more than 60 years. Both classes were designed originally for a field‐station type of teaching, with daily short instruction on theory followed by field collections from local habitats and finally observation of live materials. The Lakeside Lab provides research‐grade microscopes for each student, state‐of‐the‐art imaging, and in‐classroom networking (students can see in real time what other students observe and faculty identify), access to a classic and current taxonomic library, transportation to locations, and access to a boat. All of these, in addition to the provision of housing and food on‐site, allow efficient instruction both in and out of the classroom, which cannot be recreated in a regular university setting. Students must invest financially for transportation to the field station, tuition, room, and board, but there are many opportunities for financial support, including a unique competitive work‐study internship summer program. The course is offered at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Over the years the success of the algae class has been driven by the high diversity of protected aquatic habitats and algal communities in an area surrounded by agricultural activities. On average, students have finished with 150 genera images and dichotomous key descriptions, supplementing their knowledge of freshwater algal groups. In a recent publication, a strong case for collection‐based research as part of classroom instruction was made (Johnson & Manoylov,  ). The effort has produced a series of images that can be used as reference voucher flora for the region. All graduate students work on specific projects related to their thesis research and finish with a voucher set of images usually identified to species level and a scientific paper write‐up. The class has been inspirational to highly motivated undergraduate students interested in phycology who had been taking the class for the field‐based component or to sharpen their microscopy skills. Occasionally, such as during the COVID‐19 pandemic and, at times, to accommodate interest from federal, state, and international professionals interested in algae, the class has been offered virtually. The virtual version of the course is an intensive, text‐based introduction with voucher‐image‐based study activities and discussions. Lectures cover biology, systematics, and ecology of common freshwater algal groups. Postgraduate biologists interested in algal taxonomy, ecology, harmful algal blooms, and water quality are encouraged to audit the class. In phycology, training in algal fine‐level taxonomy takes meticulous, often one‐on‐one mentoring during observations on research microscopes. Working closely together with students, faculty are, in turn, informed of new technological opportunities and get exposure to the different learning styles of the current generation of students.

## Importance of professional phycological societies and regional chapters
The annual North American Diatom Symposium (NADS) and the annual phycological meetings such as those of PSA and NEAS and other societies with aquatic‐related topics (e.g., Society for Freshwater Science, Ecological Society of America, or Association for the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography) are excellent opportunities for students to present their research, learn more about algae, create new ideas for future studies, and connect with professionals. All of these societies and meetings offer financial support for student research and travel.
Beyond field courses, informal, student‐centered phycological meetings are also valuable for nurturing the next generations of phycologists. Recognizing this, in October 1979, Joe Ramus and Rick Searles hosted the first Southeastern Phycological Colloquy (SEPC) at the Duke University Marine Laboratory in Beaufort, North Carolina. They chose the term colloquy intentionally over other terms used for professional meetings because it means a conversation or dialogue. Their intention was that the SEPC would foster dialogue between students and between students and more established researchers. Ramus and Searles encouraged students to give presentations on their research projects early in the process, even before data had been collected, to enable them to get feedback on their ideas and experimental design from the wide range of colloquy participants. Most years, many of the SEPC talks have been on marine algae, but they have included presentations on freshwater and subaerial algae, as well as on seagrasses. If it is about alga, cyanobacterium, or any photoautotroph living in water, there is a place for a student talk at the SEPC.
As with the first SEPC, across the years the event has usually started off with a Friday evening social for those able to get to the venue in time. (Almost everyone drives—another factor that fosters undergraduate participation in addition to the inclusion of presentations at early stages of a project.) The first evening reception is followed by presentations most of the day on Saturday and then dinner (sometimes also an after‐dinner talk). Depending on the venue, there is sometimes a Sunday morning field trip, but people are able to be home by Sunday evening, meaning that students (and faculty) miss classes only on Friday (if at all). Because of its small size (commonly 40–50 attendees), the SEPC can be held in university or marine station classrooms at very low cost to attendees (particularly low are the student rates). In the early years, there were sometimes concurrent sessions, but for the majority of the 45 annual SEPCs thus far, there has only been a single oral session that everyone attends. Students always have priority for oral presentation slots, and although there was only a single undergraduate attending and presenting at the 1979 colloquy, undergraduate participation has become very common. (That single undergraduate—Amsler—still regularly attends the SEPC and has hosted it several times, illustrating how meetings and courses truly do help sustain phycology.)
Every year since its start in 1979, the SEPC has had phycological faculty members from southeastern US institutions step up to host, including during the COVID‐19 pandemic when the meeting pivoted to an online (Zoom) format. There is no formal organization or long‐term planning, although past hosts have always helped the current year's host as much as they need. The late Dennis Hanisak, who hosted the 45th SEPC in 2023, less than a year before his untimely passing, was a driving force in keeping the SEPC vibrant over the past 2 decades, and he will be greatly missed in so many ways. Despite his passing, across all the years since Ramus and Searles initiated the colloquy, senior southeastern phycologists have recognized how important this event is to their students. There is no doubt that the SEPC will continue to enrich phycological students for many years to come.

## Importance of outreach and public education
Public interest in the environment has never been stronger. Surveys often identify environmental quality as a main concern. What is often lacking is educational and knowledge resources that are accessible to people. This is particularly true when considering organisms whose structure is only accessible by microscopy. Although even casual observers can determine the various shades of green, brown, and even red in water that manifest the presence of algae, they have little experience with or concept of the diversity of organisms that are responsible for these expressions of nature. We extoll the positive attributes of algae while recognizing their ability to severely degrade water bodies. Clearly, more needs to be done to promote a more sophisticated knowledge of algae and the conditions that may bring about their transformations from good to bad.
Citizen science (see discussions on the use of the term community science in Lin Hunter et al.,  ) provides a mechanism for the public to learn about algae in their local environments while contributing to the global knowledge base of algal ecology and their resident ecosystems. People are generally much more motivated to make careful and sustained observations when they know they are contributing to a global endeavor. In the process, they become more curious about why certain species occur in one place and not another, in one season and not another, and in a clean system and not a degraded one. There are initial efforts to create and sustain citizen science platforms for algae. These include the Cyanoscope program of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Planktoscope, an affordable imaging machine. Even the basic i‐Naturalist app can identify many common algal taxa if given a photomicrograph. The SeaweedSorter app (https://seaweedsorter.com/) is an excellent resource helping amateur and seasoned phycologists alike in the Pacific Northwest. Admittedly, training and access to equipment are more problematic with regard to microorganisms than with regard to macroscopic plants and animals. However, the programs mentioned above provide affordable access to equipment for viewing algae. Phycologists should support these platforms and participate in training and community‐building around citizen science approaches to outreach.
Indeed, a short 2‐ to 3‐day algal foray that includes citizen scientists, students, Indigenous experts, agencies, experts, and anybody interested in algae can be (and has been) an effective (and fun) way to teach people about algae; in these forays, participants learn, collect, and observe algae alongside experts. An added benefit to these focused gatherings is the network of contacts and connections that emerge and allow the learning and training to continue. Great examples are the algal forays organized by Drs Mary Power, Rex Lowe, and Paula Furey at the Angelo Coast Range Reserve on Eel River and Klamath River in California, which benefit people engaged with algae‐related issues. Similar gatherings of students and other people interested in algae are needed in other areas of the country experiencing algal proliferation and HABs.
Incorporating algal diversity into existing citizen (or community) science projects may be a way to leverage existing networks. One example is the Alabama Water Watch (AWW; https://aaes.auburn.edu/alabamawaterwatch/), an Alabama‐wide citizen science program focused on water quality monitoring, based in the Auburn University Water Resources Center since 1992. Its mission is to improve both water quality and water policy through monitoring and action, by educating people of all backgrounds about the environment, pollution, and stewardship. Alabama Water Watch has EPA‐approved quality assurance plans for water chemistry and has certified over 8500 volunteer water monitors. More than 97,000 water data records from 2500 sites on 900 different waterbodies have been submitted to the AWW database. The AWW network, as an example, offers an unparalleled opportunity to incorporate algae information into other water quality monitoring. There is great evidence that citizen science, as promoted by programs like AWW, can play a significant role in increasing scientific knowledge for its participants (Bonney et al.,  ). By gaining knowledge of a specific scientific field, participants are more likely to change related behaviors and attitudes (Jordan et al.,  ).
Nevertheless, it takes dedicated faculty, students, and staff to ensure the success of algal education through regional algal forays and colloquia. Entire labs pack and travel to locations, bring research‐grade microscopes, take part in collection and immediate observation of the collected algal material, or present research. These types of gatherings are invaluable experiences, as students can be sitting next to their professors and able to participate in the discussion and observation of fresh algal material. They can learn the interpretation of the different life histories and adaptations on the spot. Accounting for the natural developmental stage, it is not possible to know everything, but paying attention to details, understanding how to follow dichotomous keys, and documenting observed characteristics allow accurate identification and inference about the ecology of the habitat. The gathered phycologists have the necessary resources that enable a large set of collected samples in short periods of time, and they offer collegiality and learning outside of the classroom. High quality images and lists can be published (Johansen et al.,  ), the events are usually advertised, and local communities are invited to come and see the invisible beauty of each region.

## CONCLUSIONS
Micro‐ and macroalgae may unlock some of the enduring mysteries surrounding eukaryotic diversity, yet, this necessitates the integration of teaching, research, outreach, and engagement. Algae cannot continue to stay a “hidden treasure, hobby, and fascination” as there are many educational opportunities to teach about undiscovered biodiversity, the potential as food and fuel for the growing human population, addressing health issues from allergies to toxin exposure, and new substances synthesized by algae.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Charles D. Amsler: Writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal). A. Bruce Cahoon: Conceptualization (equal); writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal). Marco Cantonati: Conceptualization (equal); writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal). Paula C. Furey: Conceptualization (equal); writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal). Pat Gillevet: Conceptualization (equal); writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal). R. Christian Jones: Conceptualization (equal); writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal). Stacy A. Krueger‐Hadfield: Conceptualization (equal); writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal). Kalina Manoylov: Conceptualization (equal); writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal). Jennifer L. Salerno: Conceptualization (equal); writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal). Rosalina Stancheva: Conceptualization (equal); writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal). John D. Wehr: Writing – original draft (equal); writing – review and editing (equal).

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank M. Coleman for the positive encouragement for this manuscript. Start‐up funds from George Mason University to RS funded the workshop “Algae and the Environment.” PCF received partial financial support for travel to the Algae and the Environment meeting via collaborative research with the US Army Corps of Engineers—Engineering Research and Development Center through Next Generation Ecological Modeling funding. The development of a field course was supported by NSF CAREER (DEB‐2141971/DEB‐2436117) to SAKH.