pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11527293PMC11527293.111527293115272933948086210.1371/journal.pone.0309715PONE-D-24-011201Research ArticleScience PolicyResearch IntegrityResearch EthicsScience PolicyScience PolicyResearch IntegrityPublication EthicsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceLearning and MemoryLearningHuman LearningComputer and Information SciencesArtificial IntelligenceResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentResearch Reporting GuidelinesPhysical SciencesPhysicsClassical MechanicsReflectionResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentSystematic ReviewsEmerging technologies and research ethics: Developing editorial policy using a scoping review and reference panel
Editorial policy fostering learning about research ethicshttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8709-5780KnightSimonConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – original draft VibergOlgaFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing MavrikisManolisFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9694-6033KovanovićVitomirFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing KhosraviHassanFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing FergusonRebeccaFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing CorrinLindaFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing ThompsonKateValidationWriting – review & editing MajorLouisValidationWriting – review & editing LodgeJasonValidationWriting – review & editing HennessySaraValidationWriting – review & editing CukurovaMutluValidationWriting – review & editing 1
Centre for Research on Education in a Digital Society and TD School, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia2
Digital Futures, KTH, Stockholm, Sweden3
UCL Knowledge Lab, University College London, London, United Kingdom4
Learning Futures, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia5
Institute for Teaching and Learning Innovation / School of Education, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia6
Institute of Educational Technology, The Open University, Milton Keynes, United Kingdom7
Deakin Learning Futures, Deakin University, Melbourne, Australia8
Faculty of Creative Industries, Education & Social Justice, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia9
Manchester Institute of Education, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom10
Faculty of Education, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United KingdomChiPrimus CheEditor files, and the linked data publication https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.26013130.v2; where data cannot be shared publicly due to copyright restrictions links to retrieve the original source data are provided.

## Data Availability
Relevant data are contained within the manuscript, its files, and the linked data publication https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.26013130.v2; where data cannot be shared publicly due to copyright restrictions links to retrieve the original source data are provided.

## 1. Introduction

## 1.1. Learning to meet ethical challenges in a changing world
Across disciplines, researchers face challenges in navigating ethical issues regarding emerging technologies and changing societal context. The dual challenge is that existing strategies for applying an ethical approach to achieving positive impact in research may not align well with emerging topics, and that there may not be clear consensus or established cross-disciplinary resources to support understanding and navigating the ethical dimensions of such work. As the primary medium of research communication, scholarly outputs serve as a safeguard on research ethics ‘compliance’, alongside providing an opportunity for learning regarding navigation of existing and emerging ethical challenges.
Recently, a significant body of regulatory and other guidance has emerged in response to high-profile cases that raised ethical concerns regarding the much-vaunted potential of artificial intelligence (AI) in the public sphere. These challenges are made more pressing by the rise of AI, including the latest developments in generative AI technologies and technologies that may have dual use applications [ ]. Four reviews of contributions to AI principle and guideline development report, 36 [ ], 84 [ ], 112 [ ], and 27 [ ] documents respectively. However, it is unclear how scholarly publishers and research institutions should incorporate these guidelines.
In this context of AI’s growth and corresponding heightened awareness of the ethical challenges of emerging technologies, a number of learned societies and publishers are reviewing their role in promoting ethical practice within research, and positive impacts from research [e.g., – ]. Prominently, NeurIPS–a respected AI, machine learning, and computational neuroscience conference–introduced an ‘impact statement’ in 2020, switching to a checklist and review in 2021 [ ]. In their recent report on the role of conferences in fostering ethics, “A Culture of Ethical AI”, the Ada Lovelace Institute highlights the need for researcher incentives regarding ethical considerations of AI research, which permeate the research development to dissemination cycle [ ].
Editors (including conference program chairs) play an important role in promotion of ethical practice because publication is a key aim for many researchers and serves as an instrumental aim towards career advancement. If editors incentivise consideration of ethical issues, and mitigation of risks, this is likely to impact research conduct and expression [ , ]. However, despite longstanding relatively procedural requirements regarding ethics, and specifically the reporting of ethical-oversight approvals and consent processes, understanding the expression of the ethics constructs and values that researchers work with is a challenge across disciplines [ ]. A recent review of articles that discuss ethical issues in research (i.e., where this is a central theme), highlights that descriptive ethics dominates, with a relative lack of clarity regarding the concepts used or reflection on these [ ]. Publications have a role in disseminating knowledge, including regarding the ethical considerations of our research, and ethics committees expect researchers to turn to the disciplinary literature in aligning their practice with disciplinary norms of ethics. Thus, this gap presents a challenge for, “increasing sensitivity to ethical issues and how empirical data may be relevant to various ethical principles and problems.” [ , p.16].
The present paper bridges this gap through systematic analysis of existing editorial policy, and development of new policies targeting development of ethical sensitivity. While we draw on broad disciplinary context via a scoping review (not limited by field), we recognise that the inherent diversity within different scholarly domains requires tailoring to specific areas. Therefore, this paper provides exemplification through the area of ‘learning and technology’, targeting emerging issues regarding research ethics and AI applications in education. Our approach thus draws out general principles for editorial policies regarding the expression of, and learning about, research ethics, while acknowledging the inherent diversity across disciplines, and their distinct challenges.

## 1.2. Background: Reporting research ethics

## 1.2.1. Recognising research ethics committees
In the inception, conduct, and dissemination of research we navigate an ethics ecosystem [ , ] that includes ethics guidelines and principles, alongside publication processes such as editorial policy that targets research ethics, and formal bodies for human and animal research oversight. These oversight bodies include research ethics committees (RECs), or boards (REBs), and institutional review boards (IRBs). RECs play a significant role in research ethics internationally, through their role in providing “ethical approval for study”–to use the refrain commonly seen in journal articles. RECs play this role in research governance, providing oversight of research conducted against ethical standards that typically incorporate the Belmont principles [ ], alongside providing feedback to researchers against these values.
While this oversight is grounded in some common values and concern regarding historic ethical abuses, it is important to recognise that: ‘ethical approval’ from a REC may not indicate the research is ethical; RECs are sometimes perceived to hinder ethical research [ ]; ethics is bound up with contextual power relationships and historical injustices [ ]; and that the scope of REC reviews is limited, for example, in the US, IRBs are explicitly instructed not to consider long-range effects that would include the risks of technologies should they be deployed at scale [for discussion, see ].
Of significance for editors, ethics guidance and governance also varies internationally, and it may not be necessary (or even possible) for researchers in some systems to gain formal approval for research projects, with the nature of review structures, and of what counts as ‘human research’, varying internationally [ – ]. Editors should thus exercise caution in imposing requirements or scoping the nature of ‘research’, in ways that could unduly exclude research, and for example, entrench existing inequities, marginalise voices in research, or exclude methodological traditions.

## 1.2.3. Reviews of research ethics publication policies
Given this important role for editors in research governance, international guidance indicates that scholarly venues should require processes of consent and ethical approval as part of submission processes. Existing policies focus on the explicit expression of key ethical principles in publications, often including discussion of principles connected to the medical research Declaration of Helsinki [ ] or Belmont Principles or Common Rule [ ]. While they serve different purposes, both include statements relating to respect for persons, beneficence, and justice, with operationalisation into publishing often focusing on explicit statements regarding informed consent, and oversight or approval of a REC as expressed in recommendations of the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors [ ] and the Uniform Requirements for Manuscripts Submitted to Biomedical Journals (URMs) [ ].
While historically these statements arose from medical research contexts, the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) and World Conferences on Research Integrity (WCRI) have developed more general material. The WCRI’s Singapore Statement final item flags the significance of “societal considerations” and a balance of risks and benefits in research, and COPE’s “Responsible research publication: international standards” for authors and editors, noting appropriate REC approval and its reporting, consent, and privacy as key issues, alongside wider concerns for research integrity and merit [ , ]. As COPE’s self-assessment for editors sets out, venues: “must publish clear guidelines on the ethical conduct of research, according to the research discipline” [ ] as part of their policies for COPE Core Practices. However, despite COPE’s multidisciplinary status, their survey of 656 editors in the arts, humanities, and social sciences indicated that “28% of respondents were completely unaware of COPE” [ , p.3]. Even in medical publishing, which has a longer association with the Declaration of Helsinki, a survey of editors of journals (n = 34 respondents) indicates not all give explicit instruction to reviewers regarding ethics (38% do not), and some (18%) report that they had published ‘ethically uncertain’ or suspect’ research previously [ ].
Several reviews have been conducted regarding journal policies for research ethics, largely instantiated through their ‘instructions to authors’ (ItAs) and alignment with the Declaration of Helsinki and International Medical Research statements (requiring ethics approval, and consent processes) (see Section 2.1). Although these reviews have been executed across disciplines, there is no synthesis across them which might aid in identifying areas of strength or/and strategies being adopted by different disciplines or publishers, particularly in light of addressing challenges posed by emerging technologies.

## 1.3. Editorial policy to support learning regarding research ethics
Editors play a role in a wider ecosystem of research ethics and impact [ , ]. As Gold et al. put it, “publishing communities (e.g., scholarly conferences) can play a larger role in supporting improved ethical practice by defining and communicating the ethical values of their community’s collective identity and aspirations” [ , p.1]. Recent reports regarding the challenges of AI as an emerging technology have set out focal areas for editors in fostering ethical practice in their research communities [ , , ]. To address these, editors have available to them a range of policy levers, articulated into material resources for their communities, that express standards and models for change, as summarises. Notably, while summarises proposals targeting issues arising from emerging technologies, most have broader impact in developing practices for research ethics.
 

## 1.4. Research questions and impetus
Central to the policy levers expressed in is the issue of how scholarly outputs express and support learning regarding the navigation of ethical implications of research, particularly in light of emerging technologies. It is imperative that we have suitable policies and practices across communities with this learning focus. Our claim is not that current research fails to consider ethical concepts, but rather, that greater attention would lead to deeper expression in order to (1) support learning within and across research communities, and (2) develop knowledge regarding the communication and development of these ethical concepts. However, the ways that publishers, editors, and authors, can support learning regarding ethics has not been a significant feature of research or policy statements to date. Thus, as sets out, this paper provides an in-depth examination of the ways ethical practice is enacted and communicated in academic publishing so it can be incorporated into processes that enable editorial teams to enhance shared understanding and knowledge development of the editorial teams themselves, alongside researchers and stakeholders, around key ethical concepts.
 

## 2. Materials and methods

## 2.1. Scoping review
Rationale and objective: A search strategy was adopted to identify the range of policies regarding research ethics, and their instantiation in published works. Scoping reviews provide a systematic approach to understanding the scope of coverage of issues, while not seeking to systematically evaluate ’effectiveness’ (per a systematic review) [ – ]. This approach is not intended to be exhaustive, but rather to capture the scope of coverage through ‘high level’ analysis, allowing for the identification of clusters and gaps that can inform the focus of future activities [ ]. A strength of the methodology is its ability to identify key features of a diverse body of research in a connected manner [ ]. The scoping review aimed to address RQ1 in order to provide insight into the range (or menu) of policies being used across venues in different fields, to inform our understanding of these existing resources and their gaps ( ). A PRISMA Checklist for scoping reviews is provided ( ).
The scoping review was not pre-registered.

## 2.1.1. Search strategy
2.1.1.1. Eligibility criteria overview. Editorial materials are sometimes the object of research publications, and occasionally they are published in the form of statements or editorials in ways that are indexed. More often though editorial policy might be identified via grey literature or analysis of journal/conference materials (primarily their websites). Research ethics policies known to have addressed emerging technologies (e.g., from the Association of Internet Researchers (AoIR), material on wearable technologies, etc., see [ ]) were considered for inclusion, however these did not typically include policies of relevance for inclusion as editorial policy. Materials were investigated for both discussion of policies, and author behaviour or the instantiation of those policies into scholarly outputs. Materials were reviewed by the lead author and included if they discussed research ethics.
2.1.1.2. Search strategy overview. A search strategy was adopted to combine cross-disciplinary scholarly indexes with searches of target venue websites, and discussion in grey literature.
2.1.1.3. Search terms. Terms and filters varied by source (see ), Scopus terms focused on research articles in which terms relating to "instructions to authors" and ethics appeared in the Title, Abstract, or Key terms; Google Scholar searches were for terms relating to “editorial policy” and “ethics reporting”; COPE resources were searched particularly for terms relating to ethics, alongside further purposive sampling.
2.1.1.4. Quality appraisal. No quality assessment was made of sources retrieved, consistent with conventional scoping review practice [ ].

## 2.1.2. Venues / Sources
Sources were identified (detailed in ) through:
Searches of scholarly indexes (Scopus; Google Scholar),
Searching COPE materials,
Purposive sampling including through citation chasing from the Ada Lovelace report,
Sampling from a set of Target Journals (see 2.2).

## 2.1.3. Data extraction
Items were selected from returned results, and purposive sampling of publishers and venues (1) known to have developed innovative approaches particularly with respect to emerging technologies and AI (e.g., the NeurIPS policies, addressed to the field of computational neuroscience, including AI applications), or (2) within the specific discipline, through analysis of journal policies. Retrieved materials were analysed by the lead author, with these materials subsequently used in reference group discussion. Analysis included both quantitative information (i.e., policy or compliance incidence), and descriptive information, particularly concerning the discussion of policy need or policy innovations including:
Discussion of editorial policies regarding research ethics. This included material reviewing editorial policies from journals in a specific discipline and their explicit mention of the requirement to report consent, as well as discussion of novel cases or introduction of new policies (particularly in the COPE and purposively sampled material).
Discussion of compliance with editorial policy regarding research ethics (e.g., reviews of papers in a specific discipline and their discussion of consent).
Items were imported into the Zotero reference management tool [ ] for categorisation, connection, and data extraction, where:
They were ‘Related’ using the ‘related’ function, such that if an item referred to another, they were linked (e.g., policies linked to published works they referred to).
The unit of analysis was identified as content related to research ethics, ranging from a paragraph or subsection, to a single bullet point or checkpoint. For many publications, the abstract contained the relevant information.
Units were extracted where they referred to research ethics (correspondingly, item elements that referred to other aspects of research integrity and merit were excluded, except where they were clearly linked to discussion of research ethics).
Extracted units were coded by strategy focus and policy lever, using an excel export of the Zotero data (see data file [ ]).

## 2.2. Target journal sampling
Learning and education research faces distinct challenges in consideration of the role of technology in research, and in learning environments. The ethical component of these challenges, alongside the potential for positive impact, has been long recognised [ ], with recent calls for clear policy regarding inclusion of ethics statements in one leading AI in Education journal [ ]. As experts in this discipline, we focused on the field to situate our policy development, while providing a model for transfer across disciplines. To identify journals of interest the lead author:
Used the SJR rankings for ‘e-learning’ (n = 72 journals), and systematically visited the site of each in the first and second quartile (n = 36) for screening;
Screened venues for whether (1) they were associated with a society (n = 9), and (2) they had a focus on learning or/and the role of technology in learning (n = 7 of that 9);
Identified a journal representing each publisher (where multiple journals were identified with the same publisher convenience sampling was used based on the lead author’s existing network);
Appended the list with purposive sampling of known journals (n = 6) in the space (adding two additional ‘self-created’ ethics statements).
This list was used to invite journals to participate (see 2.3), and for extraction of policies, with a review of pages representing all publishers for references to ‘ethics’ (9 generic boilerplate materials were identified from publishers: Wiley/ IGI/ Emerald/ PKP/ T&F/ Springer/ Inderscience/ IEEE/ informingscience). Further detail is provided in published data [ ].

## 2.2.1. Paper sampling within target journals
To understand how ‘ethics’ is incorporated into published works in the field, permission was sought from the subset of journals whose editors were on the reference group (n = 3, see below), to analyse their published works for the year 2021. Two searches were conducted with a narrower and broader query, with summary statistics and a Key Words in Context (KWIC) output created using an R script, in order to use these materials as stimulus in the expert consultation.

## 2.3. Reference group consultation

## 2.3.1. Recruitment approach
A reference group of journal editors was invited to collaborate, with an aim to discuss the issues they encounter, and possible policy directions. Invites were sent January 26 2023 with a request to respond (with a decision, or request for more time) by February 7th; editors of n = 6 journals were invited, editors of n = 3 journals accepted. In discussion with those editors, it was decided to proceed without a further round of invites. A subset of these editors led consultation with their ‘Editor-in-Chief’ teams, with the full team contributing to policy development and this manuscript. The invitation made clear that insofar as policies might be an outcome, the intent was not to seek a universal mandate, but to develop adaptable material that would respect the plurality of values and the needs of communities being served.
Editors of the journals were selected on the following basis: (1) each journal focuses on learning and technologies; (2) there is some variation in editor location across the journals; (3) a range of publishers (e.g., Sage), societies, or/and publishing platforms (e.g., the open source PKP OJS platform) are represented each of which provides their own boilerplate policies for journals. There was a pre-existing relationship between the lead author and all invited editors. Of those invited, three journals responded positively and thus form the reference group (n = 6 editors comprising a single representative of two, and the full team of one journal, n = 1 convenor). This process is represented in an adapted PRISMA Flow, .

## 2.3.2. Ethical considerations and consent
The editors were invited in the course of their ordinary duties, with an indication that the work would be collaborative and–subject to ICMJE authorship guidelines–involve co-authorship. The project was approved under the ‘negligible risk’ category for consensus methods (ETH23-7991 at UTS, ratified at UCL ExREC0005); participants were provided an information sheet outlining the implied consent approach “Your participation in this work will be treated as confirmation that you have read this information sheet, and consent to participate.” This was also noted at the start of the first meeting, alongside expectation setting and initial discussion of any ground rules regarding, for example, use of quotes from our meeting sessions.

## 2.3.3. Participation approach
The group met for four virtual workshops collectively over a 6-month period, with sub-group meetings and asynchronous collaboration targeting:
Co-developing and promoting an approach to drawing on expertise in learning, to review and develop practices and editorial policies with AI ethics as a shared initial impetus.
Contributing to evaluation of existing, and drafted, policies and development of policies aiming to produce materials to be adopted/adapted across disciplines.

## 3. Results

## 3.1. Scoping review across disciplines
The review identified resources as indicated in the modified PRISMA Flow diagram ( , with further detail of the review process and search terms in ). The subset of these resources identified in Google Scholar and Scopus searches that reported empirical reviews addressing ethics policies and reporting is indicated in .
 These papers were reviewed to inform our understanding of the existing policy landscape and reflections on this for policy development. Where available, policy foci and materials were extracted from papers even where they were excluded from the numeric summary analyses provided.

## 3.1.1. Summary of policy incidence
On inspection of the papers focusing on policy, those focusing solely on ItA issues outside research ethics, such as conflict of interest statements, were excluded (n = 4); a number were not available (n = 3); some did not report data applicable for this review (n = 9); one further meta-analysis of systematic reviews of instructions to authors was identified (row 2 ) [ ], however that research did not report on the policy incidences identified in the papers it reviewed, and thus is excluded in further analysis, leaving n = 50). Analysis of those studies that investigated editorial policy regarding ethics guidelines indicates that across reviews of journals included (n = 4,440) many (n = 2,393 or 53.90%) do not include explicit statements regarding reporting of research ethics. These studies incorporate a range of journals, with varied disciplinary and geographic distribution, as does the number of venues included in any one analysis (one study analysed a single venue, M = 88.80, SD = 86.86, Median = 68). The average policy incidence in the journals included in each study was M = 47.86 (47.03%; SD = 60.11), i.e., almost half of journals appeared to have no explicit policy.
Where reference to specific external standards or guidelines was made, these were checked for inclusion in our ‘policy menu’, informing later phases. This checking of external resources is significant because in one review of articles (n = 324) analysing social media data, it was found that, “none of the five main publishing houses ha[d] any specific policies on the use of [social media] data in research. Rather, all referred to their affiliations with the Committee of Publishing Ethics (COPE), which on investigation, also had no specific policies.” [ , p.335].
In addition, the included studies investigate a range of issues, and present specific policy suggestions. An example is that studies in the discipline of psychiatry that may not be unethical, but might nevertheless be controversial, should explicitly report these issues, and that reporting guidelines should be extended to foster such discussion [ ] In the discipline of ecology it is suggested that formal guidance should be developed for authors and reviewers regarding the ethics of research in sensitive areas, and ethical practice in work with Indigenous peoples or on traditional lands [ ]. In clinical research involving photographs that may be re-identifiable, it is suggested that standards should be established with policy enforcement for deidentification [ ]. While each of these issues relates to particular challenges of the discipline, in each case there are cross-disciplinary lessons in making explicit these concerns. Relevant to our focus (section 3.2), one Spanish language review examined the policies of 214 JCR indexed education journals and found 11.2% had no mention of ethical issues including issues of integrity, and animal and human considerations–corresponding to our focus on research ethics–covered in 23% of journals [ ].

## 3.1.2. Summary of expression incidence particularly as related to emerging technologies
Of the papers discussing the incidence of expression of ethical concerns in published works, data could be extracted from n = 26, with two exclusions additional to those described above, due to different methodological focus. Across this 26, a total of 10,198 documents were reported as analysed (M = 407.92, SD = 613.41, Median 158). Across these papers, n = 5,212 (51.11% of the total) omitted discussion of ethics, a finding consistent across the papers (M = 208.48, 44.54%; SD 285.57; Median = 85, 49.04%). Corresponding to journal policies, many papers do not address key ethics requirements, across a range of disciplines and document types.
From these papers, concerningly in consideration of challenges arising from emerging technologies, one analysis of health technologies research indicates that papers: (1) typically (53% or 120/227) did not refer to ethical principles, and (2) focused on immediate participant impacts and the intent of interventions, rather than longer term evaluation of effects when technologies are implemented [ ]. Similarly concerning for any research involving unequal power relationships or diminished capacity to provide consent, in research with Alzheimer’s patients–who may have impaired decision-making capacity–almost half of articles reviewed (n = 125 articles across 62 journals) did not mention participant involvement in consent processes [ ]. In a further paper of relevance to emerging ethical issues, a recent analysis of 132 articles that used publicly available data for discourse-analysis, roughly a third did not discuss ethics [ ]. Similarly, Badampudi et al., [ ] reviewed software engineering journals to investigate how researchers report the ethical issues around consent, confidentiality, and anonymity, finding that roughly half discussed ethical issues, but very few (6/95) addressed all three issues. Indeed as noted above, in analysis of 324 articles analysing social media data, only 8% (n = 25) reported having sought ethics review, and 20% (n = 65) provided a justification for not having done so, with journals not only providing little policy direction in this regard but instead pointing to external resources that would provide no suitable guidance to address this issue of research ethics [ ].

## 3.2. Targeted content analysis
Across the items reviewed, the most frequent focus was on the instantiation of external policy such as the Declaration of Helsinki or ICMJE guidance into instructions to authors, or/and published works in the venues (see ). Other policies mentioned were tangential to research ethics, including reporting guidelines relating to methodological quality, and integrity issues such as conflict of interest. Some works appear to highlight gaps in existing guidelines, but it is not clear if these have been addressed, nor how they might be consolidated to support learning across disciplines. To further assess the range of policies, non-empirical, and grey literature sources (including venue policies) were assessed for their alignment with the foci identified in .
The data in this section were derived from the scoping review searches, in addition to purposive sampling both of disciplines in which innovations targeting emerging technologies were known to have occurred, and across a set of journals/publishers (n = 11 sources) within our specific discipline.

## 3.2.1. Policy review: Recent innovations
Policies vary with respect to their intent to be identified or expressed explicitly in other works. For example, the NeurIPS policies make clear that part of the intent of introducing a prescriptive review checklist, is to foster reflection and support dialogue in the wider research community regarding the impacts of research. In this way, it explicitly intends to become part of the discourse regarding those impacts. Early work has analysed the impact of the NeurIPS changes [ ]. Through an analysis of the impact statements the authors highlight that the reviewer statements on the ethics requirement (introduced simultaneously) flag a desire for authors to elaborate further on their REC process and mention explicitly both what guidelines were followed and how [ ]. A recent scoping review of publications on ethics in the ACM Digital Library–a large full-text index of computing publications–discussed a range of considerations including studies that provide helpful guidance in navigating emerging ethical concerns [ ].
In many cases, excellent discussion will exist regarding ethical practice that is internal to research communities, including reflected through published articles. However, this discourse may not be reflected in editorial policy pages, thus limiting its inclusion in this scoping work. Nevertheless, the focus of most policy examples is “prescriptive and reflexive interventions”, largely via instructions to authors and correspondingly to reviewers. Typically, this focuses on a narrow set of criteria as set out in IJCME or/and COPE, with other examples provided in supplementary material ( , and published data).

## 3.2.2. Policy review: Target venues
From each venue, references to ‘ethics’ were investigated in all guidance provided, including searches, and following links in menus or embedded in guidance to identify discussion of research ethics. These were grouped with respect to the common policy instruments identified, and the ethics issues addressed (often briefly). Most guidance was provided via general instructions to authors, or through resources linked from policy pages, with–from the materials available to us–relatively little coverage in submission templates or processes, or reviewer materials (see ). Moreover, the focus of discussion was often out of scope, providing guidance on issues of integrity but not research ethics more broadly, or/and on only parts of consent, ethics oversight, and consideration of identifiable data, or the wider set of ethical concerns relevant to research. COPE guidance was mentioned in many venues, but as noted above, COPE does not provide specific guidance on research ethics.
 

## 3.3. Editorial reference group
The group worked with the materials identified via the scoping review and targeted content analysis (which included the policies from the journals represented, ), and an analysis of the published works from those journals for the year 2021, for terms relating to ‘ethics’ used to create summary statistics and a Key Words in Context (KWIC) output. From this, of the 210 outputs (excluding 12 editorials), 186 (83.75%) include any references to ethics (which might include ethics review board, etc.). Uses of these terms were provided to the editors to support discussion regarding how research ethics is reflected in their journals. Editors were also invited to consider suitability of current policy, and examples of research or/and research dissemination where they had seen good practice, or issues that policy development might address.
The reference group was invited to:
Discuss the distinctive characteristics of research involving AI particularly in the disciplinary context of education research, as a way of framing our initial discussions in light of a perceived growing impetus;
Identify the set of stakeholders to whom editorial policy might apply and the policy instruments that might be used to foster expression of research ethics;
Develop draft materials to this end.
These discussions indicated that much of the concern in the space of editorial policy regarding research ethics for AI could have broader implications, both in considering other emerging technologies, and in considering wider concerns regarding research ethics and its communication. There are distinctive features of AI research such as black-box models and their implications for autonomy and consent. However, policies that would foster expression of ethical approaches to such issues and their sharing for wider community learning would generally apply to a wider variety of research. This lens thus provided the framing for four key outputs developed, with material from the scoping review addressing 1–3 below collated into the draft of each document, and informing its development:
‘Joint Statement’ ( ): This document set out key terms of reference, or a manifesto, for framing the role of editorial policy in research ethics. The overarching position of this statement can be summarised by two key claims: that editorial policy regarding research ethics should: (1) Foster ethical practice and expression within our research communities; (2) Support learning about ethical practice and concepts across the communities that engage with us as researchers;
Guidance for Authors ( ): This document is grounded in a review of ItAs, and draws on these and the joint statement to frame author guidance with respect to learning for ethics;
Guidance for Reviewers ( ): This document reviewed all checklists and other available reviewer guidance regarding research ethics, to consolidate, and identify themes in these, with a framing statement noting the role of reviewers in fostering learning regarding research ethics.
Guidance for Editors ( ): This document draws on the entire research project, providing a summary for editors regarding their role in research ethics, and approaches they might take in evaluating their practice and developing new policy.
To ensure that the perspectives of both the reference group and their wider editorial teams were properly represented in the materials, the cohort were invited to co-author a joint piece (this paper) regarding the shared imperative and outputs. In doing so we aim to share these materials, to inform further dialogue regarding research ethics and its expression in scholarly publications.

## 4. Discussion
Emerging technologies and changing societal context give rise both to novel ethical concerns, and increased need for cross-disciplinary and -stakeholder communication regarding the navigation of ethics in research. Given the role that journal and conference papers play in communication to scholarly and stakeholder communities, looking to them for insight regarding navigation of these ethical issues seems reasonable. However, as analysis arising from our scoping review shows, there are significant gaps in policy across a wide range of journals (57.80% have no statement regarding reporting of research ethics), and adherence (48.95% of papers reviewed did not refer to ethics considerations). If not in these outputs, where should researchers and stakeholders learn about the ethical considerations of research?
Our analysis of policies, both arising from the scoping review and from the specific discipline of learning technologies, indicates a range of approaches adopted, however with significant variation in coverage of ethical concerns, and gaps, and a prescriptive policy focus largely on ethical oversight. We provide an overview of the state-of-the-discipline, highlighting key policies to support their uptake. We would also re-iterate a point made earlier in this paper, that many venues refer to COPE guidance, despite COPE providing limited specific guidance on research ethics.
Using this review, our reference group meetings noted that (1) many of the issues raised in light of AI are not specific to AI, and (2) many issues are longstanding. There are some specific expressions of ethical concern in research involving AI, including concerns regarding: consideration of long-range impacts; adequacy of oversight for research and its outputs in exploratory and developmental research stages (e.g., creating an algorithm) vs, in implementation and deployment stages (e.g., the algorithm being taken up in a product); and the secondary uses of data for unanticipated purposes. However, these concerns are not always expressed in frameworks, and highlighting their novel nature may help stakeholders in understanding how different research contexts give rise to particular ethical concern. To address gaps in existing policy, we highlighted the potential for a policy shift to emphasise the potential for scholarly outputs to support learning regarding the ethical issues encountered and their navigation.

## 4.1. Limitations
Our approach drew on a scoping review of research regarding research ethics and materials specifically targeting this issue drawn from journal and conference materials. The intent of this scoping review was to gain a view of the policies being used and adhered to, and how these might be drawn on in our reference group. This approach is limited insofar as the scoping review searches are not exhaustive (nor are they intended to be), the materials review was led by the first author, and the policy development is from a subset of editors, in a particular field. Most significantly, the leap from policy creation to implementation in venues, and assessment of the impact of such policies, is a challenge for future work.

## 4.2. Conclusion
This paper sought to learn from the existing policy landscape, to practically develop materials that might be adapted/adopted across disciplines. While our initial impetus was use of AI in education, our analysis indicated broader potential for addressing longstanding concerns, and thus the materials developed provide indications for where they may be modified for different disciplines and contexts, and have broad application in seeking to foster learning and constructive dialogue regarding the ethical implications of research and its conduct.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Modified PRISMA flow diagram of scoping review search and process.
(DOCX)
S1 File

## Joint statement on editorial policy to foster learning regarding research ethics.
(DOCX)
S2 File

## Guidance for authors on their role in fostering learning regarding research ethics.
(DOCX)
S3 File

## Guidance for reviewers on their role in fostering learning regarding research ethics.
(DOCX)
S4 File

## Guidance for editors on their role in fostering learning regarding research ethics.
(DOCX)
S5 File

## Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR).
(DOCX)
S6 File

## PRISMA-flow with detailed search information.
Modified PRISMA Flow Diagram of Scoping Review Search and Process.
(DOCX)
S7 File

## PRISMA-flow of journal invites.
Modified PRISMA Flow Diagram of Identification of Relevant Journals for Reference Group Invitation.
(DOCX)
S8 File

## ‘Policy menu’ examples.
(DOCX)

The research reported was instigated as a collaboration between the Journal of Learning Analytics (JLA), Australasian Journal of Educational Technology (AJET), and the British Journal of Educational Technology (BJET), by the lead author, who was a previous co-editor-in-chief of the JLA. The authors acknowledge BJET co-editor-in-chief Cathy Lewin, who joined the journal later in this process, and thus did not participate in authoring this piece.
The views expressed are those of the authors, and may not represent the views of the journals, scholarly societies, or other organisations to which they are affiliated.
The work was begun over the course of the lead author’s sabbatical, which included periods co-located at UCL and KTH / the Swedish Digital Futures research centre, supporting direct interaction with editors based at those institutions.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0309715.r001Decision Letter 0
ChiPrimus CheAcademic Editor© 2024 Primus Che Chi2024Primus Che Chihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
10 Jun 2024

PONE-D-24-01120How do we learn about research ethics from published research? Developing editorial policy for emerging technologies using a scoping review and reference panelPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Knight,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 25 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Primus Che Chi, Ph.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section: 
"The research reported was instigated as a collaboration between the Journal of Learning Analytics (JLA), Australasian Journal of Educational Technology (AJET), and the British Journal of Educational Technology (BJET), by the lead author, who was a previous co-editor-in-chief of the JLA. The authors acknowledge BJET co-editor-in-chief Cathy Lewin, who joined the journal later in this process, and thus did not participate in authoring this piece.
The views expressed are those of the authors, and may not represent the views of the journals, scholarly societies, or other organisations to which they are affiliated. 
The work was begun over the course of the lead author’s sabbatical, which included periods co-located at UCL and KTH / the Swedish Digital Futures research centre, supporting direct interaction with editors based at those institutions."
Please confirm that this does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, by including the following statement: ""This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests).  If there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared. 
Please include your updated Competing Interests statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. Please note that in order to use the direct billing option the corresponding author must be affiliated with the chosen institute. Please either amend your manuscript to change the affiliation or corresponding author, or email us at plosone@plos.org with a request to remove this option.
4. When completing the data availability statement of the submission form, you indicated that you will make your data available on acceptance. We strongly recommend all authors decide on a data sharing plan before acceptance, as the process can be lengthy and hold up publication timelines. Please note that, though access restrictions are acceptable now, your entire data will need to be made freely accessible if your manuscript is accepted for publication. This policy applies to all data except where public deposition would breach compliance with the protocol approved by your research ethics board. If you are unable to adhere to our open data policy, please kindly revise your statement to explain your reasoning and we will seek the editor's input on an exemption. Please be assured that, once you have provided your new statement, the assessment of your exemption will not hold up the peer review process.
5. Please upload a copy of Figure 2, to which you refer in your text on page 38. If the figure is no longer to be included as part of the submission please remove all reference to it within the text.
6. Please ensure that you refer to Figure 2 and 3 in your text as, if accepted, production will need this reference to link the reader to the figure.
7. We note you have included a table to which you do not refer in the text of your manuscript. Please ensure that you refer to Table 5 in your text; if accepted, production will need this reference to link the reader to the Table.
8. We notice that your supplementary [figures/tables] are included in the manuscript file. Please remove them and upload them with the file type 'Supporting Information'. Please ensure that each Supporting Information file has a legend listed in the manuscript after the references list.
9. We note that this manuscript is a systematic review or meta-analysis; our author guidelines therefore require that you use PRISMA guidance to help improve reporting quality of this type of study. Please upload copies of the completed PRISMA checklist as Supporting Information with a file name “PRISMA checklist”.

Additional Editor Comments:

Dear Authors,
We have received some detailed and excellent feedback from two reviewers. The reviewers have raised substantial issues with the manuscripts and how these issued can be addressed in the next revision of the manuscript. The most important of the issues raised are the role of AI technology within the manuscript and coherence/connectedness of the various sections of the write-up. I am confident that if these issues are carefully reviewed and addressed by the authors it would strengthen the paper and improve the chances of being recommended for publication.
Best wishes!
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: I Don't Know
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the opportunity to review “How do we learn about research ethics from published research? Developing editorial policy for emerging technologies using a scoping review and reference panel”. The paper seeks to develop a new editorial policy for research ethics across social science. The paper reports original research, not published elsewhere, though requires additional detail to sufficiently describe the research and resulting conclusions.
My comments focus on areas in which to provide more information to better align the stated goals of the paper with the actual achievements of the paper, and to sufficiently describe the research so as to understand what is done:
• The title does not align with the paper. I was expecting to see some published research heuristics, like work published by Abel Brodeur and others, but that wasn’t there and so I think the paper could be simply retitled to better address the actual content.
• The paper gets at an idea which is an important one: we are often missing clear guidelines with respect to ethical behavior in new technologies. AI has scrambled the academic world from top to bottom and we are all struggling to catch up. Understanding a new set of guidelines is essential. Unfortunately, the AI perspective of this feels completely missing or tacked on later to the paper. AI seems to be an addition, rather than the focus. I wonder if the framing could be revised so that AI is a single element, rather than pitched as the focus. Or could it be removed and added as a dynamic considered, just as a mentioned topic. Just reading as is, things feel unbalanced and undelivered, and so more detail is needed, or other reframing is required to better align the stated contribution with the actual research. This comment is the most significant in requiring revision before the paper could be published.
• Something that I inherently do not understand, with respect to editorial polices and research is: why can an executive decision not be made, and changes implemented? If a journal sets a new policy that X action or Y requirement must be implemented for acceptance, perhaps with a date in the future for implementation, why is this not an option? Some of this article feels fussy around the edge, without letting us understand, as readers, why editors cannot just define new, better, and perhaps more strict ethical criteria. I have long assumed it is inertia, so it would be useful to motivate why things are not simply changed.
• The conversation about de facto versus de jure use of IRB was very interesting. I appreciate the perspective that IRBs and similar review boards have been the focus of journals, although we all generally acknowledge that they are insufficient. I would have liked to see a bit more of a discussion of whether these requirements have achieved anything or if we should move away from them.
• I want to express some pushback on the recommendation for international IRB – or the perception that there should be a lack of it (on pages 3 and 4). It strikes me as close to soft bigotry. Many international organizations across the globe have excellent IRBs and many countries now have national offices. This recommendation feels very out of line with the current state of IRBs.
o The two references cited 17 and 18 are from 2002 and 2015. Things have significantly changed with respect to IRBs outside of “Western” contexts. The authors should either engage with this with respect to more recent publications; better contextualize that this comment is a perception of editors; and/or remove it.
• One of the strategy foci presented in what I believe to be Table 5 on page 29 is training. Is this a realistic recommendation. Several of the foci in Table 5 gave me similar pause, but this recommendation stood out. Given the extreme constraints facing journals and editors, is training an actually realistic recommendation?
• It would be useful to understand what defines social science. At present a lot of it seems to simply be “education”. Which is fine but is not encompassing of social science. If this is the case (e.g., that the focus is on education not necessarily social science), the entire paper should be reframed.
• Ultimately, I read this paper twice through my process of reading and reviewing. On my second reading, I came away with the impression that it was several disjointed sections adhered together. This, of course, is not necessarily relevant to PLOS ONE, which wants to publish unique and well-done work – which I do think this paper is. But, if this is to be a useful piece for anyone but the authors, significant revisions are needed to make it coherent, comprehensible, and actionable.
Reviewer #2: At the beginning the article foregrounds AI. I couldn't tell at that point if AI was to be taken as an example of an emerging technology that challenges research ethics in ways of concern in publication or if, more than a passing reference, AI was to the focus of the article and your methods. AI is not mentioned again until the end. It doesn't appear that concerns about AI in particular shaped the methodology, unless as a non-methodologist I have missed something. Therefore as a reader I would have found it helpful to have more clarity about AI as one among other emerging technologies, perhaps the most pressing on at the moment, that your approach would hope could be addressed by all the parties responsible for ethical research practices in published work. This appears to be merely a framing problem that should be easily resolved.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Jonathan D Moreno
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0309715.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
31 Jul 2024

Please see attached response to reviews
AttachmentSubmitted filename: round_1_review.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0309715.r003Decision Letter 1
ChiPrimus CheAcademic Editor© 2024 Primus Che Chi2024Primus Che Chihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
19 Aug 2024

Emerging Technologies and Research Ethics: Developing Editorial Policy Using a Scoping Review and Reference Panel
PONE-D-24-01120R1
Dear Dr. Knight,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Primus Che Chi, Ph.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Dear Authors,
Thank you for carefully addressing the comments raised from the initial submission. After another round of review the reviewers have recommended that the manuscript should be accepted for publication, a recommendation that I agree to. Congratulations to the entire team for the amazing work that has gone into developing the manuscript to this stage.
Best wishes,
Primus
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for your thorough and thoughtful response. I appreciate you taking the time to address my remarks and to revise your manuscript.
Reviewer #2: I am satisfied with the responses to my concerns. The reframing of the manuscript meets the reservations I had about the original submission.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Jonathan D Moreno
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0309715.r004Acceptance letter
ChiPrimus CheAcademic Editor© 2024 Primus Che Chi2024Primus Che Chihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
29 Aug 2024

PONE-D-24-01120R1 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Knight, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Primus Che Chi 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE