pmcCBE Life Sci EducCBE Life Sci Educ421cbelifesci101269039lseCBE Life Sciences Education1931-7913American Society for Cell BiologyPMC12415595PMC12415595.112415595124155954072959910.1187/cbe.24-02-0074CBE.24-02-00741ArticleUnderstanding the Lived Experiences of the members of the Society for the Advancement of Biology Education Research through Collins' Matrix of Domination Framework
ChasenAriel ScheuermannNicole L. BalserTeri ChouvalovaAnastasia CoffmanClark ConnerAmanda CruzAdriel EdenAlexander ErdmannRobert M. Foster-HartnettDawn GerstnerBenjamin IshikawaCathy LiepkalnsJustine MetzgerKelsey J. SeguraMiriam Smith-KeilingBeverly L. WilliamsErika L. WrightAshli M. CaporaleNatalia aDepartment of STEM Education, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78705bDepartment of Biological Sciences, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL 60115cDepartment of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 1G3dDepartment of Biological Sciences, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409eDepartment of Genetics, Development and Cell Biology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011fDepartment of Biology, Georgia Southern University, Savannah, GA 31419gDepartment of Biological Sciences, Sierra College, Rocklin, CA 95677hDepartment of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199iCenter for Learning Innovation, University of Minnesota Rochester, Rochester, MN 55904jVeterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108kDepartment of Biology, Penn State Behrend, Erie, PA 16563lDepartment of Biological Sciences, California State University, Sacramento, CA 95819mDepartment of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, Colorado State University, CO 80521nDepartment of Biology, University of North Georgia, Dahlonega, GA 30597oDepartment of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of Minnesota Medical School and College of Biological Sciences, Minneapolis, MN 55455pDepartment of Applied Science and Technology, North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro, NC 27411qCenter for Life Sciences Education, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210rDepartment of Neurobiology, Physiology and Behavior, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616Warfa,AbdiRizakMonitoring EditorConflict of interests: The authors declare no financial conflict of interest.
*Address correspondence to: Ariel Chasen (achasen@utexas.edu); Natalia Caporale (ncaporale@ucdavis.edu).Fall0192025243496457ar32
1522024
0752025
1552025
010920250909202509092025© 2025 Chasen et al. CBE—Life Sciences Education © 2025 The American Society for Cell Biology. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). It is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported Creative Commons License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).2025“ASCB®” and “The American Society for Cell Biology®” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology.Professional science societies stand at the intersection of science, education, and research, providing crucial professional development and career opportunities for scientists. Their structures and policies can either promote more equitable ideologies, practices and outcomes or deepen existing disparities within science. In recent years, many societies have implemented diversity statements and initiatives, but few studies have examined their actual impact on membership composition and the experiences of their minoritized members. Critical education scholars emphasize the importance of examining these experiences through frameworks that center their voices, acknowledge institutional racism, and address the power imbalances that exclude marginalized groups. This study uses the matrix of domination framework (Collins, 1990) and its four domains of power (structural, disciplinary, interpersonal, and cultural/hegemonic) to investigate the perceptions and experiences of inclusion/exclusion of the members of the Society for the Advancement of Biology Education Research (SABER). We identified factors that contribute to and detract from the society's equity goals by analyzing members' experiences at different systemic levels. By framing members' experiences through the lens of dimensions of power, we reveal relationships and structures that may have otherwise remained invisible, offering new insights into strategies that can better aid professional societies toward their equity goals.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes

## INTRODUCTION
Professional organizations host academic conferences to promote the dissemination of knowledge, to provide professional development opportunities, and to bring together practitioners and researchers. However, these conferences are often exclusionary to scholars of color, those with disabilities, those with young children, and other diverse identities or experiences ( ). To address this, many professional organizations have launched initiatives and committees that focus on promoting diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI). For these efforts to be effective and sustainable, organizations need to regularly evaluate membership data and also collect feedback pertaining to the success of their DEI initiatives and the overall organization's inclusive climate ( ). This self-evaluation must be conducted using frameworks and methods that center the voices of those often excluded, that ensure the safety of those speaking up to power, that recognize the intertwined history of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and racism in the United States, and that acknowledge the racism, sexism, classism, ableism, and other forms of discrimination that are prevalent in STEM culture and disciplines ( ).
In this article, we use a theoretical framework termed the matrix of domination developed by sociologist Patricia Hill Collins ( ) that examines power relations in society through four domains of power (structural, disciplinary, interpersonal, and cultural/hegemonic). We use these domains to organize and explore the perceptions and experiences of members of the Society for the Advancement of Biology Education Research (SABER), a STEM education professional society, and of individuals who attend SABER conferences but are not members of SABER. Specifically, we examine survey and roundtable feedback about SABER's DEI efforts collected from SABER members via a survey and from attendees of the 2023 SABER conference about their experiences at this conference. SABER has multiple regional conferences throughout the year, including SABER West, East, and Midwest, but the largest conference is the Annual Meeting in Minneapolis in July, which is where we collected the data for our study. We discuss our findings, and highlight the value of implementing data collection and analysis methods that are informed by theoretical and methodological frameworks rooted in critical race theory (CRT) ( ), and intersectionality ( ) to guide efforts of professional STEM societies toward becoming more equitable and inclusive.

## BACKGROUND
Science professional organizations shape their disciplines by influencing research priorities, norms, and policies. They provide opportunities for networking, collaboration, and career advancement for professionals of all career stages. However, these organizations are also part of broader societal structures, and are thus influenced by the same power dynamics present in those structures.
Many STEM professional organizations were founded by privileged White elites within each discipline, and as such, they often reflect the lived experiences, values and priorities of their founders. As a result, the structures, practices, and policies of these STEM organizations are often better suited to serve the needs of professionals whose identities, goals, and life histories align with those of the organization's founders, resulting in the (unwitting) exclusion and marginalization of individuals with other identities ( ; ). This differential treatment perpetuates and amplifies the structural racism, ableism, classism, and colonial mindset that remains prevalent in STEM disciplines today ( ).
In recent years, there has been growing attention to how these organizations contribute to the social inequities present within the different STEM disciplines. As a result, many organizations have implemented DEI initiatives to address this issue ( ), yet these efforts often overlook the voices and experiences of underrepresented groups within their membership, including Persons Excluded because of Ethnicity or Race (PEER) ( ), disabled persons ( ), LGBTQ+ persons ( ), and 2-year institution ( ) or teaching-focused faculty ( ). As a result, these initiatives can fall short of the organizations' inclusion goals, leading to reduced retention of persons with marginalized identities and backgrounds. Importantly, contributions from diverse groups of people are linked to increased productivity, problem-solving, and scientific impact ( ; ; ), and thus are not only valuable, but necessary for STEM advancement. To achieve meaningful and lasting change toward a more equitable environment in science and society, professional organizations must undergo courageous transformative restructuring processes that center the voices of their marginalized members. Furthermore, these processes must engage all society members in rigorous, data-informed conversations that examine the historical racial and classist roots of the organization's principles and practices leading to the proposal and implementation of mutually-agreed changes.

## Barriers to Access and Inclusion in Professional Societies
Research documenting the barriers to access and inclusion present in STEM professional organizations and their events is limited and uneven across STEM disciplines ( ; ; ; ). Even data on the diversity of the membership of these societies are scant and what exists highlight the persistent disparities in membership ( ; ; ). Furthermore, a recent study highlighted the lack of consensus across professional STEM organizations on what demographic data to collect and the options to include in demographic surveys ( ). The sparsity of data on these topics stands in contrast with the large number of STEM societies that have issued DEI statements and the abundance of publications providing guidelines and recommendations for promoting diversity and inclusion (D&I) at STEM professional societies (see next section). The reasons for this limited research are unclear yet the scarcity of data on this topic is in itself a significant barrier to the goals of promoting inclusion and diversity in these societies.
When one considers the wide range of decisions that are involved in the organization and maintenance of professional societies as well as the organization of conferences and other professional development events, one can easily identify several key choices that have direct (e.g., costs) and indirect (e.g., through signaling of priorities) impacts on who engages with the organization. Examples of such decisions include: selection of abstracts for presentations, selection of keynote speakers, venue accessibility, online versus hybrid versus in person format, awards, who is promoted in marketing materials, membership cost, event attendance cost, presentation scheduling, conference date selection, event location, and more ( ; ). In most instances, the deliberation process that leads to each of these decisions is unclear to society members and only includes those with positions of power within the organization. Research is needed to better understand how the salience of identity and power shapes decision-making processes across different contexts such as those unique to professional societies.
To illustrate how leadership choices can impact members differently, we will use geographical location of a conference as an example. Membership of U.S. professional organizations includes individuals from diverse political, geographical, national, and cultural backgrounds. Therefore, where an organization chooses to hold its conferences and official events can have complex implications for attendance and requires intentional and critical reflection. The perceived safety of a location has been shown to influence the decision to attend conferences and meetings ( ). In addition, hosting events in areas that are known for discrimination against underrepresented groups (i.e., PEERS, women, LGBTQ+, disabled people) sends a message about whose identities and safety are valued within the organization ( ). Furthermore, recent U.S. legislation surrounding DEI may make it difficult for some scholars to receive institutional funding for conferences that uphold the tenets of DEI or that are held in states with differing laws (e.g., California's now repealed Assembly Bill 1887).
Some of the existing approaches to DEI can also unwillingly contribute to perpetuating the existing barriers to access and inclusion in professional societies at the organizational level. First, although many science organizations have issued DEI statements in response to growing public attention to social injustices, effective DEI policies must be proactive, not merely reactive, as reactive efforts are rarely effective (e.g., ; ; ; ; ). Yet implementation of these reactive measures can result in STEM professional societies feeling as though they have “done their part” and thus be less compelled to focus on developing proactive initiatives. Second, after issuing DEI-affirming statements, many societies have then focused their efforts on targeted recruitment to diversify their membership, but recruitment to diversify membership is only successful when coupled with efforts to create a supportive, safe environment for marginalized members, who are more likely to have negative experiences within professional societies ( ). Without first addressing the internal climate, recruitment efforts may backfire and risk perpetuating tokenism, where members feel that their membership is valued only as a performative indicator of the organization's commitment to DEI ( ; ). Such devaluing, negative outcomes can be prevented with intentional, evidence-based efforts to attend to the needs of all current and potential society members.

## Addressing Barriers to Access and Inclusion in STEM Professional Societies
In recent years, many STEM professional societies have engaged in efforts to increase the diversity of their membership and promote supportive, inclusive environments at their events and meetings. Many of them have published recommendations, providing a foundation for lasting, evidence-based DEI efforts (e.g., ; ; ; ; ; ). These publications vary in both their span (i.e., some are very field specific, others apply across STEM) as well as on the specific focus of their recommendations. STEM societies whose founding mission focused on promoting the success of marginalized populations and inclusion in STEM, such as SACNAS ( ; ) and iEMBER ( ; ) have also published recommendations and guidelines for making professional societies more inclusive. Although a comprehensive review is outside the scope of this paper, we summarize below the main commonalities we have observed in the recommendations listed in these publications.
Organizations should assess their leadership structures and member composition to ensure diverse representation without tokenization ( ; ; ; ).
Establishment of DEI committees, clear codes of conduct, and strategic plans are all essential for driving change ( ; )
DEI efforts need to be accompanied by intentional and sustained efforts to identify and address intersectional identity barriers ( ; ; ; ; ).

Despite the wealth of recommendations, most STEM professional societies have yet to engage in rigorous, critically informed assessment of the impact of the implementation of such recommendations on, for example, the diversity of their membership, their members' sense of belonging or frequency and degree of microaggressions experienced (but see ; ; ). Furthermore, research focusing on understanding the systemic structures that underlie the existing barriers to access and inclusion in STEM professional organizations as well as research examining the mechanisms by which specific DEI policies may be improving (or not) the inclusive climate of such organizations are also scant. It is high time for STEM professional societies to apply the same rigorous approaches that are central to their disciplines to their efforts to advance equity and inclusion in STEM.

## The Society for the Advancement of Biology Education Research
SABER was founded in 2010 to address the lack of professional networks focused on biology education research (BER) within the broader Discipline-Based Education Research (DBER) community ( ). With support from an NSF grant (NSF, #095572), SABER held its first meeting in 2010 followed by its first annual conference in 2011 at the University of Minnesota (Minneapolis, MN), a tradition that has continued to date. Currently, SABER boasts over 650 members and three regional conferences (SABER West, SABER Midwest, and SABER East) in addition to its main annual meeting, which was attended by over 500 scholars in 2024.
SABER's mission, culture, and vision have evolved over time. Although initially focused on creating a supportive space for the growing BER community, SABER now emphasizes DEI in all aspects of its work. Its mission statement highlights the importance of fostering a diverse, equitable, and inclusive BER community that welcomes “all individuals, including but not limited to age, gender, race/ethnicity, national origin, LGBTQ+ identity, religious identity, political affiliation, socioeconomic status, or disability status” ( ), and promoting diversity in its membership, leadership, and research. Today, SABER has several standing committees focused on DEI. These include the D&I, PEER, DBER Scholars in Training (DBER-SiT), Mentoring, and Data Analysis and Stewardship committees.
In 2019, SABER undertook a self-study of its DEI practices and climate and enacted several new policies and practices to address the issues they identified, particularly with regard to antiracist efforts ( ). As part of this work, SABER chronicled the recommendations, progress made, and future plans to be accomplished. However, in the years since, members continued to report persistent issues with experiences of cliquishness and deficit framing, both of which were identified in the self-study. Thus, continuing their commitment to data-driven DEI efforts, members of SABER's D&I committee conducted a new climate survey in 2023 that specifically asked about the effectiveness of the implemented changes and about areas for improvement. The data collected through this new survey and related efforts were used for this study.

## Critical Analysis and Theoretical Frameworks
Frameworks such as CRT , critical disability studies ( ; ), and intersectionality ( ) provide scholars with the necessary language, scaffolding, and structure to critically and rigorously examine issues of racism, classism, ableism, sexism, and other forms of discriminations across institutions and society as a whole. Theoretical frameworks are critical to educational scholarship, as they provide lenses to better visualize, understand, and explain the individual and collective experiences being studied. Yet, although education research has a long history of implementing critical theories to better understand the experiences of students in K-12 and higher education, scholars in BER have only recently begun to utilize these frameworks. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, these frameworks have not yet been used to study DEI challenges and efforts in the context of STEM professional societies and conferences.
The current study utilizes the Matrix of Domination framework, which originated from Black Feminist Thought ( ) and also incorporates principles from intersectionality ( ). This framework allows the investigation of whether and how intersecting axes of power (such as gender, class, and race) operate as forces that oppress or empower marginalized people in particular times and spaces. As described previously by , p.18) “Intersectional paradigms remind us that oppression cannot be reduced to one fundamental type, and that oppressions work together in producing injustice. In contrast, the matrix of domination refers to how these intersecting oppressions are actually organized” (structural, disciplinary, hegemonic, and interpersonal). Although our study is informed by Collins' Matrix of Domination framework, we are not focusing the study solely on the experiences of Black women. Scholars have used this framework to study structures of power in a variety of settings and across a large number of identities ( ). noted that “Black feminist thought views Black women's struggles as a part of a wider struggle for human dignity and social justice” (p. 276). This framework further pushes us to consider systemic, as opposed to individual, relationships with power in scientific professional societies.
We use ) Matrix of Domination as a heuristic tool, which we henceforth call the domains-of-power-framework ( ), to analyze the multiple intersecting axes of power and their manifestations within a STEM professional organization. This framework describes the organization of power across four domains: structural, disciplinary, interpersonal, and cultural ( ). The structural domain describes elements that organize and consolidate power. These elements organize large-scale, systemic oppression by creating policies and structures that lead to social systems that impart different outcomes and opportunities to individuals, depending on their social status. The disciplinary domain describes systems that manage oppression in attempts to sustain it. This form of power often manifests through the actions of institutional authorities that discipline people to “stay” in their place of the perceived social hierarchy. Disciplinary in this framework does not refer to academic discipline but rather to methods of behavioral obedience. The power in the interpersonal domain of power refers to how our individual behavior serves to control and maintain oppression via interactions with others. It also addresses individual consciousness and how we uphold the subordination of others, including how interactions perpetuate oppressive power struggles. Finally, the hegemonic/cultural domain refers to the system of ideas developed by the dominant group to justify their oppressive practices. An example of this would be the use of negative stereotypes about a specific social/racial group to justify their current societal status or how society treats them. The hegemonic/cultural domain is unique in that it represents ideas and ideologies that are often derived from and inform the other three domains. These serve to legitimize oppression through systems of ideas developed by a dominant group that justify their practices through individual consciousness ( ). Therefore, this fourth domain contains dimensions of the other three. This heuristic tool, the domains of power framework, is useful to visualize the purposes and effects of power that often elude detection and can be used for analytical sensemaking of situations that consist of multiple and overlapping forms of power and privilege.
 

## Aim of this Study
To achieve significant, sustained progress toward effective inclusiveness, professional societies must openly address the existing issues of racism, oppression, and discrimination within their structures by using theoretical frameworks and constructs that have been developed with that specific goal. The aim of this paper is to examine the current landscape of equity, inclusion, and diversity at a STEM education professional society, the SABER from the perspective of its members and to investigate how SABER members navigate various domains of power while engaging with the society and field. The ways in which we analyze these data are not meant to be a comprehensive analysis of organizational practice, but rather a means to illustrate how power and oppressions reveal themselves across and between domains of power so as to provide insight into how to best address them in the future. Although we present the findings in the context of SABER, this study also exemplifies how a critically informed approach (which is currently underutilized in STEM fields) could be used to examine the lived experiences members of any professional society

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Positionality Statement
All authors are members of the SABER's D&I Committee or SABER's Executive Committee. As such, we are dedicated to advancing equity and identifying obstacles that may impede it within the organization and more broadly in the fields of BER and DBER. Our collective perspective is shaped by our various lived experiences, including disability, neurodivergence, first-generation status, Black, Hispanic, White, LGBTQ+, international, and religious identities. We represent a multifaceted understanding of educational disparities with personal and professional experiences spanning from 2-year institutions to research institutions composed of Predominantly White Institutions, Hispanic Serving Institutions, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Minority Serving Institutions (MSI), and K-12 learning environments, and with members at various levels of academia, from graduate students to full professors. We are biologists, educators, education researchers, advocates, and administrators. As a collective of SABER members with various roles across the organization, we leverage our different backgrounds, lived experiences, and disciplinary areas to engage in constant reflection and self-evaluation to become aware of our own biases and to work together toward creating a professional society culture that is supportive to all and considers data-driven approaches to achieve this goal.

## Data Collection

## Participants.
Data for this study come from three different sources as follows: 1) deidentified demographic data about SABER's 2023 conference attendees collected by SABER leadership; 2) responses to a questionnaire sent out to SABER members, SABER listserv members, and SABER annual conference participants in 2023. Respondents answered questions pertaining to SABER's success and remaining challenges in promoting DEI. The questionnaire consisted of open-ended questions as well as Likert-scale items and multiple select items and it also included demographic questions. demographic questions; 3) data collected during a roundtable session that was held during the SABER 2023 Annual Conference, which focused on SABER's efforts and outcomes in the context of DEI. This study was reviewed and approved by the University of Minnesota's Institutional Review Board (IRB protocols #00019559, #00020845).
SABER attendees' aggregate demographic data were requested from SABER leadership and provided for analysis in a deidentified manner. The demographics of the conference attendees and questionnaire respondents are presented in .
 

## Questionnaire Development.
To collect data about SABER members' experiences in the conferences and society, we developed a questionnaire intended to examine members' experiences by asking them about their sense of belonging, inclusion, any instances of experiences with microaggressions, experiences with gender, racial or religious discrimination at events and meetings and whether they perceived ableism or heteronormative biases within SABER. The questionnaire was developed through a multistep process that included self-reflection by the D&I Committee about the history of SABER and its DEI efforts, a review of the literature on DEI challenges at conferences and professional societies, and discussions among the D&I Committee members who come from diverse backgrounds and life experiences. The pilot questionnaire consisted of open-ended questions and was sent to a convenience sample consisting of the SABER PEER Committee and D&I Committee.
Based on responses and feedback (n = 27), we developed Likert-scale questions and multiple-choice options, modified the wording of some questions, and finalized the questionnaire. For example: the pilot questionnaire asked participants, “In what ways, if any, has SABER NOT fully practiced diversity, equity, and inclusion from your perspective?” which was then modified to “To what extent have these practices been a barrier to your desire to be part of SABER?” This question was followed by an open-ended question that gave participants the option of adding other barriers. The final instrument included a combination of 32 Likert-scale and multiple select, or open-ended questions. In addition, it included demographic questions comparable with those in the SABER registration form so that we could compare how the sample of final participants reflected the larger group of scholars that attended the SABER conference.

## Questionnaire Deployment and Data Cleaning.
A link to the questionnaire was emailed to the membership of SABER on July 6, 2023, which gave members three weeks to complete the questionnaire. Responses were gathered using Qualtrics. The link to the questionnaire was also supplied to roundtable attendees (see below) via a QR code. A total of 124 people completed the questionnaire, representing 22.5% of SABER membership as of 2023. Data cleaning removed incomplete questionnaire responses, ultimately yielding a final number of 80 participants (14.5% of SABER membership). Participant demographics are shown in .

## Roundtable Organization and Structure.
At the 2023 annual meeting, the D&I Committee hosted a roundtable discussion, “Toward a SABER culture of inclusion and belonging” designed to solicit feedback and ideas about DEI recruitment and outreach activities, and to provide more elaborate follow-up to the climate questionnaire responses, with a total 82 participants in attendance. Participants were shown an initial tentative analysis of the questionnaire responses that we had received to that point (∼50% of final responses) to motivate discussion and were then invited to consider four questions in groups and then write their responses on large sticky notes taped to the conference room walls or provide their comments to committee members who were taking notes. The four questions of the roundtable that are included in this study and an example note are shown in .
 

## Data Analysis
We separately analyzed Likert-scale questions and open-ended questions. Answers to Likert questions were analyzed first and used to guide initial open coding and discussions between authors about codes. For this analysis, we analyze each response to an open-ended question as a separate “response” fragment. One reason for using responses and not respondents in the results is that coded fragments were collected from the open-ended survey questions and roundtable. We do not know how many roundtable attendees also took the survey and would have no way of matching identities, so “respondent” is an unclear concept unless we restrict our analysis to one data form or the other. We also feel that focusing on numbers of people could be counterproductive, as our natural tendency as scientists is to give less weight to less common occurrences. This could lead to the sort of marginalization of views we hope to avoid.

## Questionnaire Open-Ended Answers and Roundtable Answers.
Open-response questionnaire and recorded roundtable data were analyzed thematically ( ) using a combination of inductive and deductive coding. First, two authors (A.Cha. and N.C.) read through and separately developed analytical memos to identify recurring ideas ( ). Then, the two authors collaboratively discussed emerging themes from the memos across the domains of power from the matrix of domination ( ), our theoretical framework. Through this conversation, the authors decided to use the four aspects of the matrix (structural domain of power, disciplinary domain of power, interpersonal domain of power, and cultural domain of power) as initial deductive codes ( ).
To test the validity of these deductive codes, A.Cha. and N.C. chose 35 quotes from the 530 open responses that they felt represented at least one of these domains of power. Six other authors (T.B., A.E., D.F.-H., C.I., J.L., A.Cr.) were asked to discuss the framework and their interpretations of each domain in the context of SABER and to then independently code these 35 datapoints using content analysis to make “valid and replicable inferences from data to their context” ( ), looking for evidence that addressed each of these domains of power. Once initial coding had been completed, the six researchers discussed their ratings until a consensus was reached. When Krippendorff's alpha ( ) was calculated as an estimate of interrater reliability, results after reconciliation and dialogic consensus yielded a score of 0.735 with a 95% confidence interval. This is an acceptable level of agreement ( ). Subsequently, A.Cha coded the remaining 495 responses across the different domains of power.
Next, two authors (A.Cha and N.S) engaged in a new round of open coding of all 530 open responses (hereafter referred to as “response fragments”) to identify emergent themes across and between domains. This round yielded codes across domains, such as “research background” and “formal communication.” These initial codes were discussed by two of the researchers (A.Cha. and N.C.) who came to consensus through axial coding that encapsulated major themes across each ( ). presents the finalized inductive codebook.
 

## RESULTS
Here, we present our findings on the experiences and perspectives of the SABER community (both members and nonmembers) regarding SABER's practices in promoting diversity, creating inclusive environments, and making organizational activities accessible as interpreted through a lens informed by intersectionality and power dynamics. We organize our results through sections representing the eight emergent themes that arose across the data through inductive coding methods ( ). Within each theme, we describe how they relate to three of the domains of power described in our theoretical framework (structural, disciplinary, and interpersonal). We save implications in the Cultural domain for our discussion section as this domain represents the ideas, ideologies, and outcomes derived from the other three domains while simultaneously informing them. We provide the coded domains in parentheses after each quote to help distinguish which domains are being discussed throughout the results. Where relevant, we also share descriptive statistics of code frequencies and results of associated Likert-scale questions to complement and expand the qualitative data findings.
Among the 530 response fragments coded from the answers collected from the 80 participants, we found that 13.6% of all fragments were coded into the “Politics and Location” theme (n = 72), 10.4% as “Financial” (n = 55), 33.1% as “Professional Identity” (n = 175), 22.1% as “Academic Capital” (n = 117), 29.8% as “Accessibility and Communication” (n = 158), 7.5% as “Personal Identity” (n = 40), 16.6% as “Belonging” (n = 88), and 9.8% as “Perception of Change” (n = 52). In addition, 43.8% of fragments (n = 232) were coded into more than one theme. depicts the degree of overlap across all themes.
 When coding the fragments deductively into the three domains of power, we found that 113 (21.3%) of all fragments were categorized as structural, 300 (56.6%) as disciplinary and 182 (34.3%) as interpersonal. Some of these fragments (n = 145, 27.3%) were coded as pertaining to more than one domain. Of the 530 response fragments, only 70 (13.2%) did not fall into any of the three domains. When examining the relationship between themes and domains, we found that all themes had fragments that were coded as belonging solely to one domain, as well as belonging simultaneously to two or three domains. The degree of the representation of each theme across domains can be seen in .
 

## Theme 1: Politics and Location
Responses from our participants frequently (n = 72 response fragments, 13.6%) touched on themes of politics and location, including national laws and policies, geographic constraints, and the politics of academia itself.
SABER leadership is responsible for choosing the location of the conference each year. This process often includes considerations such as state legislation and attitudes toward people of color (POC) or reproductive health, yet the discussions are private, resulting in a lack of transparency and bias that has led to feelings of alienation among some members. One member expressed frustration, saying:

I value interacting with others who think differently but do not like the assumption or the automatic framing that to think differently is wrong. I think we should be able to coexist as educators while disagreeing on some things. It was problematic that the organization assumed a position for me [in their stance about conference location] that I do not have. (Structural, Disciplinary).

Some members felt that SABER needed to consider local politics more seriously when designing events and should “provide more support for faculty and students in states hostile to DEI efforts” (Structural, Disciplinary) or consider holding conferences in different areas and “maintaining robust online options” (Disciplinary) to increase participation based on these political considerations.
Politics also impacted members on an interpersonal level. Cultural and political perspectives are not uniform across the organization, and members can sometimes feel isolated based on their views if they hold views contrary to the dominant narrative. One respondent shared:

I'm a religious, politically conservative, non-U.S. citizen. When discussing American culture in relation to education research, I often don't feel heard, or I'm surrounded by individuals who think I'm crazy. After a short-talk, someone commented that one cannot be a good scientist and a religious person, which I find totally compatible. (Structural, Disciplinary)

In addition to cultural and political perspectives, SABER members and conference attendees also expressed a strong awareness of geopolitical issues, emphasizing the importance of integrating “land-based pedagogy in practice” (Structural) and advancing from land acknowledgment to cultural acknowledgment within the context of structural and disciplinary decisions. Discussions about political power and location frequently intersected with considerations of financial (23.6% of fragments coded as “politics and location”), professional identity (33.3%), and access and communication (34.7%) factors ( ). A notable example is the discourse on academia's politics and hierarchies and how SABER might exacerbate or maintain these existing privileges. Members highlighted various academic privileges some members of SABER might hold, such as institutional funding, lower teaching obligations, and geographic proximity to other BER researchers.

## Theme 2: Financial
Financial considerations were coded across several power domains and included topics pertaining to inclusion, ability to engage in DBER, and conference accessibility. We also see financial concerns (theme 2) strongly associated with professional identity (theme 3), with 45.5% of response fragments coded as financial also being coded as professional identity related ( ), including concerns about tenure status, institution type, and ability to travel.
Survey participants who indicated that they were not members of SABER (n = 14 participants) identified financial constraints as the main barrier to membership (n = 7 participants), with the next most frequently selected barrier being “too many other professional commitments” (n = 3 participants). Furthermore, survey respondents indicated that increasing funding from various sources (n = 15 participants), such as SABER travel grants and institutional funds, would encourage them to submit abstracts and engage in membership (n = 10 participants), further highlighting how finances were acting as barriers to their engagement with SABER.
Findings from qualitative analysis underscored the importance of financial constraints in guiding membership and access for participants. One respondent said that the “cost of SABER is so prohibitive now to attend in person that it's nearly impossible for a faculty member who does not have a grant to attend”(Structural, Disciplinary). Another said, “For many reasons, including disability and financial burden, travel for conferences is often not possible for me” (Structural). Financial barriers across academia and different geographies delineate who can and cannot access experiences such as conferences that are important for their own learning, professional development, and career growth, as well as for developing a sense of belonging to their field.
Respondents broadly discussed financial barriers in a structural and disciplinary context, often citing overhead costs, lack of institutional funding, or institutional politics as a means of financial constraint. The structure of academia tends to financially favor individuals at a more advanced career stage or with higher institutional standing, whereas the rest of the scholars, who could arguably benefit more from community or professional organizations, often face barriers that hinder their participation, perpetuating inequalities within the academic sphere. For example, one respondent discussed being staff at one institution and a student at another that put them in a situation where they “did not have travel funds through either institution” (Structural). However, on a disciplinary level, SABER can address these inequities through targeted grants and registration rates. Participants addressed financial barriers as well as how SABER has or can address them in ways that spanned each domain. As expressed by one respondent:

The online conference was a VERY accessible way to participate in SABER (Disciplinary). It allows so much flexibility in scheduling and accommodates individuals with funding issues, folks who cannot easily travel, and more (Structural). I have heard some individuals say that they do not “prefer” online conferences because they do not feel connected to participants (Interpersonal), but this comes from a place of privilege and being able to easily pay for the conference, food, and lodging, being able to easily fit in among the majority participants (Interpersonal), being able to easily take time off and travel and similar (Structural).

This quote is particularly helpful in understanding how all domains of power can operate within a single experience. In this example, the barriers surrounding travel for this participant are structural in nature, connection to other participants and how those perceptions shape belonging are interpersonal and finally the modality decisions that SABER makes about conferences are disciplinary.

## Theme 3: Professional Identity
Professional identity emerged as a theme in 33% (n = 175) of response fragments. This included concepts such as research background, career stage, content and methodology expertise, and institutional characteristics ( ).

## Institutional Biases.
Some of the ways in which professional societies maintain power in their organization are through decisions about which institutions to collaborate with and through targeted recruitment for participation and membership. We consider these decisions within the disciplinary domain as they regulate and maintain the norms under which the organization exists. Survey respondents (n = 14 participants) agreed that lack of collaboration with MSIs or 2-year institutions was a significant or large barrier to their desire to be a part of SABER. The decision to neither engage nor actively collaborate with these institutions could be interpreted as undervalued, regardless of whether this is SABER leadership's intention or not. This extends to planning the annual conference for which participants advocate that “certain spots for talks, roundtables, etc. [should be] prioritized for research from underrepresented institutions”(Disciplinary) and that there should be “funds to help these presenters attend”(Disciplinary). Within our data, these ideas about professional identity often (27.4% of response fragments) coincided with sentiment about belonging (theme 7), showing that SABER attendees desire affinity in their professional experience with those from similar institutions, such as MSIs and community colleges, particularly those that are not privileged in academic spaces.

## Research Background and Training.
Another aspect of professional identity that respondents discussed was their training and research background and how they related to their experiences at SABER. As one participant noted that, “This is a challenging field to enter without formal training” (Structural). As such, many people expressed feelings of exclusion related to their training background or the support available at their institution to pursue BER. One member underlines the role of interpersonal relationships and connections in building this expertise:

Although I have an undergraduate degree in biology and was interested in biology education work, it wasn't until I started my graduate education that I learned about SABER. For folks at schools that may not have anyone doing DBER, the only way to find out about SABER is to have the right connections. (Structural, Interpersonal)

SABER has and can continue to facilitate these connections on a disciplinary level through “good advertising” in special interest groups and committees for emerging BER researchers or those from underrepresented institution types, and mentorship programs. Responses emphasized that they desired SABER members in general to be “More inclusive to those who don't do DBER research and jargon”(Interpersonal).

## Disciplinary Norms.
In addition, SABER, as with many professional organizations, may make decisions that uphold normative structures of what constitutes knowledge and which types of knowledge (methodologies, traditions, backgrounds, etc.) are respected and valued. At a conference, decisions about which abstracts are accepted and which speakers are promoted signal the organization's priorities and biases. It is thus easy for dominant ideologies to be held up as standard, unless specific efforts are made to be intentional in abstract selection and conference organization to prevent this from happening. Furthermore, it is important that organizations make these efforts known and explicit to their members, as this would increase their affinity and sense of belonging to the organization and their eagerness to submit abstracts. A few participants indicated feeling that the SABER conference programs and abstracts were exclusionary to their interests. One stated that “You often see a preference for specific backgrounds/programs at the conference and in the organization,” (Disciplinary) while another said:

I would need to feel like the research I do is valued and wanted by the SABER community. Most of the time, I feel the work I do isn't “mainstream SABER” and the abstract reviews tell me that (i.e., they don't think SABER attendees would be interested in this work). (Disciplinary)

The last sentence of this quote refers to one of the abstract review criteria used by SABER, which is whether the reviewer thinks the abstract topic would be of interest to the SABER attendees. In submitting conference abstracts for review, members sometimes feel that “there is a stigma against those not from specific types of programs for BER training”(Disciplinary, Interpersonal) and that other backgrounds such as training in K-12 education research (even if currently working in higher education) are not seen as valuable.
Overall, our findings indicate that the current methods for reviewing conference abstracts and choosing talks do not feel inclusive to some of SABER's members. Moreover, study participants feel that current abstract review policies may be upholding dominant or oppressive ideologies rather than challenging them. Across our data, participants proposed some recommendations for promoting a diversity of thought and methodologies at SABER. Among the proposed ideas were teaching demonstrations at SABER meetings to show research in practice for those new to DBER, differentiating the annual and regional conferences based on membership needs (researcher- vs. practitioner-focused, respectively), and connecting to science education and science communication communities more explicitly. Some individuals (n = 7) mentioned that more training, instructions, and guidance regarding abstract composition and submission would encourage them to submit an abstract to SABER. Although the abstract committee hosts yearly training sessions before the abstract submission deadline, it seems that individuals would benefit from greater advertisement of this opportunity, more individualized abstract feedback, as well as more detailed and explicit abstract rubrics.

## Regional Opportunities.
Finally, respondents discussed opportunities for decreasing barriers based on professional identity in the development of regional conferences or expanding to include sections based on interest. One member stated that “The way I perceive the different types of conferences is that the annual conference focuses on research and the regional conferences are for classroom practitioners”(Disciplinary). Another suggested that “Having a section for emerging ideas/approaches. That way, someone who has begun their research but it isn't complete can get feedback and share ideas”(Disciplinary).

## Theme 4: Academic Capital
Tangential to the theme of professional identity, participants discussed academic capital in how the actions and resources of SABER and its members could be used as currency in their professional life. Here, we define academic capital as the various inherited and acquired resources used to promote status within academic institutions ( ). Mentions of academic capital, which included formal and informal networking, professional engagement, or shared professional mindset ( ), showed up in 22% (n = 117) of response fragments and simultaneously occurred with mentions of professional identity 29.1% (n = 34 response fragments) of the time ( ).
Academic capital was cited as a major motivation for attending the annual conference (n = 32 response fragments) and members shared that networking opportunities were often moderated by factors increasing or decreasing exclusion within the organization. For example, while one participant stated that “Many of the academics that I follow are somehow affiliated with SABER” (Structural), they later said that:

First, as a 2-year college faculty, and now as a university staff member, I often feel like I'm not the person university faculty seek to collaborate with. I also don't know anyone when I go to the conference so I spend a lot of time trying to meet people that can be exhausting but is also one of the primary reasons I attend. (Structural, Interpersonal)

Discussions about attaining academic capital through SABER mostly elicited barriers perceived as interpersonal (29.9% of response fragments) or at the intersection of the interpersonal and disciplinary domains (27.4% of response fragments) as seen in . Members highlighted networking as a “valuable way to meet other DBER, researchers, and a community of scholars interested in teaching,” and shared ideas about ways in which SABER could encourage more equitable approaches to fostering and developing these networks. Some of these ideas included affinity groups, virtual coffee hours, and mentoring opportunities beyond the conference.

## Theme 5: Accessibility and Communication
Mentions of accessibility and communication (n = 158 response fragments) showed up as a primary disciplinary equity barrier, with 62% of response fragments coded for accessibility and communication also being coded as belonging solely to the disciplinary domain ( ). This indicates that members believe that matters of accessibility, and how accessibility is communicated, to be a responsibility of organizational management. Through planning, policy, and protocols, professional societies such as SABER have the power to make their organizations accessible (or not), and through this, more equitable and inclusive (or less so).
Although these institutional processes may be interpreted as structural power, they also have the effect of “disciplining” marginalized groups to remain in their marginalized status in STEM by obfuscating opportunities that would advance their academic or professional pursuits. For example, multiple participants expressed concerns about the lack of clarity and accessibility for leadership roles, with one stating that “clarity on what these roles entail, being able to speak with and interact with people in these roles, and seeing people like me in these roles”(Disciplinary, Interpersonal) would better encourage them to pursue the opportunities. Others discussed needing “more accessible examples of successful abstracts”(Disciplinary), which is especially important for students or researchers coming from different methodological backgrounds (see theme 3: professional identity). How organizational goals and information are conveyed to members can, therefore, operate to challenge or maintain oppressions in the disciplinary domain. The conference itself was also often mentioned as being inaccessible for different groups of people, with one participant stating that, “Conference planning should include diversity from the start versus tacked on later. If the organization considered this more deeply outside of the committee, it might make planning easier/more inclusive from the get-go” (Disciplinary). This feeling was echoed by another participant who stated that SABER should “Start considering accessibility proactively, not reactively” (Disciplinary). Common suggestions in our data for addressing conference accessibility include shuttles for mobility, considering sensory and processing concerns (e.g., having too many events in a single room), ensuring captions at all stages of the event, and laying out conference materials ahead of time such as maps, schedules, and navigation tools.
Accessibility concerns were prominent when participants discussed the remote and hybrid options provided by SABER, with 31% of participants (n = 25 out of 80) mentioning that these options promoted inclusion and accessibility. Even when taking advantage of the few existing remote and hybrid options, participants noted that these needed improvement, as exemplified in the following quote:

The sessions being so far from the hotel, there is no time to decompress without missing a lot of the sessions. I tried logging into a session from my room to take a break, but the Zoom experience did not allow for interaction with the in-person discussions. (Disciplinary, Interpersonal)

The deployment of an effective and efficient hybrid or remote conference is logistically and technically challenging in ways that are distinct to those of an in-person conference. Thus, as mentioned before by the participants, significant planning must be made in advance to ensure that these modalities can meet the member's needs and cannot just be an afterthought.

## Theme 6: Personal Identity
Responses mentioned some aspect of personal identity in 7.5% (n = 40) of analyzed response fragments. This included concepts such as disability, racial identity, gender/sexuality, and family structure ( ). Responses coded for personal identity heavily overlapped with access and communication (theme 5), with 55% of fragments being simultaneously coded in both themes. Discussions of personal identity were largely coded as addressing disciplinary barriers to participation (52.5% of response fragments) rather than structural (5%) or interpersonal (12.5%) barriers ( ). In addition, 15.0% and 7.5% of fragments were coded as disciplinary and structural or as disciplinary and interpersonal, respectively.
Conference logistics are what many of these responses focused on, often surrounding discussions of accommodations. One participant appreciated the free cost and the ability to attend remotely, saying, “I would not have been able to attend otherwise–the free cost and ability to stay home with my kids was very nice” (Structural, Disciplinary). This comment underscores the importance of maintaining virtual participation options to accommodate individuals with family responsibilities or other constraints. Disciplinary barriers were also frequently mentioned, particularly for those with disabilities. One participant noted that, “No place to request accommodations for physical disabilities”(Disciplinary). This lack of accommodation hinders participation and highlights a gap in SABER's inclusivity efforts. Another participant echoed this sentiment, explaining that “travel (given my disability) is incredibly challenging to manage and prohibits my attendance at national SABER” (Structural, Disciplinary). These comments emphasize the need for more comprehensive planning to include the needs of individuals with disabilities, ensuring they have support to attend and participate fully in events.
Gender as an identity also influenced how participants experienced SABER. Several women-identifying participants remarked appreciating the large percentage of women among attendees. One participant remarked that, “Most people look like me and have similar backgrounds to me (white female), which is probably why others don't feel as included” (Structural, Interpersonal). Another participant added that “While it is not diverse in all ways, the fact that it is not dominated by cis-males makes a difference”(Interpersonal). These observations point to the homogeneity of the group, which can make those from different backgrounds and gender to feel excluded.
Additionally, several participants reported negative experiences during interactions at events related to their racial or gendered identities. One respondent experienced that “being ignored or treated differently during poster sessions when speaking with presenters or other attendees, and fewer PIs stopping by posters [of peers of other identities]” (Interpersonal). Another participant shared experiences of “mansplaining during Q&A of some talks” (Interpersonal) and “people of dominant identities talking about my areas of research and identities with problematic perspectives and overoccupying the conversation” (Disciplinary, Interpersonal). These comments highlight the need for addressing community norms and protocols within the organization and are addressed further as they relate to belonging (theme 7) and microaggressions in the next section.

## Theme 7: Belonging
Responses mentioned some aspect of belonging in 16.6% (n = 88) of analyzed response fragments. This included concepts such as cliques, perceived hierarchies, discrimination, microaggression, othering, and belonging ( ). Fragments coded for these ideas were primarily expressed as relating to interpersonal, (46.6% of theme 7 response fragments) or as interpersonal and disciplinary (17.5%), or interpersonal and structural (8.0%) domains of power ( ), which shows that SABER members and conference attendees see belonging as an aspect of how interactions and internalizations serve to perpetuate power inequities. Discussions of belonging had high levels of overlap with professional identity (54.6% of response fragments) and moderate levels of overlap with academic capital (18.2%) and access and communication (17%) ( ).
Cliques were a commonly mentioned concept that SABER members felt impacted their sense of belonging. One participant mentioned that “SABER is very closed off and clique-like, especially if you've been a long time attender” (Structural, Interpersonal). As many members of the organization specifically attend conferences like these to network, learn new ideas, and reach new audiences, the high frequency and visibility of cliques presents a barrier to these networking goals. Another participant stated that “it did feel a bit like there were a few strongly connected labs that drove a lot of the conversation and didn't interact outside themselves” (Structural, Interpersonal). Additionally, participants mentioned that “longstanding relationships among repeat attendees” can inadvertently create exclusivity, leading newcomers to feel like outsiders, particularly “during down time or meals.” Concerns regarding cliques and how they affect belonging tend to rely on interpersonal dynamics and informal behaviors across organizational events.
Additionally, informal exchanges are sometimes marked by competitive undertones, where attendees feel judged or pressured to meet specific “standards” or to be part of an “in-crowd.” One SABER member said that they felt that other members “implied that because my research is involved with K-23 and in-service teacher preparation, that somehow my work did not fit in…I have resisted submitting an application ever since” (Interpersonal). This is also a key example of how a sense of belonging had high levels of overlap with professional identity (theme 3). Cultural ideas about power and value are therefore reified, not only by leadership and organizational decisions, but by interpersonal and informal interactions.
Finally, at SABER conferences, some participants report experiencing microaggressions and a sense of othering, particularly in informal settings where exclusion can be subtly reinforced. One respondent recalls the discomfort of being questioned about their absence from prior meetings, with an implied judgment about their visibility and commitment to the community; such comments create a hierarchy of “insiders” and “outsiders” that is difficult for newer or less-frequent attendees to penetrate. In another example of this “othering,” one attendee describes being treated differently during poster sessions, where fewer established researchers engaged with them, and they felt overlooked based on their appearance and perceived affiliation.

## Theme 8: Perception of Change
The final theme we identified in our data was that of perception of change. This theme was represented in 9.8% of response fragments (n = 52) and contained codes related to systemic change, diversity of perspectives, visibility of underserved communities, and broader impacts ( ). Of these response fragments, 48.1% (n = 25) were simultaneously coded with professional identity (theme 3) and 40.4% (n = 21) with access and communication (theme 5) as shown in .
When viewing perception of change through the structural domain, participants discussed how efforts can be “performative at times” and questioned how “SABER can move beyond recognizing disparities to actively empower researchers/trainees from minoritized backgrounds”(Structural). Other respondents suggested thinking “about axes of diversity that are less in trend/fundable by NSF/NIH but clearly block others (us!) from participating” (Structural) showing consideration for how social systems impart different outcomes depending on social status in space and time. SABER members want to see the organization “challenge systems of power within academia and consider other organizational ways of doing and knowing” (Structural, Disciplinary).
One reason that this theme commonly occurred alongside mentions of professional identity was due to the urging of members to address barriers using interdisciplinary and longitudinal approaches. Some members suggested that SABER could better facilitate collaboration between practitioners and BER researchers. Others suggested that SABER could “identify a mechanism to allow connections and interactions between individuals interested in various aspects of DEI” (Disciplinary, Interpersonal) or that the organization could facilitate purposeful mentorship across institution types, disciplinary expertise, identities, and career stages.
Finally, our data indicate that while “the conference is doing a great job centering DEI experiences in short talks and keynotes” (Disciplinary), members are “not noticing much about broader impacts, systemic changes/improvements to education and biology, and engagement outside of the society” (Disciplinary).

## DISCUSSION
In this study, we used Collins' domains of power framework to examine the perceptions of conference attendees and members of a STEM educational conference and organization, SABER, focusing on the organization's function in relation to issues of equity and inclusion. Collins' ( ) four power domains framework allow us to situate our findings within the context of the larger discussion of how power operates in institutions, including scientific professional societies, to perpetuate and re-enact societal norms and beliefs that intrinsically discriminate against women, POC, members of the LGBTQ+ community, individuals with disabilities, neurodiverse individuals, and other minoritized populations. Here, we discuss findings and implications drawn from these results, as well as recommendations for how societies can continue to address exclusionary practices more systematically.
In her 1990 foundational work, Patricia Hill Collins introduces the Matrix of Domination that outlines four domains of power through which we can understand intersectional oppressions. In later works, she discusses how each domain operates “singularly and in combination in shaping the social organization of power” ( , p. 22). Power flows dynamically across these domains, with the hegemonic/cultural domain playing an organizing role as it represents the values, narratives, and ideologies that contribute to creating, perpetuating, and institutionalizing the multiple forms of oppression that are manifested across the other three domains. Sustainable change thus requires not only challenging policies and practices, but also challenging the social and cultural norms that are legitimizing them. The first step is to highlight how our aspirational practices are deeply connected to broader systems, which we demonstrate through this empirical example.

## Praxis across Domains of Power
Our data revealed various barriers to participation, engagement, and sense of belonging to SABER, which were organized into eight themes that often presented elements across the structural, disciplinary, and interpersonal domains of power. Here, we recap and discuss our findings, centering them now in each of the four domains of power in order to 1) more clearly delineate the various ways in which we can use these domains to address exclusionary practice in professional organizations and 2) show the fluid nature of these domains and highlight the importance of professional societies being mindful of systemic intersectionality.

## Structural Domain of Power.
Public policies that establish and manage social institutions are the foundation of the structural domain of power. This domain functions to shape the day-to-day experiences of individuals through the regulations, rules, and processes established by institutions, laws, and policy ( ).
Public and institutional policies often dictate financial constraints that were one of the most significant barriers to engagement in SABER. Over two-third of respondents cited the lack of funding available for travel and conference attendance, combined with the cost of SABER's registration as barriers to participation. This aligns with findings from other organizations (e.g., ) and is indicative of broader issues in academia. Institutions provide limited funding for membership fees, conference registration, and travel within an academic year; undergraduates, graduate students, post-doctoral positions, and untenured faculty often receive the lowest amounts of institutional travel funding. Institutional funds may not fully cover associated travel expenses such as Wi-Fi or parking garage fees, leaving individuals or the hosting organization to fill in the gaps. Compounding this issue, POC are less likely to receive federal research awards ( ), which often support conference participation. Improving funding access may also reduce the prominence of U.S.-centric perspectives and encourage more international attendees, as only four of the respondents were not from the United States. Because of these systemic issues within academia, cost is a primary influence in the decision of whether or not to attend an in-person conference ( ; ), such as SABER.
Politics and location also arose as significant structural barriers to participation. Our findings highlight the disenfranchisement experienced by some SABER members and SABER conference attendees related to their political beliefs, both directly, though specific policies or dominant discourses during the conference, and indirectly, by the geopolitics related to the choice of city for the venue. Individuals residing in states with discriminatory laws may face additional challenges if professional organizations choose conference locations based on state-level politics. These individuals can end up being indirectly penalized for their state's political decisions, experiencing a form of double jeopardy. Although the organization's intention might be to take a stand against the state's policies, the impact can unintentionally burden the residents who are not responsible for those decisions. The selection of the conference location is by itself a statement of an organization's principles and priorities, and it is inextricably related to local politics. Although no single location would be amenable to everyone's beliefs, science organizations could turn this into an opportunity for engaging in dialogue with their members. They could communicate their process of conference location, inviting members to vote for preferred/nonpreferred locations, and being transparent about the limitations and constraints that also guide this decision. SABER members also expressed a desire to have SABER become more involved with the local community during the conferences. In this manner, attendees could connect with local schools, outreach efforts and scholars, and volunteer some of their time to the community hosting them. SABER and other professional organizations have started to implement these place-based initiatives. For example, although it took place at the 2024 annual SABER meeting, and therefore after the data collection that informed this study, SABER leadership invited Justice Jones as a keynote speaker who is an activist local to Minneapolis and an organizer of place-based organizations such as the Minneapolis Community Members for Environmental Justice and Powderhorn Park Neighborhood Association. However, more research is needed to identify the benefits and broader impacts of these efforts.

## Disciplinary Domain of Power.
In the disciplinary domain, power serves to govern and manage groups of people, ensuring they conform to their designated roles in the social hierarchy, or by overseeing and managing their behaviors ( ). Professional organization policies and decision-making largely operate at the disciplinary level, where the choices made can either challenge or maintain the dominant narrative. In this study, we identified many themes that fell within the disciplinary domain of power, among them challenges imposed by the hierarchical structure of SABER and lack of transparency, lack of effective options for accessible and remote participation, and the perceived biases in the types of research that were presented and promoted by SABER. We expand on each of these below:
Many respondents found that the hierarchical structure of SABER, combined with the lack of transparency as to the inner workings of this hierarchy, was a demotivator when considering becoming more involved with the organization and even joining the leadership. Respondents noted a lack of information about the precise responsibilities of the different leadership roles, as well as the process of becoming nominated for a position and securing it. This could result in a reduced representation of marginalized scholars in the leadership of SABER, which perpetuates the dominant perspectives and practices at the organization and conferences. Without transparency, a hierarchy soon develops between those “in the know” who have access to leadership, know when and how to attend open executive meetings and are aware of upcoming changes, thus having the opportunity to provide feedback and suggestions, and those “not in the know” who are standing on the sidelines and whose valuable insight and experience are being ignored. Increasing transparency and clarity from leadership about organizational operations to their members is a challenge for many professional science societies ( ). Opportunities such as online town halls and open leadership meetings that are hosted in safe and supporting environments can provide one avenue for direct and open communication between leadership and their members. In addition, creating a policies and procedures handbook that is available to all members can codify practices, policies, and procedures promoting both transparency and communication (e.g., ; ). Other ways in which professional societies can promote communication is by documenting and broadcasting actions that they take to promote DEI ( ), and by codifying how individuals and leaders are held accountable for their behavior, such as an official code of ethics for members and a code of conduct at society events ( )
The most important objectives of professional conferences are to allow for the exchange of ideas, for networking and for the establishment of new collaborations and projects. Through planning, policy, and protocols, professional societies such as SABER have the power to make their organizations accessible or inaccessible. These decisions impact who can access their communities and resources, and manage when or where this access happens. Several individuals, for example, could only participate remotely in the conference, and while this was an option, it was limited to only certain events at the conference and to broadcasting the presentations through Zoom. This felt, to remote attendees, that the hybrid option was an “add on” to the conference, plagued with technical issues and with very limited opportunities for the remote participants to engage in the ongoing conversations.
Participants reported many barriers that were related to their standing (or lack of) in the DBER community, the focus of their scholarship, their research methods, the institutions that they represented, as well as their familiarity with the overall organization of SABER. These forms of power are highly salient in professional organizations but not discussed as often as DEI efforts in social identities such as race, gender, or sexuality. Being selected to present at SABER could play a pivotal role in the careers of early-scholars, yet many felt lost when it came to how SABER selected abstracts for presentations and noted a severe lack of presenters of color and from non-R1 institutions. They also felt othered because their scholarship did not align with the traditional Eurocentric research approaches and ways of knowing. This alienated these scholars and reinforced existing discriminatory practices in the DBER disciplines, harming other scholars who would benefit from exposure to a variety of methodological approaches and theoretical frameworks. As in our results, noted concerns about limited acceptance of abstracts and presentations outside of the dominant fields, topics, and methodologies in SABER. The SABER abstract committee used this feedback to implement changes to the rubrics used for evaluating abstract proposals. For example, reviewers previously assessed the likely interest of the BER community based on their own perceptions of the field. Now, the rubric asks them to assess whether applicants explained how their submission is of interest to the BER community.
Professional organizations can critically examine how conferences are designed to prioritize accessibility across salient identities, guiding where to focus efforts for meaningful change. This includes selecting venues that are wheelchair-accessible, offering captioning for all talks, and providing quiet spaces for sensory breaks, as well as breastfeeding/pumping rooms. Organizers should avoid scheduling events of interest to marginalized groups simultaneously, which forces individuals to choose between aspects of their identities. Examining biases in programming timing, event formats, and materials—such as ensuring large-font, braille, and digital options—further promotes inclusion. Additionally, addressing participant movement between venues with accessible transportation options can remove significant barriers.

## Interpersonal Domain of Power.
Findings within the interpersonal domain center the day-to-day interactions between people. There are many manifestations of social hierarchy and power dynamics within individualized experiences. Among the themes identified, academic capital, professional identity and belonging were the ones more relevant to this domain.
Attending professional conferences provides opportunities to network and establish new collaborations. Yet many attendees reported finding that there were many “cliques” at the event that limited the networking opportunities and also promoted the feelings of alienation and lack of belonging. Respondents felt they were being excluded from these groups based on their personal identities, their beliefs, their approaches to education research, their institution of origin, and their level of expertise and time in the DBER field. Despite SABER's recent efforts to reduce some of these challenges (such as the SABER buddies program; ), these issues came up repeatedly in our study.
It is important that organizations also provide support and training that help their existing, more experienced members create a welcoming and nondiscriminatory environment at the organization and its events. recommend providing routine training to members and leadership that empowers them to be allies, advocates, and accomplices that are comfortable calling out microaggressions. Although recommend normalizing the idea that anyone can commit a microaggression and that alone should not be an irredeemable offense, societies should codify protocols that lay out how to respond to repeat offenders or offenders who exhibit overt aggression, including potential consequences for offenders. In addition, societies should provide ways for members and conference participants to anonymously report any microaggressions, experiences with other forms of overt or covert racism and challenges that they have experienced in the context of their many identities, as well as recommendations for improvements.

## Cultural Domain of Power.
The cultural domain of power shapes collective beliefs, norms, values, and ideologies that define what is considered acceptable, desirable, or “normal” within a society. This domain reinforces dominant cultural narratives and stereotypes that legitimize the hierarchies perpetuated by other domains of power. For instance, cultural narratives that frame certain groups as “undeserving” or “inferior” provide justification for discriminatory policies (structural domain) and unequal treatment (disciplinary and interpersonal domains). These narratives often stem from historical contexts and are maintained through media, education, and social institutions, perpetuating cycles of marginalization.
The cultural domain is not an isolated entity; it is deeply intertwined with the structural, disciplinary, and interpersonal domains. Oppressions within the cultural domain, such as the spread of harmful stereotypes, fuel the structural domain by shaping policies and institutional frameworks that uphold inequity. Simultaneously, cultural narratives are reinforced through disciplinary actions—such as administrative and choices—that regulate behavior and conformity to these norms. On an interpersonal level, cultural messages manifest in everyday interactions, influencing individual attitudes and behaviors that sustain oppression. In this way, the cultural domain both draws upon and contributes to the mechanisms of power in the other domains, creating a mutually reinforcing cycle of systemic oppression. Understanding the inextricable connections between these domains is essential for dismantling the structures of inequality that they uphold.
An example of these connections can be seen when thinking about the “cost” of attending a conference. Some might see cost as a neutral and intrinsic factor related to required expenses. Yet this perspective would preclude understanding the wide implications of financial constraints as well as the many levels at which cost is acting. In the structural domain, this might present as costs related to tenure decisions and resource availability depending on career level. Through a disciplinary lens, costs might be linked to topics being proposed and risks associated with less accepted methodologies. In the interpersonal domain, these costs might be related to social standing and perceptions of peers, or the cost of networking in one specialty over another. Taken together, these ideas create a culture (cultural domain) of what is acceptable cost versus what should be addressed. These ideas and cultures are malleable over time but are still products of the conditions of their creation.

## Utilizing the Domains of Power Framework to Guide Change
Understanding a scientific organization's members' lived experiences requires recognizing the intrinsically hierarchical nature of professional societies, which interacts with individual identities to influence subjective experiences. The diverse backgrounds within interdisciplinary organizations like SABER promise increased innovation, but also complicate efforts to foster inclusivity and respect across such varied perspectives and experiences. Intersections of race, gender, and other identities shape how individuals experience and navigate power dynamics within the organization. Therefore, continuously collecting feedback and elevating different voices is crucial for visible progress. In the context of SABER, this approach is exemplified by recent initiatives following George Floyd's murder in 2020 ( ) as well as by the work presented in this paper. Yet documenting inequitable experiences is just the first step toward creating equitable and just professional organizations. Such a change, we argue, requires recognizing the various layers of oppression by which members are being silenced and excluded, and challenging the cultural domain of power that underlies the practices and policies responsible for this. This change cannot be accomplished through a top-down approach, but instead requires the joint work of members at all levels of the organization's hierarchy, collaborating in an environment that is safe, supportive, and courageous. Initiatives addressing one aspect of oppression at a time or targeting one specific demographic at a time will not fully rectify the systemic barriers faced by the marginalized individuals in that field.
Over the past 5 years, more than 280 laws have been proposed to limit what educators can discuss about politicized topics, including race, racism, gender identity, sexuality, and American history ( ). More than 71 bills targeting universities were introduced in 2023 alone ( ) and as of August 2023, 25 states had signed at least one anti-DEI legislation impacting K-12 or postsecondary education into law ( ). Anti-DEI legislation has introduced high levels of uncertainty and perceived risk among educators ( ). Organizations like SABER have the opportunity to create a counter-space for individuals to engage in disciplinary and social justice work, fostering a community where their voices and experiences are valued. This would provide an environment that promotes inclusivity and empowerment, enabling members to effectively address structural oppressions.

## SABER's Response to Improve Members' Experiences—Opportunities, Challenges, and Roadblocks.
The respondents' experiences and perceptions of SABER highlighted many areas where deep structural transformation could lead to improved sense of belonging and agency among its members. Yet some of the issues raised by the respondents were already being addressed by SABER through a variety of initiatives that predated the data collection. Some of these initiatives have been very successful like the special interest group (SIG) for PEER SABER members that aimed to create community and amplify their voices, but the comments from some of the respondents suggested that they were unaware of the existence of this SIG. Similarly, some respondents commented on the need for more transparency in leadership and leadership roles, while SABER has been hosting open informational sessions on leadership opportunities available and how to join the governance of the organization. This disconnect between the experiences of some of SABER's members and the resources and structures that SABER has put in place to promote D&I highlight the complexity of the barriers to achieving this goal. Resources not only need to be created, but their existence needs to be effectively communicated to those who may benefit the most from them. Structures must be set in place to facilitate the identification and usage of these opportunities and resources. Additionally, the findings of this paper largely deal with cultural shifts that are slow and gradual. The effects of specific initiatives and programs might not be fully realized immediately after implementation and will take time.
Professional organizations such as SABER also face financial barriers to the implementation of specific policies and changes that would further promote a more equitable space and society. In addition, they do not act in a vacuum, and their ability to implement change can be limited by federal and state policies. For example, SABER recognizes the value and importance of: 1) training members of the leadership in ways to become allies against racism, 2) providing financial, informational, and networking support to bring members who are not “in the know” into the leadership of the organization, and 3) recruiting and supporting members from institutions and racial and ethnic groups that are underrepresented in SABER to make the culture of the organization more welcoming. However, instituting these changes in a sustainable and comprehensive manner requires funds that nonprofit organizations often lack. In 2024, several members of SABER received an NSF BIO-LEAPS Grant (#2334951) that began to put into place many of the policies and structures that this study highlighted as beneficial for making professional societies more equitable. However, the recent executive orders issued by the Trump administration led to the termination of this funding, putting a stop to these efforts.

## LIMITATIONS
Because we chose to collect data from multiple sources, there is a potential that participants who contributed data by completing the survey were also involved in the roundtable discussions at the SABER 2023 Annual Conference. Therefore, it is possible that these individuals contributed the same idea at most twice. Although triangulation across data sources did not include identifying information, our team did confirm that themes and ideas were abundant across and within data sources to account for this possible confound. Additionally, the presentation of the initial analysis from the online survey to the roundtable participants before any discussion is likely to have influenced some of the responses we received. Specifically, data may be biased toward those topics that were present in the initial analysis.
Conducting a study of an institution or organization of which one is a member provides affordances and limitations to the study. As members of SABER's D&I committee, some of the authors likely have a better understanding of the structure and function of the organization, which could provide them with unique insights or more nuanced understanding of the experiences under study. On the other hand, active engagement in this committee could lead to potential bias due to personal investment in SABER's DEI policies or preconceived ideas about the organization's challenges. The authors remained mindful of these factors throughout the design, data collection, analysis and writing of this article, engaging in periodic reflections and discussions to minimize their impact.
Additionally, we note that the data collected and analyzed herein contain survivorship bias, meaning that responses were collected from active SABER members or SABER 2023 attendees who elected to participate in our survey or roundtable discussion. There have doubtless been many former or less active members and prospective members who have been driven away by the exclusionary practices seen in our data and others that remain unreported, and thus are not represented in our data.

## CONCLUSION
Although systems of power are always theoretically operating, certain forms of power become more salient in specific social contexts. “Intersectionality provides a template for seeing multiple systems of power as imminent, yet not all systems of power are equivalent or even visible” ( , p. 25) in particular circumstances. In this paper, we provide an example of how more community-driven and directed actions geared toward equity and inclusion can better serve the populations that these efforts proclaim to benefit. By understanding the salience of identities, power, and the needs of those in our communities, as well as recognizing the absence of other identities, professional societies can make better use of available resources to address exclusionary factors. In stewarding the welfare of SABER and other professional societies, we propose embracing a multidimensional view of D&I. Accessibility is multifaceted, and equitable solutions for one barrier to accessibility may create new barriers in other dimensions of accessibility. Navigating equitable solutions for accessibility requires organizations to respond in dynamic ways and create pathways for constant communication that are transparent to members. We advocate that organizations remain adaptable and context-aware in implementing best practices, with particular sensitivity to the dynamic sociopolitical landscape. Organizations should pay attention to how they can normalize and integrate communication into their communities and into their culture, practices, and protocols.
Critical frameworks, such as the one outlined in this study, can play a crucial role in helping organizations monitor and understand how oppressive systems operate. By utilizing such frameworks, organizations can continuously assess and analyze power dynamics, intersecting oppressions, and the impact of sociopolitical developments. This iterative process allows for a more nuanced and comprehensive understanding of structural oppressions, enabling organizations to proactively adapt their approaches and strategies to create more inclusive and equitable environments.

## Supplementary Material

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We extend special thanks to the SABER membership and annual meeting attendees, particularly those who shared their experiences through the survey. We thank the SABER Data Analysis and Stewardship committee for providing organizational data, as well as the SABER Executive Committee and PEER Committee for their contributions to the pilot survey and feedback on this article.