pmcCochrane Database Syst RevCochrane Database Syst Rev3102cochrev10090974714651858The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews1469-493X1361-6137John Wiley and Sons, Inc. and the Cochrane LibraryPMC11102824PMC11102824.111102824111028243876351810.1002/14651858.CD015330.pub2CD015330.pub2CD0153301Medicine General & Introductory Medical SciencesInterventions to prevent obesity in children aged 12 to 18 years old
Cochrane Public Health GroupSpigaFrancesca .
***Number of randomised participants
EXPLANATIONS
aDowngraded two levels due to risk of bias (evidence contributing 61.4% of the weight is from one result at high risk of bias) and one level due to imprecision (evidence from 605 participants); note that the certainty of the evidence in this result is also lowered by indirectness (concerns on substantial contribution to weight of two studies in highly specific populations: one study targeted adolescents who reported consuming at least 1 serving per day of sugar‐sweetened beverages (SSB) and lived predominately in one household; one study included girls and boys at risk for excess weight gain (i.e. BMI ≥ 70th percentile or two biological parents with reported obesity [BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2]))
bDowngraded one level due to risk of bias (evidence contributing 37.3% of the weight is from one result at high risk of bias); downgraded one level due to imprecision (evidence is from 900 participants); downgraded one level due to inconsistency (tau = 0.43 and the direction of the results is inconsistent)
cDowngraded one level due to imprecision (evidence is from 44 participants) and one level due to indirectness (concerns about the study being conducted in a highly specific population: the study included girls and boys at risk for excess weight gain (i.e. BMI ≥ 70th percentile or two biological parents with reported obesity [BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2]).
dDowngraded one level due to risk of bias (evidence contributing 38.9% of the weight is from two results at high risk of bias) and one level due to inconsistency (tau = 0.062 and the direction of the results is inconsistent)
eDowngraded one level due to imprecision (evidence is from 112 participants) and one level due to publication bias (outcome non‐reporting bias: one large study reported no effect of the intervention with the potential of overturning the results of the meta‐analysis).
fDowngraded one level due to imprecision (evidence is from 1089 participants); one level due to inconsistency (tau = 0.14 and the direction of the results is inconsistent); one level due to indirectness (concerns on substantial contribution to weight of one study in a highly specific population: one study included girls and boys at risk for excess weight gain (i.e. BMI ≥ 70th percentile or two biological parents with reported obesity [BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2])).
gDowngraded one level due to imprecision (evidence is from 377 participants) and one level due to publication bias (outcome non‐reporting bias: there is the potential for missing evidence as the reported results are from studies that measured BMI, zBMI or BMI percentile at baseline and follow‐up only).
Abbreviations
BMI: body mass index (kg/m2); CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; CI: confidence interval; SSB: sugar sweetened beverages; zBMI: body mass index standardised for age and sex
 

## Background
Population levels of overweight and obesity are a growing, major challenge throughout the world ( ; ; ; ). The causes of this are complex: the 2007 foresight report mapped over 100 interconnected factors, all of which contribute to the population prevalence of obesity ( ). These factors include macroeconomic drivers, biological factors, food supply and production, media, healthcare, built environment, transport and recreation, technology, early life experiences and education. These factors can operate differently in different people, and partially explain inequalities in childhood obesity. A good example is the relative cost of healthy food such as fruits and vegetables, which may be prohibitive for families on a low income ( ).
Obesity prevalence is inextricably linked to the degree of relative social inequality. In high‐income countries, such as the UK, a significant association has been observed between obesity and lower socioeconomic status ( ; ). In the UK, body mass trends during adolescence were associated with local area deprivation in a large UK cohort, even when controlling for family socioeconomic circumstances ( ). In a study of children aged six to nine years living in 24 countries in the WHO European region, an inverse relationship between the prevalence of childhood overweight or obesity and parental education was found in high‐income countries, whereas the opposite relationship was observed in most of the middle‐income countries ( ). In low‐income countries, the relationship is variable, and there appears to be a shifting of the obesity burden across socioeconomic groups and different patterns by gender ( ; ).
It is therefore critical that, in preventing obesity, we are also reducing the associated gap in health inequalities, ensuring that interventions do not inadvertently lead to more favourable outcomes in those with a more socioeconomically advantaged position in society. suggests that the preferred way of addressing health inequalities is to target the population health disparity exclusively. Where interventions are universal in nature (i.e. target the whole population), then it is important to assess whether their effectiveness varies by level of deprivation/disadvantage. Equally, there is a need to understand how to minimise obesity in more affluent groups in low‐income countries. The available knowledge base includes limited evidence on which we can develop a platform for obesity prevention action and select appropriate public health interventions, whether for the whole population or for those at greatest risk of obesity ( ).
The WHO Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity states that progress in tackling childhood obesity has been slow and inconsistent, and obesity prevention and treatment require a whole‐of‐government approach in which policies across all sectors systematically take health into account, avoid harmful health impacts, and thus improve population health and health equity ( ; ). Indeed, it is now acknowledged that tackling obesity requires a systems approach and policy initiatives across government departments that are joined up ( ).
The broader system that influences obesity has been elegantly described ( ), and is multi‐level and complex in nature. Understanding this broader system allows us to identify points that could be reasonable targets for intervention development. Some of these points are upstream (e.g. policy environment), some downstream (e.g. individual‐level education), and some points in the system are more modifiable than others. Downstream interventions rely on individuals actively making a choice to consume a healthier diet or have a more active lifestyle. These types of interventions often simply provide education and information on a healthy diet or healthy physical activity levels, and rely on the individual child and family being willing and able to make these changes. Upstream interventions change policy or the environment in which the child lives (home, school, the wider environment), which makes consuming a healthy diet and doing physical activity the easy choice (sometimes the only choice). Examples include mandatory food standards and guidance on physical education for schools; policies around marketing of foods with a high level of fat, salt or sugar (HFSS foods), which are targeted at children (including in supermarkets); town planning policies on mobile food and beverage vans close to schools; and the number and locations of takeaways on walking journeys experienced by adolescents.
There is evidence that downstream interventions are more likely to result in intervention‐generated inequalities ( ; ; ). Importantly, the most successful approach to tackling childhood obesity is to develop and implement both upstream and downstream interventions. Experts have noted, in relation to Chapter 2 of the Childhood Obesity Plan for England, that the main focus of interventions relies on self‐regulation at an individual level (downstream interventions), and that an equal focus on upstream interventions is also required if a step change in tackling childhood obesity is to be realised ( ; ). There is also evidence that the successful implementation of a whole‐school approach, such as that used in the Nutrition‐Friendly Schools Initiative ( ), is a key factor in the effectiveness of interventions to promote healthy eating for children. However, careful consideration should be given to how school culture can and needs to be shifted, working with schools to tailor the approach and circumnavigate staff capacity issues, and building relationships within and outside the school gates to enhance sustainability ( ; ).

## Description of the condition
The global evidence suggests that the prevalence of overweight and obesity in children started to rise at the end of the 1980s ( ). By 2010, 43 million children under five years of age were categorised as having overweight or obesity, with approximately 35 million of these children living in low‐ and middle‐income countries ( ). Internationally, childhood obesity rates continue to rise in some countries (e.g. Mexico, India, China, Canada), although there is evidence of a slowing of this increase or a plateauing in some age groups in some countries ( ; ). In 2015, the World Health Organization (WHO) Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity found that childhood obesity is reaching alarming proportions in many countries. The WHO posited that this poses an urgent and serious challenge ( ; ). The Sustainable Development Goals, set by the United Nations in 2015, also identify prevention and control of non‐communicable diseases, including obesity, as core priorities ( ). Obesity in childhood and adolescence can be difficult to reverse through interventions ( ; ).
Children and adolescents with obesity have poorer psychological well‐being and elevated levels of cardio‐metabolic risk factors ( ). Obesity comorbidities, including high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol and insulin insensitivity, are being observed at an increasingly early age ( ). Childhood obesity may also cause musculoskeletal problems, obstructive sleep apnoea, asthma and a number of psychological issues ( ; ; ; ). Childhood obesity is associated with type 2 diabetes and heart disease in adulthood and middle‐age mortality ( ; ). Obesity itself tracks through to adulthood ( ), strengthening the case for primary prevention. Adult obesity is associated with increased risks for heart disease, stroke, metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes and some cancers ( ; ).
Estimates of the economic impacts of obesity (adult and child) as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) range from 0.13% in Thailand ( ) to 9.3% in the USA ( ). However, the methods used to estimate these costs vary between studies, and most studies use a health system perspective rather than a societal perspective. Recently, estimated current and future national economic impacts of obesity across a sample of heterogeneous contexts globally. They estimated that obesity cost between 0.8% and 2.4% of GDP in 2019 in the eight countries in their study (Australia, Brazil, India, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Spain and Thailand). Their projections revealed an increasing trend in obesity costs as a percentage of GDP over time, estimated to reach 2.4% of GDP in Spain and up to 4.9% in Thailand by 2060. They concluded that the economic impacts of obesity are substantial and reach a similar magnitude in low‐income and middle‐income countries as in high‐income contexts. A separate projection for England reports that halving childhood obesity by 2030 could save the National Health Service GBP 37 billion and wider society GBP 202 billion ( ).
Children aged 12 to 16 years attend secondary schools in most countries, and schools are seen as a key setting for obesity prevention as the majority of children have long‐term and in‐depth contact with them ( ). However, the other environments (in real life and virtual environments) in which they live and play also provide opportunities for intervention. Adolescence may be a critical time for excess weight gain, in that this age group normally has more freedom in food and beverage choices made outside the home compared with younger children. This, alongside the fact that physical activity levels usually decline (and sedentary behaviours rise) during adolescence, particularly in girls, offers both opportunities and barriers for those developing interventions.
The potential for negative unintended consequences of obesity prevention interventions has received much attention. Whilst the risk of inducing or worsening eating disorders/disordered eating as part of an obesity prevention intervention remains small, when this does occur the results can be severe ( ). The shared aetiology of obesity and eating disorders has implications for the design of interventions to prevent childhood obesity. Researchers in both the obesity and eating disorder fields have proposed using an integrated approach to prevention that addresses the spectrum of weight‐related disorders within interventions. The identification of risk factors that are shared between these weight‐related disorders is an essential step in developing effective prevention interventions ( ).
Overweight and obesity are terms used to describe an excess of adipose tissue (or fatness) above the ideal for good health. Obesity results from a sustained positive energy imbalance, and a variety of genetic, behavioural, cultural, environmental and economic factors have been implicated in its development (reviewed in ). The interplay of these factors is complex and has been the focus of considerable research. The relationship between BMI change and BMI at baseline applies across the range of ages and for boys and girls, which together increase the variability of BMI at baseline, but much less so, BMI change. Conversely, zBMI is already adjusted for age and sex, and hence the variability in baseline zBMI is much smaller. There is a positive correlation between zBMI at baseline and zBMI change, whereby higher zBMI at baseline is associated with a smaller reduction in zBMI change. This same correlation is masked with BMI, where the age–sex variability, which is broadly uncorrelated with BMI change, introduces noise and weakens the correlation between baseline and change, in the classic form of regression to the mean. The relationship between BMI and age is non‐linear, and it may differ in shape between the sexes. Thus, BMI change adjusted for BMI at baseline, age and sex introduces complex age–sex‐related patterns to the residuals, whereas zBMI is adjusted for age and sex using separate non‐linear curves. For this reason, the age and sex coefficients for BMI change and zBMI change are very likely to differ in form, and one should prefer the zBMI model to the BMI model. However, in other respects, the two models are very similar, particularly in terms of the significance or non‐significance of other covariates ( ). Current expert opinion supports the use of body mass index (BMI) cut‐off points to determine weight status (like healthy weight, overweight or obese) for children, and several standardised BMI (zBMI) cut‐offs have been developed that account for the child’s age and gender ( ; ). Population monitoring of overweight and obesity is best done through use of BMI, but this measure has limitations at an individual level and, in children, zBMI is deemed to be more useful. Despite this, there is no consistent application of this methodology by experts and a variety of percentile‐based methods are also used, which can make it difficult to compare randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that have used different measures and weight outcomes.
Overweight and obesity in childhood are known to have significant impacts on both physical and psychosocial health (reviewed in ). Indeed, many of the cardiovascular consequences that characterise adult‐onset obesity are preceded by abnormalities that begin in childhood. Hyperlipidaemia, hypertension, abnormal glucose tolerance, and type 2 diabetes occur with increased frequency in children with obesity ( ). In addition, obesity in childhood is known to be associated with cardiovascular disease risk factors in adults ( ), underpinning the importance of obesity prevention efforts.

## Description of the intervention
This review involves assessing interventions aimed at preventing obesity, either the primary aim of the intervention or one of the key aims of the intervention, and partially supersedes our previous review on this topic ( ). Only those interventions which clearly aim to change and improve individual–level behaviours for dietary intake, 'activity' levels (physical activity, sedentary behaviour and/or sleep), or both, are included in this review. For the avoidance of doubt, interventions that primarily aim to improve individual–level behaviours for fitness and sporting ability, and those that aim to promote a healthy weight by assessing the BMI of the child and then informing their parents that their child is overweight or obese, are not included in this review.
In terms of settings, included interventions may be implemented in any setting, including schools, the home, the community, and healthcare settings, and any combination of these settings. We included interventions with a minimum of 12 weeks follow‐up outcome data.

## How the intervention might work
Interventions that aim to prevent childhood obesity seek to maintain an energy balance that is ideal for the healthy growth and development of the child. All such interventions work either by limiting the amount of energy (calories) consumed or by increasing the amount of energy expended (which includes basal metabolic rate, physical activity and other movement, including sleep and energy required for child growth), or by both limiting the amount of energy consumed and increasing the amount of energy expended. If sustained energy expenditure (normal metabolic demands plus cost of growth) exceeds energy consumed, the child may become malnourished. A severe energy deficit over a prolonged period in childhood, particularly during rapid periods of growth such as adolescence, may have serious negative consequences for growth and development, and these effects are potentially irreversible. Getting the balance of short‐term effectiveness versus a more moderate, safer and sustained energy deficit in the context of childhood obesity prevention interventions 'right' remains a key public health challenge ( ).
The safest and most reliable way to ensure an ideal energy balance in growing children is for the child to eat a healthy diet (low in fat and sugar) and be physically active. Most countries have age‐specific recommendations for daily food and drink intake, and physical activity levels. Most interventions that include a diet component promote a low fat or low sugar intake, or both; for example, by replacing sugary drinks with water and high fat snacks with fruit and vegetables. Takeaways and fast food are particularly high in fat, and these are often the target of interventions to prevent obesity. Examples relevant for adolescents include town planning regulations that restrict the presence of mobile food vans and fast‐food outlets close to schools ( ), limiting vending machine content in schools and other environments where children frequent and play ( ), and monitoring the content of packed lunches ( ). Voluntary and mandatory school food standards are in place in many countries.
Interventions that include an 'activity' component promote physical activity at school and active leisure time activities, active travel, a reduction in sedentary behaviour, or a combination of these. Examples relevant for adolescents include the introduction of after‐school dance or sport sessions ( ), a limit on the time an adolescent can spend on gaming or Internet use in a day ( ), and the introduction of safe cycling and walking routes to school ( ). Most countries include physical education as part of the curriculum in schools.

## Why it is important to do this review
Governments internationally are being urged to take action to prevent childhood obesity and to address the underlying determinants of the condition. To provide decision makers with high‐quality research evidence to inform their planning and resource allocation, this review aims to provide an update of the evidence from RCTs designed to prevent childhood obesity.
Previous work has highlighted that the current evidence base focuses mainly on individual‐level interventions that are assessed via an RCT. Where possible, the totality of the evidence base should also capture studies that evaluate the effectiveness of upstream interventions ( ), mindful of the fact that these types of interventions are not commonly assessed via an RCT because of the design challenges at scale.
There has been considerable growth in the number of studies in this field over the last five years. Importantly, many of the relatively recent studies we have identified have reported data on inequalities and new evidence that could affect the recommendations.
The burden of children with obesity was exacerbated in most countries during the Covid‐19 pandemic. Indications in a number of countries show that the rising levels of childhood obesity (www.worldobesity.org/) has also increased health inequalities. In some countries, particularly low‐income countries, the double burden of malnutrition (obesity and undernutrition) has risen sharply during the pandemic ( ; ). Those responsible for public health in all regions of the world, countries, and local communities are planning (and then implementing) their Covid‐recovery policies. As such, our public health policymakers’ needs for cost‐effective interventions to prevent childhood obesity that are scalable and feasible are more urgent than ever before. These interventions should then feed into a broader strategy that includes upstream interventions.

## Objectives

## Primary objective
To assess the effects of interventions that aim to prevent obesity in adolescents by modifying dietary intake or ‘activity’ levels, or a combination of both, on changes in BMI, zBMI score and serious adverse events.
To evaluate the effects of interventions that aim to modify dietary intake on changes in BMI, zBMI score and serious adverse events amongst children and adolescents.
To evaluate the effects of interventions that aim to modify physical activity, sedentary behaviour, sleep, play and/or structured exercise (collectively referred to as ‘movement behaviours’ in the literature and, simply, as ‘activity’ in this review) on changes in BMI, zBMI score and serious adverse events amongst children and adolescents.
To evaluate the effects of interventions that aim to modify both dietary intake and activity on changes in BMI, zBMI score and serious adverse events amongst children and adolescents.
To compare the effects of interventions that aim to modify dietary intake with those that aim to modify activity on changes in BMI, zBMI score and serious adverse events amongst children and adolescents.

## Secondary objective
To collect information on factors related to health inequity and about the costs of interventions.
To collect information to explore if, how, and why the effectiveness of interventions on BMI/zBMI varied on factors related to health inequity, using the PROGRESS factors ( ).
Place of residence
Race/ethnicity/culture/language
Occupation
Gender/sex
Religion
Education
Socioeconomic status
Social capital
To collect information about the costs of interventions to enable use of the review as a source of information to inform economic analyses.

## Methods

## Criteria for considering studies for this review

## Types of studies
We included studies that:
were individually‐randomised, or cluster‐randomised with at least three clusters per intervention arm (to allow some level of comparability between arms and to allow reasonable estimation of the intra‐cluster correlation coefficient (ICC)). We included only the first period of any trials with a cross‐over design (due to important concerns about carry‐over effects);
measured BMI at baseline and after the end of the intervention period (including collection of self‐reported measurement); and
included an active intervention period of any duration, provided that the studies reported follow‐up outcome data at a minimum of 12 weeks from baseline (any intervention shorter than 12 weeks is less likely to result in a sustainable change in BMI).

We included studies written in any language. We excluded studies published before 1990, since global evidence suggests that the prevalence of overweight and obesity in children started to rise at the end of the 1980s ( ; ). Given the time lag between the conception, funding, and completion of RCTs, we considered a 1990 publication date as a pragmatic and reasonable starting point for the literature in the area. We excluded experimental, comparative studies that did not use formal randomisation (so‐called 'quasi‐randomised studies', e.g. randomisation by date of birth or medical record number).

## Types of participants
We included children and adolescents with a mean age of 12 years and above, but less than 19 years, at baseline. We applied this rule if an age‐based subset of children from a trial including a wide range of ages was reported separately and fulfilled this criterion.
We considered studies to include eligible children if they met any one of the following criteria:
targeted children or adolescents in the general population;
included children or adolescents who were part of a family group receiving the intervention, if outcome data could be extracted separately for the children;
targeted children who were ‘at risk’ for overweight or obesity; for example, because a parent was overweight or obese; or
targeted children and adolescents who were from specific place‐based areas (e.g. of high deprivation) or specific settings (e.g. religious settings) where that population was known to have relatively low levels of physical activity, high levels of energy intake, high levels of obesity, or a combination of these factors.

In order to reflect a public health approach that recognises the prevalence of a range of weights of children and adolescents within the general population, we included RCTs that recruited participants with overweight or obesity, except for RCTs that had an aim to treat obesity.
We excluded:
RCTs that recruited only children and adolescents with overweight or obesity at baseline, because we considered these interventions to be focused on treatment rather than prevention; and
RCTs of interventions designed for children and adolescents with a critical illness or severe comorbidities.

## Types of interventions
Eligible interventions were those whose main aim was changing at least one factor from: diet, physical activity, sedentary behaviour, sleep, play or structured exercise to help prevent obesity in children and adolescents.
Examples of interventions that were included in the review include the following.
Interventions that provided opportunities for children to do more physical activity in school time (e.g. active lessons) to improve concentration in the classroom and, in the longer term, help prevent obesity.
Interventions that altered the food environment within the school canteen (e.g. layout of food by kiosks) to make it easier to purchase healthier food items.
Interventions that provided education to children and adolescents and their families on how to have a healthier diet and to do more physical activity.
Interventions that regulated how HFSS foods are advertised to children within, and in close proximity to, educational settings.
Digital interventions that were accessed by children and adolescents on their smartphones that used interactive games to educate on the nutritional value of certain food types.

We excluded studies of:
interventions designed primarily to improve sporting performance (focused on strength and sport‐specific fitness training); and
interventions designed to prevent obesity in people who were pregnant.

## Setting
We included interventions in any setting, including the home, healthcare settings, childcare, schools and the wider community. We also included digital interventions. There is no single agreed definition of a digital intervention, and we operationalised it here as one that employs software, hardware and/or digital services (e.g. mobile health apps, wearable devices, telehealth and telemedicine, and personalised medicine) to help prevent childhood obesity.

## Comparators
We included studies that compared an eligible intervention with a non‐intervention control group who received no intervention or usual care, or with another eligible intervention (i.e. head‐to‐head comparisons).

## Types of outcome measures

## Primary outcomes
Our primary outcomes are:
unstandardised BMI, measured from weight and height of the children at least 12 weeks after randomisation;
zBMI score, measured from weight and height of the children at least 12 weeks after randomisation and standardised to age‐specific local or national tables for BMI;
BMI percentile, measured from weight and height of children at least 12 weeks after randomisation and standardised to age‐specific local or national tables for BMI; and
serious adverse events, defined as eating disorders, body dysmorphia disorder, body image disturbance or injuries sufficient to seek medical attention.

Studies were eligible for inclusion if BMI, zBMI or BMI percentile were measured at baseline and at a minimum of 12 weeks from baseline.
We consider zBMI to be more useful than BMI as a measure of body fatness in children. We present results for BMI because zBMI is not reported in some studies, particularly older studies. We added BMI percentile as an outcome since writing the protocol ( ), as we found studies reporting only this interpretation of BMI. In the event of presentation of multiple sets of data for BMI or zBMI, we followed the decision rules set out under and Measures of treatment effect. We presented these main outcomes in the summary of findings tables.
We included BMI, zBMI and BMI percentile results taken from either measured or self‐reported weight and height data. To address the impact of using self‐reported data, we conducted a sensitivity analysis (see ). Serious adverse events were assessed as the number of cases in each study.

## Time points
We collected data from all reported post intervention time points at least 12 weeks from baseline. We grouped data for analysis into three time periods: i) 12 weeks from baseline to < 9 months (short term); ii) 9 months from baseline to < 15 months (medium term; corresponding to approximately one school year); and iii) 15 months or more (long term).

## Secondary outcomes
There are no secondary outcomes.

## Search methods for identification of studies
The search methods for this review (12 to 18 years) were built on, and are an update of, the literature searches and record screening activities, previously undertaken for the Cochrane Review of children aged 0 to 18 years ( ). Because our eligibility criteria coincide with those of the review, we updated but did not repeat their earlier searches. This review, and three other reviews covering children aged 0 to 2, 2 to 4, and 5 to 11 will replace and update the review.

## Electronic searches
For this review, studies were obtained from several different electronic searches, including updated searches from collaborators, an appended search of CENTRAL on the Cochrane Library and the inclusion of educational databases and grey literature ( ), as described below.

## Hodder update searches
Searches were conducted for an interim (non‐Cochrane) update of the review ( ). The review sought records published from 2018 (the date of the last full search for ) up to 23 March 2021, and also screened the records listed as ongoing and awaiting classification studies in . Details of the search strategies and methods of selection of studies can be found in . They included searches of Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, Embase, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), PsycINFO and trial registries.

## New databases and grey literature searches

## Database searches (September 2021)
We searched the following databases to update previous searches as mentioned above (see section 1.1 in ):
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL; 2021, Issue 9) in the Cochrane Library (searched 26 September 2021);
MEDLINE Ovid (23 March to 24 September 2021);
Embase Ovid (23 March to 24 September 2021); and
PsycINFO Ovid (23 March to 24 September 2021).

In addition, in September 2021, we searched the following education databases from 1990 onwards, to extend our reach compared with previous versions of the and reviews (see section 1.2 in ):
Australian Education Index (AEI) ProQuest (1990 to 26 September 2021);
British Education Index (BEI) EBSCOhost (1990 to 26 September 2021);
ERIC (Education Resources Information Center) EBSCOhost (1990 to 26 September 2021); and
Appended search of CENTRAL (1990 to 2021, Issue 9) in the Cochrane Library (searched 26 September 2021).

The appended search of CENTRAL (see sections 1.3 and 1.4 in ) included search terms for interventions around the following topics of: marketing; beverages and sweetening agents; food labelling; school meals; after/out‐of‐school activities; parental interventions; public health; electronic apps and web‐based interventions (backdated to 1990 onwards). The decision to limit the appended search to CENTRAL only was pragmatic, as Cochrane’s Centralised Search Service (CSS) uses a highly efficient search strategy to capture reports of RCTs from MEDLINE and Embase (for inclusion in CENTRAL) ( ). Also, our full rolling search (run across all databases, all years to date) includes several generic ‘prevention’ search strings, to capture any type of intervention.

## International trial registers (September 2021)
We searched the international trial registers (ClinicalTrials.gov) and the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, search portal (ICTRP) via CENTRAL on the Cochrane Library (searched 26 September 2021; see sections 1.3 and 1.4 in ).

## Grey literature (February‐March 2022)
We restricted the search of the grey literature to theses and dissertations and ran a pragmatic search for PhD theses (1990 onwards) on the following databases (see section 1.5 in ):
Proquest Dissertations & Theses Global (search.proquest.com/pqdtglobal/dissertations/; searched 1990 to 24 February 2022);
Electronic Theses Online Service (EThOS) ‐ British Library (ethos.bl.uk/Home.do; searched 1990 to 11 March 2022); and
DART ‐ Europe e‐theses Portal (dart-europe.eu/basic-search.php; searched 1990 to 31 March 2022).

## Retractions and corrigenda (April 2022)
We ran a search for retractions and corrigenda on 6 April 2022 (see section 1.6 in ).

## Search updates (February 2023)
From September 2021 to 7 February 2023, we ran automated weekly searches for new studies or additional reports of those already included, and screened the results. This search comprised a multi‐file search of Ovid MEDLINE, Embase and PsycINFO together with a search of CENTRAL on the Cochrane Library (see section 1.7 in ). This search supersedes all previous searches of the four main bibliographic databases (MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO, CENTRAL), as it is far more sensitive, based on terms for condition and population only (plus an RCT filter) (no terms for intervention).
Searches of the education databases were manually updated on 7 October 2022.
In databases where it was possible and appropriate, study design filters for randomised trials were used; in MEDLINE we used a modified version of the Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search Strategy for identifying randomised trials in MEDLINE: sensitivity‐ and precision‐maximising version (2008 revision) ( ).
We regard the date of last search for this review as 7 February 2023 because, except for the grey literature and education databases, this is the latest date that all other databases were searched.

## Searching other resources
We scanned the references of the included studies reports to identify additional relevant records. We also screened the records that were classified as awaiting classification and ongoing by Hodder’s team (obtained via personal communication with the authors).

## Data collection and analysis
In the successive sections, we reported only the methods we used, and the reader should refer to our protocol ( ) and section for pre‐planned but unused methods.

## Selection of studies
Two review authors (FS, ET) screened titles and abstracts independently and in duplicate using systematic review software. They retrieved full‐text articles of records that potentially met the eligibility criteria and screened these independently and in duplicate. The two authors resolved any differences in opinion or uncertainty through a process of discussion and, when necessary, they involved a third author. We recorded the selection process in a PRISMA diagram ( )

## Data extraction and management
We modified a data collection form for study characteristics and outcome data that was used in the Cochrane Review of interventions to prevent obesity in children. Two review authors (FS, ET) piloted the form, then extracted study characteristics and numerical data independently and in duplicate. Any disagreement was resolved through a process of discussion and, when necessary, the involvement of a third author. We extracted the study characteristics listed in .
Where we were not able to extract desirable statistics directly (e.g. standard deviations of BMI), we computed or estimated these using the methods described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ). We provide details of these imputation methods in Section 3.2 of the Statistical .
Furthermore, for studies that only reported outcome data as the proportion of individuals with overweight/obesity (i.e. not BMI, zBMI or BMI percentile), we used the proportions to estimate mean zBMI. The estimation procedure assumes that zBMI in each study sample follows a normal distribution. We describe the methods in detail in Section 3.1.3 of the Statistical .
We examined serious adverse events only in the studies meeting the main eligibility criteria, and we did not perform an additional search focusing on serious adverse events.

## Assessment of risk of bias in included studies
We assessed the risk of bias (RoB) for all BMI, zBMI and BMI percentile results at short‐term, medium‐term and long‐term follow‐up, using the RoB 2 tool ( ). RoB 2 is structured into five domains of bias: bias arising from the randomisation process; bias due to deviations from intended interventions; bias due to missing outcome data; bias in measurement of the outcome; and bias in selection of the reported result. For cluster‐RCTs, we used the version of the RoB 2 tool designed for studies using cluster‐randomisation ( ), which has an additional domain 'bias arising from the identification or recruitment of participants into clusters'. Judgements about risk of bias were determined using the algorithms in the tool, based on answers we gave to the relevant signalling questions. Judgement can be 'low' or 'high' risk of bias, or can express 'some concerns'. All assessments were managed using the RoB 2 Excel tool, freely available online (sites.google.com/site/riskofbiastool/welcome/rob-2-0-tool).
We assessed the risk of bias for the effect of assignment to the intervention at baseline (i.e. the 'intention‐to‐treat' (ITT) effect) for zBMI, BMI and BMI percentile at short‐, medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up, and only for specific results that contributed to meta‐analyses. For studies with multiple intervention arms, we assessed the risk of bias for each specific pairwise comparison contributing to meta‐analyses.
For studies identified through new searches, two authors independently used the RoB 2 tool to carry out the assessments (ET or FS), with advice received from other authors (JPTH, JS, THMM). Results included in either the Cochrane Review or the review had been assessed for risk of bias by two authors independently using the original Cochrane risk of bias tool (RoB 1) ( ). We transformed these RoB 1 assessments into RoB 2 assessments as follows. One author (ET or FS) first completed an independent RoB 2 assessment (blind to the RoB 1 assessment). She then compared this with the previous RoB 1 assessment. Differences or uncertainties were resolved through discussion with a second reviewer (FS or ET) and, where necessary, by involving a third author (JPTH, JS or TM). Detailed answers to signalling questions for all outcomes are available in Figshare (10.6084/m9.figshare.23904684).
To draw an overall conclusion about the risk of bias in a synthesised result across included studies, we used the methods set out in 4.2.a of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ). We used our overall risk of bias assessment for each result in the review to inform GRADE (see Summary of findings and assessment of the certainty of the evidence) and for sensitivity analyses (see ).
 

## Measures of treatment effect
We measured intervention effects on BMI, zBMI, and BMI percentile using an unstandardised mean difference (MD) between intervention groups and computed 95% confidence intervals. Most studies reported arm‐level data rather than contrast‐level data. Where contrast‐level data were reported, they often arose from models that were either not fully explained or involved a high level of covariate adjustment. For these reasons, we used the arm‐level data (in preference to contrast‐level data) to calculate mean differences in the change of zBMI/BMI/BMI percentile from baseline to post intervention. In accordance with our prioritisation of arm‐level data, we calculated mean differences from (in order of preference) (i) post intervention means adjusted for baseline values, (ii) mean change from baseline reported in the study (change scores), and (iii) change from baseline calculated from unadjusted baseline and post intervention means. In the absence of arm‐level data, we used contrast‐level data if they could be interpreted as measures of mean difference in outcome change. We provide details of these calculations in Section 3.1 of the Statistical . For serious adverse events, we intended to measure intervention effects using risk ratios, where possible.

## Unit of analysis issues
We examined each cluster‐RCT to determine whether the analysis accounted for clustering. For results that were not adjusted for clustering, we created an approximate analysis by inflating the standard error of the estimated intervention effect according to an estimated ‘design effect’ ( ). This required an estimate of the intra‐cluster correlation coefficient (ICC), describing the relative variability within and between clusters. For studies that did not report an ICC, we used an external estimate based on other cluster‐RCTs in the review. Given the values of ICC reported in these other trials, we chose a value of ICC = 0.02 for trials with clusters at the classroom and school level. We performed a sensitivity analysis with ICCs of 0 and 0.04 (see ). We chose not to adjust for clustering at the family level as cluster sizes were very small. We provide details of the cluster adjustment methods and choice of ICC in Section 3.1.3 of . Furthermore, we reported all values of unadjusted and adjusted standard errors plus the data used to calculate them in supplementary data in .
We addressed RCTs with more than two intervention groups according to guidance in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ). For RCTs with more than two experimental (or comparator) arms relevant to the same meta‐analysis, we combined the arms to create a single pairwise comparison. See Section 3.2 of the Statistical for details.

## Dealing with missing data
We examined the extent and reasons for missing data as part of the risk of bias assessment of each included RCT. For all outcomes, we sought results that most closely followed ITT principles. We did not impute missing data. Missing summary data were handled as reported in section 3.2.1.4 of .

## Assessment of heterogeneity
We assessed clinical diversity across studies by inspecting the included studies for variability in participants, intervention, and setting, and methodological diversity of studies by inspecting studies for variability in risk of bias. We used the I2 statistic to quantify the degree of inconsistency across results, supplemented by a P value from a test of homogeneity to measure the strength of evidence of statistical heterogeneity and interpreted these in line with the Cochrane Handbook ( ). For each meta‐analysis, we reported the results of the heterogeneity assessments (I2 and P value) alongside the measure of treatment effect.

## Assessment of reporting biases
We assessed the risk of bias arising from (non)reporting bias, including selective reporting bias using a preliminary version of the ROB‐ME (risk of bias due to missing evidence) tool ( ), which is based on the framework described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ). For meta‐analyses with more than 10 studies, this included examination of contour‐enhanced funnel plots and Egger's test for funnel plot asymmetry ( ).

## Data synthesis
We performed meta‐analyses of zBMI scores, BMI and BMI percentile using the generic inverse variance method with a random‐effects model ( ), and method of moments estimates of among‐study variance. Our main comparisons are:
dietary intervention versus no intervention/control;
activity intervention (including those targeting sedentary behaviour, sleep, play and exercise) versus no intervention/control;
intervention with both dietary and activity components versus no intervention/control;
intervention with both dietary and activity components versus dietary intervention alone;
intervention with both dietary and activity components versus activity intervention alone; and
dietary intervention versus activity intervention.

We analysed the MD, as described in the section. We analysed differences that were adjusted for clustering (including our own approximate adjustments) in preference to analyses that were not adjusted for clustering. Decision rules regarding which effect measure to extract and analyse, when multiple measures were presented, are described in the and sections. All studies eligible for meta‐analysis were included in the primary analyses.

## Synthesis if data cannot be combined with meta‐analysis
We supplemented the meta‐analyses with comments about the potential impact of studies from which data were not suitable for inclusion in the meta‐analyses.

## Serious adverse events
Due to the diversity of measures used to define adverse events, and the sparsity of data for this outcome, we tabulated information about serious adverse effects and summarised the results narratively.

## Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity
We explored heterogeneity in the primary analyses by performing the following pre‐planned subgroup analyses for BMI, zBMI and BMI percentile at short‐, medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up, according to study‐level characteristics and participant‐level characteristics.
Main setting of the intervention. This was coded as ‘school’; ‘school and home’; ‘home’; or ‘other’. After‐school programmes were coded as ‘school’. The ‘other’ category included settings such as community, web, health service and telehealth. Studies in mixed settings were coded according to the following rules:
school and other was coded as ‘school’;
home and other was coded as ‘home’; and
school and home and other was coded as ‘school and home’, unless ‘other’ was clearly the main setting and the other elements were minor (e.g. intervention was carried out in a community setting but with some short homework tasks).
Income status of country (high‐income country versus non‐high‐income country, using World Bank criteria).
Socioeconomic status (low versus mixed, based on categorisations as described by the trial authors).

We selected ‘main setting of the intervention’ for subgroup analysis because public health policymakers and commissioners need to understand where best (given their limited financial resources) to target the implementation of the interventions to prevent childhood obesity (e.g. schools or the community) ( ). We selected ‘income status of country’ to provide information on the relative effectiveness of the interventions between countries of different income status, given that the effect of interventions developed in high‐income countries may (or may not) translate well to low‐income countries due to contextual factors, such as stark differences in opportunities for healthy eating and physical activity ( ). Finally, ‘socioeconomic status’ was selected given the wealth of evidence that suggests that some public health interventions can result in intervention‐generated inequalities ( ).
We also planned subgroup analyses according to sex and duration of intervention. However, not enough studies presented subgroup analyses by sex, and we decided that attempting to code duration of intervention was not particularly meaningful when some of the interventions sought long‐term changes through short‐term activity to change physical environments.
Tests for subgroup differences were based on standard heterogeneity tests as described in Chapter 10, section 10.11.3.1 of the Cochrane Handbook ( ). A P value ≤ 0.05 was used to indicate a likely difference between subgroups.

## Sensitivity analysis
We performed sensitivity analyses to examine the robustness of our findings to inclusion of (i) results assessed as being at high risk of bias; and (ii) results where the outcome (BMI/zBMI/BMI percentile) had been self‐reported, by repeating analyses with such results omitted. We investigated the impact of imputing ICCs in cluster‐RCTs, as described in the section Unit of analysis issues.

## Summary of findings and assessment of the certainty of the evidence
We prepared summary of findings tables for each of our main comparisons (i.e. dietary intervention versus control, activity interventions versus control and dietary and activity interventions versus control) using RevMan Web ( ). Each summary of findings table summarises the size and certainty of effects of the interventions for BMI and zBMI at short‐, medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up, and serious adverse events. We based our assessments of certainty on the five GRADE considerations (overall risk of bias, consistency of effect, imprecision, indirectness and publication bias) and the criteria that we have used are reported in . We followed the methods described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ).
Two authors worked independently to make GRADE judgements, resolving any disagreements by discussion. All decisions to rate down certainty in the results were justified using footnotes, with comments added to aid readers’ interpretation of the tables. We documented and incorporated the GRADE judgements into the reporting of results for each outcome.

## Results

## Description of studies

## Results of the search
The study selection process is summarised in the PRISMA flowchart reported in . From the studies included in the previous version of this review ( ), we identified 32 age‐relevant studies. Of these, we included 31 studies and excluded one study due to it having fewer than three clusters per group. From the update searches from , we identified 64 age‐relevant studies. We included 25 of these, excluded 13 and identified 26 ongoing studies. From our new searches, we identified 8204 records from our electronic searches and 77 from searching other sources. After deduplication, two review authors screened 6198 records by title and abstract and excluded 5501. We assessed 697 full‐text reports and excluded 573 as irrelevant; 25 (16 studies) are listed in . We included 18 studies, listed four as awaiting classification and identified eight as ongoing. We combined these with the studies included in the previous version, such that this review includes 74 studies and identified four studies as awaiting classification and 34 ongoing studies.
 

## Included studies
Summaries of each of the 74 included studies are provided in the . We summarised additional material relating to the study design, participants, intervention, setting, comparisons, serious adverse events, costing, PROGRESS characteristics and studies excluded from the meta‐analyses in , , , , and . Studies are ordered within these tables to correspond to the order in which they appear in subsequent forest plots.
 

## Study design
Twenty‐five of the included studies were individually‐randomised and 48 were cluster‐randomised (see ) with one trial starting as individually‐randomised and being modified to a cluster‐RCT in its second year. Sixty‐six of the included studies (89%) were two‐arm studies, five had three arms (7%), two studies had four and five arms each (1%), one study had eight arms and used a 2 x 2 x 2 factorial design (1%). In 36 cluster‐RCTs (49%), the unit of allocation was the school and, in seven studies (9.5%), it was the classroom; in the remainder, the unit of allocation was the family (n = 3, 4%), parent/caregiver‐child dyad (n = 2, 3%), scout troop (n = 1, 1%), orthodontist practice (n = 1, 1%) and primary care clinic (n = 1, 1%).

## Study setting
Details of the study setting in the included studies can be found in and . Thirty‐five (47%) studies were conducted in North America, with 33 of these in the USA (45%); the remainder were conducted in Europe (n = 19, 26%), Australasia (n = 10, 14%), South America (n = 7, 9%); Asia (n = 3, 4%), and the Middle East and North Africa (n = 2, 3%) ( ). Based on the World Bank classification of countries by income, 60 RCTs were conducted in high‐income countries (81%), with eight (11%) in upper‐middle income countries, and three (4%) in lower‐middle‐income countries. Note that three studies (4%) were conducted in more than one country (high‐income and upper‐middle income countries).
 

## Participants
Details of the participants in the included studies can be found in and . Nineteen studies (26%) specifically targeted disadvantaged children or families, or both, in a particular setting (e.g. school/community/area) or a school or community within a disadvantaged area. Indeed, this is the preferred way of addressing health inequalities, i.e. to target the health disparity population exclusively ( ). In 65 studies (88%), participants were selected from the general population and, in nine studies (12%), participants were selected from a specific population; for example, three studies only recruited participants at risk of developing overweight or obesity, one study recruited participants from immigrant and refugee populations, one study recruited participants considered by their teachers to be disengaged in physical activity, three studies only recruited girls practising low physical activity (defined as less than one daily hour of physical activity or with activity levels at or below 30 minutes per day/3 days per week) and one study recruited participants that reported consuming at least one serving per day of sugar‐sweetened beverage. In 26 studies (35%), children with physical disabilities were excluded and, in 29 studies (39%), children with mental disabilities were excluded.

## Interventions
Details of the interventions in the included studies can be found in and .

## Theory
In 42 studies (57%), the intervention was reported to be based on one or more theories, the most common being social cognitive theory (n = 24, 32%).

## Type of intervention and comparison
Sixty‐one studies (82%) investigated one intervention against control. Ten studies (14%) compared two interventions; three (4%) compared three interventions (including one study with height arms that used a 2 x 2 x 2 factorial design); one study (1%) implemented four interventions.
Of the 74 studies included, 19 studies (26%) implemented a dietary intervention, 22 studies (30%) implemented an activity intervention and 33 studies (45%) implemented a combined dietary and activity intervention. Thirty‐one studies (42%) compared a combined dietary and activity intervention with a control group; 20 studies (27%) compared an activity intervention with control and 16 (22%) compared a dietary intervention with control ( ). One three‐arm study compared both a dietary and activity intervention and an activity intervention with a control group. One study compared a dietary intervention with control in year one and two dietary interventions in year two (the control group received a reduced intervention in year two). Five studies reported head‐to‐head comparisons: one compared an activity intervention with a dietary intervention, two compared two combined dietary and activity interventions, one compared two dietary interventions and one compared two activity interventions.

## Duration
Fifty‐one interventions (69%) were implemented for fewer than nine months; 19 interventions (26%) were implemented for a period between nine and less than 15 months, and four interventions (5%) were implemented for 15 or more months. The shortest intervention was conducted over one visit ( ) and the longest over 28 months ( ).

## Setting
Forty‐three studies (58%) were conducted in schools and some of these included after‐school programmes (ASP, n = 9, 12%); others were conducted in the community (n = 5, 7%), in the home (n = 5, 7%), in a primary care setting (n = 3, 4%), by telehealth (n = 1, 1%), and in more than one setting (n = 12, 16%). Community settings included the research centres where the study was based (n = 3), recreation centres (n = 1), and boy scout groups (n = 1). The primary care setting included offices of a healthcare centre (n = 1), orthodontist offices (n = 1) and a primary care clinic (n = 1). For the purpose of meta‐analyses, we classified RCTs into the following subgroups according to the main setting (i.e. the setting where most of the intervention was carried out): school (n = 46, 62%), home (n = 6, 8%), school + home (n = 11, 15%), other (n = 11, 15%) ( ).
Amongst the 74 studies included: in 19 (26%), the intervention included a home activity (note, in only 10 of these, the intervention was set at home, either exclusively or partially); in 19 studies (26%), the intervention was experienced by the children individually; in 34 studies (46%), it was experienced as a group; and in 21 studies (28%), it was experienced both individually and as a group. In 16 studies (22%), the intervention was delivered electronically (online/digital interventions, either exclusively or significantly) and in six studies (8%), there was a minor component that was delivered electronically.
Amongst the 19 studies in which dietary interventions were implemented: in five (29%), the intervention included a home activity (note that in only two of these, the intervention was partially set at home); in five studies (26%), the intervention was experienced by the children individually; in 8 studies (42%), it was experienced as a group; and in six studies (32%), it was experienced both individually and as a group. In only three studies (16%), the intervention was delivered electronically (either exclusively or significantly) and in three studies (16%), there was a minor component that was delivered electronically.
Amongst the 23 studies in which activity interventions were implemented: in six (26%), the intervention included a home activity (note that in only three of these, the intervention was set at home, either exclusively or partially); in two studies (9%), the intervention was experienced by the children individually; in 15 studies (65%), it was experienced as a group; and in six studies (26%), it was experienced both individually and as a group. In seven studies (30%), the intervention was delivered electronically (either exclusively or significantly) and in one study (4%) there was a minor component that was delivered electronically.
Amongst the 34 studies in which combined dietary and activity interventions were implemented, in nine studies (26%); the intervention included a home activity (note that in only five of these the intervention was set at home, either exclusively or partially); in 12 studies (35%), the intervention was experienced by the children individually; in 11 studies (32%), it was experienced as a group; and in 11 studies (32%), it was experienced both individually and as a group. In seven studies (21%), the intervention was delivered electronically (either exclusively or significantly) and in two studies (6%), there was a minor component that was delivered electronically.

## Complexity and mechanism
Amongst the 74 included studies, over half of the studies (46, 62%) delivered multi‐component interventions (i.e. included three or more components). In 51 studies (69%), the intervention had an explicit component of modifying the child’s behaviour; in 58 studies (78%), the intervention had an explicit component that provided education or information for the child; in 42 studies (57%), the intervention had an explicit component aiming to change the social environment of the child; and in 19 studies (26%), the intervention had an explicit component aiming to change the physical environment of the child.
Amongst the 19 studies in which dietary interventions were implemented, only just over half of the studies (11 studies, 58%) delivered multi‐component interventions (i.e. included three or more components). In 10 studies (53%), the intervention had an explicit component of modifying the child’s behaviour; in 16 studies (84%), the intervention had an explicit component that provided education or information for the child; in eight studies (42%); the intervention had an explicit component aiming to change the social environment of the child; and in six studies (32%), the intervention had an explicit component aiming to change the physical environment of the child.
Amongst the 23 studies in which activity interventions were implemented, only just over half of the studies (14, 61%) delivered multi‐component interventions. In 20 studies (87%), the intervention had an explicit component of modifying the child’s behaviour; in 13 studies (57%), the intervention had an explicit component that provided education or information for the child; in 10 studies (43%), the intervention had an explicit component aiming to change the social environment of the child; and in five studies (22%), the intervention had an explicit component aiming to change the physical environment of the child.
Amongst the 34 studies in which combined dietary and activity interventions were implemented, the majority of the studies (23 studies, 68%) delivered multi‐component interventions. In most of the studies (31 studies, 68%), the intervention had an explicit component of modifying the child’s behaviour; in 31 studies (91%), the intervention had an explicit component that provided education or information for the child; in 24 studies (71%), the intervention had an explicit component aiming to change the social environment of the child; and in only eight studies (24%), the intervention had an explicit component aiming to change the physical environment of the child.

## Comparators
Details of the comparators reported in the included studies can be found in and . The nature of control groups varied across the 74 included studies. In the majority (n = 59, 80%), the comparison group was 'no active intervention' (i.e. reported as no intervention, usual care, or waiting‐list comparisons). Some studies (n = 10, 14%) included an active control comparison in which the type of the intervention was not eligible for inclusion (e.g. a smoking reduction and second‐hand smoke exposure programme, a health and safety programme, general health programmes, a sun protection behaviour programme, and a self‐help programme). As both 'no active intervention' and 'attention control' interventions were not expected to affect the outcomes, we coded such comparisons as 'controls' in the meta‐analyses. In three studies (4%), the comparison was made against the same type of intervention (two were dietary and activity interventions and one was a dietary intervention); the remaining study (n =1, 1%) had a dietary intervention as comparator for an activity‐only intervention ( ).

## Outcomes
Details of all outcomes reported in the included studies can be found in and , , , , and . The most common measures of adiposity (fatness) reported were BMI (n = 37, 50%), zBMI (n = 29, 39%), and BMI percentile (n = 10, 14%). Some studies reported only the proportion of children who were living with obesity or overweight (n= 8, 11%) and one study (1%) reported only the proportion of children living with obesity. Fourteen studies (19%) reported data on serious adverse events ( ) and three studies (4%) reported data on observed serious adverse events (e.g. injuries) that were related to participation in the study.

## Funding sources
Details of funding sources reported in the included studies can be found in . The majority of the studies declared non‐industry funding, such as funding from not‐for‐profit charitable organisations and government institutes (n = 62, 84%). Five studies (7%) described mixed funding from both industry and not‐for‐profit organisations, including sponsorship received from food suppliers (n = 1), a PlayStation manufacturer (n = 1), a gym equipment supplier (n = 1), a healthcare device manufacturer (n = 1) and a private healthcare facility (n = 1). No RCTs were funded wholly by industry. Six studies (8%) did not report any details on funding, and one study (1%) declared that no funding was received. Nineteen studies (26%) declared that both research and writing of the trial reports had been done independently from the funders, including three (4%) that received some industry sponsorship.

## Implementation factors

## Economic information
Details of economic information reported in the included studies can be found in . Of the 74 trials identified, 31 studies mentioned resources associated with the trial or the intervention or referenced a linked economic evaluation. Of these, seven did not provide further details. Eleven studies reported trial‐related costs and, in all cases, these were incentives for participation or data collection or both, and were paid to participants in both intervention and control arms. Total incentives ranged from USD$5 to $100 per participant. These costs would not usually be included in an economic evaluation. In total, 13 studies reported intervention costs. In several cases, the cost of a package of resources for schools to deliver the intervention was provided or the cost of a limited grant to purchase equipment themselves. These costs ranged from AUD$1500 to $5000 per school. None of the publications reported a full economic evaluation; however, four referenced linked economic analyses. All were trial based, with no modelling of costs and effects conducted.

## Equity and disadvantage – PROGRESS characteristics
Details of PROGRESS characteristics reported in the included studies can be found in the and . The vast majority of the studies (n = 72, 97%) reported baseline data on at least one PROGRESS characteristic, with only two studies (3%) mentioning none of them. Data on place of residence were reported by 28 studies (38%), race/ethnicity/culture/language by 48 studies (65%), parent(s) occupation by 5 studies (7%), gender/sex by 70 studies (95%), parent(s) education by 23 studies (31%), and socioeconomic status by 42 studies (57%); none of the studies reported data on religion or social capital.
Seventeen studies (23%) reported on the impact of at least one PROGRESS characteristic on the effectiveness of the intervention (i.e. test for interaction, effect modification or subgroup analysis); the impact of race/ethnicity/culture/language was assessed in three studies (4%); parent(s) occupation in one study (1%); gender/sex in 15 studies (20%); parent(s) education in one study (1%); and socioeconomic status in five studies (7%). None of the studies reported on the impact of place of residence, religion or social capital.
It is important to note here that the preferred way of addressing health disparities/inequalities, as suggested by , is to target the population at risk of disparity exclusively, e.g. by intervening in a school or community with significant health disparities/inequalities. In this type of population, all adolescents in the study would be at high risk of health disparity. In this Cochrane Review, we did not consider studies where the entire sample was at risk of health disparity; we considered only those with subgroup analysis based on disparity. Further analysis of these individual studies, for example using the approach suggested by McNulty and colleagues, would provide a more comprehensive assessment of the impact of such interventions on health disparities/inequalities.

## Studies awaiting classification and ongoing studies
We were not able to obtain the full text of three records ( ; ; ) and one record awaits translation ( ). Details of studies awaiting classification are reported in .
We identified 34 ongoing studies (41 records), and details are reported in . Ongoing studies and those awaiting classification will be incorporated into future updates of this review.
Of the 34 potential ongoing studies identified, 13 (38%) were conducted in North America, with most of these in the USA (n = 12 ; 31%); the remainder were conducted in Europe (n = 7, 21%), with two (6%) being conducted in the United Kingdom; five studies (15%) were conducted in Asia; four (12%) in Australasia; four (12%) in South America; and one (3%) in Africa. Based on the World Bank classification of countries by income, most ongoing studies were conducted in high‐income countries (n = 25; 73%), five (15%) were conducted in upper‐middle income countries, and four (12%) in lower‐middle‐income countries.
The type of intervention was dietary in six studies (18%), activity in seven (%) and dietary and activity in 19 studies (21%); one study (3%) had multi‐arms and reported on more than one type of intervention and, in one study (3%), the type of intervention is unclear. In 11 of the ongoing studies (32%), the interventions were mainly or substantially delivered electronically, which is a higher percentage compared with the included studies (n = 22%). The main setting of these studies was school in 22 studies (65%), community in 13 studies (38%; some in primary care and church), and home in one study (3%).
We note that many of the ongoing studies listed here were expected to complete data collection over two years ago, and some of these were conducted over 10 years ago. From the information in their trial registration and/or protocols, they intended to report (primary or secondary outcomes) on change in BMI (or other weight status) and, for some of these studies, results of other outcomes or process evaluations have been published. We understand that the COVID pandemic may have impacted on planned intervention delivery and data collection, and on the author’s capacity to write up study findings for publication.

## Excluded studies
Details of the 16 excluded studies that we identified as potentially being most likely to be considered eligible are reported in . Of these, 14 studies were identified from previous versions of the review and two were identified by our database searches. From the review, we excluded one study ( ) due to ineligible study design (i.e. the participants of age relevant to this review were recruited from two clusters/groups). From , we excluded 13 studies. Two studies were from the updated searches ( ; ) and 11 from the list of ongoing studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). We excluded due to ineligible study design and due to outcome of interest not being measured (BMI was measured at baseline but not at follow‐up). From the 11 studies that we have excluded from the list of ongoing studies in the Hodder review: five studies were excluded due to outcome of interest not being measured ( ; ; ; ; ), three due to ineligible study design ( ; ; ), and three due to ineligible population ( ; ; ). We also excluded two studies ( ; ) identified by our database searches that were initially assessed as included when the full text of the paper was first read, but during the process of data extraction, it was apparent that the study did not meet the inclusion criteria due to ineligible study design. A full citation list of the 569 excluded reports is available on Figshare (10.6084/m9.figshare.24564871).

## Risk of bias in included studies
We used the RoB 2 tool to assess the risk of bias in the results from the 54 studies that were included in the meta‐analyses. Traffic light plots (domain‐level judgements and overall) for each individual result are reported alongside each study result in the relevant forest‐plots; a supplementary file containing detailed answers to signalling questions for all outcomes is available on Figshare (doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.23904684). Since each of the 54 studies may have contributed to more than one meta‐analysis, we assessed the risk of bias in 91 results. Overall, eight results (9%) were judged as having 'low' risk of bias, 59 (65%) were judged as having 'some concerns' and 24 (26%) were judged as having 'high' risk of bias. Most judgements of high risk of bias were due to missing outcome data (n = 20, 22%). Supporting statements for each domain judgement are reported in the .
We used a preliminary version of the ROB‐ME (risk of bias due to missing evidence) tool to assess the risk of bias due to missing evidence in each of the main meta‐analyses ( ). Twenty meta‐analyses were judged as having 'some concerns' due to the potential for missing studies that are likely to have eligible results (traditional publication bias). Fifteen of these meta‐analyses had no missing results in the included studies; in five meta‐analyses, results were missing from the included studies, but we judged that the synthesised effect estimate would be unlikely to be impacted by missing results. Six meta‐analyses were judged as being at 'high' risk of bias due to results being missing from the included studies that had the potential to impact on the synthesised effect estimate.
 

## Effects of interventions
See: ; ; 
See , and .

## Overview of evidence
We presented the results by comparison, within that by outcome, and within that by time point (short, medium or long term as defined in the section in the Methods). Of the 74 studies included in this review, 54 studies (73%) were included in meta‐analyses. Amongst these, 31 reported BMI, 25 reported zBMI, 7 reported the proportion of children with obesity or overweight (from which we derived zBMI) and 8 studies reported BMI percentile. For each outcome, we provided a summary forest plot presenting the results for all comparisons and all three time points. Forest plots displaying results of individual studies can be found in each comparison section. We focused on findings for average effects across studies within each subset. Importantly, heterogeneity was generally high across the analyses. We presented findings from our prespecified subgroup analyses and note that heterogeneity was generally not well explained by the subgrouping.
Details of 20 studies excluded from the meta‐analyses, and reasons for exclusion are reported in . In five studies (7%), the results were reported narratively and, in four studies, the results reported were not usable for inclusion in the meta‐analyses. We presented findings from these studies alongside the meta‐analysis results. In a further four studies, outcomes were measured at follow‐up, but results were not reported and, in five studies (7%), measurement of the outcome(s) at eligible follow‐up(s) was planned (e.g. listed in the trial registry or study protocol or both) but results were not reported (and we found no evidence that they were measured). In two studies (3%), the comparison was not eligible for inclusion in the meta‐analysis (i.e. the comparison was between the same type of intervention). In addition to the excluded studies, we also reported that evidence was missing for some time points from four included studies (5%).
For clarity, the results provided in this review describe the effect of interventions in terms of the difference in change in BMI between the intervention and control groups. The aims of the interventions were to limit the upward trend of increasing BMI (and gaining excess weight and developing overweight and obesity) compared with what adolescents might otherwise experience. The aim of the interventions was not to reduce BMI per se in children living with underweight or ideal weight. However, given that most study samples included a combination of adolescents who were living with underweight, ideal weight, overweight and obesity (note: some studies excluded adolescents that were underweight or with obesity), the potential positive impact of these interventions for adolescents already living with obesity was to reduce further excess weight gain.
There is no agreement in the literature regarding a minimum threshold for what constitutes a 'clinically' significant effect of interventions to prevent obesity in terms of BMI units/zBMI change. One might assume that an effective intervention to prevent obesity in children would result in zero change, but this is complicated (at least for BMI units), in that the ideal BMI varies with age during childhood ( ). For the purpose of this review, we simply focused on any statistical differences between the intervention and control groups, but with the caveat that small differences may not translate into clinically meaningful differences.

## Dietary interventions versus control
We found 17 studies (13,071 participants) that compared dietary interventions versus control and, of these, 13 studies (8982 participants) were included in meta‐analyses.

## BMI
Meta‐analysis results for BMI are reported in . We found that dietary interventions, when compared with control, may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.18, 95% CI ‐0.41 to 0.06; I2 0%, P = 0.83; 3 studies, 605 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; ) or at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.30, 95% CI ‐1.67 to 1.07; 1 study, 44 participants; low‐certainty evidence; ), but the evidence is very uncertain. In contrast, we found that dietary interventions, when compared with control, may reduce BMI at medium‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD ‐0.65, 95% CI ‐1.18 to ‐0.11; I2 88%, P < 0.001; 3 studies, 900 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; ). One of the three studies was at high risk of bias due to selection of the participants into the study and to missing outcome data. A sensitivity analysis removing the study at high risk of bias resulted in loss of the evidence of a beneficial effect at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.67, 95% CI ‐1.75 to 0.41; 2 studies, 394 participants), whereas it did not change the overall results of the meta‐analyses for BMI at short‐ and long‐term follow‐up ( ).
 

## Narrative data
One study found that dietary interventions, on average, may have little to no effect on BMI at medium‐term follow‐up compared with control ( ; ).
One study measured the effect of dietary interventions on BMI at medium‐term follow‐up but did not report the results ( ).

## zBMI
Meta‐analysis results for zBMI are reported in . The evidence suggests that dietary interventions compared with control do not reduce zBMI at short‐term (MD ‐0.06, 95% CI ‐0.12 to 0.01; I2 78%, P = 0.001; 5 studies, 3154 participants; low‐certainty evidence; ) or at medium‐term (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.17 to 0.21; 1 study, 112 participants; low‐certainty evidence; ) follow‐up. Furthermore, we found that dietary interventions compared with control may have little to no effect on long‐term follow‐up of zBMI, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD ‐0.14, 95% CI ‐0.38 to 0.10; I2 75%, P = 0.04; 2 studies, 1089 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; ). Sensitivity analysis removing studies at high risk of bias did not change the overall results of the meta‐analyses ( ).
 

## Narrative data
One study found that, when measured at short‐term follow‐up, the intervention may decrease the proportion of children with obesity, but did not report whether the same effect was observed in the control group ( ; ).

## BMI percentile
Meta‐analysis results for BMI percentile are reported in . The evidence suggests that dietary interventions compared with control do not reduce BMI percentile at short‐term (MD ‐0.05, 95% CI ‐1.23 to 1.13; I2 0%, P = 0.64; 2 studies, 453 participants; low‐certainty evidence; ) or long‐term (MD ‐2.53, 95% CI ‐7.02 to 1.96; 1 study, 44 participants; low‐certainty evidence; ) follow‐up. Furthermore, we found that dietary interventions compared with control likely do not reduce BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.89, 95% CI ‐3.95 to 0.18; I2 0%, P = 0.52; 2 studies, 421 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; ). A sensitivity analysis removing studies at high risk of bias did not change the overall results of the meta‐analyses ( ).
 Two studies measured the effect of dietary interventions on BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up ( and ) but did not report the results ( ).

## Serious adverse events
Details of serious adverse events are reported in . Two studies (377 participants) reported data on serious adverse events ( ; ), but neither found that any occurred as a result of the intervention (low‐certainty evidence).

## Activity interventions versus control
We found 21 studies (17,402 participants) that compared activity interventions versus control and, of these, 15 studies (13,447 participants) were included in meta‐analyses.

## BMI
Meta‐analysis results for BMI are reported in . We found that activity interventions on average, compared with control, do not reduce BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.64, 95% CI ‐1.86 to 0.58; I2 98%, P < 0.001; 6 studies, 1780 participants; low‐certainty evidence; ). This result was downgraded one level due to imprecision (evidence is from 1780 participants) and one level due to inconsistency (tau = 1; the outlying study reported a large reduction in BMI in the intervention group, though it contributed only 16.8% of the weight to the analysis). In contrast, we found that activity interventions may result in a slight reduction in BMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.32, 95% CI ‐0.53 to ‐0.11; I2 33%, P = 0.22; 3 studies, 2143 participants; low‐certainty evidence; ). Of the three studies included in the meta‐analysis, one study was at high risk of bias due to potential bias in the selection of the reported result. We also found that activity interventions may reduce BMI slightly during long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.28, 95% CI ‐0.51 to ‐0.05; 1 study, 985 participants; low‐certainty evidence; ). Sensitivity analysis removing studies at high risk of bias did not change the overall results of the meta‐analyses (i.e. no evidence of a difference; ).

## Narrative data
One study found no effect of activity interventions on BMI ( ; ).
One study measured the effect of activity interventions on BMI at medium‐term follow‐up but did not report the results ( ) and, in two studies, measurement of BMI at short‐term ( ) and medium‐term ( ) follow‐up were planned, but results were not reported and we have no evidence that it was measured.

## zBMI
Meta‐analysis results for zBMI are reported in . We found that activity interventions compared with control do not reduce zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.01 to 0.05; I2 = 0%, P = 0.76; 7 studies, 4718 participants; high‐certainty evidence; ). We also found that activity interventions compared with control likely do not reduce zBMI at medium‐term (MD 0, 95% CI ‐0.04 to 0.05; I2 = 48%; P = 0.08; 6 studies, 5335 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; ) or long‐term (MD ‐0.05, 95% CI ‐0.12 to 0.02; 1 study, 985 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; ) follow‐up. Sensitivity analysis removing studies at high risk of bias did not change the overall results of the meta‐analyses (i.e. no evidence of a difference; ).
In two studies, zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up was planned ( ; ), but results were not reported, and we have no evidence that it was measured ( ).

## BMI percentile
Meta‐analysis results for BMI percentile are reported in . We found that activity interventions compared with control may have little to no effect on BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD ‐1.09, 95% CI ‐2.81 to 0.63; 1 study, 1020 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; ); note that the one study reporting data had high risk of bias due to randomisation and missing outcome data.
We found no studies reporting BMI percentile at long‐term follow‐up, but we found one study that measured BMI percentile in the short term but did not report the results ( ; ).

## Serious adverse events
Details of serious adverse events are reported in . Seven studies (5428 participants) reported data on serious adverse events ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Of these, two studies reported occurrence of serious adverse events: one study, , reported that 20% of the participants in the intervention group reported an injury (e.g. bruises or strained muscles/tendons) as a result of the intervention; another study, , reported that some participants did not complete the study due to absence, withdrawal, or injuries or illness, although it was not reported whether these were related to participation in the study, and no quantification is provided (low‐certainty evidence).

## Dietary and activity interventions versus control
We found 32 studies (31,445 participants) that compared dietary and activity interventions versus control and, of these, 25 studies (23,456 participants) were included in meta‐analyses.

## BMI
Meta‐analysis results for BMI are reported in . We found that dietary and activity interventions on average, compared with control, result in little to no difference in BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.03, 95% CI ‐0.07 to 0.13; I2 0%, P = 0.58; 11 studies, 3429 participants; high‐certainty evidence; ). In a sensitivity analysis excluding one study in which the outcome was self‐reported ( ), we still found little to no effect of interventions (MD 0.03, 95% CI ‐0.07 to 0.13; 10 studies, 3249 participants). Similarly, we found that dietary and activity interventions compared with control probably do not reduce BMI at medium‐term (MD 0.01, 95% CI ‐0.09 to 0.11; I2 0%, P = 0.95; 8 studies, 5612 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; ) or long‐term (MD 0.06, 95% CI ‐0.04 to 0.16; I2 55%, P = 0.05; 6 studies, 8736 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; ) follow‐up. A sensitivity analysis removing studies at high risk of bias did not change the overall results of the meta‐analyses (i.e. no evidence of a difference) at any of the follow‐up times ( ) and a funnel plot did not show evidence of small‐study effects ( ).

## Narrative data
One study reported little to no effect of dietary and activity interventions compared with control on BMI at medium‐term follow‐up ( ; ). A further study reported the odds of maintaining a normal BMI or improving from a BMI indicating overweight or obesity at medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up and found little to no effect of the intervention ( ).
Two studies measured the effects of dietary and activity interventions compared with control on BMI at medium‐term ( ) and long‐term ( ) follow‐up but did not report the results. Furthermore, two studies planned measurement of BMI at short‐term ( ) and medium‐term ( ) follow‐up, but results were not reported, and we have no evidence that the measurements took place ( ).

## zBMI
Meta‐analysis results for zBMI are reported in . We found that dietary and activity interventions compared with control may have little to no effect on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD ‐0.09, 95% CI ‐0.20 to 0.02; I2 = 77%, P = 0.01; 3 studies, 515 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; ). Furthermore, the evidence suggests that dietary and activity interventions compared with control do not reduce zBMI at medium‐term (MD ‐0.05, 95% CI ‐0.10 to 0.01; I2 = 58%, P = 0.03; 6 studies, 3511 participants; low‐certainty evidence; ) or long‐term (MD ‐0.02, 95% CI ‐0.05 to 0.01; I2 = 30%, P = 0.20; 7 studies, 8430 participants; low‐certainty evidence; ) follow‐up. Sensitivity analysis removing two studies at high risk of bias resulted in dietary and activity interventions likely to reduce zBMI at short term follow‐up (MD ‐0.22, 95% CI ‐0.33 to ‐0.11; 1 study, 194 participants; ), but did not change the overall results of the meta‐analyses (i.e. no evidence of a difference) at medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up.

## Narrative data
Two studies reported little to no effect of dietary and activity interventions compared with control on zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up ( ; ; ). One study only reported a beneficial effect in favour of the intervention at short‐term follow‐up ( ).
Three studies measured the effects of dietary and activity interventions compared with control on zBMI at short‐term ( ) and medium‐term ( ; ; ) follow‐up, but did not report the results ( ).

## BMI percentile
Meta‐analysis results for BMI percentile are reported in . We found that dietary and activity interventions compared with control may reduce BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD ‐1.69, 95% CI ‐3.22 to ‐0.16; 1 study, 46 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; ); note that the one study reporting data had high risk of bias due to randomisation and missing outcome data. We found little to no effect of dietary and activity interventions compared with control on BMI percentile at long‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD ‐1.05, 95% CI ‐2.85 to 0.75; 1 study, 1368 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; ); note that the one study reporting data had high risk of bias due to randomisation and missing outcome data. We found no studies reporting BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up.

## Serious adverse events
Details of serious adverse events are reported in . Four studies (2394 participants) reported data on serious adverse events (very low‐certainty evidence; ; ; ; ). One study reported that 8.7% of the participants developed clinical levels of concern about shape and weight ( ). One study reported that, in one enroled patient (in the control group), death occurred during the study period ( ), however, the authors stated that the death was in no way related to participation in this research study. The patient's death occurred following data collection at the first month time point, but prior to data collection at the sixth‐month time point. Two studies reported no effect of the intervention on serious adverse events.

## Activity interventions versus dietary interventions
We found one study ( ; 473 participants) that compared activity interventions versus dietary interventions.

## BMI
Meta‐analysis results for BMI are reported in . We found that activity interventions compared with dietary interventions may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain (MD 0, 95% CI ‐0.28 to 0.28; 1 study, 416 participants; very low‐certainty evidence; ).

## BMI percentile
Meta‐analysis results for BMI percentile are reported in . The evidence suggests that dietary interventions compared with activity interventions do not reduce BMI percentile at short term follow‐up (MD ‐1.35, 95% CI ‐2.99 to 0.29; 1 study, 403 participants; low‐certainty evidence; ).
The study did not measure BMI or BMI percentile at medium‐term or long‐term follow‐up, zBMI at any time point, or serious adverse events.

## Dietary intervention versus dietary intervention
We found one study ( ; 21,261 participants) that compared two dietary interventions (i.e. with no control group; ).

## BMI
One study compared two dietary interventions (i.e. with no control group; ): one intervention that was delivered as a multi‐component was compared with an environmental intervention. All students enroled in a school participating in the DIATROFI Program received a fresh boxed meal at 10 a.m. every school day. In the schools assigned to the multi‐component intervention group, a healthy nutrition educational programme was also implemented, including educational material and activities for each target group. The outcome was the proportion of participants whose BMI changed from indicating overweight or obesity to normal weight BMI. The authors reported that there was little to no effect of the multi‐component intervention, compared with an environmental intervention, on the probability of improving from overweight or obesity to normal weight in adolescents at medium follow‐up.

## zBMI, BMI percentile and serious adverse events
The study did not measure zBMI, BMI percentile, or serious adverse events.

## Activity intervention vs activity intervention
We found one study ( ; 78 participants) that compared two activity interventions (i.e. with no control group; ).

## BMI
The study planned to measure BMI at short‐term follow‐up, but the results were not reported, and we have no evidence that BMI was measured.
The study did not measure zBMI or BMI percentile.

## Serious adverse events
The study authors reported that there were no serious adverse events (including all causes of mortality); however, it is not clear if these results referred to the parents or the children or both.

## Dietary and activity intervention versus dietary and activity intervention
We found two studies (435 participants) that compared the effects of two dietary and activity interventions (i.e. with no control group; ): and .

## BMI
 (384 participants) compared a dietary and activity intervention that included training sessions on coping skills with the same intervention without the training sessions. The authors found little to no effect of the interventions on BMI at short‐term follow‐up.

## BMI percentile
 (51 participants) compared a dietary and activity intervention that included a motivational interviewing component with the same dietary and activity intervention but without the motivational interviewing component. The authors found no effect of the interventions on BMI percentiles at short‐term follow‐up.
Neither study reported data on zBMI or serious adverse events.

## Subgroup analyses
We conducted prespecified subgroup analyses by main setting of the interventions (school, home, school and home, other), country income status (high income versus non‐high income) and participants' socioeconomic status (low versus mixed). Results for all individual subgroups are presented in .
Subgrouping by these factors did not provide an explanation for the heterogeneity observed amongst the studies. Although for some tests there was evidence of differences in effect between subgroups ( ), these arose from subgroups containing single studies, and they reflected the heterogeneity pervasive amongst the studies.

## Sensitivity analysis > different ICCs
In our main analysis, we imputed an ICC = 0.02 in cluster‐RCTs that had not been analysed according to the cluster design. In our sensitivity analyses, we investigated the impact of imputing ICCs of 0 and 0.04, and we found no material differences in the results ( ).

## Discussion

## Summary of main results
This review includes 74 studies (83,407 participants) of interventions for the prevention of obesity in children aged from 12 to 18 years. The majority of the studies compared an intervention involving components to improve both diet and activity with a control group. The main setting for intervention delivery was schools (57 studies), with some in the home (nine studies), the community (five studies) and within a primary care setting (three studies). Most interventions were implemented for less than nine months, with the shortest intervention conducted over one visit and the longest over 28 months. Over half of the interventions were based on one or more theories of behaviour change, the most common being social cognitive theory.
Meta‐analyses of results from 54 studies (46,358 participants) were included in this review.
We found that the evidence is very uncertain about the effects of dietary interventions compared with control on BMI at short‐ and medium‐term follow‐up and zBMI at long‐term follow‐up. However, dietary interventions may have little to no effect on BMI at long‐term follow‐up, zBMI at short‐ and medium‐term‐term follow‐up and on serious adverse events (low‐certainty evidence; ).
Activity interventions, compared with control, may not reduce BMI at short‐term follow‐up and probably do not reduce zBMI at medium‐ or long‐term follow‐up. Activity interventions do not reduce zBMI at short‐term follow‐up but may reduce BMI slightly at medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up. Two studies reported injuries relating to the exercise component of the intervention (low‐certainty evidence; ).
The largest amount of evidence (i.e. number of studies) was available for interventions that combined dietary and activity intervention components compared with control. We found that these interventions, compared with control, do not reduce BMI at short‐term follow‐up, and probably do not reduce BMI at medium‐ or long‐term follow‐up. Furthermore, they may have little to no effect on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up, but the evidence is very uncertain, and they may not reduce zBMI at medium‐ or at long‐term follow‐up, compared to control. One study reported an increase in weight concern in a minority of study participants (very low‐certainty of evidence; ).
Nineteen studies specifically targeted individuals or communities of low socioeconomic status (SES; also known as disadvantaged or underserved individuals or communities). As highlighted by , the preferred way of addressing health disparities is to target the health disparity population exclusively. Of note, although these 19 studies were included in our analysis exploring differences in impact of an intervention between individuals of low versus mixed SES, their findings were unable to contribute to our learning because, usually, all participants were considered low SES.
The vast majority of studies (72 of 74) collected and reported data at baseline on at least one PROGRESS characteristic (Place of residence, Race, Occupation, Gender, Religion, Education, Socioeconomic status, Social status). However, only 17 studies reported on the impact of at least one PROGRESS characteristic on the effectiveness of the intervention; gender/sex (15 studies), socioeconomic status (5 studies), parent(s) education (1 study), parent(s) occupation (1 study). Although we understand the reluctance of researchers to perform multiple, post hoc analyses of this type, the dearth of evidence in this review on the impact of interventions on health inequalities is a significant limitation.
For the avoidance of doubt, all interventions that met the inclusion criteria, regardless of the target/setting (e.g. individual adolescent, families/home, classroom, school, healthcare or community) were included in this review. Details regarding the distribution of target/setting of interventions are described in the Results section under ‘Interventions’ and then ‘Settings’. We did not conduct or present analysis by each of these target settings, but instead presented analysis by diet‐only, activity‐only, and diet combined with activity interventions, compared with control or another type of diet and/or activity intervention, separately for type of BMI outcome (BMI, zBMI and BMI percentile). We took the view that separating the studies even further, by target/setting, would only allow us to include one or a limited number of studies in each meta‐analysis. That said, further analysis by type of target or setting, by BMI outcome, would be possible and potentially worthwhile, and we will explore this further in our planned future (separate) work which will examine the results through a wider determinant of the health lens (as an update to our previous work ( )).

## Overall completeness and applicability of evidence
Most studies were undertaken in general populations of high‐income countries and this may affect the applicability of our results to non‐high‐income countries (we identified eight studies from upper‐middle‐income countries, three from a lower‐middle‐income country and three from a mix of high‐ and upper‐middle‐income countries). The reasons why fewer trials of public health interventions that focus on non‐communicable diseases, such as those that aim to prevent obesity in children, are conducted in low‐ and middle‐income countries, include the cost of these trials and also the difference in research capacity, infrastructure, culture and priorities ( ). In most of the studies, the participants were a mix of genders (59 studies); 11 studies were conducted only on girls, and two only on boys. It is worth noting that many (28 of 74) of the interventions included in this review were tested in adolescents considered hard‐to‐reach and/or disadvantaged (mainly low income), or at greater risk of developing obesity. Nineteen studies specifically targeted disadvantaged children (or families) in a particular setting (e.g. school/community/area) or specifically targeted a school or community within a disadvantaged area. Nine studies targeted children considered 'at risk' of obesity based on their dietary and/or activity behaviours, including children disengaged in physical activity, children consuming at least one serving per day of sugar‐sweetened beverages, and one study recruited participants from immigrant and refugee populations. Given that public health policymakers require evidence of the impact of interventions to prevent obesity in adolescents who are in the greatest need (disadvantaged, underserved), they cannot be confident of the completeness and applicability of the evidence reviewed here in relation to children with physical and/or mental health disabilities. Most interventions identified were school‐based.
Of the studies, 30% aimed to improve activity behaviours (physical activity or sedentary behaviour; there were no interventions that targeted sleep behaviours), 26% dietary behaviours, and 45% both dietary and activity behaviours. The comparator for the majority of interventions was usual care, although some studies used an alternative intervention that was not associated with energy balance behaviours (e.g. a course on safety), and a few studies tested one type of intervention to prevent obesity versus another.
All interventions involved some level of provision of information. Most interventions that aimed to change and improve the diet of children (with or without also changing activity levels) sought to provide the children with information and also to change the children’s social environment, enabled and guided by their parents, teachers or other responsible adults. Most interventions that aimed to change and improve activity behaviours sought to enable and/or guide choice by changing the children's physical environment (at school or at home).
A lack of completeness of evidence was identified for certain individuals within our society (population), interventions and outcomes. First, 26 studies excluded children with physical disabilities and 29 studies excluded children with mental disabilities. Second, we did not identify any studies met our inclusion criteria that used a 'whole systems' or 'whole school' approach, or were focused on improving the wider environment (i.e. beyond the home, school, healthcare and community); we appreciate that such interventions are more able to integrate fully other socio‐ecological factors that are determinants of individual‐level diet and activity behaviours and, in theory, thus have a more meaningful population level effect and public health benefit ( ; ). We did not identify any interventions that specifically targeted settings for adolescents who had chosen not to stay in mainstream education beyond the age of 15 or 16. Also, we did not identify any interventions that specifically focused on digital or artificial intelligence technology, which has developed at pace over the last five years; such innovation may be a focus of interventions for adolescents in the future. However, we note that a much higher proportion of ongoing studies include a focus or element of digital intervention. Furthermore, although zBMI and/or BMI outcomes were reported by the majority of studies, some studies (including those published in the last five years) only reported BMI percentile or other body weight‐related outcomes (e.g. proportion of children living with overweight and obesity). Most studies did not report on serious adverse events.
Because most of the evidence (58%) identified was from school‐based interventions, the findings from this review are mostly applicable to policymakers, local education authorities and schools, and health professionals who work with schools. These stakeholders can be reasonably confident of the completeness of the evidence reviewed for school‐based interventions for adolescents. Importantly, increasing activity levels and eating a healthier diet have health and well‐being benefits (outcomes) beyond the prevention of obesity ( ; ) and there is evidence that these behaviours track from childhood to adulthood ( ; ). Indeed, major health conditions that make the greatest contribution to the burden of healthcare in adulthood in most high and middle‐income countries are driven by unhealthy and risky behaviours, including low levels of physical activity, high levels of sedentary behaviour and an unhealthy diet. Tackling these behaviours during adolescence should therefore be a priority; for example, through town planning regulations that restrict the presence of mobile food vans and fast‐food outlets close to schools ( ) and the introduction of after‐school dance or sports sessions ( ). A lack of completeness of evidence was identified for the impact of interventions on serious adverse events (harms), including eating disorders.

## Quality of the evidence
We used the RoB 2 tool to assess the risk of bias in the 91 results from the 54 studies that were included in the meta‐analyses. Overall, most of the results (59) were judged as having 'some concerns', while eight results were judged as having 'low risk of bias'; 24 results were judged as having 'high risk of bias' (mostly because of missing outcome data). We tested the effect of removing studies rated at 'high' risk of bias ( ).
We used GRADE to assess the certainty of evidence of effects in all the main analyses results (i.e. BMI, zBMI and BMI percentile at short‐, medium‐ and long‐term follow‐up); we downgraded almost all results to 'moderate', 'low' or ‘very low’ certainty depending on the proportion of results at high risk of bias, the level of imprecision and heterogeneity, the generalisability of the results and the amount of missing evidence. Reasons for downgrading each of the GRADE criteria for our main results (i.e. reported in the summary of findings tables) are reported below.

## Risk of bias
Of the 21 results (i.e. outcomes) reported in the summary of findings tables, six were downgraded one or two levels due to high risk of bias (i.e. the studies at high risk of bias contributed > 30% of the weight in the meta‐analysis). The results within the downgraded outcomes were judged at high risk of bias mostly due to missing outcome data (five outcomes), the randomisation process (one outcome) and the selection of the reported result (one outcome). The other 15 outcomes were not downgraded due to risk of bias, as the results at high risk of bias contributed ≤ 30% of the weight in the meta‐analysis, or there were no results at high risk of bias included in the meta‐analysis. We did not downgrade outcomes with a high number of results judged as having some concern, as such judgement was mostly due to lack of information.

## Imprecision
Of the 21 results (i.e. outcomes) reported in the summary of findings tables, 12 were downgraded one level due to imprecision (the number of participants included in each meta‐analysis was < 3000 and there was no clear evidence of an effect). The number of participants was less than 100 in one outcome, between 100 and 500 in two outcomes, between 500 and 1000 in five outcomes, between 1000 and 2000 in two outcomes and between 2000 and < 3000 in two outcomes. The other nine outcomes were not downgraded as the number of participants was > 3000 per outcome.

## Inconsistency
Of the 21 results (i.e. outcomes) reported in the summary of findings tables, 11 were downgraded one level due to inconsistency: nine had a tau value > 0 and the direction of the results was inconsistent; in two that were not included in meta‐analyses (severe adverse events) the direction of the results was inconsistent. The other 10 outcomes were not downgraded as tau = 0, or tau > 0, but results were in the same direction, or the results were from a single study.

## Indirectness
Of the 21 results (i.e. outcomes) reported in the summary of findings tables, four were downgraded one level due to indirectness (i.e. substantial contribution of the results from studies in unusual populations). Specifically, we had concerns over these outcomes including results from studies conducted on children who were at risk of developing obesity, mainly due to their lifestyle (e.g. only included if they reported at baseline a relatively high sugar diet or low levels of physical activity) or having one or more parent living with obesity. Six outcomes also included data from highly specific populations (also regarded as at high risk for obesity, e.g. from specific communities with a high prevalence of obesity), but we did not downgrade these outcomes, as the contribution of these studies to the results was moderate (< 30% weight). The other 11 outcomes only included data from the general population.

## Publication bias
Of the 21 results (i.e. outcomes) reported in the summary of findings tables, nine were downgraded one level due to non‐reporting bias. For two of these outcomes, the meta‐analyses showed benefit, but there was potential for missing data to impact on the result. For four of these outcomes, the meta‐analyses showed no effect of the interventions, but the extent of the missing data was relatively high; therefore, there was potential for missing data to impact on the result. We downgraded three outcomes not included in the meta‐analyses (severe adverse events) as the reported results were from studies that measured BMI, zBMI or BMI percentile at baseline and follow‐up only and this leads to the potential for missing evidence. We did not downgrade four outcomes in which the interventions did not affect adiposity (fatness) and for which evidence was missing due to a relatively small number of participants from whom data were missing. For the remaining eight outcomes, there was no evidence of missing data. For all 18 results included in the meta‐analyses, we had some concerns over the potential for missing studies that were likely to have eligible results, but we did not downgrade those results.
Overall, our confidence in the evidence is reduced, mainly due to the high proportion of studies judged as being at high risk of bias (largely due to missing participant data and the randomisation process), imprecision of the results (studies were very small or there were not enough studies with data contributing to the evidence for some of the outcomes), inconsistency of results across the different studies, and missing evidence.

## Potential biases in the review process
Our review updates part of a previous Cochrane Review using the same eligibility criteria and largely the same methodology ( ). Following the original review, we only included studies that stated the main aim of changing diet and or activity (physical activity, sedentary behaviour, sleep) to help prevent obesity in children and adolescents. We therefore excluded studies of similar interventions that did not report such an aim. There is potential for this to bias our selection of studies if the reporting of primary studies’ aims has been influenced by their findings. If in any doubt, we checked the aim with that provided in the published protocol or trial register, where possible. We restricted eligibility to studies providing evidence of having assessed BMI at baseline and follow‐up so that we could examine changes from baseline. Again, this restriction may have led to exclusion of studies with similar interventions to those we included.
Following the previous review and, as specified a priori in our protocol, we also grouped studies into somewhat crude comparisons according to the broad target of behaviour change (diet or activity or both) of the intervention. This led to a diversity of specific intervention approaches within comparisons and probably accounts for some of the subsequent statistical heterogeneity. We were unable to determine the specific causes of this heterogeneity with our planned analyses. Further investigation of how the variation in intervention approaches and intervention fidelity impact on outcomes may be valuable, including how these relate to the wider determinants of health.
An important observation in most of our meta‐analyses was high statistical heterogeneity, i.e. that effects varied substantially across studies within the comparisons. Prespecified (in our protocol) subgroup analyses by main setting of the interventions (school, home, school and home, other), country income status (high income versus non‐high income) and participants' socioeconomic status (low versus mixed) did not provide an explanation for the heterogeneity observed amongst the studies. This heterogeneity might be due to the interventions combined within each category (diet, activity, diet combined with activity) being variable in nature, intensity and duration; their only common feature was the intended mechanism by which they worked. It is also possible that the heterogeneity is due, at least in part, to variability in the fidelity of the interventions, although we did not collect data on this.
In addition, heterogeneity could also be due to differences in participants' baseline characteristics within and across trials (e.g. PROGRESS characteristics, baseline weight status). Further analysis of the impact of these participant‐level characteristics would be useful to help determine for whom preventive interventions work better. Such analyses would require collection of individual participant data or of aggregated results subgrouped by baseline participant characteristics, and future work should address this.
We made some additions to the planned methods as set out in the protocol due to the design. Of note, we collected and analysed additional data where adiposity (fatness) was only reported as BMI percentile (rather than BMI or zBMI).
We restricted our attention to the outcome measures zBMI, BMI and BMI percentile. Outcome reporting bias may be operating if studies with systematically different results reported different outcome measures ( ; ), although we regard this as unlikely. Evidence of possible suppression of uninteresting findings is addressed as part of our GRADE assessment. Finally, because we are looking at general populations of children rather than clinical populations, and the main aim of many of our interventions of interest was not exclusively the prevention of obesity (for example, many studies focussed on improving diet or activity levels to improve health in general, although one of the stated aims was the prevention of obesity), many RCTs reported a wide variety of other outcomes that we did not examine in this review (e.g. diet and activity behaviours).

## Agreements and disagreements with other studies or reviews
Other comprehensive reviews on this topic have found similar results to those reported in this review ( ; ; ; ), in that there is a modest effect or no effect of interventions that target individual change to prevent obesity in adolescents. Of course, one can always find the rare study that shows that an intervention is effective, but the evidence base taken together suggests that the effect of these interventions showed little to no effect. Compared with previous reviews ( ; ; ; ), including the previous version of the Cochrane Review on preventing obesity in children ( ), this review includes the largest number of studies and adolescents. The stark increase in the number of studies published over the past five years reflects the focus and effort on tackling obesity in adolescents by research funding bodies and researchers. Although the confidence in the certainty of results remains low or very low, mainly due to methodological issues of the studies, the increased volume of evidence available for this review provides readers and stakeholders with reassurance that, at least for school‐based interventions, the results of little to no effect of the interventions are unlikely to change with the addition of further studies.

## Authors' conclusions

## Implications for practice
This review update provides practitioners with a robust evidence base because it is restricted to randomised controlled trials (RCTs), and it includes almost three times as many (74 compared with 29) studies relevant to adolescence included in the previous version of this review ( ). The body of evidence in this review suggests that a range of diet and/or activity interventions have little to no effect on developing obesity in adolescents (i.e. gaining excess weight compared with what adolescents may otherwise experience). Compared with the previous Cochrane review ( ), where no effect of diet (only two studies) or diet combined with physical activity interventions (eight studies) were found in adolescents, the increased number of studies in this review provides a more balanced and comprehensive summary of the impact of these interventions.
The interventions were diverse in nature (theory, duration, setting, complexity, target of mechanism). We acknowledge the limitations of simply grouping such diverse interventions into three broad categories by diet, activity, or both. For example, dietary interventions underpinned by a particular theory, or that took place in a particular setting, may have been more effective. However, as per protocol, we considered post hoc subgroup analysis on the myriad of possible combinations (usually of just one or a small number of studies) to be statistically unwise.
The long‐term clinical significance, at a population level, of a very small benefit of an intervention that prevents the gain of BMI and excess weight, compared with what an adolescent would otherwise experience over the short‐ or medium‐term is difficult to assess and, at best, minor. However, we know that the diet and activity behaviours that are adopted in childhood track throughout life ( ). The potential cumulative effect of small but sustainable changes towards a healthier diet and a more physically active lifestyle could, at least in theory, reap long‐term benefits for the promotion of healthy weight for individuals, communities and populations ( ). A healthy diet and being physically active have many health and well‐being benefits for adolescents beyond the promotion of a healthy body weight, including positive associations with academic achievement ( ).
The WHO Commission on Ending Childhood obesity suggests that part of the failure of interventions, such as the majority of those included in this Cochrane Review, is due to the fact that they target individual behaviour change ( ). The WHO Commission suggests that upstream interventions may be particularly important, and more effort is required in this area. Example interventions for adolescents include tackling the marketing of unhealthy foods such as sugar‐sweetened beverages, and the obesogenic environment such as take‐away food outlets. It is now acknowledged that tackling obesity requires a systems approach, and policy initiatives across government departments should be joined up ( ; ).
From our exploratory analyses, we found no indication that interventions to prevent obesity in adolescents are less effective in those with low socioeconomic status. The preferred way of addressing health disparities is to target the health disparity population exclusively ( ), and we identified 19 (of 74) such studies. Most (55 of 74) excluded adolescents from taking part in the trial if they had a physical or mental disability, and we note this potential source of inequity in this review with reference to the WHO guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour in adolescents living with disability ( ).
Another important finding is that none of the 14 studies that reported relevant data found any serious adverse events; however, one study reported that a small number (about 10%) of adolescents reported an increase in weight concerns. Adolescence, which includes puberty and the transition to adulthood, is a critical time for mental health and well‐being. Only a few studies assessed the costs and cost‐effectiveness of interventions included in this review. On this basis, it is not possible to say whether these interventions are cost‐effective. Evidence from newly identified studies from upper‐ and lower‐middle‐income countries is an important contribution to this review (11 of 74 studies), in terms of context and external validity, particularly for policymakers in those countries.
It is worth highlighting that, although we only included studies in this review where the aim was to prevent obesity (rather than treat children already living with obesity), most studies included entire groups of children that attended, for example, the selected nurseries or childcare centres. This is a similar approach to that taken for most public health interventions. Therefore, a relatively small proportion of children in all the included studies were already living with obesity, and this proportion was great in those studies that selected groups at high risk of developing obesity as they get older (e.g. for children attending childcare programmes specifically for low‐income families).

## Implications for policy
The interventions included in this update mainly focused on changing individual (personal) behaviours and were mainly conducted in schools, with some being delivered at home, in the community, or within a primary care setting. A school setting may be a relatively easy setting to target; however, many adolescents who are hard‐to‐reach are disengaged with school but do have meaningful affiliations with local youth groups and sports clubs, and some have meaningful involvement with faith‐based groups. Social media and peer pressure also play an important role in shaping energy‐balance‐related behaviours in this age group.
We recognise that the methods we chose to employ, including the grouping of all types of interventions together under one of three categories (diet, activity, or diet combined with activity) may create results of limited value to policymakers deciding on which specific interventions within each category would 'work best' in their context. However, within these categories, hierarchies of specific interventions by observed effectiveness could be misleading. The effectiveness of the same intervention is likely to vary by age and sex (even within the 12‐ to 18‐year age group) and context (e.g. type of school provision), and the feasibility of implementation is likely to be dependent on local resources. Furthermore, policymakers who are responsible for implementing specific policies for the prevention of obesity in adolescents need to ensure that such policies 'fit' within the wider public health strategy and initiatives of the community and population they serve. However, this review does provide policymakers with examples of interventions on diet, activity, or both, by country and setting, which may be helpful for planning.
We did not identify interventions for this review that aimed to take a (whole) systems approach to preventing obesity in adolescence. Local health authorities and national guidance usually champion the importance of taking such an approach in tackling obesity (incorporating both prevention and treatment initiatives). However, research studies (mainly evaluations) designed to assess the impact of implementing such an approach are not traditionally RCTs and therefore did not meet our inclusion criteria.
An explanation or potential opportunity to enhance the impact of interventions that aim to prevent obesity in adolescents is through greater application to implementation science. There are some suggestions that the effects of health innovations can be enhanced by up to 12 times with potent implementation approaches ( ). A recent Cochrane Review found that the use of implementation strategies may result in large increases in implementation of interventions, and slight improvements in measures of diet and physical activity ( ). As implementation science advances, the application of it could be important to amplify the effects of behavioural interventions to prevent obesity in adolescents.

## Implications for research
We do not anticipate the effect sizes we found in this review to change significantly with the addition of more school‐based interventions that target individual‐level energy‐balance‐related behaviours in adolescents. However, we do recommend that further research of this type, in adolescence, should be conducted where it includes a wider range of community settings (including faith‐based groups, local youth groups and local sports clubs, and social media‐based and digital‐based interventions). We also recommend that future research in this area proactively includes adolescents with disabilities.
For existing and ongoing studies that would meet the inclusion criteria of this review, we suggest they include follow‐up over several years. Such follow‐up data could provide important information on the sustainability of behaviour change and impact on weight. We understand the barriers to conducting this type of work, including funding challenges, ethical approval and data protection issues. We also understand the perceived higher prestige attached to primary research compared with secondary data or follow‐up research and encourage funding bodies and journal editors to place a higher value on this type of research activity. We also suggest that a better understanding of process and implementation, using evaluation methods by which one can better compare the results of one study with the next (and summarise the information for reviews such as this), would be extremely useful. This type of activity is critical for the successful translation of interventions from one context to another, and across different countries.
We also urge researchers to collect and report baseline information on gender and other PROGRESS (Place, Race, Occupation, Gender, Religion, Education, Socioeconomic status (SES), Social status) factors, and also to analyse the effect of the intervention by these factors. We understand the reluctance of researchers to perform multiple, post hoc analyses of this type; however, these are necessary if we are to provide confidence for practice and policy that interventions we deem effective do not increase inequalities.
Going forward, we suggest the need to rethink the priorities and methods for research that aims to prevent obesity in adolescence. This may include a focus on valuing and conducting research that assesses the impact of multilevel, community, or other interventions that better address systemic and structural factors related to obesity, including those that take a 'whole systems approach', and do not rely on traditional randomised controlled trials. We suggest that research in this field also needs to look beyond diet and activity behaviours as the focus of interventions and instead explore both a focus on the wider environment and political factors that drive obesity, and also the wider determinants of health that drive inequalities in dietary intake and food insecurity, physical activity, physical activity insecurity, and obesity. The research community needs to help and support policymakers and stakeholders in bringing the totality of the evidence base together in a balanced and accessible format.
We urge researchers and funding bodies in all countries to continue to support research on adolescent obesity in low‐ and middle‐income countries, and better understand the experiences of nutrition transition and rapid weight gain. In the context of some countries, this research should aim to address the double burden of malnutrition.
It is worth noting that there are many more published studies that have evaluated the impact of interventions and programmes to prevent obesity in children that are not RCTs as compared with those that are. Where funding and capacity allows, we would encourage researchers to opt for an RCT design for their evaluations, since this provides stronger evidence for policy, practice and the public.
Finally, we support the research recommendations set out by the WHO Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity ( ).

## What's new
 

## History
Protocol first published: Issue 7, 2022 Review first published: Issue 5, 2024

## Risk of bias
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

## Acknowledgements
We thank all those who contributed to the first and/or update versions of the Cochrane review entitled ‘Interventions for preventing obesity in children’ on which this review, which solely focuses on children and adolescents aged 12 to 18, has been built. Special thanks go to Elizabeth Waters, who was one of the founding authors and a driving force for the update versions and the Cochrane Public Health Group, who sadly died in 2015. We thank Yang Gao, Deborah M Caldwell, James Nobles, Sharea Ijaz, Russel Jago, Sophie Phillips and Frances Hillier‐Brown for contributing to the protocol for the review. For this review, we particularly acknowledge Lena Schmidt for her contribution to the set‐up of the automated weekly searches, and the Cochrane Central team for their guidance and support.

## Editorial and peer‐reviewer contributions
Cochrane Public Health supported the authors in the development of this review.
The following people conducted the editorial process for this article:
Sign‐off Editor (final editorial decision): Brenda Bongaerts, Cochrane Metabolic and Endocrine Disorders Group, Düsseldorf;
Managing Editor (selected peer reviewers, provided editorial guidance to authors, edited the article): Joanne Duffield, Central Editorial Service Editorial Team;
Editorial Assistant (conducted editorial policy checks, collated peer‐reviewer comments and supported editorial team): Lisa Wydrzynski, Central Editorial Service Editorial Team;
Copy Editor (copy editing and production): Anne Lethaby, Cochrane Central Production Service;
Peer‐reviewers (provided comments and recommended an editorial decision): Solange Durao, Health Systems Research Unit, South African Medical Research Council (clinical/content review); Justin D Smith, PhD, Department of Population Health Sciences, Spencer Fox Eccles School of Medicine at the University of Utah (clinical/content review); Andrej Belančić, Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Clinical Hospital Centre Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia; Department of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology with Toxicology, University of Rijeka, Faculty of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia; Secretary of the Croatian Society of Obesity; EASO and WOF member (consumer review); Nuala Livingstone, Cochrane Evidence Production and Methods Directorate (methods review); Jo Platt, Central Editorial Information Specialist (search review).

The views expressed in this review are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the NHS, the NIHR, NIHR ARC, or the NHMRC.

## Appendices

## Appendix 1. Criteria for judging certainty in the evidence
We evaluated the five GRADE domains for assessing certainty in our results using the following criteria.
 

## Appendix 2. Search strategies

## 1.1 Rolling Search (2021 update)

## Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL <1946 to September 24, 2021>
Date limited: March to September 2021
1 exp overweight/ 238864
2 exp body weight changes/ 76584
3 body weight/ or ideal body weight/ or waist‐height ratio/ or waist‐hip ratio/ 198957
4 Body mass index/ or adiposity/ 146076
5 (obes* or adipos*).mp. 500168
6 (weight gain or weight loss).mp. 181416
7 (overweight or over weight or overeat* or over eat*).mp. 85000
8 weight change*.mp. 12443
9 ((bmi or body mass index) adj2 (alter* or measur* or gain or loss or change)).mp. 12092
10 or/1‐9 830029
11 exp Behavior Therapy/ 81430
12 social support/ 74861
13 exp Psychotherapy, Group/ 27306
14 ((psychological or behavio?r*) adj (therapy or modif* or strateg* or intervention*)).mp. 85774
15 (group therapy or family therapy or cognitive therapy).mp. 17855
16 ((lifestyle or life style) adj (chang* or intervention*)).mp. 17670
17 counsel?ing.mp. 129697
18 social support.mp. 96918
19 (peer adj2 support).mp. 5992
20 (children adj3 parent* adj3 therapy).mp. 133
21 or/11‐20 366576
22 exp Obesity/dh [Diet Therapy] 8132
23 exp Diet Therapy/ 58036
24 Fasting/ 36683
25 (diets or diet or dieting).mp. 527093
26 (diet* adj (modif* or therapy or intervention* or strateg*)).mp. 77944
27 (low calorie or calorie control* or healthy eating).mp. 12044
28 (fasting or modified fast*).mp. 130206
29 exp Dietary Fats/ 93688
30 (fruit or vegetable*).mp. 147052
31 (high fat* or low fat* or fatty food*).mp. 59146
32 formula diet*.mp. 700
33 or/22‐32 807308
34 exp Exercise/ 217427
35 exp Exercise Therapy/ 56426
36 exercis*.mp. 417380
37 (aerobics or physical therapy or physical activity or physical inactivity).mp. 183405
38 (fitness adj (class* or regime* or program*)).mp. 977
39 (aerobics or physical therapy or physical training or physical education).mp. 76087
40 dance therapy.mp. 473
41 sedentary behavio?r.mp. 14736
42 or/34‐41 591641
43 exp Complementary Therapies/ 239044
44 (alternative medicine or complementary therap* or complementary medicine).mp. 27279
45 (hypnotism or hypnosis or hypnotherapy).mp. 12696
46 (acupuncture or homeopathy or homoeopathy).mp. 36037
47 (chinese medicine or indian medicine or herbal medicine or ayurvedic).mp. 47638
48 or/43‐47 282249
49 ((diet or dieting or slim*) adj (club* or organi?ation)).mp. 28
50 (weightwatcher* or weight watcher*).mp. 145
51 (correspondence adj (course* or program*)).mp. 93
52 (fat camp* or diet* camp*).mp. 27
53 or/49‐52 293
54 exp Health Promotion/ 81232
55 exp Health Education/ 253760
56 (health promotion or health education).mp. 178600
57 (media intervention* or community intervention*).mp. 2649
58 health promoting school*.mp. 376
59 ((school* or community) adj4 program*).mp. 35625
60 School health services/ 17840
61 ((school* or community) adj4 intervention*).mp. 21247
62 (family intervention* or parent* intervention).mp. 2513
63 (parent* adj2 (behavio?r or involve* or control* or attitude* or educat*)).mp. 26219
64 or/54‐63 365140
65 exp Health Policy/ 111172
66 ((health or school or food or nutrition*) adj3 (policy or policies)).mp. 120211
67 65 or 66 151124
68 exp Obesity/pc [Prevention & Control] 20422
69 exp Primary Prevention/ 162740
70 (primary prevention or secondary prevention).mp. 68528
71 (preventive measure* or preventative measure*).mp. 28824
72 (preventive care or preventative care).mp. 6173
73 (obesity adj2 (prevent* or treat*)).mp. 22250
74 or/68‐73 281599
75 exp Cell Phones/ or Social media/ or Mobile Applications/ or Electronic Mail/ 37010
76 (app or apps or text messag* or texting or social media or facebook or mobile technolog* or e‐mail* or email* or smartphone* or mobile phone*).ti,ab. 92063
77 75 or 76 103417
78 10 and (21 or 33 or 42 or 48 or 53 or 64 or 67 or 74 or 77) 286872
79 exp child/ or adolescent/ 3170185
80 (child or children or childhood or adolescen* or pediatr* or paediatr* or boy or boyhood or boys or girl or girlhood or girls or youth or youths or teenage* or young people or young person or schoolchild* or juvenile).tw. 1974681
81 79 or 80 3801892
82 78 and 81 64232
83 exp animals/ not humans.sh. 4890266
84 (animal* or rodent* or mouse or mice or rat or rats or murine).ti. 1593937
85 82 not (83 or 84) 62698
86 controlled clinical trial.pt. 94426
87 randomi#ed.ab. 639710
88 placebo.ab. 221714
89 randomly.ab. 366508
90 (clinical trials as topic or controlled clinical trials as topic).sh. 202924
91 trial.ti. 248175
92 exp randomized controlled trial/ or exp randomized controlled trials as topic/ 689840
93 or/86‐92 1496200
94 85 and 93 9617
95 (202103* or 202104* or 202105* or 202106* or 202107* or 202108* or 202109*).ep,ez. 893938
96 ("2021 Mar*" or "2021 Apr*" or "2021 May*" or "2021 Jun*" or "2021 Jul*" or "2021 Aug*" or "2021 Sep*").dp. 678587
97 (2021 03* or 2021 04* or 2021 05* or 2021 06* or 2021 07* or 2021 08* or 2021 09*).dp. 234439
98 limit 94 to yr=2021‐ 388
99 95 or 96 or 97 1092323
100 94 and 99 303
101 98 or 100 391
************************************

## Ovid Embase <1974 to 2021 September 24>
Date limited: March to September 2021
1 *overnutrition/ or exp *obesity/ or childhood obesity/ or adolescent obesity/ 267785
2 *body weight/ or *body weight change/ or *body weight loss/ or *body weight control/ or *body weight fluctuation/ or *body weight gain/ or *ideal body weight/ 44609
3 *body mass/ or *waist to height ratio/ or *waist hip ratio/ 36395
4 (obes* or adipos*).mp. 742525
5 (weight gain or weight loss).mp. 308464
6 (overweight or over weight or overeat* or over eat*).mp. 121599
7 weight change*.mp. 26001
8 ((bmi or body mass index) adj2 (alter* or measur* or gain or loss or change)).mp. 19810
9 or/1‐8 1019356
10 *Behavior Therapy/ 16388
11 *social support/ 24496
12 *family therapy/ 6717
13 *group therapy/ 10256
14 ((psychological or behavio?r*) adj (therapy or modif* or strateg* or intervention*)).mp. 111599
15 (group therapy or family therapy or cognitive therapy).mp. 74992
16 ((lifestyle or life style) adj (chang* or intervention*)).mp. 26120
17 counsel?ing.mp. 220349
18 social support.mp. 112851
19 (peer adj2 support).mp. 8315
20 (children adj3 parent* adj3 therapy).mp. 189
21 or/10‐20 496871
22 exp *Diet Therapy/ 98711
23 (diets or diet or dieting).mp. 777251
24 (diet* adj (modif* or therapy or intervention* or strateg*)).mp. 75017
25 (low calorie or calorie control* or healthy eating).mp. 17252
26 (fasting or modified fast*).mp. 177877
27 exp *fat intake/ 17057
28 (fruit or vegetable*).mp. 230164
29 (high fat* or low fat* or fatty food*).mp. 86965
30 formula diet*.mp. 861
31 or/22‐30 1095249
32 exp *Exercise/ 155651
33 exp *kinesiotherapy/ 35308
34 exercis*.mp. 570034
35 (aerobics or physical therapy or physical activity or physical inactivity).mp. 277386
36 (fitness adj (class* or regime* or program*)).mp. 1277
37 (aerobics or physical therapy or physical training or physical education).mp. 56302
38 dance therapy.mp. 708
39 sedentary behavio?r.mp. 8604
40 or/32‐39 782671
41 exp *alternative medicine/ 35261
42 (alternative medicine or complementary therap* or complementary medicine).mp. 55867
43 (hypnotism or hypnosis or hypnotherapy).mp. 15869
44 (acupuncture or homeopathy or homoeopathy).mp. 57978
45 (chinese medicine or indian medicine or herbal medicine or ayurvedic).mp. 98826
46 or/41‐45 208909
47 ((diet or dieting or slim*) adj (club* or organi?ation)).mp. 47
48 (weightwatcher* or weight watcher*).mp. 236
49 (correspondence adj (course* or program*)).mp. 81
50 (fat camp* or diet* camp*).mp. 30
51 or/47‐50 394
52 exp *Health Education/ 117203
53 (health promotion or health education).mp. 226187
54 (media intervention* or community intervention*).mp. 3429
55 health promoting school*.mp. 450
56 ((school* or community) adj4 program*).mp. 45545
57 *school health service/ 7413
58 ((school* or community) adj4 intervention*).mp. 26744
59 (family intervention* or parent* intervention).mp. 3302
60 (parent* adj2 (behavio?r or involve* or control* or attitude* or educat*)).mp. 49137
61 or/52‐60 369532
62 *health care policy/ 69961
63 ((health or school or food or nutrition*) adj3 (Policy or policies)).mp. 239520
64 62 or 63 239520
65 exp Obesity/pc [Prevention & Control] 16674
66 primary Prevention/ 42819
67 (primary prevention or secondary prevention).mp. 89810
68 (preventive measure* or preventative measure*).mp. 38213
69 (preventive care or preventative care).mp. 7719
70 (obesity adj2 (prevent* or treat*)).mp. 30589
71 or/65‐70 175662
72 *mobile application/ or *text messaging/ or exp *mobile phone/ or *e‐mail/ or *social media/ 35056
73 (app or apps or text messag* or texting or social media or facebook or mobile technolog* or e‐mail* or email* or smartphone* or mobile phone*).ti,ab. 134604
74 72 or 73 142358
75 9 and (21 or 31 or 40 or 46 or 51 or 61 or 64 or 71 or 74) 363429
76 child/ or preschool child/ or school child/ or juvenile/ or adolescent/ 2957200
77 (child or children or childhood or adolescen* or pediatr* or paediatr* or boy or boyhood or boys or girl or girlhood or girls or youth or youths or teenage* or young people or young person or juvenile* or schoolchild*).tw. 2508471
78 76 or 77 3737806
79 75 and 78 70228
80 exp animal/ not human/ 4983435
81 (animal* or rodent* or mouse or mice or rat or rats or murine).ti. 1746540
82 79 not (80 or 81) 68027
83 randomized controlled trial/ or "randomized controlled trial (topic)"/ 884751
84 crossover procedure/ 68184
85 "double blind procedure"/ 187998
86 "single‐blind procedure"/ 43827
87 ((doubl* or singl*) adj blind*).tw. 249100
88 placebo/ or placebo.tw. 478469
89 (cross adj over).tw. 34400
90 (random* or factorial* or crossover).tw. 1774825
91 or/83‐90 2220300
92 82 and 91 10585
93 limit 92 to yr="2021" 535
94 (202103* or 202104* or 202105* or 202106* or 202107* or 202108* or 202109* or 2021*).dd,dc. 1876487
95 (spring 2021 or summer 2021 or autumn 2021).dp. 505
96 (mar* 2021 or 0* mar* 2021 or 1* mar* 2021 or 2* mar* 2021 or 3* mar* 2021 or apr* 2021 or 0* apr* 2021 or 1* apr* 2021 or 2* apr* 2021 or 3* apr* 2021 or may* 2021 or 0* may* 2021 or 1* may* 2021 or 2* may* 2021 or 3* may* 2021 or jun* 2021 or 0* jun* 2021 or 1* jun* 2021 or 2* jun* 2021 or 3* jun* 2021 or jul* 2021 or 0* jul* 2021 or 1* jul* 2021 or 2* jul* 2021 or 3* jul* 2021 or aug* 2021 or 0* aug* 2021 or 1* aug* 2021 or 2* aug* 2021 or 3* aug* 2021 or sep* 2021 or 0* sep* 2021 or 1* sep* 2021 or 2* sep* 2021 or 3* sep* 2021).dp. 841606
97 94 or 95 or 96 1903232
98 92 and 97 780
99 93 or 98 789
************************************

## Ovid APA PsycINFO <1806 to September Week 3 2021>
2019 to 2020
1 exp overweight/ 27609
2 weight control/ 5141
3 (obes* or adipos*).ti. 17415
4 obesity.tw. 37939
5 (weight loss or weight gain).ti. 4977
6 (overweight or over weight).tw. 16357
7 weight loss/ 4106
8 weight gain/ 3310
9 (overeat* or over eat*).tw. 2784
10 weight change*.tw. 2349
11 ((bmi or body mass) adj3 (alter* or measur* or gain or loss or change)).tw. 3069
12 or/1‐11 55473
13 (adolescence 13 17 yrs or childhood birth 12 yrs or preschool age 2 5 yrs or school age 6 12 yrs).ag. 824848
14 (teenage* or young people or young person or juvenile or schoolchild*).tw. 75214
15 (child or children or childhood or adololescen*).tw. 714760
16 (pediatr* or paediatr*).mp. 53867
17 (boy or boys or boyhood or girl or girlhood or girls or youth or youths).tw. 209081
18 or/13‐17 1194126
19 12 and 18 18989
20 exp treatment effectiveness evaluation/ 26596
21 clinical trials/ 11978
22 placebo/ 6085
23 placebo*.tw. 42334
24 ((singl* or doubl* or trebl* or tripl*) adj3 (blind* or mask*)).tw. 27668
25 random*.tw. 218305
26 trial.ti. 33645
27 ((clinical adj3 trial*) or (evaluat* adj3 stud*)).tw. 108150
28 or/20‐27 346310
29 19 and 28 2505
30 limit 29 to yr="2019 ‐ 2021" 371
31 (2019* or 2020* or 2021*).up,yr,an. 518276
32 29 and 31 474
33 30 or 32 474
34 (BMIz or (BMI* adj2 (z‐scor* or zscor*))).tw. 942
35 ((bmi or body mass index) adj3 outcome?).tw. 515
36 34 or 35 1394
37 18 and 28 and 36 320
38 (33 or 37) 794
************************************************************************

## 1.2 New search of the education databases 1990 onwards

## Australian Education Index (AEI) (ProQuest)
Searched 26 September 2021
Search history
[Condition]
#1 MAINSUBJECT.EXACT("Body weight") (85) or MAINSUBJECT.EXACT("Obesity") (215)
#2 (obes*) (249)
#3 (weight N/5 gain*) or (weight N/5 los*) (36)
#4 (overweight or “over weight”) (83)
#5 (overeat* or (over P/1 eat*)) (5)
#6 (weight N/5 chang*) (14)
#7 (bmi or bmiz or “body mass index”) (38)
#8 ((adiposity or fat or weight) AND (goal or goals or outcome or outcomes)) (117)
#9 (1 OR 2 OR 3 OR 4 OR 5 OR 6 OR 7 OR 8) (433)
[Study Design Filter]
#10 MAINSUBJECT.EXACT("Intervention") (2177)
#11 (RCT or cRCT or randomized or randomised or (control* P/3 group*) or (control* P/3 trial*) or (control* P/3 stud*)) (1508)
#12 noft(random* or groups or trial or placebo or matched) (37,586)
#13 (10 OR 11 OR 12) (39233)
#14 (9 AND 13) (130)
(MAINSUBJECT.EXACT("Body weight") OR obes* OR ((weight N/5 gain*) or (weight N/5 los*)) OR (overweight or “over weight”) OR (overeat* or (over P/1 eat*)) OR (weight N/5 chang*) OR (bmi or bmiz or “body mass index”) OR ((adiposity or fat or weight) AND (goal or goals or outcome or outcomes))) AND (MAINSUBJECT.EXACT("Intervention") OR (RCT or cRCT or randomized or randomised or (control* P/3 group*) or (control* P/3 trial*) or (control* P/3 stud*)) OR noft(random* or groups or trial or placebo or matched))
Date Limited (1990‐01‐01 to 2021‐09‐26), n=126
[Record Type: Journal articles (43); Theses (41); Conference Papers (14); Journal Articles Overseas (13); Book Chapters (10); Research Reports (2); Books (1); Conference Proceedings (1); Government Reports (1)]

## British Education Index (BEI) (EBSCOhost)
Searched 26 September 2021
Search history [Boolean Search]
[Condition]
S1 obes* (495)
S2 (weight N5 gain*) or (weight N5 los*) (58)
S3 (overweight or “over weight”) (138)
S4 (overeat* or (over W1 eat*)) (9)
S5 (weight N5 chang*) (21)
S6 (bmi or bmiz or “body mass index”) (169)
S7 ((adiposity or fat or weight) AND (goal or goals or outcome or outcomes)) (110)
S8 (S1 OR S2 OR S3 OR S4 OR S5 OR S6 OR S7) (692)
[Study Design Filter]
S9 (RCT or cRCT or randomized or randomised) (1271)
S10 ((control* N3 group*) or (control* N3 trial*) or (control* N3 stud*)) (3365)
S11 (random* or groups or trial or placebo) (33,876)
S12 (matched N5 (class or classes or cluster or clusters or school or schools or community or communities or population or populations) (73)
S13 (S9 OR S10 OR S11 OR S12) (34370)
S14 (S8 AND S13) (238)
Date Limited (1990 onwards), n=238
[Record Type: Academic Journals (234); Magazines(4)]

## ERIC (Education Resources Information Center) (EBSCOhost)
Searched 26 September 2021
Search history [Boolean Search]
[Condition]
S1 TI obes* OR AB obes* OR KW obes* OR SU obes* (3526)
S2 TI (weight N5 gain*) OR AB (weight N5 gain*) OR KW (weight N5 gain*) OR SU (weight N5 gain*) (326)
S3 TI (weight N5 los*) OR AB (weight N5 los*) OR KW (weight N5 los*) OR SU (weight N5 los*) (640)
S4 TI overeat* OR AB overeat* OR KW overeat* OR SU overeat* (73)
S5 TI (over W1 eat*) OR AB (over W1 eat*) OR KW (over W1 eat*) OR SU (over W1 eat*) (21)
S6 TI (weight N5 chang*) OR AB (weight N5 chang*) OR KW (weight N5 chang*) OR SU (weight N5 chang*) (266)
S7 TI ( (bmi or bmiz or “body mass index”) ) OR AB ( (bmi or bmiz or “body mass index”) ) OR KW ( (bmi or bmiz or “body mass index”) ) OR SU ( (bmi or bmiz or “body mass index”) ) (1278)
S8 TI ( ((adiposity or fat or weight) AND (goal or goals or outcome or outcomes)) ) OR AB ( ((adiposity or fat or weight) AND (goal or goals or outcome or outcomes)) ) OR KW ( ((adiposity or fat or weight) AND (goal or goals or outcome or outcomes)) ) OR SU ( ((adiposity or fat or weight) AND (goal or goals or outcome or outcomes)) ) (1320)
S9 (S1 OR S2 OR S3 OR S4 OR S5 OR S6 OR S7 OR S8) (5762)
[Study Design Filter]
S10 TI ( (RCT or cRCT or randomized or randomised or randomization or randomisation or randomizing or randomising) ) OR AB ( (RCT or cRCT or randomized or randomised or randomization or randomisation or randomizing or randomising) ) OR KW ( (RCT or cRCT or randomized or randomised or randomization or randomisation or randomizing or randomising) ) OR SU ( (RCT or cRCT or randomized or randomised or randomization or randomisation or randomizing or randomising) ) (7981)
S11 TI ( (random* AND (administ* or allocat* or assign* or class* or control* or determine* or divide* or division or distribut* or expose* or fashion or number* or place* or recruit* or split or subsitut* or treat*))) ) OR AB ( (random* AND (administ* or allocat* or assign* or class* or control* or determine* or divide* or division or distribut* or expose* or fashion or number* or place* or recruit* or split or subsitut* or treat*))) ) OR KW ( (random* AND (administ* or allocat* or assign* or class* or control* or determine* or divide* or division or distribut* or expose* or fashion or number* or place* or recruit* or split or subsitut* or treat*))) ) OR SU ( (random* AND (administ* or allocat* or assign* or class* or control* or determine* or divide* or division or distribut* or expose* or fashion or number* or place* or recruit* or split or subsitut* or treat*))) ) (29063)
S12 TI "at random" OR AB "at random" OR KW "at random" OR SU "at random" (14001)
S13 AB (control* N3 group*) (22313)
S14 TI trial OR AB trial OR KW trial OR SU trial (15512)
S15 TI trial OR AB trial OR KW trial OR SU trial (806)
S16 AB (matched N5 (class or classes or cluster or clusters or school or schools or community or communities or population or populations) (1057)
S17 (S10 OR S11 OR S12 OR S13 OR S14 OR S15 OR S16) (62683)
S18 (S9 AND S17) (637)
S19 (child* or adolescen* or pediatr* or paediatr* or boys or girls or youth or youths or teenage* or "young people" or "young person" or "young adult*") (500,370)
S20 TI school* OR AB school* OR KW school* OR SU school* (708643)
S21 TI communit* OR AB communit* OR KW communit* OR SU communit* (224783)
S22 (S19 OR S20 OR S21) (1,062,371)
S23 (S18 AND S22) (462)
S24 Limiters ‐ Date Published: 19900101‐20211231 n=435
***************************************************************************

## 1.3 Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) in the Cochrane Library
Issue 9 of 12, 2021
Date run: 26/09/2021

## Rolling search
Limited Mar‐Sept 2021
ID Search Hits
#1 MeSH descriptor: [Obesity] explode all trees 14800
#2 MeSH descriptor: [Body Weight Changes] explode all trees 9217
#3 (obes*):ti,ab,kw 46134
#4 (“weight gain” or “weight loss”):ti,ab,kw 32868
#5 (overweight or “over weight” or overeat* or (over next eat*)):ti,ab,kw 18432
#6 (weight next change*):ti,ab,kw 4229
#7 ((bmi or “body mass index”) near (gain or loss or change*)):ti,ab,kw 4292
#8 #1 OR #2 OR #3 OR #4 OR #5 OR #6 OR #7 69612
#9 MeSH descriptor: [Behavior Therapy] explode all trees 17646
#10 MeSH descriptor: [Social Support] explode all trees 3439
#11 MeSH descriptor: [Psychotherapy, Group] explode all trees 3560
#12 ((psychological or behavio?r*) near (therapy or modif* or strateg* or intervention*)):TI,AB,KW 53803
#13 (“group therapy” or “family therapy” or “cognitive therapy”):ti,ab,kw 10896
#14 ((lifestyle or “life style”) near (chang* or intervention*)):ti,ab,kw 10017
#15 counsel?ing:ti,ab,kw 22739
#16 “social support”:ti,ab,kw 8569
#17 (peer near2 support):ti,ab,kw 102294
#18 (children near/3 parent* near/3 therapy):ti,ab,kw 388
#19 #9 OR #10 OR #11 OR #12 OR #13 OR #14 OR #15 OR #16 OR #17 OR #18 173694
#20 MeSH descriptor: [Obesity] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [diet therapy ‐ DH] 2003
#21 MeSH descriptor: [Diet Therapy] explode all trees 6228
#22 MeSH descriptor: [Fasting] this term only 3327
#23 (diets or diet or dieting):ti,ab,kw 67825
#24 (diet* near (modif* or therapy or intervention* or strateg*)):ti,ab,kw 28307
#25 (“low calorie” or (calorie next control*) or “healthy eating”):ti,ab,kw 4036
#26 (fasting or (modified next fast*)):ti,ab,kw 35052
#27 MeSH descriptor: [Dietary Fats] explode all trees 7743
#28 (fruit or vegetable*):ti,ab,kw 9710
#29 (high next fat*) or (low next fat*) or (fatty next food*):ti,ab,kw 7159
#30 (formula next diet*):ti,ab,kw 237
#31 #20 or #21 or #22 or #23 or #24 or #25 or #26 or #27 or #28 or #29 or #30 103927
#32 MeSH descriptor: [Exercise] explode all trees 26442
#33 MeSH descriptor: [Exercise Therapy] explode all trees 15023
#34 exercis*:ti,ab,kw 112202
#35 (aerobics or “physical therapy” or “physical activity” or “physical inactivity”):ti,ab,kw 44627
#36 (fitness near (class* or regime* or program*)):ti,ab,kw 1349
#37 (“physical training” or “physical education”):ti,ab,kw 4525
#38 “dance therapy”:ti,ab,kw 180
#39 (sedentary next behavio?r*):ti,ab,kw 2522
#40 #32 OR #33 OR #34 OR #35 OR #36 OR #37 OR #38 OR #39 139600
#41 MeSH descriptor: [Complementary Therapies] explode all trees 20952
#42 ( “alternative medicine” or (complementary next therap*) or “complementary medicine”):ti,ab,kw 3613
#43 (hypnotism or hypnosis or hypnotherapy):ti,ab,kw 1818
#44 (acupuncture or homeopathy or homoeopathy):ti,ab,kw 16425
#45 (“chinese medicine” or “indian medicine” or “herbal medicine” or ayurvedic):ti,ab,kw 11369
#46 #41 OR #42 OR #43 OR #44 OR #45 44532
#47 (diet* or slim*) near (club* or organi?ation):ti,ab,kw 128
#48 (weightwatcher* or (weight next watcher*)):ti,ab,kw 134
#49 (correspondence near (course* or program*)):ti,ab,kw 28
#50 ((fat or diet*) next camp*):ti,ab,kw 2
#51 #47 OR #48 OR #49 OR #50 291
#52 MeSH descriptor: [Health Promotion] explode all trees 6886
#53 MeSH descriptor: [Health Education] explode all trees 20741
#54 (“health promotion” or “health education”):ti,ab,kw 19796
#55 (“media intervention*” or “community intervention*”):ti,ab,kw 630
#56 (health next promoting next school*):ti,ab,kw 48
#57 ((school or community) near/2 program*):ti,ab,kw 2921
#58 ((school or community) near/2 intervention*):ti,ab,kw 4510
#59 ((family next intervention*) or (parent* next intervention*)):ti,ab,kw 1744
#60 (parent* near/2 (behavio?r* or involve* or control* or attitude* or educat*)):ti,ab,kw 5960
#61 #52 OR #53 OR #54 OR #55 OR #56 OR #57 OR #58 OR #59 OR #60 41158
#62 MeSH descriptor: [Health Policy] explode all trees 672
#63 ( (health next polic*) or (school next polic*) or (food next polic*) or (nutrition next polic*)):ti,ab,kw 1462
#64 #62 OR #63 1595
#65 MeSH descriptor: [Obesity] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [prevention & control ‐ PC] 1761
#66 MeSH descriptor: [Primary Prevention] explode all trees 4376
#67 (“primary prevention” or “secondary prevention”):ti,ab,kw 10932
#68 (preventive next measure*) or (preventative next measure*):ti,ab,kw 1396
#69 (“preventive care” or “preventative care”):ti,ab,kw 581
#70 (obesity near/2 (prevent* or treat*)):ti,ab,kw 5220
#71 #65 OR #66 OR #67 OR #68 OR #69 OR #70 21508
#72 (#19 OR #31 OR #40 OR #46 OR #51 OR #61 OR #64 OR #71) 420107
#73 #8 AND #72 42842
#74 MeSH descriptor: [Child] explode all trees 58448
#75 MeSH descriptor: [Infant] explode all trees 33346
#76 (child* or adolescen* or infant*):ti,ab,kw 289920
#77 (teenage* or “young people” or “young person” or (young next adult*)):ti,ab,kw 91369
#78 (schoolchildren or “school children”):ti,ab,kw 12811
#79 (pediatr* or paediatr*):ti,ab,kw 37240
#80 (boys or girls or youth or youths):ti,ab,kw 17734
#81 MeSH descriptor: [Adolescent] this term only 106993
#82 #74 OR #75 OR #76 OR #77 OR #78 OR #79 OR #80 OR #81 345686
#83 #73 AND #82 12799
[Additional terms for BMI]
#84 (BMIz or (BMI* near/2 (z‐scor* or zscor*))):ti,ab 1102
#85 ((bmi or "body mass index") near/3 (assess* or calculat* or change? or changing or differ* or increas* or decreas* or reduc* or post‐intervention* or "follow* up*" or followup*)):ti,ab 8093
#86 ((bmi or "body mass index") near/3 outcome?):ti,ab 1927
#87 ((adiposity or fat or weight) near/3 (goal? or outcome?)):ti,ab 5101
#88 #84 OR #85 OR #86 OR #87 14422
#89 #88 AND #72 AND #82 3596
#90 #89 NOT #83 625

## 1.4 Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) in the Cochrane Library

## New search (difference set)
Issue 9 of 12, 2021
Date run: 26/09/2021
#91 MeSH descriptor: [Marketing] explode all trees 530
#92 MeSH descriptor: [Persuasive Communication] this term only 314
#93 MeSH descriptor: [Communications Media] explode all trees 12804
#94 (marketing or advert* or campaign* or "mass media" or "social media" or blog* or vlog*):ti,ab,kw 8893
#95 (persuasive or persuasion or persuader*):ti,ab,kw 860
#96 MeSH descriptor: [Food Packaging] this term only 37
#97 MeSH descriptor: [Food Labeling] explode all trees 169
#98 ((food? or drink? or product? or nutrition* or diet* or carb* or sugar* or fat? or calori* or warning) NEAR/3 (label* or packag*)):ti,ab,kw 1855
#99 "traffic light*":ti,ab,kw 193
#100 (#91 OR #92 OR #93 OR #94 OR #95 OR #96 OR #97 OR #98 OR #99) 23426
#101 MeSH descriptor: [Artificially Sweetened Beverages] this term only 5
#102 MeSH descriptor: [Beverages] this term only and with qualifier(s): [adverse effects ‐ AE] 138
#103 MeSH descriptor: [Sweetening Agents] explode all trees 770
#104 (artificial* near/3 sweeten*):ti,ab,kw 248
#105 ((sugar* or sweeten* or unsweeten* or diet or "low calorie" or fizzy or carbonated) NEAR/3 (beverag* or drinks or juice? or cordial? or pop or smoothie? or snack?)):ti,ab,kw 1777
#106 (((fizzy or carbonated) near/3 (beverag* or drinks)) or soda?):ti,ab,kw 804
#107 ("low sugar" or "high sugar" or "high fat" or HFSS):ti,ab,kw 4083
#108 ((sugar or fat or food) near/2 (literacy or education)):ti,ab,kw 309
#109 (#101 OR #102 OR #103 OR #104 OR #105 OR #106 OR #107 OR #108) 7209
#110 MeSH descriptor: [Food Services] explode all trees 389
#111 MeSH descriptor: [Dietary Services] this term only 43
#112 (school* near/3 (breakfast? or catering or diet* or dinner? or dining or lunch* or meal? or food? or snack?)):ti,ab,kw 873
#113 ("breakfast club?" or "catering service?"):ti,ab,kw 173
#114 (mealtim* or "meal tim*" or "meal environment?"):ti,ab,kw 883
#115 ("packed lunches" or "tuck shops" or "snack shops"):ti,ab,kw 18
#116 "vending machine?":ti,ab,kw 23
#117 (#110 OR #111 OR #112 OR #113 OR #114 OR #115 OR #116) 2195
#118 ("after school" or out‐of‐school):ti,ab,kw 574
#119 MeSH descriptor: [Non‐Medical Public and Private Facilities] explode all trees 5420
#120 MeSH descriptor: [Leisure Activities] explode all trees 19390
#121 MeSH descriptor: [Physical Education and Training] this term only 1621
#122 MeSH descriptor: [Sports and Recreational Facilities] explode all trees 118
#123 ((youth? or communit* or holiday* or vacation* or activit* or fitness or sport* or recreation* or leisure) near/3 (center? or centre? or camp? or club?)):ti,ab,kw 3740
#124 ((youth? or communit* or holiday* or vacation* or leisure) next based):ti,ab,kw 9610
#125 MeSH descriptor: [Movement] this term only 2461
#126 MeSH descriptor: [Fitness Trackers] this term only 123
#127 (((movement or activit* or fitness) near/2 (app or based or chang* or monitor* or measur* or track*)) or recreation* or sport* or play):ti,ab,kw 44174
#128 MeSH descriptor: [Sleep] explode all trees 6005
#129 sleep*:ti or ((sleep near/3 (duration or efficienc* or hygiene or problem* or quality)) or actigraph*):ti,ab,kw 25133
#130 (#118 OR #119 OR #120 OR #121 OR #122 OR #123 OR #124 OR #125 OR #126 OR #127 OR #128 OR #129) 101953
#131 ((parent* or family or families or guardian?) near/2 (advice or advisory or (behavi* near chang*) or coach* or educat* or focus* or intervention* or program* or project* or psychoeducat* or strateg* or study or support* or therap* or train* or trial)):ti,ab,kw 19851
#132 ((parent* or family or families or guardian?) next (based or centred or centered or focus* or tailored or target*)):ti,ab,kw 2863
#133 #131 OR #132 20617
#134 MeSH descriptor: [Religion] explode all trees 1271
#135 MeSH descriptor: [Culture] explode all trees 2923
#136 (religi* or church or spiritual or faith?):ti,ab,kw 3296
#137 ((cultur* or multicultur* or race or racial*) near/2 (adapted or appropriate or based or center* or centre* or competent or focus* or tailored or translat* or target*)):ti,ab,kw 2635
#138 #134 OR #135 OR #136 OR #137 9246
#139 MeSH descriptor: [Public Health] this term only 262
#140 "public health":ti,ab,kw 14709
#141 ((complex or co‐ordinated or comprehensive or factorial or interdisciplinary or inter‐disciplinary or multiple or "multi component?" or multicomponent? or multidisciplin* or "multi disciplin*" or multidimension* or "multi dimension*" or multifactor* or "multi factor*" or multifacet* or "multi facet*" or multilevel* or "multi level*" or multimodal* or "multi modal*" or multiparamet* or "multi paramet*" or multiecological or "multi* ecological") near (intervention? or program* or project? or strateg* or study or support* or system? or therap* or train* or trial)):ti,ab,kw 62757
#142 #139 OR #140 OR #141 76106
#143 MeSH descriptor: [Computer Communication Networks] explode all trees 4404
#144 MeSH descriptor: [Telecommunications] explode all trees 7443
#145 MeSH descriptor: [Mobile Applications] this term only 888
#146 MeSH descriptor: [Cell Phone] explode all trees 1992
#147 MeSH descriptor: [Therapy, Computer‐Assisted] this term only 1358
#148 digital*:ti,kw OR (digital near/3 (assist* or based or deliver* or intervention? or pilot or platform? or program* or project? or strateg* or study or support* or system? or technolog* or therap* or train* or trial)):ab 5502
#149 (android or app or apps or avatar* or blog* or CD‐ROM or "cell* phone*" or cellphone* or "chat room*" or chatroom* or cyber* or DVD or eHealth or e‐health or "electronic health" or e‐Portal or ePortal or ePsych* or e‐Psych* or eTherap* or e‐therap* or "electronic forum*" or gaming or "information technolog*" or "instant messag*" or ipad or i‐pad or iphone or i‐phone or ipod or i‐pod or podcast or "smart phone" or smartphone or "social network* site*" or "social networking" or mHealth or m‐health or multi‐media or multimedia or "personal digital assistant" or PDA or SMS or smartwatch* or "smart watch*" or "social medi*" or telehealth* or tele‐health* or telemed* or tele‐med* or telemonitor* or tele‐monitor* or telepsych* or tele‐psych* or teletherap* or tele‐therap* or texting):ti,ab,kw 27793
#150 (internet or technolog* or tele* or web):ti,kw or ((computer or e‐mail* or email* or messaging or internet* or mobile or online* or on‐line or software or technolog* or telecomm* or tele‐comm* or "text messag*" or virtual* or web or WWW) near/3 (assist* or based or deliver* or intervention? or pilot or platform? or program* or project? or strateg* or study or support* or system? or technolog* or therap* or train* or trial)):ti,ab,kw 32308
#151 (gaming or gamification or "wearable device?" or wearables or videogame or "video game" or videoconferenc* or "video conferenc*"):ti,ab,kw 3342
#152 (synchronous or asynchronous or (electronic near/2 deliver*) or eLearning or e‐learning or "blended learning"):ti,ab,kw 2642
#153 (screentime or "screen time"):ti,ab,kw 477
#154 ("self care" and (computers or internet or software)):kw 967
#155 #143 OR #144 OR #145 OR #146 OR #147 OR #148 OR #149 OR #150 OR #151 OR #152 OR #153 OR #154 60834
#156 #100 OR #109 OR #117 OR #130 OR #133 OR #138 OR #142 OR #155 255258
#157 MeSH descriptor: [Child] explode all trees 58448
#158 (child* or adolescen*):ti,ab,kw 260114
#159 (teenage* or “young people” or “young person” or (young next adult*)):ti,ab,kw 91369
#160 (schoolchildren or “school children”):ti,ab,kw 12811
#161 (pediatr* or paediatr*):ti,ab,kw 37240
#162 (boys or girls or youth or youths):ti,ab,kw 17734
#163 MeSH descriptor: [Adolescent] this term only 106993
#164 (#157 OR #158 OR #159 OR #160 OR #161 OR #162 OR #163) 318126
#165 ((#8 OR #88) AND #156 AND #164) 7331
#166 #165 NOT #83 1281
**************************************************************************

## 1.5 Pragmatic search for grey literature (theses – all years)

## ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Global (www.proquest.com/pqdtglobal/dissertations/)
Date of search: 24 February 2022
[Title]ti((((randomised or randomized or "randomly allocated" or "randomly assigned" or "random assignment" or RCT or cRCT) AND (adolescent or adolescents or boys or girls or child or children or schoolchildren or childhood or parents or guardians or parental) AND (((obesity or overweight) and (prevent or preventing or prevention or promote or promotion or promoting)) or "weight management" or “weight gain” or “weight loss” or "physical activity" or "physical activities" or ((dietary or lifestyle) and (behaviours or behaviors or behavioural or behavioral or changes or intervention))) AND (cluster or cRCT or school or schools or schoolchildren or classroom or classrooms))) ) OR [Abstract] ab((((randomised or randomized or "randomly allocated" or "randomly assigned" or "random assignment" or RCT or cRCT) AND (adolescent or adolescents or boys or girls or child or children or schoolchildren or childhood or parents or guardians or parental) AND (((obesity or overweight) and (prevent or preventing or prevention or promote or promotion or promoting)) or "weight management" or “weight gain” or “weight loss” or "physical activity" or "physical activities" or ((dietary or lifestyle) and (behaviours or behaviors or behavioural or behavioral or changes or intervention))) AND (cluster or cRCT or school or schools or schoolchildren or classroom or classrooms))) ) (214)

## Electronic Theses Online Service (EThOS) ‐ British Library (ethos.bl.uk/Home.do)
Date of search: 11 March 2022
Search terms (OR):
obesity and prevention and randomised (50)
obesity and prevention and randomized (14)
obesity and school(s) and randomised (18)
obesity and school(s) and randomized (9)
adiposity and randomised and children (9)
adiposity and randomized and children (4)
adiposity and randomised and school(s) (4)
adiposity and randomized and school(s) (0)
BMI and randomised and children (25)
BMI and randomized and children (11)
BMI and randomised and school(s) (13)
BMI and randomized and school(s) (7)
BMI and z‐score and randomised (9)
BMI and z‐score and randomized (3)
weight and randomised and children (50)
weight and randomized and children (25)
weight and randomised and school(s) (32)
weight and randomized and school(s) (24)
school‐based and randomised (151)
school‐based and randomized (159)
healthy and children and randomised (49)
healthy and children and randomized (17)
25 theses selected for screening (16 duplicates with PQDT)
9 new records to screen

## DART ‐ Europe e‐theses Portal (https://www.dart‐europe.org/basic‐search.php)
Date of search: 31 March 2022
Search terms (OR):
obesity and prevention and children and randomised (7) (4 selected)
obesity and prevention and children and randomized (11) (4 selected)
obesity and prevention and adolescents and randomised (2) (2 duplicates )
obesity and prevention and adolescents and randomized (8) (4 selected, all duplicates)
obesity and randomised and schools (6) (3 selected; 2 duplicates)
obesity and randomized and schools (11) (5 selected; 3 duplicates)
adiposity and randomised and children (5) (4 selected; 2 duplicates)
adiposity and randomized and children (0 selected)
adiposity and randomised and adolescents (2) (1 selected)
adiposity and randomized and adolescents (3) (0 selected)
adiposity and randomised and schools (2) (2 selected, both duplicates)
adiposity and randomized and schools (0)
BMI and randomised and children (18) (3 selected, 2 duplicates)
BMI and randomized and children (23) (2 selected, both duplicates)
BMI and randomised and adolescents (10) (2 selected, all duplicates)
BMI and randomized and adolescents (15) (3 selected, 2 duplicates)
BMI and randomised and school(s) (5) (4 selected, all duplicates)
BMI and randomized and school(s) (11) (4 selected, all duplicates)
BMI and z‐score and randomised and children (9) (2 selected, both duplicates)
BMI and z‐score and randomised and adolescents (7) (2 selected, both duplicates)
BMI and z‐score and randomized and children (15) (1 selected, 1 duplicates)
BMI and z‐score and randomized and adolescents (12) (3 selected, all duplicates)
weight and randomised and children (46) (4 selected, 3 duplicates)
weight and randomized and children (71) (4 selected, 3 duplicates)
weight and randomised and adolescents (13) (1 duplicate)
weight and randomized and adolescents (24) (2 selected, both duplicates)
school‐based and randomised (52) (4 selected, 2 duplicates)
school‐based and randomized (81) (5 selected, 2 duplicates)
healthy and children and randomised (41) (5 selected, 4 duplicates)
healthy and children and randomized (82) (2 selected)
healthy and adolescents and randomised (12) (2 selected, 2 duplicate)
healthy and adolescents and randomized (27) (1 selected, 1 duplicate)
healthy and schools and randomised (12) (3 selected, 3 duplicates)
healthy and schools and randomized (10) (2 selected, both duplicates)
n=25 theses selected for screening
5 duplicates with PQDT and BL eTHOS
20 to screen
[Note. Several theses have also been retrieved from databases which index this type of literature, e.g. PsycINFO, Australian Education Index (AEI)]
***************************************************************************

## 1.6 Search for retractions/errata
Date of search: 6 April 2022
Ovid multifile search
APA PsycInfo <1806 to April Week 1 2022>
Embase <1974 to 2022 April 06>
Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL <1946 to April 06, 2022>
1 exp overweight/ or exp body weight changes/ or body weight/ or ideal body weight/ or waist‐height ratio/ or waist‐hip ratio/ or body mass index/ or adiposity/ 1789517
2 1 use medall 539949
3 *overnutrition/ or exp *obesity/ or childhood obesity/ or adolescent obesity/ or *body weight/ or *body weight change/ or *body weight loss/ or *body weight control/ or *body weight fluctuation/ or *body weight gain/ or *ideal body weight/ or *body mass/ or *waist to height ratio/ or *waist hip ratio/ 573049
4 3 use oemezd 340024
5 exp overweight/ or weight control/ or weight loss/ or weight gain/ 1035600
6 5 use psyh 35168
7 (2 or 4 or 6) 915141
8 (obes* or adipos* or weight gain or weight loss or overweight or over weight or overeat* or over eat* or weight change*).mp. 1737633
9 ((bmi? or body mass index) adj2 (alter* or assess* or calculat* or change? or changing or differ* or gain or increas* or decreas* or loss or reduc* or post‐intervention* or postintervention* or follow* up* or followup*)).mp. 107069
10 (BMIz or BMI‐z* or zBMI* or z‐BMI*).mp. 14358
11 (BMI* adj2 (z‐scor* or zscor*)).mp. 13076
12 or/7‐11 2010782
13 exp child/ or preschool child/ or school child/ or adolescent/ 6930323
14 (child or children or childhood or adolescen* or pediatr* or paediatr* or boy or boyhood or boys or girl or girlhood or girls or youth or youths or teen* or young people or young person? or schoolchild* or youth or youths).tw. 5491742
15 (school? adj (based or setting student?)).tw. 53821
16 or/13‐15 9153070
17 (12 and 16) 376094
18 exp randomized controlled trial/ 1271931
19 randomized controlled trial.pt. 563745
20 Randomization/ or Random Allocation/ 200537
21 (randomi#ed or randomi#ation or randomi#ing).mp. 2512633
22 (RCT or cRCT).tw. 80040
23 "at random".ab. 31601
24 (random* adj3 (administ* or allocat* or assign* or class* or cluster or crossover or cross‐over or control* or determine* or divide* or division or distribut* or expose* or fashion or number* or place* or pragmatic or quasi or recruit* or selected or split or subsitut* or treat*)).tw. 1799071
25 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj2 (blind* or mask* or dummy)).mp. 632841
26 trial.ti. 650175
27 (prevention adj (study or trial)).tw. 16015
28 (intervention and trial).tw. 321931
29 program.ti. and trial.tw. 24533
30 ((intervention or program) and control* and (group? or school? or communit*)).tw. 500989
31 ((intervention or program) adj5 (control* or group? or study or trial)).tw. 481711
32 controlled clinical trial.mp. 604659
33 or/18‐32 4070222
34 (17 and 33) 46661
35 (retracted publication or "retraction of publication").pt. 21796
36 Tombstone.pt. 3894
37 Retracted article/ 11134
38 (retracted or retraction).ti. 29282
39 (35 or 36 or 37 or 38) 51319
40 (17 and 39) 88
41 remove duplicates from 40 74
42 erratum.pt. 250070
43 published erratum.pt. 113022
44 (erratum or errata).ti. 209724
45 (42 or 43 or 44) 379603
46 (34 and 45) 59​
47 remove duplicates from 46 48
48 (47 not 41) 45
***************************************************************************

## 1.7 Search updates (Automated Searches; October 2022)
September 2021 onwards

## Cochrane Library
Search name: Obesity‐Living‐Systematic‐Review‐1
#1 MeSH descriptor: [Obesity] explode all trees
#2 MeSH descriptor: [Body Weight Changes] explode all trees
#3 "body mass index":kw
#4 (obes* or adiposity):ti,ab,kw
#5 (“weight gain” or “weight loss” or (weight next change*) or (weight next fluctuat*)):ti,ab,kw
#6 (overweight or "over weight" or overeat* or (over next eat*) or overnutrition or "over nutrition"):ti,ab,kw
#7 ((fat or weight) near/3 (goal* or outcome*)):ti,ab,kw
#8 ((bmi or "body mass index") near/3 (assess* or calculat* or change* or changing or differ* or gain* or increas* or decreas* or reduc* or post‐intervention* or (follow* next up*) or followup* or loss or outcome*)):ti,ab,kw
#9 (BMIz or BMI‐z or zBMI or z‐BMI or (BMI* near/2 (z‐scor* or zscor*))):ti,ab
#10 ((waist near/2 height near/2 ratio*) or (waist near/2 hip* near/2 ratio*)):ti,ab,kw
#11 "weight control":ti,ab,kw
#12 (#1 OR #2 OR #3 OR #4 OR #5 OR #6 OR #7 OR #8 OR #9 OR #10 OR #11)
#13 MeSH descriptor: [Child] this term only
#14 MeSH descriptor: [Child, Preschool] this term only
#15 MeSH descriptor: [Adolescent] this term only
#16 (child* or adolescen* or pediatr* or paediatr* or boy or boyhood or boys or girl or girlhood or girls or youth or youths or teen* or "young people" or (young next person*) or schoolchild* or (school next child*) or youth or youths):ti,ab,kw
#17 (school* next (based or setting or student*)):ti,ab,kw
#18 (#13 OR #14 OR #15 OR #16 OR #17)
#19 (#12 and #18)

## Ovid multi‐file search
APA PsycINFO <1806 to April Week 3 2022>
Embase <1974 to 2022 April 25>
Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL <1946 to April 25, 2022>
1 exp overweight/ or exp body weight changes/ or body weight/ or ideal body weight/ or waist‐height ratio/ or waist‐hip ratio/ or body mass index/ or adiposity/
2 1 use medall
3 *overnutrition/ or exp *obesity/ or childhood obesity/ or adolescent obesity/ or *body weight/ or *body weight change/ or *body weight loss/ or *body weight control/ or *body weight fluctuation/ or *body weight gain/ or *ideal body weight/ or *body mass/ or *waist to height ratio/ or *waist hip ratio/
4 3 use oemezd
5 exp overweight/ or weight control/ or weight loss/ or weight gain/
6 5 use psyh
7 (2 or 4 or 6)
8 (obes* or adipos* or weight gain or weight loss or overweight or over weight or overeat* or over eat* or weight change*).mp.
9 ((bmi? or body mass index) adj2 (alter* or assess* or calculat* or change? or changing or differ* or gain or increas* or decreas* or loss or reduc* or post‐intervention* or postintervention* or follow* up* or followup*)).mp.
10 (BMIz or BMI‐z* or zBMI* or z‐BMI*).mp.
11 (BMI* adj2 (z‐scor* or zscor*)).mp.
12 or/7‐11
13 exp child/ or preschool child/ or school child/ or adolescent/
14 (child or children or childhood or adolescen* or pediatr* or paediatr* or boy or boyhood or boys or girl or girlhood or girls or youth or youths or teen* or young people or young person? or schoolchild* or youth or youths).tw.
15 (school? adj (based or setting student?)).tw.
16 or/13‐15
17 (12 and 16)
18 exp randomized controlled trial/
19 randomized controlled trial.pt.
20 Randomization/ or Random Allocation/
21 (randomi#ed or randomi#ation or randomi#ing).mp.
22 (RCT or cRCT).tw.
23 "at random".ab.
24 (random* adj3 (administ* or allocat* or assign* or class* or cluster or crossover or cross‐over or control* or determine* or divide* or division or distribut* or expose* or fashion or number* or place* or pragmatic or quasi or recruit* or selected or split or subsitut* or treat*)).tw.
25 ((single or double or triple or treble) adj2 (blind* or mask* or dummy)).mp.
26 trial.ti.
27 (prevention adj (study or trial)).tw.
28 (intervention and trial).tw.
29 program.ti. and trial.tw.
30 ((intervention or program) and control* and (group? or school? or communit*)).tw.
31 ((intervention or program) adj5 (control* or group? or study or trial)).tw.
32 controlled clinical trial.mp.
33 or/18‐32
34 (17 and 33)
35 remove duplicates from 34
***************************************************************************

## Appendix 3. Information extracted from study reports
We collected the following data from study reports.
Methods: study design (including number of clusters in cluster‐RCTs); total duration of study; details of any 'run‐in' period; number of study centres and location; study setting; date of study
Participants: numbers randomised, lost to follow‐up/withdrawn and analysed; age (mean and range); sex; exclusion criteria
Baseline zBMI, BMI and/or BMI percentile
For studies that did not report any of these measurements, we instead collected data on the prevalence of overweight/obesity at baseline (if available).
Interventions: description of experimental and comparator interventions, such as type of intervention, duration of intervention, setting, theory behind the intervention, unit of intervention (who is targeted), who delivers the intervention
Outcomes: zBMI (mean and SD); BMI (mean and SD); BMI percentile (mean and SD); numbers of reported serious adverse events. For studies that did not report one of the three primary outcomes, we instead collected the prevalence of overweight/obesity at the follow‐up time (if available).
Time points: as described under in the methods section;
Measurement: we recorded whether BMI and zBMI were self‐reported (by parent or child) or measured by researchers;
Effect estimates (contrast‐level data): we collected contrast‐level data on BMI, zBMI and BMI percentile according to these preferences:
post intervention difference in means adjusted for baseline zBMI/BMI/BMI percentile from analysis of covariance; in preference to
difference in mean change from baseline; in preference to
post intervention difference in means (unadjusted).
Follow‐up measurements (arm level data): we collected arm‐level data on BMI, zBMI and BMI percentile according to these preferences:
post intervention means adjusted for baseline BMI/zBMI/percentile; in preference to
change from baseline means (change scores); in preference to
post intervention means (unadjusted).
Effect estimates from cluster‐RCTs: we collected BMI, zBMI and BMI percentile results that were adjusted for clustering in preference to results that are not adjusted for clustering.
PROGRESS factors;
Information about the costs of interventions, for the purposes of secondary analysis by healthcare policymakers (we did not analyse costs in this review, but we have reported this information in a table); and
Notes: funding for trial, and notable conflicts of interest of trial authors.

Abbreviations BMI: body mass index PROGRESS: Place of residence, Race/ethnicity/culture/language, Occupation, Gender/sex, Religion, Education, Socioeconomic status, Social capital RCT: randomised controlled trial SD: standard deviation zBMI: standardised body mass index

## Appendix 4. Statistical details

## 3.1 Details of statistical method

## 3.1.1 Selecting outcome data
We aimed to combine data on mean differences between groups in change‐from‐baseline measures (of BMI (body mass index)/zBMI (standardised body mass index)/percentile (body mass index percentile)). Since most studies reported arm‐level data rather than contrast‐level data and because many contrast‐level estimates came from models that were either not fully explained or involved a high level of covariate adjustment, we decided to prioritise arm‐level data, where available. Arm‐level data were prioritised as follows: (i) follow‐up means adjusted for baseline values, (ii) mean change from baseline (change scores), (iii) unadjusted baseline and follow‐up means, and (iv) unadjusted follow‐up means without baseline data. There were no instances of option (iv) in this data set. In the absence of arm‐level data, we collected contrast‐level data if they could be interpreted as a measure of the mean difference in change from baseline.

## 3.1.2 Calculation of mean differences from arm‐level data
For options (i), (ii) and (iv) above, we calculated the mean difference (MD) and its standard error (SE) in the same way. We labelled the arm‐level means as mx, standard deviations (SDs) as sx, and participant numbers (at follow‐up) as nx where X ∈ (A, B) represent the two intervention groups. The MD and SE were then calculated as follows:
MD = mA‐mB,
SE = √(sA2/nA + sB2/nB).
For option (iii), we labelled the baseline variables with the subscript 0 and follow‐up variables with the subscript 1. The MD and SE are then,
MD = (mA1‐mA0)‐(mB1‐mB0),
SE = √(sA02/nA0 + sA12/nA1 + sB02/nB0 + sB12/nB1 ‐ 2ρ(sA0sA1/√(nA0nA1) + sB0sB1/√(nB0nB1))),
where ρ is the correlation coefficient between baseline and follow‐up measurements. Values for ρ are discussed in Section 3.1.2.1.

## 3.1.2.1 Correlation coefficient
The correlation coefficient between baseline and follow‐up measurements is given by:
ρ = (s02 + s12 ‐ sCS2)/2s0s1,
where s0, s1 and sCS represent standard deviations on baseline, follow‐up and change scores, respectively. We found four studies in which all three of these measurements were reported. For each group within these studies, we calculated the associated correlation coefficient via the above equation. The mean of these values was 0.953 and the median was 0.951. We also looked at studies reporting baseline and change‐from‐baseline measurements. Assuming the follow‐up SD was equal to the baseline SD in these studies (s1 = s0), we approximated the correlation coefficient using the same formula. These calculations gave a mean of 0.93 and a median of 0.94. Based on these results, we chose to impute a value of ρ =0.95 in our calculations.

## 3.1.3 Cluster adjustment
The majority of studies were cluster‐randomised. For each result, we assessed whether the authors had adjusted for clustering in their reported precision. For those that had not, we accounted for the effect of clustering by adjusting the standard error on the mean difference via:
SE' = SE√(1+ICC(c‐1)),
where SE' is the adjusted standard error, c is the mean cluster size (= number of participants divided by the number of clusters), and ICC is the intra‐cluster correlation coefficient. We discussed choices for the value of ICC in Section 3.1.3.1. We decided not to adjust for clustering at the family level as the cluster sizes were very small.

## 3.1.3.1 Intra‐cluster correlation coefficient
Most studies that required cluster adjustment did not report the relevant ICC. To choose a value to use for these studies, we collected all the ICCs reported across the trials. There were no notable differences between ICCs reported at the classroom level compared with the school level. The median across all these values was 0.02. Based on these observations, we chose to use ICC = 0.02 for all studies that required cluster adjustment but did not report their own ICC.
Some studies assumed an ICC value in their sample size calculations. These values were usually based on external evidence. The median across all the assumed ICCs was 0.03. This suggested that a sensitivity analysis using ICC = 0.04 was sensible. We also performed a sensitivity analysis with ICC = 0 (i.e. no cluster adjustment).

## 3.2 Data extraction and imputation

## 3.2.1 General methods

## 3.2.1.1 Combining results from subgroups
Five studies reported data on the subgroup level only. Usually, this meant the results were stratified by sex. To use these results in the meta‐analysis, we had to combine the subgroup results. We labelled the mean, standard deviation, and number of participants in each subgroup as mi, si and ni where the subscript i ∈ (a, b) labels subgroups a and b. The mean and standard deviation of the combined subgroups were calculated via ( ):
ma+b = (nama + nbmb)/(na+nb),
sa+b2 = ((na‐1)sa2 + (nb‐1)sb2)/(na+nb‐1) + ((nanb/(na+nb))(ma2+mb2‐2mamb)/(na+nb‐1).
For results with more than two subgroups, these equations can be applied sequentially.

## 3.2.1.2 Multiple follow‐up times
Follow‐up times were categorised into three groups: (i) short term [3 to < 9 months], (ii) medium term [9 to < 15 months], (iii) long term [≥ 15 months]. For any studies that reported more than one follow‐up time within categories (i) and (ii), we chose the time point that was closest to the midpoint of the interval (6 and 12 months, respectively). For studies that reported more than one long‐term time point, we chose the longest follow‐up time.

## 3.2.1.3 Estimating zBMI from proportions of children with overweight/obesity
In some studies, the only outcome data available were the proportion of participants classified as having overweight or obesity. Since definitions of overweight/obesity are based on zBMI or equivalent percentile cut‐offs, we used these data to estimate zBMI means. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) charts define a child as being overweight if their BMI exceeds the 85th percentile for their age and sex and define obesity as a BMI greater than or equal to the 95th percentile. The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies an overweight child as one whose zBMI exceeds 1 and define obesity as zBMI > 2. We can convert between zBMI and percentile cut‐offs using the standard normal cumulative distribution:
pc = Φ(zc),
zc = Φ‐1(pc),
where zcis the zBMI cut‐off for overweight and obesity, pc is the equivalent percentile cut‐off and Φ(z) = Pr(Z ≤ z) is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of a variable Z with a standard normal distribution. For each study, we used the zBMI or percentile cut‐off reported by the growth chart or classification index used to define overweight/obesity in that study. In the following, we used ηc to represent the proportion of participants whose zBMI exceeds the threshold zc.
For a normally distributed variable X = μ + Zσ with mean μ and standard deviation σ the CDF is:
Pr(X ≤ x) = Pr(μ + Zσ ≤ x) = Φ((x‐μ)/σ).
Furthermore, from the CDF we can write:
Pr(Z > z) = 1 ‐ Φ(z).
Therefore, to estimate mean zBMI from the proportion of participants classified as having overweight or obesity, we assumed that zBMI sampled within a trial follows a (non‐standard) normal distribution, X∼N(μz, σz2), with mean μz and standard deviation σz. The probability that a sampled value of zBMI exceeds the zBMI cut‐off for overweight and obesity is then:
Pr(X > zc) = Pr(Z > (zc‐μz)/σz) = 1 ‐ Φ((zc‐μz)/σz),
where Z∼N(0,1) represents a standard, normal, random variable. The proportion of participants, ηc, with zBMI greater than zc is an estimate of the probability Pr(X > zc). Therefore, inserting this estimate into the above equation gives:
ηc = 1 ‐ Φ((zc‐μz)/σz),
(zc‐μz)/σz = Φ‐1(1‐ ηc).
By definition, the population standard deviation of zBMI is equal to 1. Therefore, in order to estimate μz, we assumed that the sample standard deviation is equal to the population standard deviation. Inserting σz= 1 into the above equation gives:
μz ≈ zc ‐ Φ‐1(1‐ ηc).
This is the equation we used to convert proportions of participants with overweight and obesity into estimates of mean zBMI. If the study reported the proportions of participants with overweight and obesity separately, then these values were summed to give the value of ηc. If the study only reported the prevalence of obesity, then we used this as ηc and replaced zc with the zBMI cut‐off for obesity.

## 3.2.1.4 Missing follow‐up SDs and participant numbers
For any study that did not report standard deviations or any other measure of precision in their follow‐up means, we set the follow‐up SDs equal to the baseline SDs in each group. From inspection of other studies in the dataset in which both baseline and follow‐up precision were reported, this was deemed a reasonable assumption, as these values tended to be very similar. For any study that reported no measure of precision on any of their zBMI means, we assumed a standard deviation of 1 (equal to the standard deviation of the population). This assumption was supported from inspection of studies that did report precision on zBMI as these SDs were approximately equal to 1. There were no instances of completely missing precision on BMI or percentile data.
In a similar vein, for any study that did not explicitly report the number of participants at follow‐up or the number of dropouts during the study, we assumed that the number of participants at follow‐up was equal to the number at baseline.

## 3.2.1.5 Reading values from graphs
When studies only reported outcomes in the form of a graph, we used the Engauge Digitizer 4.1 software ( ) to extract the plotted values.

## 3.2.2 Notes on specific trials

## 3.2.2.1 Andrade 2014
This study reported BMI and zBMI data. The two outcomes were reported in different papers and have slightly different participant numbers (NB: zBMI requires data on the age and sex of the participant). In the paper reporting zBMI, we were missing the number of participants per group at baseline (we were given the total number of participants at baseline and the number per group at follow‐up). To impute these values, we used the BMI participant numbers to work out the ratio of dropouts in each group relative to the overall dropout. Assuming these ratios are the same for the zBMI outcome, we used these along with the total dropout and number of participants at follow‐up to estimate the baseline participant numbers per group for the zBMI outcome.

## 3.2.2.2 Arlinghaus 2021
This study reported means and SDs on zBMI at baseline per group. The only follow‐up data are plotted in their , which shows the change in zBMI per group stratified by weight status (healthy weight, overweight and obese). We read the zBMI change scores from the figure using the Engauge Digitizer software. The healthy weight and overweight subgroup change scores were combined using the methods described in 3.2.1.1. The baseline and change score means were used to obtain follow‐up means. Finally, we assumed that follow‐up SDs were equal to the baseline SDs in each group.

## 3.2.2.3 El Ansari 2010
Results from the different subgroups (boys and girls) were combined using the methods outlined in Section 3.2.1.1.

## 3.2.2.4 French 2011
This was a study of households, some of which contained adolescents. The adolescent data were reported separately from the adult data. There was no information on the precision of zBMI means, hence, we assumed SDs of 1 (see Section 3.2.1.4). There was also no information on the number of adolescents per group (we have the total number of adolescents and the number of households per group). To impute these numbers, we calculated the average number of adolescents per household and multiplied this by the number of households per group at baseline and follow‐up.

## 3.2.2.5 Haerens 2006
Results from the different subgroups (boys and girls) were combined using the methods outlined in Section 3.1.1.

## 3.2.2.6 Hovell 2018
The follow‐up data on zBMI were reported as the results of a regression analysis plotted in . In the figure, predicted zBMI is plotted against time (from 0 to 1000 days) for each group and each sex. The study also reported the raw zBMI means and SDs per group at baseline. We read off the predicted zBMI means at baseline (0 months) and 24 months using the Engauge Digitizer software. We combined the subgroup values for boys and girls using the methods described in Section 3.2.1.1. We assumed the standard deviations on the predicted zBMI means at baseline and follow‐up were equal to the SDs on the raw zBMI means at baseline. We chose to use the predicted baseline means over the raw baseline means so that the values were consistent with the follow‐up values.

## 3.2.2.7 Jago 2006
Results from the different subgroups (spring wave and fall wave) were combined using the methods outlined in Section 3.2.1.1.

## 3.2.2.8 Neumark‐Sztainer 2003
The study was missing precision on follow‐up means. We assumed SD at follow‐up was equal to SD at baseline.

## 3.2.2.9 Neumark‐Sztainer 2010
The study was missing precision on follow‐up means. We assumed SD at follow‐up was equal to SD at baseline.

## 3.2.2.10 Ooi 2021
The study only reported BMI measurements for a "subset of year 7s". The number in this subset per group were reported at baseline but not at follow‐up (we do have the total number of participants per group at baseline and follow‐up). To calculate the number of participants at follow‐up in the subset, we assumed that the dropout rate per group in the subset was the same as the dropout rate per group in the total population.

## 3.2.2.11 Pfeiffer 2019
The study was missing precision on follow‐up means. We assumed SD at follow‐up was equal to SD at baseline.

## 3.2.2.12 Singh 2009
This study reported BMI data subgrouped by sex but we were missing the group‐specific and sex‐specific participant numbers at all time points except at randomisation. The study did report the total number of participants at each time point. To impute the missing numbers, we assumed that the proportion of participants per group (relative to the total sample) and the proportion of boys and girls in each group remained fixed by randomisation across the subsequent time points.
Results from the different subgroups (boys and girls) were combined using the methods outlined in Section 3.2.1.1.

## 3.2.2.13 Takacs 2020
At baseline, the study reported the total number of participants per group and the number of participants per group for which there were BMI measurements. At follow‐up, they only reported the total number of participants. To estimate the number of BMI measurements at follow‐up, we assumed that the ratio of the number of measurements to total sample size remained fixed across the time points.

## 3.2.1.14 Weiland 2018
This study included data from adults and adolescents. We were missing the adolescent‐specific participant numbers at follow‐up. We had the total number of participants per group (adults and adolescents) at baseline and follow‐up, and the number of adolescents per group at baseline. We assumed the proportion of adolescents relative to the total population remained fixed from baseline to the subsequent follow‐up times.

## 3.2.1.15 Wilksch 2015
The study reported data subgrouped by sex at two follow‐up times. The study included four arms (we labelled them A, B, C and D for simplicity). We extracted data only on groups A and B, as C and D did not target obesity prevention. A second paper reported extra information on two arms of the trial, A and D. Here, they reported the proportion of boys and girls in each of these groups at baseline. Overall, we were missing all participant numbers at the first follow‐up, the number of boys and girls in group B at all time points, and the number of boys and girls in group A at the two follow‐up times. We made the following imputations.
To impute the total number of participants at the first follow‐up time, we assumed a linear dropout rate across the two time points and used the reported baseline and second follow‐up participant numbers.
To impute the number of boys and girls in group A at the two follow‐up times, we assumed the ratio of boys to girls in group A remained fixed from baseline across the time points.
To impute the number of boys and girls in group B at baseline, we assumed that the relative proportion of boys and girls in the two missing data groups (B and C) were the same. The proportion of girls/boys in the total population is simply a mean of the proportions in the four groups, weighted by the number of participants in each group. Therefore, we used proportions reported in groups A and D to work out what proportions were required in the other two groups in order to produce the overall proportions. We then assumed that these ratios were fixed over the time points.

Results from the different subgroups (boys and girls) were combined using the methods outlined in Section 3.2.1.1.

## Appendix 5. Supplementary data files for cluster adjustment
The following table lists all cluster‐randomised trials, along with values of unadjusted and adjusted standard errors, plus the data used to calculate them.
 

## Appendix 6. Sensitivity analyses

## 6.1 Excluding high risk of bias studies
The following table shows the results of all meta‐analyses in the main analysis (mean difference, 95% confidence interval, and I2) alongside the equivalent results excluding studies evaluated as high risk of bias.
 

## 6.2 Different ICCs
The following table shows the results of all meta‐analyses in the main analysis (mean difference, 95% confidence interval, and I2) alongside the equivalent results using imputed ICC values of 0 and 0.04 (compared to 0.02 in the main analysis).
 

## Appendix 7. Funnel plot
We reported only one meta‐analysis with more than 10 studies (dietary and activity interventions versus control for BMI at short‐term follow‐up). As planned in the protocol ( ), we produced a funnel plot for this meta‐analysis, which did not show notable asymmetry ( ). An Egger test for funnel plot asymmetry gave P = 0.53, which does not indicate an important problem.
 

## Appendix 8. Subgroup analyses
We conducted subgroup analyses by main setting of the interventions, country income status and participants' socioeconomic status. Here, we present the results of the tests for subgroup differences; all meta‐analysis results are reported in summary forest plots (see below specific analyses).

## 8.1 Test for subgroup analysis
The following table shows the results of the test for subgroup differences (P value) alongside the total number of studies and the number of studies in each subgroup.
 

## 8.2 Subgroup analysis by setting
Summary forest plots for subgroup analyses by setting (school, home, school and home, other) are provided in , , , and for BMI; , , and for zBMI; and , , and for BMI percentile.
 The results of the test for subgroup differences by setting are reported in the table above. For dietary intervention versus control there was evidence of differences in effect between subgroups in zBMI at long‐term follow‐up (P = 0.04) but not in BMI at short‐term follow‐up (P = 0.82) and zBMI short‐term follow‐up (P = 0.44) follow‐up. For activity intervention versus control, there was evidence of differences in effect between subgroups in zBMI medium‐term follow‐up (P = 0.01), but not in BMI at medium‐term follow‐up (P = 0.80) and zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (P = 0.67). For dietary and activity intervention versus control, there was evidence of differences in effect between subgroups in zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (P = 0.01), but not in BMI at short‐term follow‐up (P = 0.12) and medium‐term follow‐up (P = 0.92), and in zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up (P = 0.09) and long‐term follow‐up (P = 0.19).

## 8.2.1 School
In studies in which the interventions were conducted at school, we found that dietary interventions compared with control may reduce BMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.65, 95% CI ‐1.18 to ‐0.11; 3 studies, 900 participants) and zBMI at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.24, 95% CI ‐0.3 to ‐0.18; 1 study, 1045 participants), but may have little to no effect on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.08, 95% CI ‐0.16 to 0; 3 studies, 2652 participants).
We found that activity interventions compared with control may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.64, 95% CI ‐1.86 to 0.58; 6 studies, 1780 participants) and medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.34, 95% CI ‐0.74 to 0.06; 2 studies, 1092 participants) and on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.01, 95% CI ‐0.02 to 0.04; 5 studies, 4089 participants) and medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.01, 95% CI ‐0.02 to 0.05; 4 studies, 4027 participants).
We found that dietary and activity interventions compared with control may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.04, 95% CI ‐0.08 to 0.16; 7 studies; 2671 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.09 to 0.13; 5 studies, 4800 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD 0.06, 95% CI ‐0.04 to 0.16; 6 studies, 8736 participants), and on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.04, 95% CI ‐0.1 to 0.02; 1 study, 191 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.04, 95% CI ‐0.1 to 0.02; 3 studies, 3110 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.01, 95% CI ‐0.04 to 0.02; 5 studies, 7558 participants).

## 8.2.2 Home
In studies in which the interventions were conducted at home, we found that a dietary intervention compared with control may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.14, 95% CI ‐0.54 to 0.26; 1 study; 103 participants).
We found that activity interventions compared with control may have little to no effect on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.05, 95% CI ‐0.04 to 0.14; 1 study, 243 participants) and medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.08, 95% CI ‐0.01 to 0.17; 1 study, 257 participants).
We found that dietary and activity interventions compared with control may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 1.7, 95% CI 0.29 to 3.11; 1 study, 72 participants) and medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.09 to 0.13; 5 studies, 4800 participants); and on zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0, 95% CI ‐0.12 to 0.12; 2 studies, 257 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.05, 95% CI ‐0.16 to 0.06; 1 study, 179 participants), but may reduce BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.69, 95% CI ‐3.22 to ‐0.16; 1 study, 46 participants).

## 8.2.3 School and home
In studies in which the interventions were conducted both at school and at home, we found that a dietary intervention compared with control may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.17 to 0.21; 1 study, 112 participants).
We found that activity interventions may reduce BMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.28, 95% CI ‐0.51 to ‐0.05; 1 study, 1051 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.28, 95% CI ‐0.51 to ‐0.05; 1 study, 985 participants), and may reduce zBMI at medium‐term follow up (MD ‐0.08, 95% CI ‐0.15 to ‐0.01; 1 study, 1051 participants), but may have little to no effect on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.04, 95% CI ‐0.03 to 0.1; 1 study, 386 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.05, 95% CI ‐0.12 to 0.02; 1 study, 985 participants); and on BMI percentile at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.09, 95% CI ‐2.81 to 0.63; 1 study, 1020 participants).
We found that dietary and activity interventions, when compared with control, may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.04, 95% CI ‐0.27 to 0.19; 2 studies, 636 participants) and medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.03, 95% CI ‐0.29 to 0.22; 2 studies, 746 participants); and on BMI percentile at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.05, 95% CI ‐2.85 to 0.75; 1 study, 1368 participants); but may reduce zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.22, 95% CI ‐0.33 to ‐0.11; 1 study, 194 participants) and medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.16, 95% CI ‐0.27 to ‐0.05; 1 study, 144 participants).

## 8.2.4 Other
In studies in which the interventions were conducted in other settings (i.e. neither home or school), we found that dietary intervention, when compared with control, may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.2, 95% CI ‐0.48 to 0.09; 2 studies, 502 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.3, 95% CI ‐1.67 to 1.07; 1 study, 44 participants); on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.04, 95% CI ‐0.09 to 0.02; 2 studies, 502 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD 0.01, 95% CI ‐0.23 to 0.25; 1 study, 44 participants); and on BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.05, 95% CI ‐1.23 to 1.13; 2 studies, 453 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.89, 95% CI ‐3.95 to 0.18; 2 studies, 421 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐2.53, 95% CI ‐7.02 to 1.96; 1 study, 44 participants).
We found that a dietary and activity intervention, when compared with control, may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.07 to 0.12; 1 study, 50 participants) and on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.03, 95% CI ‐0.13 to 0.07; 1 study, 130 participants), but may reduce zBMI at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.07, 95% CI ‐0.13 to ‐0.01; 1 study, 693 participants).
We found that an activity intervention, when compared with a dietary intervention, may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0, 95% CI ‐0.28 to 0.28; 1 study, 416 participants) and on BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.35, 95% CI ‐2.99 to 0.29; 1 study, 403 participants).

## 8.3 Subgroup analysis by country income status
Summary forest plots for subgroup analyses by country income status (high income versus non‐high income) are provided in , , and for BMI; , , and for zBMI; and , , and for BMI percentile.
 The results of the test for subgroup differences by country income status are reported in the table above. For dietary intervention versus control, none of the studies were conducted in non‐high‐income countries. For activity intervention versus control, there was evidence of differences in effect between subgroups in BMI at short‐term follow‐up (P < 0.001). For dietary and activity intervention versus control, there was evidence of differences in effect between subgroups in BMI at long‐term follow‐up (P = 0.02), and in zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (P = 0.003) and medium‐term follow‐up (P = 0.03), but not in BMI at short‐term follow‐up (P = 0.33) and medium‐term follow‐up (P = 0.69), and in zBMI at long‐term follow‐up (P = 0.54).

## 8.3.1 High‐income countries
In studies conducted in high‐income countries, we found that dietary interventions compared with control may reduce BMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.65, 95% CI ‐1.18 to ‐0.11; 3 studies, 900 participants), but may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.18, 95% CI ‐0.41 to 0.06; 3 studies, 605 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.3, 95% CI ‐1.67 to 1.07; 1 study, 44 participants); on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.06, 95% CI ‐0.12 to 0.01; 5 studies, 3154 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.17 to 0.21; 1 study, 112 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.14, 95% CI ‐0.38 to 0.1; 2 studies, 1089 participants); and on BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.05, 95% CI ‐1.23 to 1.13; 2 studies, 453 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.89, 95% CI ‐3.95 to 0.18; 2 studies, 421 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐2.53, 95% CI ‐7.02 to 1.96; 1 study, 44 participants).
We found that activity interventions compared with control may reduce BMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.32, 95% CI ‐0.53 to ‐0.11; 3 studies, 2143 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.28, 95% CI ‐0.51 to ‐0.05; 1 study, 985 participants); but may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.04, 95% CI ‐0.22 to 0.15; 5 studies, 1620 participants), on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.01 to 0.05; 7 studies, 4718 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0, 95% CI ‐0.04 to 0.05; 6 studies, 5335 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.05, 95% CI ‐0.12 to 0.02; 1 study, 985 participants); and on BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.09, 95% CI ‐2.81 to 0.63; 1 study, 1020 participants).
We found that dietary and activity interventions compared with control may reduce BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.69, 95% CI ‐3.22 to ‐0.16; 1 study, 46 participants); but may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.01, 95% CI ‐0.1 to 0.12; 9 studies, 2965 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.09 to 0.13; 6 studies, 4866 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.06 to 0.11; 5 studies, 7666 participants); on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.04, 95% CI ‐0.09 to 0.02; 2 studies, 321 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.03, 95% CI ‐0.07 to 0.02; 5 studies, 3367 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.02, 95% CI ‐0.06 to 0.01; 6 studies, 7370 participants); and on BMI percentile at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.05, 95% CI ‐2.85 to 0.75; 1 study, 1368 participants).
We found that an activity intervention, when compared with a dietary intervention, may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0, 95% CI ‐0.28 to 0.28; 1 study, 416 participants) and on BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.35, 95% CI ‐2.99 to 0.29; 1 study, 403 participants).

## 8.3.2 Non‐high‐income countries
In studies conducted in non‐high‐income countries, we found that an activity intervention, compared with control, may reduce BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐4.03, 95% CI ‐4.45 to ‐3.61; 1 study, 160 participants).
We found that dietary and activity intervention compared with control may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐4.03, 95% CI ‐4.45 to ‐3.61; 1 studies, 160 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.15, 95% CI ‐0.11 to 0.42; 2 studies, 464 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.03, 95% CI ‐0.29 to 0.22; 2 study, 746 participants), but may reduce zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐4.03, 95% CI ‐4.45 to ‐3.61; 1 studies, 160 participants) and medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.15, 95% CI ‐0.11 to 0.42; 2 studies, 464 participants).

## 8.4 Subgroup analysis by participants' socioeconomic status
Summary forest plots for subgroup analyses by participants' socioeconomic status (mixed vs low) are provided in , , and for BMI; , and for zBMI; and , , and for BMI percentile.
The results of the test for subgroup differences by socioeconomic status are reported in the table above. For dietary intervention versus control, there was some evidence of no differences in effect between subgroups in zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (P = 0.27) and BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up (P = 0.52). For activity intervention versus control, there was evidence of differences in effect between subgroups in zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up (P = 0.01), but not in BMI at short‐ (P = 0.37) and medium‐term follow‐up (P = 0.080), or BMI at short‐term follow‐up (P = 0.09). For dietary and activity intervention versus control, there was evidence of differences in effect between subgroups on zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up (P = 0.003), but not on BMI at short‐ (P = 0.52), medium‐ (P = 0.29) or long‐term follow‐up (P = 0.81).

## 8.4.1 Mixed socioeconomic status
In studies in which participants had socioeconomic status, we found that dietary interventions compared with control reduced BMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.65, 95% CI ‐1.18 to ‐0.11; 3 studies, 900 participants), but may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.18, 95% CI ‐0.41 to 0.06; 3 study, 605 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.3, 95% CI ‐1.67 to 1.07; 1 study, 44 participants); on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.07, 95% CI ‐0.14 to 0; 4 study, 2899 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.17 to 0.21; 1 study, 112 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.14, 95% CI ‐0.38 to 0.1; 2 study, 1089 participants); and on BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.05, 95% CI ‐1.23 to 1.13; 2 study, 453 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.14, 95% CI ‐4.22 to 1.94; 1 study, 269 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐2.53, 95% CI ‐7.02 to 1.96; 1 study, 44 participants).
We found that activity interventions compared with control may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.76, 95% CI ‐2.39 to 0.87; 5 study, 1419 participants), and medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.34, 95% CI ‐0.74 to 0.06; 2 study, 1092 participants); on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.03, 95% CI 0 to 0.06; 5 study, 3200 participants) and medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.01 to 0.06; 5 study, 4284 participants); and on BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.09, 95% CI ‐2.81 to 0.63; 1 study, 1020 participants).
We found that dietary and activity interventions compared with control may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.09 to 0.13; 8 study, 3073 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.03, 95% CI ‐0.07 to 0.14; 5 study, 5108 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD 0.07, 95% CI ‐0.02 to 0.17; 5 study, 8502 participants); and on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.03, 95% CI ‐0.13 to 0.07; 1 study, 130 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD 0.02, 95% CI ‐0.03 to 0.06; 2 study, 2698 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.02, 95% CI ‐0.04 to 0.01; 4 study, 7582 participants); but may reduce BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.69, 95% CI ‐3.22 to ‐0.16; 1 study, 46 participants).
We found that an activity intervention, when compared with a dietary intervention, may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0, 95% CI ‐0.28 to 0.28; 1 study, 416 participants) and on BMI percentile at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.35, 95% CI ‐2.99 to 0.29; 1 study, 403 participants).

## 8.4.2 Low socioeconomic status
In studies in which participants had low socioeconomic status, we found that dietary interventions compared with control may have little to no effect on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0, 95% CI ‐0.11 to 0.1; 1 study, 255 participants), and on BMI percentile at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐2.5, 95% CI ‐5.28 to 0.28; 1 study, 152 participants).
We found that an activity intervention compared with control may reduce BMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.28, 95% CI ‐0.51 to ‐0.05; 1 study, 1051 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.28, 95% CI ‐0.51 to ‐0.05; 1 study, 985 participants); and zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.08, 95% CI ‐0.15 to ‐0.01; 1 study, 1051 participants); but may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.01, 95% CI ‐0.25 to 0.23; 1 study, 361 participants); and on zBMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.02, 95% CI ‐0.06 to 0.03; 2 study, 1518 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.05, 95% CI ‐0.12 to 0.02; 1 study, 985 participants).
We found that dietary and activity interventions, compared with control, may reduce zBMI at medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.08, 95% CI ‐0.12 to ‐0.04; 4 studies; 813 participants); but may have little to no effect on BMI at short‐term follow‐up (MD 0.24, 95% CI ‐0.41 to 0.89; 3 study, 356 participants), medium‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.14, 95% CI ‐0.44 to 0.16; 3 study, 504 participants), and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.36, 95% CI ‐0.9 to 0.18; 1 study, 234 participants); zBMI at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.36, 95% CI ‐0.9 to 0.18; 1 study, 234 participants) and long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐0.03, 95% CI ‐0.14 to 0.08; 3 study, 848 participants); and BMI percentile at long‐term follow‐up (MD ‐1.05, 95% CI ‐2.85 to 0.75; 1 study, 1368 participants).

## Data and analyses
 

## Characteristics of studies

## Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of studies awaiting classification [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of ongoing studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Differences between protocol and review
We changed the author list to reflect contributions to the review.
We ran a search for retractions and corrigenda.
We added BMI percentile as an outcome as we found studies reporting only this interpretation of BMI.
We changed the coding of the subgroup analysis by setting and socioeconomic status to reflect the setting and population of the included studies.
We prepared summary of findings tables for each of our main comparisons for BMI and zBMI at short, medium and long‐term follow‐up.
We changed the order of the outcomes in the objectives and methods sections to reflect the order by which we reported the outcomes in the SoF and results sections.
We did not do the following.
Write to authors to request missing data due to scarcity of time and resources.
Include any cross‐over trial as no eligible cross‐over studies were found.
Undertake additional analyses (‘syntheses without meta‐analysis’) using methods based on P values and directions of effect. We made extensive efforts to estimate intervention effects from diversely reported results (e.g. from regression coefficients, from P values and from analyses based on dichotomised BMI scores ( )). However, very few of the studies not included in meta‐analyses provided this basic information.
Undertake subgroup analyses according to sex and duration of intervention. Not enough studies presented subgroup analyses by sex, and we decided that attempting to code duration of intervention was not particularly meaningful when some of the interventions sought long‐term changes by short‐term activity to change physical environments.
Undertake SMD sensitivity analyses. We observed that studies included different age ranges (e.g. many in single year groups but others across multiple year groups), so that the SDs for BMI used for the standardisation would be expected to reflect mainly the spread of age ranges rather than the differences in the measurement scale ( ).

## Contributions of authors
FS assessed studies for inclusion, collected data and information on risk of bias, extracted data, conducted risk of bias assessment, analysed the data, assessed the certainty in the body of evidence and interpreted data, amended the methods from the protocol, wrote the results and discussion sections and was responsible for project administration.
ET assessed studies for inclusion, collected data and information on risk of bias, extracted data, conducted risk of bias assessment, edited and provided advice on the manuscript.
AD extracted data, analysed the data, amended the methods from the protocol, wrote the results, edited and provided advice on the manuscript.
THMM developed the concept of the review, produced the infographic, advised on risk of bias assessments, edited and provided advice on the manuscript.
SD designed the search strategies, conducted the searches, amended the methods from the protocol, edited and provided advice on the manuscript.
KB extracted and analysed the costing data, edited and provided advice on the manuscript.
JS developed the concept of the review, provided advice on risk of bias assessment, edited and provided advice on the manuscript.
RKH provided lists of records and of completed data extraction forms, edited and provided advice on the manuscript.
LW edited and provided advice on the manuscript.
JPTH developed the concept for the review update, acquired funding, acted as the co‐lead senior author, checked data extraction, provided advice on risk of bias assessment, assessed the certainty in the body of evidence and interpreted data, edited and provided advice on the manuscript.
CDS developed the concept of the review, acted as the co‐lead senior author, amended the background, checked data extraction, wrote the discussion and edited and provided advice on the manuscript. CDS is the guarantor for the review.

## Sources of support

## Internal sources
Univerity of Bristol, UK
FS, ET, AD, TM, SD, KB, JS and JH are employed by the University of Bristol
University of Durham, UK
CDS is employed by the University of Durham

## External sources
National Institute for Health Research (Public Health Research, NIHR131572), UK
Higgins J (PI), Caldwell D, Bell M, Moore T, Nobles J, Breheny K, Savović J, Summerbell C. Towards optimal public health interventions for preventing obesity in children: a novel evidence synthesis. National Institute for Health Research (Public Health Research, NIHR131572). Total: £448,536 (07/2021 – 12/2023). The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.
National Institute for Health and Care Research Applied Research Collaboration West (NIHR ARC West), UK
Jelena Savović and Theresa Moore were partly supported by the National Institute for Health and Care Research Applied Research Collaboration West (NIHR ARC West). The views expressed in this article are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.
National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), Australia
Luke Wolfenden is supported by an NHMRC Investigator Grant (G1901360) and an NHMRC Centre for Research Excellence (No. APP1153479).
New South Wales (NSW) Cardiovascular Research, Australia
Luke Wolfenden is supported by a NSW Cardiovascular Research Capacity Program grant (No. H20/28248).

## Declarations of interest
Francesca Spiga: declares that she has no conflicts of interest.
Eve Tomlinson: declares that she has no conflicts of interest.
Annabel Davies: declares that she has no conflicts of interest.
Theresa HM Moore: reports being employed by Cochrane as a Methodology Editor (September 2019 to December 2021). She was not involved in the editorial process for this review.
Katie Breheny: is an author of a study eligible for inclusion in the work (DOI 10.1038/s41366-019-0511-0). The study was funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) and Birmingham City Council; the funder had no role in the design, conduct or publication of the study. KB was not involved in assessing the eligibility of this study; this task was performed by two independent review authors (FS, ET).
Sarah Dawson: reports being employed by Cochrane Common Mental Disorders as Information Specialist. She was not involved in the editorial process for this review.
Jelena Savovic: reports payment from Core Models Ltd in 2021, to deliver online teaching of introductory systematic review methods; personal payment. JS also reports being a co‐author in an advisory capacity on a systematic review conducted by Paul Hartmann; unpaid position.
Rebecca K Hodder: reports working as a Program Manager, Hunter New England Population Health, Hunter New England Local Health District, responsible for the delivery of chronic‐disease prevention programmes in secondary schools. RH is a research associate with Cochrane Public Health, contributing to research to improve the conduct of systematic reviews. She had no role in the editorial process for the review.
Luke Wolfenden: reports research grants to undertake trials likely to be included in the review; paid to University of Newcastle, but LW benefitted financially from these payments and/or had access to or control of the funds. LW reports involvement in conducting two studies included in the work: , funded by the New South Wales Health Translational Research Grant Scheme and , funded by the NSW Ministry of Health, Heath Promotion Demonstration grant scheme), with in kind support from the Hunter New England Local Health District. The project also received infrastructure support from the Hunter Medical Research Institute (HMRI). All organisations listed provided direct research or infrastructure support. LW was not involved in decisions regarding study selection, data extraction, assessment of risk of bias or grading of the certainty of the evidence for these two studies. These tasks were performed by two independent review authors (FS, ET). LW reports working as a health promotion programme manager at Hunter New England Local Health District, a government‐funded health service. LW is the Co‐ordinating Editor of Cochrane Public Health; however, he was not involved in the editorial process for this review.
Julian PT Higgins: reports a grant from the National Institute for Health Research for this review and other activities (Public Health Research, NIHR131572); paid to the University of Bristol.
Carolyn D Summerbell: reports being affiliated with the WHO, and contributing to their work for their 'Ending Childhood Obesity' report.