pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11687874PMC11687874.111687874116878743973994510.1371/journal.pone.0299935PONE-D-23-228651Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationSocial SciencesSociologyCommunicationsSocial CommunicationSocial MediaTwitterComputer and Information SciencesNetwork AnalysisSocial NetworksSocial MediaTwitterSocial SciencesSociologySocial NetworksSocial MediaTwitterMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesInfectious Disease ControlVaccinesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19People and PlacesGeographical LocationsAsiaJapanComputer and Information SciencesData ManagementData VisualizationInfographicsGraphsMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Care ProvidersPhysiciansPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsMedical PersonnelPhysiciansAnalyzing information sharing behaviors during stance formation on COVID-19 vaccination among Japanese Twitter users
Information sharing behaviors during stance formation on COVID-19 vaccinationhttps://orcid.org/0009-0007-9755-8607ChoShoConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing HisamitsuShoheiConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualization JinHongshanInvestigationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing ToyodaMasashiProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing YoshinagaNaokiProject administrationSoftwareSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 
1
The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan

2
Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
GuptaAnkitEditor ].
In Japan, a country that had previously ranked among the nations with the lowest vaccine confidence globally [ ], significant concerns existed regarding vaccine uptake, particularly among young individuals. According to a national survey on the intent to vaccinate against COVID-19 in February 2021, 32.9% answered “uncertain,” and 11.0% answered “no” regarding vaccination. However, following the beginning of the vaccination campaign on February 17, 2021, the percentage of individuals who received a second dose of the vaccine (fully vaccinated at the time) in Japan saw a remarkable surge, rising from 3.4% in June to 75.3% in October of the same year. This rapid increase put Japan in first place among G7 nations (Japan, Canada, Italy, France, United Kingdom, Germany, and the United States), as depicted in . The vaccination campaign in Japan thus proceeded smoothly, with many individuals who initially hesitated to get vaccinated consequently opting to receive the vaccine.
 Examining successful vaccination campaigns, such as those in Japan, is crucial for understanding common factors influencing acceptance or hesitancy toward vaccines, and recently much research has studied these factors using social media data [ – ] while conventional approaches often rely on questionnaires and surveys [ , , , ]. These investigations found several common reasons for vaccine hesitancy: anxieties about vaccine safety [ ] and a lack of trust in vaccine efficacy [ ]. Other studies looked into people’s attitudes towards vaccination, exploring factors such as cross-country variations in positive and negative views on vaccination [ ], spatiotemporal shifts in sentiment towards vaccines in the US [ ], and the polarization among different vaccination communities in Japan [ ]. A later study found that the majority of negative sentiment in Twitter predominantly mentioned the coercive policies or vaccine mandates, rather than safety or efficacy concerns [ ]. Several studies reported that SNS users’ stances toward vaccination were characterized by the information they obtained from SNS, such as external links [ , ] or posts from other users [ , ], resulting in wrong medical stances.
While these studies have enriched our understanding of overall characteristics and trends of public sentiment regarding COVID-19 vaccination, they assume that the stances of SNS users remain fixed throughout the study period, neglecting the process of stance formation of each user. We consider the stance formation as the process where users, initially without any stances on COVID-19 vaccination, shape their perspectives. In this study, users are classified into three stances: Pro-vaccine (those accepting or planning/getting vaccinated), Anti-vaccine (those avoiding vaccination), and Neutral (those without a specific stance on vaccination). We mainly focused on SNS users who were initially neutral and eventually held Pro-vaccine or Anti-vaccine stances and examined the contents shared by these users, including tweets from other users and external websites during their stance formation.
To draw lessons from Japan’s success in improving COVID-19 vaccine coverage, we conducted an analysis of users’ vaccination stances on Twitter for the purpose of identifying information-sharing behaviors that might have impacted their stance formations. We collected all Japanese tweets including a reference to vaccination over a span of five months when vaccine coverage rapidly grew (from June to October in 2021), which constituted a dataset of vaccination-related tweets. Within this dataset, we annotated a portion of the tweets with the stances of the users who posted them. Using this annotated dataset, we trained a classifier for stance detection, which is an NLP task [ ] for predicting a stance (typically favor, against, and none) of given text toward a certain target. We developed a deep neural network utilizing both content and network features to assign vaccination stances to each tweet in the dataset and determined each Twitter user’s stance toward COVID-19 vaccines. Using this classifier, we periodically aggregated the predicted stances for each user to investigate how users’ stances on vaccination were shaped over time. This paper represents an extended version of our previously published work [ ], in which we have enhanced the performance of our deep neural model and incorporated several new results into our analysis.
Our analysis is conducted as follows. We first examined the shift in stance distribution, discovering that the pro-vaccine group significantly outnumbered the anti-vaccine group. Subsequently, we investigated polarization in the user reaction graphs, and as a result, there was a gradual increase in the degree of polarization between the two factions over time. This finding suggested that the impact of anti-vaccine activity in Japan was limited. Finally, we focused on the users who were neutral at the beginning of the period, became pro-vaccine or anti-vaccine, and kept the stances. Our deeper exploration into their information-sharing behaviors allowed us to find potential factors that influenced their stance formation. One such user group, i.e., users who moved from neutral to pro-vaccine, exhibited a preference for more reliable information sources. These users frequently engaged with accounts of medical doctors and mainstream media outlets and shared links to external sites of mass media and web news. On the contrary, users who moved from neutral to anti-vaccine showed a tendency for alternative information sources. They regularly interacted with accounts of unclear or unknown occupation, and commonly shared links to bulletin board systems (BBSes), weblogs, and video hosting sites.

## Related work
Research into public attitudes towards vaccination, particularly in relation to COVID-19, has leveraged social media data [ ]. Using data from social media has many merits compared with traditional survey-based methods. For example, they make it possible to timely observe public opinions, leading to better understanding of vaccination intentions and attitudes regarding ongoing immunization campaigns [ ]. We divided vaccine-related research using social media data into three categories: thematic analyses of vaccine-related discussions, assessments of polarization in vaccine debates, and observations of stance formation in vaccination attitudes.
Thematic analyses have been used to identify prevalent topics concerning vaccines and to investigate the underlying causes of vaccination hesitancy. In such work, anxiety about vaccine safety [ ] and doubt in vaccine efficacy [ ] were commonly regarded as the most common reasons. Research focused on polarization within vaccine debates has quantified the ratio of positive to negative perspectives on vaccine-related content [ ], examined the network structure [ ], and assessed the degree of polarization among different vaccine communities on social networks [ ]. In addition, some studies have analyzed sentiment changes in response to specific vaccine-related events to find the topics influencing vaccination intentions. Hu et al. [ ] conducted a study on the spatiotemporal patterns of public sentiment and emotion, tracking these factors over time at both national and state levels in the United States. They identified three distinct phases during the pandemic period where sharp changes in public sentiment and emotion occurred. It is noteworthy, however, that these studies on online vaccine debates [ , ] did not focus the formations of users’ stances on vaccinations.
A variety of studies incorporated various techniques such as sentiment analysis, stance detection, and graph analytics. The majority of these studies assigned sentiment labels to each tweet using classifiers that were trained on a small set of accurate labels while some studies preferred to use crowd-sourcing platforms like Amazon Web Services (AWS) for labeling tweets [ ]. Yousefinaghani et al. [ ] used the Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner (VADER) [ ], a lexicon and rule-based sentiment analysis tool written in Python. Cotfas et al. [ ] used several machine learning and deep learning methods to classify users’ stances towards vaccination. They demonstrated that the use of Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) [ ] showed state-of-the-art results. Alhuzali et al. [ ] combined sentiment analysis with geographical analysis. They used tweets from various cities in the United Kingdom to predict sentiment labels with a deep learning model and performed city-wise analyses. Mønsted et al. [ ] leveraged transfer learning to enhance their stance classifier’s performance. They studied the propagation process of misinformation about vaccination on a mutual mention/retweet network. Garcia et al. [ ] compared the transition of COVID-19 related topics in Brazil with that of the USA in Twitter. They also combined deep learning models and embedding-based techniques. To measure the level of polarization, some techniques for graph analytics such as community detection like METIS [ ] and stochastic simulation like Random Walk Controversy (RWC) [ ] were used. For instance, Yuan et al. [ ] monitored polarization in debates on vaccination using the Louvain method [ ], while Miyazaki et al. [ ] quantified the degree of polarization using RWC.
This paper explores the information-sharing behaviors of SNS users during their stance formations for a more profound understanding of such behaviors. In terms of methodology, our study differs from prior work, which typically relies solely on content for sentiment analysis and stance classification. Instead, we propose a novel deep learning model incorporating both content and network-based elements. Furthermore, we leverage established methods of social network analysis to quantify controversies surrounding vaccine debates. This allows us to observe the formation of stances within the context of polarization.

## Dataset construction
Twitter is a social media platform widely used in Japan and has a broad range of age groups, particularly younger generations (https://www.humblebunny.com/japans-top-social-media-networks). This platform allows users to share their thoughts through tweets and engage with others by reacting to their posts. These reactions, comprising retweets, quotes, and replies, indicate the users’ interest in the content of the tweets. Consequently, we leveraged these tweets to monitor people’s attitudes towards vaccination and used the reactions to look into their information-sharing behaviors.
Vaccination for individuals aged 18 to 64 in Japan started on June 17, 2021. By the end of October, approximately 75% of the population had been fully vaccinated. From all Japanese tweets, we extracted tweets from June 1, 2021 to October 31, 2021 that contained the keyword “ワクチン” (wakuchin, vaccine in English), resulting in 19,502,448 tweets posted by 4,446,499 users. The data of all Japanese tweets was provided by the NTT Data Japan Corporation. We took the utmost care in handling personal data and conducted our research in strict compliance with Twitter’s “Twitter Developer Agreement”(https://developer.twitter.com/en/developer-terms/agreement-and-policy/source). We intentionally excluded tweets posted by the “share via Twitter” function on certain websites and those produced by an app named “shindanmaker,” as they lacked any valuable information for assessing user intent. Our investigation of user accounts revealed that tweets posted from 4 major clients (iPhone, Android, iPad, and Web) accounted for 93.9%, and tweets posted from client applications including “bot” in their name accounted for only about 1%, which meant that explicit bot accounts had only a small impact on our analysis. Consequently, we created a dataset of vaccine-related tweets, consisting of 18,462,168 tweets posted by 4,408,669 unique users. illustrates the trend in the number of collected tweets. There was a great increase in tweet volume from June, which began to decline in late August when the initial vaccination rate surpassed 58.22%.
 

## Vaccination stance classification
As the basis and key to subsequent analysis, we identified users’ stances towards vaccination. Stance detection was done by using a vaccination stance classifier trained on our annotation dataset. This dataset was constructed on vaccine-related tweets manually annotated by four annotators. We trained the classifier using this dataset to label the other tweets. shows our tweet-selection process.
 Previous studies on predicting vaccine stances from tweets [ , ] relied only on textual information and failed to classify tweets that referred to posts with the opposite vaccination stance. We additionally used reaction graph information to classify tweets into users’ stances towards vaccination using a deep neural network.

## Annotation of stance of tweets
In this study, users are classified into three stances based on their stance towards vaccination: Pro-vaccine (those accepting or planning/getting vaccinated), Anti-vaccine (those avoiding vaccination), and Neutral (those without a specific stance on vaccination). To develop a deep learning model for stance classification, we conducted manual annotation on a subset of vaccine-related tweets. This involved categorizing tweets into three classes: pro-vaccine, anti-vaccine, and neutral towards vaccines. Criteria for stance annotation were established (see ) to ensure consistent annotation. Pro-vaccine tweets consisted of expressions of support for vaccines, personal vaccination plans or experiences, recommendations for vaccination, and criticism of anti-vaccine sentiments. Anti-vaccine tweets consisted of vaccine denial, discouragement of vaccination, and criticism of pro-vaccine advocates. Neutral tweets consisted of factual information, introductions to press releases from public institutions, and discussions unrelated to the merits and drawbacks of vaccination. In accordance with these annotation criteria, four annotators labeled the same 500 tweets to measure the inter-annotator agreement; Fleiss’ kappa coefficient [ ] for this annotation task was 0.74, which confirms the stability of the annotations. Each annotator then labeled an average of 2313 randomly-chosen tweets, resulting in a total of 9250 labeled tweets. shows our annotation, learning, and classification process.
 

## Text and graph-based stance classification
With the above annotated tweets, we next trained a deep neural network on the basis of the textual content and reaction to classify vaccine stances. The architecture of our model is illustrated in . Our model includes three components: a text encoder, reaction encoder, and classifier.
 The text encoder induces linguistic features from tweet text. We fine-tuned a pre-trained Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) [ ] on our target task. For each tweet, we carried out basic preprocessing, such as full-width half-width character conversion, case conversion, and removal of various symbols in the input before inputting it to BERT. To gain better classification performance, we conducted domain-adaptive pre-training (DAPT) [ ] that continues pre-training for the pre-trained BERT with a corpus of a target task domain. In our model, BERT was pre-trained with a masked language model (MLM) objective using our vaccine tweet dataset that we constructed in the previous section.
Motivated by the fact that a user’s stance can be influenced by whom that user interacts with, the reaction encoder extracts reactions (retweets, quotes, and replies) between users to generate a reaction vector (RA vector) for each user representing who reacted to that user and whom the user reacted to. To reduce the computational costs, we used reactions to the most influential users. Specifically, we divided each month into three periods, 1st day to 10th, 11th to 20th, and 21st to 30th (31st), and we collected the top-10K users who reacted to others (hereinafter, information spreaders) and the top-10K users who others reacted to (hereinafter, information senders) for each period. We then vectorized the number of reactions between each user and top information spreaders/senders in the last three periods. The obtained RA vector was input to a fully-connected layer and tanh function to reduce the number of dimensions. The classifier inputs a concatenation of the tweet-text and reaction-graph vectors to a fully-connected layer. It then passes the output to the softmax function to make a prediction.

## Experiments on vaccination stance classification

## Settings
For learning our vaccination stance classifier, we prepared datasets for training, development, and testing. displays the statistics of the dataset. We created training and development datasets using the 9250 annotated tweets. To address potential annotator bias resulting from variations in the number of labeled tweets, we extracted an equal number of 125 tweets from each annotator to construct the development dataset, while the remaining 8750 tweets constituted the training dataset. To construct a reliable test dataset, we used the 500 tweets labeled by the four annotators to measure the inter-annotator agreements. To arrive at the final labels for the test dataset, a majority voting approach was used. In cases where there were disagreements among the annotators, resolutions were reached through collaborative discussions by the annotators.
 To implement the text encoder, we used the Japanese BERT pre-learning model released by NICT, Japan (https://alaginrc.nict.go.jp/nict-bert/index.html). This Japanese-version BERT was pre-trained on Japanese Wikipedia. We used NICT_BERT-base_JapaneseWikipedia_100K. We set the maximum number of tokens to 160. On this BERT model, we performed DAPT with our vaccine tweet dataset for two epochs because no improvement in the performance (macro-F1 on the development data) was obtained after three epochs. For the reaction encoder, we obtained RA vectors with 500 dimensions by feeding the original 95,016 dimensional vectors to two fully connected layers and the tanh function.

## Results
To confirm the performance improvement of our classifier, we first compared the BERT classifier with that using DAPT. Subsequently, we incorporated the reaction encoder into the model to assess its efficacy. lists the results including the precision, recall, F1 scores of each class, and macro-F1 score. The BERT classifier with DAPT pre-training (+DAPT) consistently outperformed the original BERT classifier across all evaluation metrics. Notably, the recall of the anti-vaccine class exhibited significant improvement, highlighting the effectiveness of DAPT in enhancing the performance of the minority class. The classifier incorporating DAPT and the reaction encoder (+DAPT+RAvec) demonstrated the highest performance across most evaluation metrics. Similarly to DAPT, it significantly enhanced the performance of the anti-vaccine class, indicating its effective utilization of user interactions in the minority class.
 Because the prediction performance of the anti-vaccine class was still not good due to the small number of tweets in the class, we set a probability threshold to obtain reliable labels when we applied it to our vaccine tweet dataset. When the class with the maximum output of the softmax function was the anti-vaccine class, we set a threshold of 0.7 to the output probability of the anti-vaccine class. Thus, the precision of the anti-vaccine class increased from 0.524 to 0.700, which is not that much worse than the other classes. Instead, the recall of the class decreased from 0.688 to 0.438.

## Analysis
We applied our vaccination stance classifier to all tweets in our vaccine tweet dataset. Using these automatically labeled tweets, we examined how users’ stances on vaccination were formed and the information-sharing behaviors that potentially influenced this process. In all analyses, we have complied with the terms and conditions of Twitter (X Corp.) at https://developer.twitter.com/en/developer-terms/more-on-restricted-use-cases. The following results update our previous findings [ ] by incorporating our improved vaccination stance classifier (BERT+DAPT+RAvec).

## Distribution of users’ stances
Using all the tweets labeled with our vaccination stance classifier, we determined users’ stances. We assumed that users do not change their stances in a short period of time and divided each month into three periods to aggregate tweet labels by each user using majority votes. In the case of a tie, we determined the user’s stance with priority toward pro-, neutral, and anti-vaccine in alignment with the order of the prediction precision.

 illustrates the distribution of users’ stances in the 15 time periods during the 5 months. The number of pro-vaccine users was comparative with the neutral users during the first two periods. As the vaccination campaign progressed, the number of pro-vaccine users gradually increased. Starting in September 2021, there was decline in the number of pro-vaccine users coinciding with the achievement of approximately 50% full vaccination coverage, suggesting that interest in vaccination may have waned among these users around that time. The number of anti-vaccine users remained consistently small compared to other stances across all periods, suggesting that their influence was minimal, but their interest in the vaccination campaign remained unchanged.
 

## Transition in polarization between vaccination stances
To examine the polarization between pro- and anti-vaccine users that is reported in online debates on vaccines for other infectious diseases [ , , ], we created a graph of interactions between users, depicting the distribution of user stances based on a prior study [ ]. We used undirected retweet graphs, where each node represented a user, and each edge represented the presence of retweets between users at both ends. To observe the changes in polarization overtime, we constructed retweet graphs for the 15 time periods and visualized each graph using Gephi (https://gephi.org/), a graph visualization tool. We only depicted nodes with degrees of 30 or higher to focus on users actively sharing information.

 shows the retweet graphs for the first ten days of each month. The node colors show users’ vaccination stances, and the numbers show how many users have each stance. We can see densely connected nodes comprising three groups in each period, which is associated with the three different stances. There were relatively sparser connections between the pro- and anti-vaccine stances than those between the neutral group and the other two. This observation suggests a persistent polarization between the pro- and anti-vaccine groups throughout the periods.
 We estimated the degree of polarization for each period and examined its transition. For this estimation, we used a modified version of the Random Walk Controversy (RWC) [ ], one of the most common measures for estimating the degree of polarization between two communities in a graph. We extended this method to measure the polarization between pro- and anti-vaccine communities in the presence of a third, neutral community. Our modified RWC first identified densely connected nodes within the retweet graph as communities. The METIS algorithm, which was used in the original RWC, is designed to divide a given graph into k clusters with an equal number of vertices. However, in our case, pro- and anti-vaccine communities has different number of vertices, making the METIS algorithm less suitable. Therefore, we used the Louvain method [ ], which produced a better partitioning result in terms of modularity better reflecting the structure of the retweet graph. In this method, the “resolution” parameter has a direct impact on the minimum size of the communities, which we set at 2. We then assigned one of three stances to each of the three largest communities through a majority vote among the community’s users. Subsequently, we computed the RWC between the pro- and anti- communities for each period. RWC was originally designed to measure polarization between two communities by calculating the ratio of random walks starting from either community that remain within the same community. Our modified version just ignored the neutral community by starting the random walk from a node of either the pro- or anti-vaccine community and finishing it at k highest-degree nodes within either of pro- or anti-vaccine community. We used k = 10 highest-degree nodes as the goal nodes.
As shown in , the three groups were initially segregated by their stances. However, the neutral and pro-vaccine groups became densely connected over the first three months. After the beginning of September, these two groups rapidly decreased in size, coinciding with a rapid increase in the number of vaccinated people, while the size of the anti-vaccine group remained consistent. This trend aligns with the decreasing number of vaccine-related tweets since late August, when first-dose vaccination coverage in Japan exceeded 58%, as shown in .
The increase in RWC of the retweet graphs can be attributed to two main factors: the diminishing number of direct edges between pro- and anti-vaccine users, and a notable decrease in the number of neutral users bridging these opposing stances over time. These observations indicate that neutral users primarily communicated with pro-vaccine users, and both groups lost interest or stopped posting after receiving their first dose. The influence of anti-vaccine users remained limited in Japan, although their activities continued. To determine whether these anti-vaccine users were bots or a special type of user, we investigated 50 randomly sampled anti-vaccine accounts. We did not find any common characteristics among these users, nor did we find any bot accounts.

## Stance formations of users
We examined the stance formations of active users who consistently posted during the data collection period. Firstly, we identified 308,789 users who posted in at least 4 months out of 5 months of data collection window. As defined in the analyses above, each month is divided into three periods. A user’s stance during each period is determined by the majority vote of stance labels from their tweets posted within that period. If a user did not post during a particular period, their stance was assigned based on their last known stance from a previous period with posts or their first stance in subsequent periods if they had no prior posts. Finally, we conducted analyses on the formation of users’ stances and their information-sharing behaviors over time. Throughout and after the analyses, we ensured that no information identifying individual users was accessed.
We first illustrate the transition in users’ stance distribution over 5 months (15 periods) in . In the initial period, the number of pro-vaccine and neutral users was nearly equal, with very few anti-vaccine users. The number of pro-vaccine users steadily increased over subsequent periods, while the number of anti-vaccine users remained consistently small.
 To further investigate the exchange of users between stance groups, we present the matrix showing the number of users transitioning between stances from the initial to the final periods in . As depicted, both the pro-vaccine and anti-vaccine groups predominantly exchanged members with the neutral group, and the exchanges between the pro-vaccine and anti-vaccine groups are notably smaller. The stance of pro-vaccine users was relatively stable, whereas that of anti-vaccine users was more vulnerable. Among the 153,410 initially pro-vaccine users, 110,817 (73%) maintained their stance, while nearly all of the remaining users shifted to a neutral stance. Among the 2,930 initially anti-vaccine users, only 471 (16%) maintained their stance, while 1,608 (55%) shifted to a neutral stance, and a relatively small number, 851 (29%), shifted to pro-vaccine. The results show that both the pro-vaccine and anti-vaccine groups primarily exchanged members with the neutral group, and less with each other. These findings align with the sparse connections observed between pro- and anti-vaccine users, as shown in . Therefore, our primary focus is on the stance formation of the 152,449 initially neutral users. Of these, 82,204 (54%) shifted to pro-vaccine, which significantly outweighed the shift from pro-vaccine to neutral. In contrast, only 1,989 (1.3%) shifted to anti-vaccine, a shift nearly equal to the movement from anti-vaccine to neutral.
 

## Information-sharing behaviors associated with stance formation changing stances
As shown above, since there were fewer transitions between the pro- and anti-vaccine groups, we focused on users who were initially neutral, changed their stance only once to either pro-vaccine (neutral-to-pro) or anti-vaccine (neutral-to-anti), and maintained that stance until the last period. For each month, we compared the information-sharing behaviors of users who changed their stance that month with those who remained neutral (remaining-neutral) during that month. In our dataset, among the 152,449 users who were initially neutral in the first period, 60,289 users fell into one of three categories: neutral-to-pro, neutral-to-anti, or remaining-neutral. Among these, 42,905 changed to pro-vaccine once, 603 changed to anti-vaccine once, and both groups maintained that stance until the last period. The remaining 16,781 users stayed neutral throughout all the periods. We analyzed their information-sharing behaviors, focusing specifically on interactions with other user accounts and external sites.

## What kinds of users were referred to by users who formed their stances?
We investigated which user accounts were most referred to (replied, retweeted, or quoted) by either the neutral-to-pro or neutral-to-anti users during their stance formation. These referred accounts were then compared to those referred to by the remaining-neutral users. For each month, we classified users into three groups: neutral-to-pro, neutral-to-anti, and remaining-neutral, based on the formation of their stances during that month. For each group, we extracted the user accounts referred to by members of each group during the period when their stance changed, as well as during the three periods prior to the change. If one user referred to the same user account multiple times in the month, it was counted only once. After identifying the user accounts frequently referred to by each group, we classified these accounts by their attributes, such as their titles, jobs and belonging organizations. The authors assigned these attributes to each user accounts based on their profiles, several recent tweets. provides the definition of each attribute.
 
 shows the attributes of the top 30 user accounts most referred to by the neutral-to-pro, remaining-neutral, and neutral-to-anti users in each month. The neutral-to-pro and remaining-neutral users consistently referred to a notable number of user accounts belonging to medical workers. In contrast, the neutral-to-anti users were unlikely to refer to such accounts. In Japan, many medical doctors voluntarily provided information on the effects and risks of vaccines to the public through their personal accounts, which may have played a important role in increasing vaccination coverage. We also observed that users referred to a wider variety of user accounts when they changed their stances. As shown in , neutral-to-pro and neutral-to-anti users referred to a diverse range of user accounts, such as artists, business persons, professional writers and influencers, compared to remaining-neutral users.
 To further examine user accounts exclusively referred to by either the neutral-to-pro or neutral-to-anti users in comparison with remaining-neutral users, we carried out a chi-squared test of independence on two user account groups at a significance level of 5%. Among the user accounts that passed the chi-squared test, we extracted the top 30 user accounts most frequently referred to by users in each group and assigned attributes in the same manner.

 shows the attributes of the top 30 user accounts referred to by neutral-to-pro and neutral-to-anti users over time. The neutral-to-pro users tend to refer to the vaccination experiences of a diverse group of users. They notably referred to many artist accounts that shared their vaccination experiences through comics and illustrations. Tweets featuring comics or illustrations tend to attract more attention than text-only tweets, and such tweets may have played a significant role.
 References to office workers and professional writers were consistently shown. They shared information about the vaccination procedure at venues and their personal experiences with vaccine side effects. In October, there was a sharp increase in references to medical workers. This was due to a combination of factors, including mentions of the downsizing of vaccination venues, information about vaccines provided by the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare and The Japanese Society for Vaccinology, and reports on studies concerning vaccinations for children.
It was found that the neutral-to-anti users tended to refer to user accounts who highlighted the negative aspects of vaccines. They mainly emphasized the dangers and ineffectiveness of vaccines, or criticize policies related to vaccines, such as opposing vaccine certificates. It is also noteworthy that we were unable to identify the occupations for about half of the accounts referred to by the neutral-to-anti users.

## What types of external sites were shared by users who determined their stances?
We next investigated the external sites that were shared by the neutral-to-pro and neutral-to-anti users during their stance formation. Similarly to the analysis of referred user accounts, we classified users into three groups (neutral-to-pro, remaining-neutral, and neutral-to-anti) for each month. For each group, we extracted members’ tweets and retweets containing links to external sites during the period when their stance changed, as well as during the three periods prior to the change. If one user shared the same link multiple, it was counted only once. After identifying the external links frequently shared by each group, the authors assigned categories to each link based on the types of their web sites. provides the definition of each category.
 
 shows the categories of the top 30 external sites referred to by the neutral-to-pro, remaining-neutral, and neutral-to-anti users for five months. The neutral-to-pro users and remaining-neutral users mainly shared links to mass media or web news sites, while the neutral-to-anti users shared alternative information sources. There was no significant difference between neutral-to-pro users and remaining-neutral users in this figure. Neutral-to-pro users tended to refer slightly more to web news sites, while there were no significant differences in the referenced articles because these sites predominantly reported articles already covered by mass media. This indicates a tendency for neutral-to-pro users to access such articles via web news sites rather than directly through mass media sites. The neutral-to-anti users frequently shared video hosting sites, BBS, and blog sites, which means they prefer these alternative information sources over mass media sites such as TV or newspapers. For example, in July, the number of video hosting sites was ten in . Among these, the number of major video sharing sites was only four, while the rest six sites were relatively minor video sharing sites. These ten videos included titles such as “Vaccines Cause Tragedies” and others claiming that vaccination for children poses a high risk, indicating that video sharing platforms have become mediums for the spread of anti-vaccine sentiments. Similarly, blogs and BBSs criticizing the government’s stance on vaccines or detailing post-vaccination deaths were frequently referenced. Specifically, these included blogs claiming that it is healthier not to get vaccinated, BBSs introducing cases of people who died after vaccination, and blogs reporting that the government concealed the number of deaths caused by vaccines. Among these, blogs that particularly highlight the dangers of vaccines often lack evidence or rely on suspicious evidence, supporting the hypothesis that blogs and BBSs serve as a hotbed of anti-vaccine.
 To further examine external links exclusively referred to by either the neutral-to-pro or neutral-to-anti users in comparison with remaining-neutral users, we carried out a chi-squared test of independence on two sets of shared links at a significance level of 5%. Among the shared links that passed the chi-squared test, we extracted the top 30 links most frequently referred to by users in each group and assigned categories in the same manner.

 shows the top30 frequently shared external websites by the neutral-to-pro and -anti users over five months. The top of shows sites shared by the neutral-to-pro users. The majority of these were web news sites, with a much smaller number being mass media sites. However, most of the shared news articles were also covered by mass media, and we did not find significant differences in content compared with . The bottom of shows sites shared by the neutral-to-anti users. Similarly, we did not find significant differences compared with .
 
 illustrates word cloud created from the headlines of the links shared by the neutral-to-pro and -anti users over time. We obtained the headlines from the external sites which were significantly frequently shared by neutral-to-pro or -anti users respectively at a significance level of 5%. From the shared sites, we extracted nouns frequently used in the titles of the headlines using MeCab (https://taku910.github.io/mecab), one of the most popular Japanese tokenizers. We performed a chi-squared test of independence on two word groups used in the titles shared by the neutral-to-pro (or neutral-to-anti) users and the remaining-neutral users at a significance level of 5%. When one user shared several sites and there was an overlap of tokens between the titles of the sites, the token was counted only once. After identifying the typical words used in each group, we conducted a deeper analysis of the contents containing these keywords.
 For neutral-to-pro users, we observed a significant interest in websites related to vaccine reservations. Specifically, in all months except for July, we identified an increased usage of the word “reservation” as users checked and shared information on how to make a vaccine reservation or tweeted that they had successfully made one.
In the first few months, neutral-to-pro users displayed significant interest in the potential drawbacks of vaccination and tended to refer to authoritative sources such as government agencies and officials in charge of vaccinations. During this period, Taro Kono, the Cabinet minister in charge of vaccinations, issued warnings about vaccine-related false rumors on his official website, which led to the emergence of the term “false rumor” in June and July (https://www.taro.org/2021/06/%e3%83%af%e3%82%af%e3%83%81%e3%83%b3%e3%83%87%e3%83%9e%e3%81%ab%e3%81%a4%e3%81%84%e3%81%a6.php). Additionally, the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare reported cases of suspected vaccine side effects online (https://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/seisakunitsuite/bunya/vaccine_hukuhannou-utagai-houkoku.html), leading to the appearance of words such as “suspicion,” “side effects,” and “report.”
Starting in August, the vaccination campaign for young people began and attracted significant attention from neutral-to-pro users for several months. In August, news reports covered the opening of vaccination venues for young people (https://news.livedoor.com/article/detail/20718403, https://news.livedoor.com/lite/article_detail/20769771), leading to the appearance of “young people,” “venue,” “coupons,” and “reservation.” Some of these words continued to appear in the following months.
Since August, there has been increased interest in the effectiveness and safety of vaccines, confirmed by authorities. The word “Moderna” appeared from August to October. In August, news reported that the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare stated that over 80% of people who received the Moderna vaccine experienced a fever and recommended resting the day after vaccination (https://news.livedoor.com/article/detail/20649919). Attention to Moderna dropped in September but rose again in October when it was reported that some Moderna vaccines contained stainless steel contaminants (https://www.tokyo-np.co.jp/article/130189). In October, the word “Pfizer” also appeared. This was due to news that 80% of the antibodies from the Pfizer vaccine decreased within six months (https://times.abema.tv/news-article/8673379) and that a booster shot had an effectiveness of 96% (https://news.yahoo.co.jp/articles/04f1fe37b1a5f7a66ecee6081de50018c102c559).
As shown in bottom of , the word cloud of the neutral-to-anti users contained words exaggerating the negative aspects of the vaccine, such as “death,” “side effects”, and “danger.” This suggests that the neutral-to-anti users were particularly anxious about the vaccine’s safety. Furthermore, BBSs and blog articles that report foreign information related to vaccines, particularly highlighting their drawbacks, attracted significant attention among neutral-to-anti vaccine users. For instance, in August, the term “Israel” began to appear, due to two blog articles: one claiming that Pfizer and Israel agreed to conceal the side effects of the vaccine (https://tocana.jp/2021/08/post_218206_entry.html), and another warning that the number of positive COVID-19 cases in Israel did not decrease despite booster shots, contrary to reports of their effectiveness (https://johosokuhou.com/2021/09/29/51798/). Since Israel was one of the first countries to start vaccinations globally, negative information about vaccines related to Israel attracted considerable attention from the neutral-to-anti users. Similarly, since September, the term “US” has also appeared, as the country was another early adopter of vaccination. This term emerged from blog articles claiming that 60% of American doctors refused to get vaccinated (http://www.rui.jp/ruinet.html?i=200&c=600&t=6&k=0&m=368469&g=131203) and introducing research from the US suggesting that vaccines posed a high risk are dangerous for young people (https://note.com/you3_jp/n/n463d19aeaf03). This appearance is considered to be for similar reasons as that of Israel.
It was also found that doctors and medical experts might be influencing neutral-to-anti vaccine users towards anti-vaccine sentiments. The results also suggest that anti-vaccine doctors and experts may be pushing people towards anti-vaccine sentiments. In August, the words “doctors” appeared, referring to the news about a group of 450 doctors and legislators submitting a petition to suspend vaccinations (https://www.sanspo.com/article/20210624-IOQJULJCVRMBXMZXIDJG6SDUHA). Additionally, in June and July, the word “developer” appeared, due to a blog article about a person claiming to be a vaccine developer who warned that the vaccine is poison (http://blog.nihon-syakai.net/blog/2021/06/12371.html?g=132207). This was actually an opinion by a Canadian vaccine researcher who had seen internal Pfizer documents. The appearance of the word “developer” over two months suggests that its influence was significant. Such news, based on the views of doctors and experts, has also garnered considerable attention, suggesting that even users with anti-vaccine tendencies find statements from individuals in authoritative medical positions to be effective. This is consistent with neutral-to-anti users tending to refer to accounts from medical workers and researchers shown in Figs and .

## Conclusion
To draw a lesson from the successful COVID-19 vaccination campaign in Japan, we analyzed stance formations of Twitter users towards COVID-19 vaccination. We developed a BERT-based stance classifier with reaction information and applied it to all vaccine-related tweets posted from June to October 2021.
Analysis of the distribution of stances and the polarization of the pro-vaccine and anti-vaccine users revealed that the number of pro-vaccine users greatly exceeds the number of anti-vaccine users, and interactions among them are relatively sparse. The number of pro-vaccine users increased from June when the vaccination campaign for individuals aged 18 to 64 started, but it decreased from September when the vaccination coverage reached around 50%. The impact of anti-vaccine users was relatively insignificant, as their numbers remained consistently low throughout the analyzed period. However, it is noteworthy that their level of interest in the vaccination campaign remained unchanged. We found that polarization between the pro-vaccine and anti-vaccine users increased over time. Additionally, we observed that neutral users tended to react more frequently to the pro-vaccine users rather than the anti-vaccine users. These findings may explain why the majority of neutral users who became other stances shifted towards being pro-vaccine. It underscores the significance of providing reliable and timely information to neutral users to effectively improve the vaccination coverage.
Users who transitioned to the pro-vaccine stance often relied on traditional and authoritative information sources such as medical doctors, mass media, governments, and politicians. This indicates that the information provided by these sources played a crucial role in influencing individuals’ decision to get vaccinated. Notably, many medical doctors took the initiative to share updated vaccine information through their personal accounts, highlighting the significant impact of personal activities in improving vaccination coverage.
Such users were also found to frequently refer to the vaccination experiences of a diverse group of user accounts. This suggests that users considering vaccination are preparing by looking at these experiences to smoothly undergo vaccination. Notably, they referred to many artist accounts that shared their vaccination experiences through comics and illustrations.
In contrast, users who transitioned to the anti-vaccine stance often relied on alternative information sources such as BBSs, blogs, video sharing sites, and accounts with unknown occupations. A word cloud analysis of the neutral-to-anti users revealed a predominant interest in vaccine safety. While it is natural for individuals to have concerns about vaccine risks, these users exhibited an elevated level of worry that led them to trust suspicious information, including rumors, gossip, and fake news. The information found on these platforms often lacked moderation and contributed to the dissemination of misinformation.
These findings highlight the importance of disseminating information through diverse channels to prevent neutral users from encountering misinformation in alternative information sources. By ensuring the availability of accurate and reliable information across various platforms, we can help neutral users make informed decisions and avoid being influenced by misleading content.
One limitation of our study is that we categorized both ‘vaccine acceptance’ and ‘vaccine uptake’ under pro-vaccine, despite their distinct nature. Expressing acceptance of COVID-19 vaccination does not necessarily mean actual uptake, and vice versa. A systematic review and meta-analysis revealed a significant difference between global acceptance rate of COVID-19 vaccination (67.8%) and its uptake rate (42.3%) [ ]. In our annotation dataset, almost all of pro-vaccine posts reported uptake (95.7%), posing a challenge for analyzing these two concepts separately.
In future studies, interpretable models could reveal the key features determining the classification of tweets into different stances. For instance, these models could identify common words or influencers associated with each stance. For example, employing such models could provide popular words or popular influencers associated with each stance. The application of NLP techniques could deepen our understanding. A thematic analysis such as LDA could unveil prevalent topics among the neutral-to-pro/anti users. Emotion fusion could offer insight into emotional features associated with each stance, and their effect on stance formation.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0299935.r001Decision Letter 0
GuptaAnkitAcademic Editor© 2024 Ankit Gupta2024Ankit Guptahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
1 Sep 2023

PONE-D-23-22865Analyzing information sharing behaviors during stance shifts on COVID-19 vaccination among Japanese Twitter usersPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Cho,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================
ACADEMIC EDITOR:
Kindly address the comments made by reviewers.
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 16 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Ankit Gupta
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. In your Methods section, please include additional information about your dataset and ensure that you have included a statement specifying whether the collection and analysis method complied with the terms and conditions for the source of the data.
3. We noticed you have some minor occurrence of overlapping text with the following previous publication(s), which needs to be addressed:

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10068695

In your revision ensure you cite all your sources (including your own works), and quote or rephrase any duplicated text outside the methods section. Further consideration is dependent on these concerns being addressed.
4. Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse.
5. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript:
“This research was conducted as part of “COVID-19 AI & Simulation Project” run by Mitsubishi Research Institute commissioned by Cabinet Secretariat, JAPAN. The methods for analysis were developed with support from JST CREST Grant Number JPMJCR19A4 and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP21H03445.”
We note that you have provided funding information that is currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form.
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows:
“This research was conducted as part of "COVID-19 AI & Simulation Project" run by Mitsubishi Research Institute commissioned by Cabinet Secretariat, JAPAN. The methods for analysis were developed with support from JST CREST Grant Number JPMJCR19A4 and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP21H03445.
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.”
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
6. We noted in your submission details that a portion of your manuscript may have been presented or published elsewhere. [This paper is an extended version of our paper published in Diachronic Analysis of Users' Stances on COVID-19 Vaccination in Japan using Twitter, Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), 2022, pp. 237-241. We have improved our classifier for stance detection, updated all experimental results, and added some new results.] Please clarify whether this publication was peer-reviewed and formally published. If this work was previously peer-reviewed and published, in the cover letter please provide the reason that this work does not constitute dual publication and should be included in the current manuscript.
7. We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
8. We note that Figure 8 in your submission contain copyrighted images. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright.
We require you to either (1) present written permission from the copyright holder to publish these figures specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license, or (2) remove the figures from your submission:
1. You may seek permission from the original copyright holder of Figure 8 to publish the content specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license.
We recommend that you contact the original copyright holder with the Content Permission Form (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=7c09/content-permission-form.pdf) and the following text:
“I request permission for the open-access journal PLOS ONE to publish XXX under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CCAL) CC BY 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Please be aware that this license allows unrestricted use and distribution, even commercially, by third parties. Please reply and provide explicit written permission to publish XXX under a CC BY license and complete the attached form.”
Please upload the completed Content Permission Form or other proof of granted permissions as an "Other" file with your submission.
In the figure caption of the copyrighted figure, please include the following text: “Reprinted from [ref] under a CC BY license, with permission from [name of publisher], original copyright [original copyright year].”
2. If you are unable to obtain permission from the original copyright holder to publish these figures under the CC BY 4.0 license or if the copyright holder’s requirements are incompatible with the CC BY 4.0 license, please either i) remove the figure or ii) supply a replacement figure that complies with the CC BY 4.0 license. Please check copyright information on all replacement figures and update the figure caption with source information. If applicable, please specify in the figure caption text when a figure is similar but not identical to the original image and is therefore for illustrative purposes only.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This manuscript deals with an interesting topic, but the framing needs improvement and the results need to be more closely interrogated.
Specific comments:
1. Please define the abbreviation 'COVID-19' in the first instance of its use.
2. "... subsequent studies leveraged social media posts and focused on the 17 COVID-19 vaccination [6–9, 11, 12]" - a later study utilising Twitter as a database found that majority of negative sentiment tweets centered around the perceived coercive policies or vaccine mandates, superseding safety or efficacy concerns. This is relevant to mention (citation: pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36146535).
3. What is the theoretical framework for the study? Is there one? Why or why not?
4. It is beneficial for the readers of the journal that a figure summarizing the methods and tweets selection process is provided.
5. I am not sure if it is apt to title this paper as "Stance Shifts on COVID-19 Vaccination"; moreover, a rapid uptake of COVID-19 vaccination does not imply a stance shift per se but simply a natural result of the fact that vaccination for people aged 18 to 64 years only began around June 2021. This implies a receptive population rather than one that shifted from vaccine hesitant to vaccine receptive.
6. Related to the above, you can see that across the time periods, there was in fact no real stance shift and the anti-vaccine portion of tweets remained consistently small.
7. Frequent tweets are an important component in maintaining a following and therefore one limitation of this study is a lack of understanding about the representativeness of these findings. The tweets could originate from a very active few or could be more widespread. How should this be considered?
8. The main body of the manuscript is relatively thin, and it is recommended that the authors further dig into the existing data for in-depth analysis apart from framing this as a stance shift, which did not really materialise.
9. What is "Full vaccination coverage" as defined in Figure 1? Is it simply receiving two doses? Please be clear.
10. There is an extensive literature on these topics. Most importantly it is fundamental to take into consideration how political institutions/authorities have used Twitter during Covid and how this has also led to misunderstanding and misinformation in some cases.
11. Given that identifying bots is a major taproot in big data analytics, it is essential that some explanation be provided. What percentage of the data could be posted by bots?
Reviewer #2: This paper analyzes Twitter posts (tweets) to explore the evolution of people’s stance on vaccination and associated information-sharing behaviors using their own collected Japanese dataset. The authors proposed the prediction model and did some analyses. These findings will help increase coverage of booster doses and future vaccinations. The overall structure is well organized and useful for COVID related research. There are some comments:
1. The G7 nations should be explained.
2. Is the BERT Japanese version? which plm?
3. Please introduce the proposed model in detail to enable readers to understand the overall structure and advantages.
4. Some future works should be added, such as emotion fusion, topic modeling, and interpretable models and Chatgpt application.
5. Some references could be added:
Topic detection and sentiment analysis in Twitter content related to COVID-19 from Brazil and the USA
Emotions and topics expressed on Twitter during the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom: Comparative geolocation and text mining analysis
Public opinion and sentiment before and at the beginning of COVID-19 vaccinations in Japan: Twitter analysis
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0299935.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
5 Dec 2023

Dear Academic Editor 
Ankit Gupta
We sincerely appreciate the valuable feedback from Editor Ankit Gupta and the two anonymous reviewers. Our manuscript has been revised to address the questions and concerns raised by the reviewers. We await your reevaluation of our work. In this note, we outline the revisions made in response to your comments.
We first summarize the major revisions:
- Rephrase all sentences without ``Vaccination stance classification'' section (correspoding to Methods section) following PLOSONE's Ethical Publishing Practice (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/ethical-publishing-practice). We highlighted the rephrased sentence in black.
- Change all ``stance change'' and similar representations in the title and manuscript into ``stance formation'' based on the comment. Through our discussions, we have reached an agreement that the term ``formation'' was a more appropriate to represent actual situation.
In the following revision note, we provide a one-on-one response to each of the reviewers’ comments and indicate how each issue is addressed in the revised manuscript.
The new sentences were written in red and the deleted ones were written in strikethrough text. 
New figures or tables were attached a notation ``(new)'' at the last of their captions.
Note that we have written the only rephrased sentences in black because almost all parts of our new manuscript was changed.
Unfortunately, we have had to cancel our plan to share our dataset in a public repository. 
Our original plan was to share a dataset that included tweet IDs and annotations showing different stances. 
However, getting permission from NTT Data, the source of our data, turned out to be a challenge. They are concerned that our dataset could go against their privacy policy.
After considering this carefully, we have decided not to release the dataset for now.
Editor
- Comment 1
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. 
The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf

and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

- Answer 1
We revised some parts of our manuscript and other files which did not meet the requirements including file naming.
- Revised parts 1
 - Change the style of the title sentence case
 - Change the symbol meaning indicating equal contributions to \\textparagraph 
 - Change the style of name of each section, subsection, and subsubsection into Bold style
 - Change the name of supporting file into ``S1_File.pdf''
- Comment 2
In your Methods section, please include additional information about your dataset and ensure that you have included a statement specifying whether the collection and analysis method complied with the terms and conditions for the source of the data.
- Answer 2
We have included additional information in dataset section about our dataset.
Also, we have included a sentence in dataset section to make it sure that our collection and analysis method were in accordance with the terms and conditions of Twitter (X Corp.).
- Revised parts 2
 - Add an overview of our dataset construction process
 - Add a consideration about bots and their impacts on our analyses
- Comment 3
We noticed you have some minor occurrence of overlapping text with the following previous publication(s), which needs to be addressed: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10068695
In your revision ensure you cite all your sources (including your own works), and quote or rephrase any duplicated text outside the methods section. Further consideration is dependent on these concerns being addressed.
- Answer 3
We cited our previous work and rephrase all duplicated representation outside the methods section (``Vaccination stance classification'' section).
Quantitatively, we ensured that in any paragraphs there were no n-gram where n >= 10 using a tool to measure how many words a sentence were duplicated in each paragraph.
- Comment 4
Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse.
- Answer 4
We shared all codes in GitHub: https://github.com/rapnob/stance_formation
- Comment 5
Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript:
``This research was conducted as part of ``COVID-19 AI & Simulation Project'' run by Mitsubishi Research Institute commissioned by Cabinet Secretariat, JAPAN. The methods for analysis were developed with support from JST CREST Grant Number JPMJCR19A4 and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP21H03445.''
We note that you have provided funding information that is currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form.
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows:
``This research was conducted as part of ``COVID-19 AI & Simulation Project'' run by Mitsubishi Research Institute commissioned by Cabinet Secretariat, JAPAN. The methods for analysis were developed with support from JST CREST Grant Number JPMJCR19A4 and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP21H03445.
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.''
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
- Answer 5
We removed all funding-related text from Acknowledgements section and included the amended statements within our cover letter.
- Comment 6
We noted in your submission details that a portion of your manuscript may have been presented or published elsewhere. [This paper is an extended version of our paper published in Diachronic Analysis of Users' Stances on COVID-19 Vaccination in Japan using Twitter, Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), 2022, pp. 237-241. We have improved our classifier for stance detection, updated all experimental results, and added some new results.] 
Please clarify whether this publication was peer-reviewed and formally published. If this work was previously peer-reviewed and published, in the cover letter please provide the reason that this work does not constitute dual publication and should be included in the current manuscript.
- Answer 6
The paper mentioned above was originally published as a short paper (4 pages) in the ASONAM 2022 conference proceedings. It underwent a review and assessment by the program committee. Due to its brevity, we had to omit certain analyses and results, and the performance of our proposed stance classifier, as presented in the paper, was subpar, which affected the reliability of our findings.
In this paper, we have significantly improved the performance of the classifier and re-conducted analyses to provide updated results. Consequently, it was necessary to include descriptions of these analyses and present the updated findings. Furthermore, in this revision, based on feedback from the editors and reviewers, we have updated and rephrased various sections to ensure that this work does not constitute dual publication.
- Comment 7
We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
- Answer 7
We have provided our dataset on the corresponding author's homepage.

https://www.tkl.iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp/~cs/PLOSONE-2023-stance-formation

- Comment 8
We note that Figure 8 in your submission contain copyrighted images. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright.
- Answer 8
Related to the Answer 3, Figure 8 in our manuscript in the current version is different from Figure 8 in the previous version of our work because we re-conducted all experiments and obtained different results. We believe Figure 8 does not contain copyrighted images. 
If our understanding is incorrect, I would appreciate it if you could inform me.
Reviewer 1
- Comment 1
Please define the abbreviation 'COVID-19' in the first instance of its use.
- Answer 1
We defined the abbreviation by introducing the below sentence in Introduction section.
``the 2019 novel coronavirus disease (hereinafter called COVID-19) pandemic''
- Comment 2
2. "... subsequent studies leveraged social media posts and focused on the 17 COVID-19 vaccination [6–9, 11, 12]" - a later study utilising Twitter as a database found that majority of negative sentiment tweets centered around the perceived coercive policies or vaccine mandates, superseding safety or efficacy concerns. This is relevant to mention (citation: pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36146535).
- Answer 2
We added a reference to this study in 5th paragraph in Introduction section
We added the below sentence into Introduction section.
``
Currently, there is no consensus on common factors for negative sentiment toward vaccination, a later study found that majority of negative sentiment tweets were predominantly mentioned the coercive policies or vaccine mandates, rather than safety or efficacy concerns [citation].
''
- Comment 3
What is the theoretical framework for the study? Is there one? Why or why not?
- Answer 3
As you said, there was a lack of explanation of our theoretical framework of this study. 
So, we added the explanation in 4th paragraph in Introduction section.
``Several studies reported that SNS users' stances toward vaccination were influenced by the information they obtained on SNS, such as external links [citation, citation] or posts from other users [citation], resulting in wrong medical treatments like vaccine hesitancy or anti-social behaviours like hoarding. 
Based on the observations, we explored the relationship between Twitter users' stances and the external information sources such as news articles or other Twitter users which they referred to just before their stances were determined. 
To this end, we implemented a classifier for stance detection, which is an NLP task [citation] of predicting a stance (typically favor, against and none) of given text toward a certain target, and determined each Twitter user's stance toward COVID-19 vaccines.
''
- Comment 4
It is beneficial for the readers of the journal that a figure summarizing the methods and tweets selection process is provided.
- Answer 4
We added an overview of the architecture of our classifier and tweets selection process for dataset construction in 1st and 3rd paragraphs in Vaccination stance classification section.
- Comment 5
I am not sure if it is apt to title this paper as "Stance Shifts on COVID-19 Vaccination"; moreover, a rapid uptake of COVID-19 vaccination does not imply a stance shift per se but simply a natural result of the fact that vaccination for people aged 18 to 64 years only began around June 2021. This implies a receptive population rather than one that shifted from vaccine hesitant to vaccine receptive.
- Answer 5
As you mentioned, stance shifts between pro-vaccine and anti-vaccine groups were uncommon in our study. To better reflect the focus of our analysis, we have adjusted the title from 'Stance Shifts on COVID-19 Vaccination' to 'Stance Formation on COVID-19 Vaccination,' emphasizing the examination of how initially neutral users formed their stance, and revised contents accordingly.
- Comment 6
Related to the above, you can see that across the time periods, there was in fact no real stance shift and the anti-vaccine portion of tweets remained consistently small.
- Answer 6
Similarly to Answer 5, the title and related parts were modified.
- Comment 7
Frequent tweets are an important component in maintaining a following and therefore one limitation of this study is a lack of understanding about the representativeness of these findings. The tweets could originate from a very active few or could be more widespread. How should this be considered?
- Answer 7
To limit the impact of very active users, we counted the same news articles (URLs) or the same user's posts shared by the same user repetitively only once, while we forgot to write that.
So we added it.
Additionally, although we found that anti-vaccine group has a tendency to post tweets more frequently than pro-vaccine in our recent study, the increase in the volume of anti-vaccine groups was very small as described in our manuscript. We will further investigate the reasons. 
We added the below sentence in ``What kinds of users were referred to by users who formed their stances?'' subsubsection. in Analysis section.
``If one user referred to the same user multiple times during these processes, it was counted only once.''
- Comment 8
The main body of the manuscript is relatively thin, and it is recommended that the authors further dig into the existing data for in-depth analysis apart from framing this as a stance shift, which did not really materialise.
- Answer 8
As we answered to the comment 5, we adjusted our focus to the stance formation of neutral users. To show the details of stance transition,
we added a table displaying the number of people moved between stances and a discussion based on that table in 2nd paragraph in ``Stance formations of users'' subsection in Analysis section, .
- Comment 9
What is "Full vaccination coverage" as defined in Figure 1? Is it simply receiving two doses? Please be clear.
- Answer 9
We added the belon explanation in Introduction section.
`` second dose of the vaccine (fully vaccinated at the time)''
- Comment 
There is an extensive literature on these topics. Most importantly it is fundamental to take into consideration how political institutions/authorities have used Twitter during Covid and how this has also led to misunderstanding and misinformation in some cases.
- Answer 10
In our case, we found an indications of their positive impacts. 
Taro Kono, Japan's minister in charge of fighting COVID-19 at that time, often used SNSs like Twitter to propagate vaccine-related information or criticize misinformation about vaccines.
As we mentioned in our manuscript, the occurrence of the word ``Mr. Kono'' indicated that people including those who were unsure to get vaccinated highly focused on his activity on SNS and the activity reduced their hesitancy in the vaccines. 
We wrote this analysis in the part of our wordcloud analysis.
``
In July, many press reported that vaccination rate was found low and thus each prefecture's governor requested people to get vaccinated, while those who hoped to get vaccinated could not make a reservation of vaccine vouchers due to troubles of reservation system at that time, 
AttachmentSubmitted filename: response.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0299935.r003Decision Letter 1
GuptaAnkitAcademic Editor© 2024 Ankit Gupta2024Ankit Guptahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
3 Jan 2024

PONE-D-23-22865R1Analyzing information sharing behaviors during stance formation on COVID-19 vaccination among Japanese Twitter usersPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Cho,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================

ACADEMIC EDITOR: 

Kindly address the comments made by reviewer # 1. (comments no 1 and 2, authors may choose to igonre comments No 3)

==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Feb 17 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Ankit Gupta
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the revisions and replies. I have some outstanding issues with the present version of the manuscript.
1. I still have issues with the phrase 'stance formation'. I may choose to get vaccinated not because I accept the vaccine but simply because I deemed it to be necessary (or that it has been strongly pushed for by the government). I may also have an attitude of 'vaccine acceptance' but still not proceed to get vaccinated. In this study, the authors are only looking at people who appear to 'accept' the vaccines. While vaccine acceptance and uptake are intricately linked, the terms are not interchangeable and have distinct constructs. I refer to the following systematic review and meta-analysis published in 2022: Mapping global acceptance and uptake of COVID-19 vaccination: A systematic review and meta-analysis (https://www.nature.com/articles/s43856-022-00177-6) which clearly shows that there is a difference between global COVID-19 vaccine acceptance (67.8%) and uptake (42.3%). While acceptance refers to an attitude, uptake refers to the actual act of receiving vaccination. The nuances should be explained.
2. "In July, many press reported that vaccination rate was found to be low, and thus, each prefecture’s governor requested people to get vaccinated, while those who hoped to get vaccinated could not make a reservation with a vaccine voucher due to trouble with the reservation system at that time, resulting in their complaints to governors and the emergence of the word “governor.” This trend was in accordance with the occurrence of the word “Mr. Kono,” who was a minister in charge of COVID-19 vaccinations and received a lot of criticism for his announcement of stopping additional procurement of vaccines in July" - at least a reference should be provided here.
3. "Considering recent advances of chatbot services like ChatGPT, we could use such services to annotate vaccine-related tweets" - I understand this was suggested by the other reviewer but I don't think this is specifically necessary and can be omitted.
Reviewer #2: The authors have addressed my comments. The research is valuable for the field.
The paper could be accepted
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0299935.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
7 Feb 2024

We sincerely appreciate the valuable feedback from Editor Ankit Gupta and the two anonymous reviewers. 
Our manuscript has been revised to address the questions and concerns raised by the reviewers. 
We await your reevaluation of our work. 
We have revised our paper in response to the comments from the editor and reviewers. In our rebuttal letter, we detailed the changes we made. 
Additionally, we have included an explanation of our user-filtering process, which was missing in the previous version. 
Note that this additional explanation does not affect our original results.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: response.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0299935.r005Decision Letter 2
LandenmarkHannaStaff Editor© 2024 Hanna Landenmark2024Hanna Landenmarkhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
15 Jul 2024

PONE-D-23-22865R2Analyzing information sharing behaviors during stance formation on COVID-19 vaccination among Japanese Twitter usersPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Cho,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE.
You let us know that you had identified concerns that needed correcting between acceptance and publication. As such, we have rescinded the accept decision and are issuing a minor revision for you to provide the revisions you yourself have identified. Please provide a "response to reviewer" document in the way that you would for a revised manuscript, where you list the concerns you identified, and the modifications you made to address these, so that the Academic Editor can evaluate these. Please also include a marked-up copy of the changes between the accepted version and the new version. Once you resubmit, the Academic Editor will once more assess the manuscript and issue the next decision.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Aug 26 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Hanna Landenmark
Staff Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0299935.r006Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version3
27 Jul 2024

Dear academic editors,
Our manuscript was previously submitted to PLOS ONE under the identifier PONE-D-23-22865R2.
Although it was accepted in March of this year, 
we have found significant issues in our data processing pipeline before publication.
We have since resolved these issues, updated the results along with the analysis, and resubmitted the manuscript under the identifier PONE-D-24-25295.
We have uploaded the revised manuscript and the description of the changes.
Please take a look at the changes.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: letter.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0299935.r007Decision Letter 3
GuptaAnkitAcademic Editor© 2024 Ankit Gupta2024Ankit Guptahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
22 Sep 2024

PONE-D-23-22865R3Analyzing information sharing behaviors during stance formation on COVID-19 vaccination among Japanese Twitter usersPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Cho,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================
ACADEMIC EDITOR: Kindly address the comments made by Reviewer #3.
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Nov 06 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Ankit Gupta
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: No
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: As the article was already accepted previously, I only reviewed the part that the authors revised from their original submission.
The line number I use for this review is for the track-change version.
Line 361: Q: Why only anti-vaccine users remained active compared to pro-vaccine? Because they are bots or some other special case of users? I guess this is the thing that authors might be able to explain based on the data collected, but if it is not possible, that is fine.
Line 365: This part is a bit confusing. Did you mean that you identified users who Tweeted at least four months out of five month of data collection window?
Line 366: What is particular period here? specific month?
Line 367: ambiguity of "particular period" makes me harder to understand the rest of the sentence.
Line 390: stances --> stance groups
Line 469-470: Is this provided in the supplementary material? If not, can it be shared in the main doc or supplementary section?
Line 491: Same for this -- Is this provided in the supplementary material? If not, can it be shared in the main doc or supplementary section?
Line 538-539: It would be really great if I can see the raw data/title of these videos in supplementary section or sth.
Line 545-546: Also for this.
So my biggest comment is that "why the authors only describe by text of the unseen data instead of at least indirectly providing them?"
Other than one big comment, I guess small points I described above are all I have.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0299935.r008Author response to Decision Letter 3
Submission Version4
3 Oct 2024

Dear academic editors,
We sincerely appreciate the valuable feedback from Editor Ankit Gupta and the anonymous reviewer. 
Our manuscript has been revised to address the questions and concerns raised by the reviewers. 
We await your reevaluation of our work. 
We have summarized our revisions in the letter.
We have also included additional descriptions and an explanation regarding our decision not to disclose certain information due to ethical considerations.
The most recent changes are highlighted in blue.
If changes were made, the detail of that changes are described; 
if no changes were made, the reasons are provided.
Thanks,
Sho Cho
AttachmentSubmitted filename: reb.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0299935.r009Decision Letter 4
GuptaAnkitAcademic Editor© 2024 Ankit Gupta2024Ankit Guptahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version4
20 Nov 2024

Analyzing information sharing behaviors during stance formation on COVID-19 vaccination among Japanese Twitter users
PONE-D-23-22865R4
Dear Dr. Cho,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Ankit Gupta
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #3: No
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #3: Most of the comments I addressed is well addressed so I do not see any issues to make this published.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #3: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0299935.r010Acceptance letter
GuptaAnkitAcademic Editor© 2024 Ankit Gupta2024Ankit Guptahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
26 Jun 2024

PONE-D-23-22865R2 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Cho, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Ankit Gupta 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE