pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11729932PMC11729932.111729932117299323980487110.1371/journal.pone.0317451PONE-D-24-149531Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorRecreationSportsSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorRecreationSportsBiology and Life SciencesSports ScienceSportsPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAsiaTaiwanSocial SciencesSociologyEducationSchoolsSocial SciencesPolitical ScienceGovernmentsScience PolicyResearch FundingGovernment Funding of ScienceSocial SciencesEconomicsFinanceBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitionDecision MakingEcology and Environmental SciencesSustainability ScienceA new shortcut for competitive sports development? The purpose of and strategy for developing and introducing sepaktakraw in Taiwan
The purpose of and strategy for developing and introducing sepaktakraw in Taiwanhttps://orcid.org/0009-0004-3726-6889WuDing-YiConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draft https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2120-8439TanTien-ChinConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – review & editing WangYan-TingConceptualizationWriting – review & editing 1
The School of Physical Education, Quanzhou Normal University, Quanzhou, China2
Graduate Institute of Sports and Leisure Management, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei City, TaiwanGongYueEditor ].
Today, sepaktakraw is an internationally competitive sport. It made its first international appearance in 1965 at the Kuala Lumpur Southeast Asian Games, officially entered the Asian Games in 1990, and was included as one of the official disciplines in the 2008 Asian Beach Games [ ]. Although sepaktakraw has not yet been included in the Olympic Games, its inclusion as an official sport in the 1990 Asian Games led many Asian countries, including many small countries or regions such as Taiwan, to introduce the sport. Why did these countries decide to introduce a new competitive sport, and how can they develop new sports?
Despite the proliferation of research on elite sports, there is little research in the English literature about new elite sport pathways in small countries or regions. The potential for small countries or regions to win more medals, which is underexplored, is not commensurate with the increasing significance of new elite sports. Several studies have examined public policy solutions to various social problems, which is an institutionalized approach for solving relevant and real-world problems [ – ]. For example, Sun et al. analysed the complex relationship between the digital economy and carbon emissions from a public policy perspective and provided actionable policy recommendations [ ]. These policy-related studies have been impactful. However, applying public policy perspectives to elite sport development in small countries or regions is rare. These two gaps are addressed in the present study.
Accordingly, this study explored why Taiwan introduced a new sport, sepaktakraw, and the strategies adopted to rapidly achieve international sporting success. The sports policy factors leading to international sporting success (SPLISS) model proposed by De Bosscher in 2006 was the main theoretical framework of this study [ ]. This study investigated the reasons for the introduction of sepaktakraw to Taiwan and its developmental strategies, which can provide a reference for the subsequent successful development of this sport in Taiwan. In addition, the results of this study provide other countries and regions with a reference for introducing new sports in the future and demonstrate how to successfully develop competitive sports. presents the framework of the research content of this paper.
 The remainder of the paper comprises five sections: literature review, methods, findings, discussion and conclusion.

## Literature review
Four theoretical studies of competitive sport policies that contribute to the success of international sports are systematic and frequently cited and discussed: Oakly and Green [ ], Digel [ ], Green and Houlihan [ ], and De Bosscher et al. [ ]. Green and Oakly systematically studied competitive sports performance in the United States, Spain, France, and Australia. The authors summarized ten critical factors for the successful development of competitive sports. Among these studies, that of De Bosscher et al. is the most representative [ ]. The team analysed the results of other research teams and extensively reviewed the literature on how mesolevel policies affect international sports performance. The team then summarized the nine policy pillars of the SPLISS model. Recently, international scholars have widely used the SPLISS model to examine the development of sports in a specific country or the link between national sports policies and international sports performance [ – ]. This model has become one of the leading analytical models in competitive sports research from a public policy perspective [ ].
The SPLISS model is composed of nine pillars (see ). Pillar 1 involves financial support, in addition to government funding, as well as diversified funding channels such as donations from nongovernmental organizations. Pillar 2 is an integrated approach to policy development that involves smooth communication between organizations, simplifying the overall organisational structure, and a clear division of labour. Pillar 3 involves the foundation and participation, for example, in the education system, which requires an adequate athletic population at all levels. Pillar 4 is an identification and development system necessary for selecting and training talented individuals after selection. Pillar 5 is athletic and postcareer support needed for funding athletes’ livelihoods, training opportunities, and career development. Pillar 6 includes training facilities, including accessible, high-quality facilities for competitive and noncompetitive sports. Pillar 7 entails coaching provision and coach development, which requires sufficient and high-quality coaches and systems to support coach development. Pillar 8 includes the opportunities to participate in international competitions, organize international competitions, and participate in national competitions. Finally, Pillar 9 describes the scientific research needed for the full development of coaching, sports science, and sports medicine.
 Compared with other analytical frameworks for exploring policies in competitive sports, such as Oakly and Green [ ], Digel [ ], and Green and Houlihan [ ], the SPLISS model De Bosscher et al. has several advantages. Lin and Tan [ ] noted that the factors in the SPLISS model are more specific and explicit than those proposed by Oakley and Green [ ]. Factors such as scientific research and coach training and development, for example, are explicit about the details of success in competitive sports. Lee et al. [ ] noted the many advantages of the SPLISS model, including a hierarchical system of summarizing the literature into constructs and subtopics. In addition, the authors conducted a policy process analysis of policy inputs to medal outputs. Despite its many advantages, the SPLISS model has several limitations. For example, it is becoming increasingly important for competitive sports to consider cultural factors, as there are always cultural differences across nations. Therefore, the SPLISS model focuses more on country-by-country comparative analyses of policy factors [ ]. According to De Bosscher, the author of the SPLISS model, using quantitative indicators that look only at the pillar’s total score without examining its construction, could send misleading policy messages or lead to misinterpretation. The interaction between elite policy and social, economic, and cultural contexts may also be overlooked. Consequently, qualitative information is needed to establish a more general conclusion [ ]. Furthermore, Henry et al. noted six problems associated with SPLISS and variable-oriented approaches to comparing sporting nations, including philosophical assumptions and causal variables, the black box problem, issues of internal validity, nonequivalence and reliability, neglect of agency, and misconceptions about mixed methods [ ]. Although the model is not without its flaws, it still has many advantages, such as a hierarchical index structure. Moreover, scholars have commonly used it to analyse competitive sport development [ – , – ]. Thus, compared with other frameworks for analysing competitive sports development, it is appropriate.
Various researchers have adapted and used the SPLISS framework to study elite sports development in general and in specific contexts to gain empirical insights into each pillar. Chen et al. [ ] and Tan and Mick [ ] noted that the successful development of competitive sports in both Korea and China has been attributed to diversified funding channels, simplified administrative organization, clear departmental responsibilities, increased participation in competitive sports through the education system, systematic selection methods and the monitoring of competitive athletes. Truyens [ ] reported that in most countries/regions with competitive athletics, financial and programmatic support is tailored to the specific performance of competitive athletes. Some competitive track and field athletes receive additional governmental or commercial support. Moreover, Green and Houlihan [ ] argued that competitive training and competition facilities, as well as sports science institutes or universities, can be shared with other sports and have been recognized as significantly contributing to the successful development of competitive sports. With respect to the development of competitive cycling in China, the need for a greater quantity and quality of coaches in the early years was one of the problems that hindered the sport’s successful development [ ]. Finally, Sotiriadou et al. [ ] suggested that one of the critical strategies for successfully developing competitive canoeing in Australia was the availability of well-developed sports science research, such as biomechanics and psychology, nutrition, strength and conditioning, athlete training load tracking, massage and physiotherapy treatments, and effective management and monitoring.
The application of the SPLISS model by scholars in the past has focused on comparing competitive sports policy development in various countries via the SPLISS model; however, the following scholars have slowly transitioned to a more diversified application. Reis et al. [ ] used the SPLSS model to organize and analyse judo science articles catalogued in the Web of Science. Venegas-Yazigi et al. [ ] defined athletic funding via the SPLISS model’s funding support pillar. Furthermore, they analysed the relationship between funding and international sport performance among Chilean athletes. Sport-specific policies, including archery in Korea [ ], canoeing in Australia [ ], and judo in Japan [ ], are explored by other groups via the SPLISS model. Most of these studies, however, focus on official Olympic sports and examine the distance between flourishing and the success of competitive sports in various countries. This study examines the development of an emerging competitive sport, sepaktakraw, from the introduction of the sport to its gradual establishment in a new country or region. This study also examines the specific actions that should be taken for an emerging sport to be developed as a sustainable or successful competitive sport in a new country or region. Therefore, exploring the development of sepaktakraw in Taiwan via the SPLISS model to understand the reasons for the introduction of an emerging competitive sport to a small country or region and how better international sports performance can be achieved in a short period is important and should provide value to relevant academic and applied groups.
The SPLISS model has been widely used to explore the development of competitive sports and sport-specific policies in different countries, identifying the factors that may make it easier for a country to succeed in developing competitive sports. Therefore, the nine pillars of the SPLISS model were used as the basis of this case study to examine the developmental process of sepaktakraw in Taiwan, from the sport’s introduction to its gradual establishment. The aspects of the SPLISS model that have been emphasized in the development strategy and which aspects have not yet been achieved are analysed. This study’s methodology is described in the next section.

## Methodology
This study examined how a sport (sepaktakraw) was developed from scratch and introduced in a new country/region (Taiwan) through a single case study approach [ ], which was chosen for three reasons. First, sepaktakraw is an exotic and non-Taiwanese local sport discipline [ , ]. Second, sepaktakraw was recently introduced to Taiwan, and good results have been achieved in international competitions [ ]. Third, the relevant data can be obtained from archives, websites, and interviews. The above reasons align with Denscombe’s principles of case selection considerations, including specific significant attributes, convenience, and feasibility [ ].

## Data collection and analysis
To understand the development of competitive sepaktakraw in Taiwan, this study collected data from domestic and foreign journal articles, media reports, official documents, and meeting records from the Taiwan government’s sports department and the Chinese Taipei SepakTakraw Federation (CTSTF).
The relevant data were also collected through semistructured interviews conducted during two periods: from March to April 2016 and from December 2022 to March 2023. The first interview period was selected because there had been initial developments by this time since Taiwan introduced the sport in 2008, such as the establishment of representative teams and participation in international tournaments, as well as initial results in international tournaments. Moreover, the same group of people were still involved in developing sports in Taiwan. The consistency of these participants can help us better grasp the development of sepaktakraw in Taiwan from the introduction of the sport to its gradual establishment in 2008–2016. The second reason for choosing the interview period is that sepaktakraw in Taiwan has developed quite significantly in a fairly short period of 7 years. Taiwan has achieved good success in international sepaktakraw tournaments. Moreover, the development of sepaktakraw in Taiwan was gradually managed by different people [ ]. By interviewing the stakeholders involved in sepaktakraw in Taiwan, further insights into the path from its gradual establishment to its flourishing can be gained. Therefore, interviews were conducted at two different time points to explore how Taiwan’s sepaktakraw developed out of nothing. This approach also explores the recent changes in its rapid development. Researchers and practitioners may find these findings useful and worthy of attention. In this study, an interview outline was developed according to the theoretical framework of the SPLISS model. Key stakeholders involved in the development of sepaktakraw in Taiwan were recruited through purposive and snowball sampling to understand the sport’s introduction and subsequent development. The stakeholders’ selection criteria were that they were first involved in sepaktakraw development in Taiwan or that they had an important position in its development. The eighteen interviewees included one official from the Sports Administration, one official from the Ministry of Education (SAME), two senior administrators, two previous and current CTSTF directors and presidents, six previous and current national team coaches and players, and two separate novel promoters. Notably, the 2016 respondents, apart from an official from SAME, were among the first to be involved in sepaktakraw development in Taiwan. Furthermore, three interviewees in 2022 and 2023 had experience coaching and playing representative teams. The interviewees of the CTSTF include those involved in introducing sepaktakraw to Taiwan (the former CTSTF chairperson), former team coaches who continue to lead teams in middle schools to participate in national competitions, and those who continue to have business dealings with the current CTSTF (the former CTSTF director). The CTSTF interviewees included the person most responsible for introducing sepaktakraw to Taiwan (former CTSTF President), former delegation team coaches who continue to lead high school teams in attending national sepaktakraw tournaments, and former CTSTF executives who continue to have business relationships with the CTSTF. In short, the vast majority of the respondents in this study witnessed the development of sepaktakraw in Taiwan. The list of interviewees included in this study is shown in .
 We interviewed these individuals in training halls, federation offices, and competition venues. Before each interview, we sent the interviewee a consent form to seek permission to conduct the interview and obtain consent to record the process. After the verbatim transcripts of the interviews were compiled, we also sent them back to the interviewees to assist in confirming and filling in missing content.
This study used a qualitative content analysis method, where all the data, including those from the documents and interviews, were coded and the themes were extracted [ ]. The process of coding and decoding was then based on the research questions and the aspects of the SPLISS model. Next, the findings of this study are presented in two parts: the main reasons for introducing sepaktakraw in Taiwan and the strategies Taiwan adopted to rapidly achieve international sepaktakraw success.

## The primary reasons for introducing sepaktakraw in Taiwan
The introduction of the sport of sepaktakraw to Taiwan can be attributed to three main reasons: the low cost of introduction, the breakthrough point of winning medals at the Asian Games, and favourable access to the leadership of international sports organizations.

## Low cost of introduction
There are three reasons for the low cost of developing sepaktakraw in Taiwan: venues, referees, and athlete sources. First, badminton courts are widely available in schools, parks, and community centres and can be used as alternative venues for sepaktakraw; thus, venue infrastructure is a particular advantage. Consequently, the venue rental fee for sepaktakraw promotions or competitions was low. [Interviewee L; P; S]. In fact, when many sports were first introduced to Taiwan, alternative facilities were used to promote their popularization. For example, the venues for promoting Japanese Judo in Taiwan in the early days included ordinary houses and converted barns and factories. In addition, temporary dojos were constructed by laying collapsed rice on roads or open spaces [ ]. Second, sepaktakraw referees were borrowed from sports with rules similar to those of sepaktakraw, such as volleyball. A comparison of the rules of volleyball with those of sepaktakraw revealed that they are the same =. However, players are not allowed to touch the ball with their hands, and individuals can touch the ball consecutively [Interviewee R; P; S]. Attracting talent from other sports with similar competition rules is one of the ways other countries have filled the professional refereeing gap quickly and cost effectively. In preparation for the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympics, China had a large shortage of professional judges for ice and snow sports and borrowed and trained people from other sports with similar rules to compensate. For example, the judgement of some turns, jumps and flips in martial arts can be applied to freestyle skiing [ ]. The third factor is cross-sport disciplinary selection. In addition to the sport having fewer body size restrictions, talent was recruited directly from sports with similar skills, such as football and badminton [Interviewee L; P; Q; R; S]. Cross-sport disciplinary selection from sports with similar or common skills has succeeded in other countries. For example, many of China’s outstanding freestyle skiers and divers, such as Chen Yuxi and Quan Hongchan, were selected from gymnastics, whose skills, such as flipping and turning, are similar to diving [ , ]. Moreover, China also engaged in cross-sport disciplinary selection from wushu for breakdancing and skateboarding, which had just entered the Olympics, as these events had similar skills of fast footwork, handstands, and flips. [ ]. Furthermore, Japan launched the Japan Rising Star Project to carry out large-scale cross-sports discipline selection. Some of the more successful examples include Maho Kakita in competitive cycling and Yoshino Sanju in handball. The former is an experienced football player with good physical fitness, and the latter is a former player of softball whose throwing skills are similar to those of handball [ ].

## The breakthrough point: Medal acquisition in Asian games
Taiwan has always wanted to add new medal-winning events to the Asian Games. After sepaktakraw was listed as an official sport in the 1990 Asian Games, Northeast Asia—China, Japan, and Korea—started to introduce the sport and, within a short period, won many medals in the Asian Games [ ]. Because there are fewer competitors and it is easier to achieve results, Mr. Huang Chung-Jen, a Taiwanese entrepreneur, became interested in introducing competitive sepaktakraw when he attended the 2006 Doha Asian Games. After establishing the CTSTF in 2008 and serving as its first president, Mr. Huang Chung-Jen immediately started recruiting individuals for a team to participate in the international sepaktakraw event at the 2014 Asian Games in Incheon, South Korea. This was supported by SAME, with the desire that sepaktakraw would be a breakthrough for Taiwan to win medals at the Asian Games [Interviewee S; [ ]]. The use of sepaktakraw as a breakthrough for winning medals at the Asian Games is somewhat consistent with the discussion in Houlihan and Zheng’s study of the primary motivations for small countries to invest in elite sports. They point to the need for small countries to utilize and allocate their limited resources more efficiently. Thus, these countries look not only to develop Olympic medal contenders but also to gain access to important global arenas, such as sport national governing bodies (NGOs) and major sporting events [ ].

## Favourable access to the leadership of international sports organizations
Compared with other Olympic international sports organizations, the Asian and International Sepaktakraw Federations remain in the early stages of development; therefore, accessing their leadership is easier. Consequently, Taiwan has been actively pursuing leadership positions in international sepaktakraw organizations. Mr. Huang Chung-Jen, the founding CTSTF chairperson, stated that "Taiwan should actively participate in international sports organizations to avoid being marginalized in the international sports arena" in his article "Our National Experience of Active Participation in International Sports Organizations" [ ]. Therefore, in addition to establishing the CTSTF in 2008, Mr. Huang actively sought to join the Asian and International Sepaktakraw Federations (ASTAF & ISTAF) as an executive committee member in the same year [Interviewee S; [ ]]. Mr. Huang subsequently recommended the second CTSTF president, Mr. Yeh Jeong-Yen, to assume the leadership of international sepaktakraw organizations after his terms as president of the ASTAF and ISTAF ended [Interviewee S; [ ]]. In addition to Taiwan, China, Korea and Japan, East Asia emphasizes the need to increase the number of leadership positions in international sports organisations in its national sports policy document. This is closely related to the need to be a part of the development of international sports, to host international competitions, to change the rules of competition, and to decide on the dispatch of referees [ – ].

## Taiwan’s strategies to rapidly achieve international sepaktakraw success
Using the nine pillars of the SPLISS model proposed by De Bosscher et al. [ ] as an analytical framework, this study summarized the strategies used by Taiwan to rapidly achieve international sepaktakraw competition results. Two aspects, namely, athletic and postcareer support and scientific research, remain unclear. Instead, seven primary areas have been prioritized: financial support, an integrated approach to policy development, foundation and participation, talent identification and development systems, training facilities, coaching provision and coach development, and (inter)national competition. summarizes the case results of the SPLISS model.
 

## Funding support from the government
The funding sources for introducing sepaktakraw in Taiwan include government grants and self-financing by the CTSTF. In the early stages, most of the self-funding came from the personal donations of the CTSTF’s president [Interviewee C; R; S]. (below) shows the annual budget from 2009 to 2021.
 shows that in the early days of sepaktakraw in Taiwan, overall funding strongly correlated with team performance in international competitions. After sepaktakraw was introduced in Taiwan in 2008, the CTSTF began to actively train both men’s and women’s teams to participate in international competitions, such as the World Championships of Sepaktakraw, and proposed a training program in anticipation of participating in the 2014 Incheon Asian Games in Korea. In 2009, the World Games were held in Taiwan, and the ISTAF was funded, including sepaktakraw as a performance event. Therefore, the CTSTF’s self-funding in 2009 was greater than the government’s subsidy. The former president of the CTSTF and its administrator claimed that “since the 2009 World Games, the sport of sepaktakraw has received considerable attention in Taiwan, which has led to an increase in government subsidies compared with the CTSTF’s self-financing” [Interviewee B; S]. In 2015, the men’s team achieved the best results in the history of Taiwan’s sepaktakraw team at the World Sepaktakraw Championships (the gold medal in the doubles regu match and the silver medal in the regu match of division 2 in the World Championships) [ ]. As a result, government grants and federation self-funding have increased since 2016. As of 2018, a new president reformed the development of sepaktakraw in Taiwan in many aspects, including organizing more domestic tournaments and coaching and refereeing seminars, bidding for international tournaments, and submitting plans to the government for funding to increase the number of young sepaktakraw players and reorganize the women’s team to increase participation in international tournaments. These measures allowed the team to exceed past achievements, such as receiving the gold medal in the men’s 4-person match and the silver medal in the regu match at the 2018 World Sepaktakraw Championships of division 1 and tying for fifth in the top eight of the women’s doubles regu match at the premier level in the same event. Therefore, since 2018, CTSTF self-funding has increased from 2 to 4 million New Taiwan dollars, and government funding has increased dramatically from 6 million to 12 million New Taiwan dollars, increasing overall funding for sepaktakraw [[ ], Interviewee L; R]. After 2019, due to the COVID-19 epidemic, domestic and many foreign sepaktakraw tournaments were not held, resulting in a decline in funding by both the government and the CTSTF. The overall source of sepaktakraw funding in Taiwan is highly dependent on government subsidies and is strongly related to performance in international competitions. However, it is necessary to overcome the overreliance on government financial support for long-term development by enlisting the support of other community forces (such as sponsorships from corporations or donations from social organizations) to sustainably develop sepaktakraw in Taiwan.

## Institutionalization of organisational decision-making
In the early stages, the CTSTF president was in charge of making important decisions. Initially, the CTSTF had few internal members and limited operations, including organizing domestic events and coaching and refereeing seminars, assisting in the training of team players, and participating in international competitions [Interviewee C]. In addition, aspects of the internal organization and functioning of the CTSTF in the early days had to be better developed. Although the CTSTF developed its official website in 2015, the website lacked management and consisted only of competition announcements and a brief introduction to the origins and development of the sepaktakraw movement [Interviewee B; [ ]]. Critical decisions, such as the selection of representative teams and participation in international competitions, were almost always made by the CTSTF president at the time [Interviewees B, F, H].
In 2018, the new CTSTF president began to carry out a series of reforms at the organisational level, and the CTSTF’s organisational decision-making gradually became institutionalized. In terms of organisational structure, additional ad hoc committees were established, and scholars and experts were invited to establish the Operations Evaluation Committee, the Election Committee, and the Anti-Doping Committee, as well as the Organizing Committee for International Competitions [[ – ]; Interviewee O; R]. In terms of institutional aspects, the CTSTF has revised its organisational regulations, clarified the qualifications of its members, and confirmed the annual financial accounts and budgets and the annual work plan. At the operational level, Athletics Selection and Training Committee meetings are held regularly to discuss the criteria for selecting national team members, confirming the list of coaches and athletes who will participate in international competitions. In 2020, the CTSTF proposed a medium- and long-term development plan according to the National Sports Law and strengthened its tasks as stipulated in the newly revised regulations [[ ]; Interviewee O; R]. Overall, after 2018, the CTSTF began to institutionalize its organisational reforms and decision-making processes. A very important and crucial element of good governance is ensuring that the organization’s "decision-making process" and "decision-implementation process" are fair, open, free from favouritism, and comply with laws and regulations, ensuring that the CTSTF will continue to sustainably promote sepaktakraw in Taiwan.

## The use of universities as a catalyst to gradually shift towards popularization at the grassroots level
During the early stages of the CTSTF’s efforts to increase participation, the focus was on the departments of physical education in teacher training colleges. National sepaktakraw team athletes were supported by the CTSTF in 2010 to promote sports in teacher colleges for three reasons. First, the intention was to rapidly promote sepaktakraw and provide enough athletes to participate in international competitions. Second, these sponsored athletes could coach sepaktakraw clubs and school teams in nearby primary and secondary schools during their free time, in addition to organizing and competing in high-level competitions. Third, these sponsored athletes were expected to have careers as teachers or coaches at elementary, junior, and senior high schools after completing their studies. In addition to teaching sepaktakraw in schools, they also organized teams to participate in CTSTF tournaments. Notably, a significant number of participants were drawn from secondary school sports teams. Many junior high and elementary schools invited badminton and football teams to participate in sepaktakraw tournaments, and the CTSTF arranged for national players to serve as coaches in those schools’ clubs or teams [Interviewee B; F; H]. At this stage, the CTSTF focused its development on the elementary, junior high, and senior high school levels to popularize sepaktakraw in Taiwan.
In recent years, the federation has begun investing in organizing more youth-level tournaments, the performance results of which can be used for high school or university entrance examinations. The federation has also begun broadcasting tournaments and the prize fund mechanism, attracting many schools below the tertiary level to participate in tournaments [Interviewee L; O; R]. For this purpose, in addition to continuing to increase the number of ready-to-play athletes from the tertiary level who participate in international competitions, there has been a return to the grassroots level of development to achieve more sustainable breakthroughs and develop future athletic talent. Numerous interviewees reported that the participation rate for high schools in the national sepaktakraw tournament in 2023 was six times higher than that in 2016 and 12 times higher than that for elementary schools [Interviewee H; Q]. Sepaktakraw in Taiwan has achieved significant results in terms of participants and has been gradually rooted downwards. The low birth rate, however, may make it difficult to recruit and compete with other sports associations for the scarce pool of young athletes in Taiwan.

## Selection system based on tournament results
When sepaktakraw was first introduced in Taiwan, there were no sepaktakraw players; thus, players were recruited from school badminton, football, and taekwondo teams. After participating in domestic competitions and short training programs, the players were soon assigned to participate in international tournaments [Interviewee E; B]. From 20082016, 12 team players have attended the World Sepaktakraw Championships each year. Nine places were released to players who had performed well in the domestic championships with the endorsement of the CTSTF president and the team coaches. The CTSTF president used the remaining places to allow school players who wished to develop their sepaktakraw skills to attend international competitions [Interviewee F; J]. The new president came into office in 2018, and he applied the talent selection and training model previously used to develop badminton in Taiwan to develop sepaktakraw. For the first time, in 2019, some domestic tournaments were converted into domestic sepaktakraw ranking tournaments, and existing players were divided into Groups A and B. The threshold for Group A players was participating in the World Sepaktakraw Championships more than twice, with subsequent players advancing by obtaining excellent performance in the ranking tournaments. After being promoted to Group A, if a player had obtained a high number of points (3 points for the champion, 2 points for the first runner-up, and 1 point for the second runner-up) in the preinternational cup matches compared with other players, and according to the comprehensive evaluation by the selection committee, an athlete was selected as a national team member [[ ], Interviewee L; O; Q; R]. The badminton talent selection and training model adopted by Taiwanese sepaktakraw has helped Taiwan achieve favourable results in international tournaments. This is due to its emphasis on competition and fairness. However, relying solely on the annual ranking tournament may incentivize elite players to miss team training because of poor match conditions on the day of the tournament. Therefore, selecting and training outstanding players in the sport is a complex but critical task for Taiwanese sepaktakraw. This selection and training must be done while keeping fair competition in mind and not missing out on potential players.

## Utilizing school badminton venues
In the early stages, when the Federation did not have sufficient funds, the teams relied more on school stadiums or county and city stadiums for training. To save money on the long-term rental of venues, the Federation used the president’s connections to coordinate with colleges and universities or with county and city governments to provide accessible venues for team training before international tournaments. However, most venues and equipment utilized badminton courts [Interviewee B; F]. With the new president in office since 2018, the AP centre, a specialized venue used by professional badminton players, has been designated a training venue for the team. In preparation for the sepaktakraw event at the 2023 Asian Games in Hangzhou, the team used the badminton court at the East Training Base National Sports Training Center at the National Taitung University High School of Physical Education and Sports [Interviewee L; R]. When not training as a representative team, players relied extensively on badminton courts in their school gymnasiums, such as those at Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science [Interviewee O; N]. Taiwan’s facilities have seen the sport of sepaktakraw gradually develop from the early days of using borrowed venues to dedicated badminton venues. However, Taiwan still must address the complex issue of the lack of dedicated sepaktakraw venues.

## Enhanced training for sepaktakraw coaches
In the early days, most team members were from the same school, and if the school team had a coach, the coach was invited by the president of the federation to coach the national team and lead it in international competitions [Interviewee C]. When the Federation initially organized coaching workshops, there was a severe shortage of sepaktakraw-specialized lecturers, resulting in poor sepaktakraw coach training [Interviewees B; E]. Since the new president took office in 2018, the training of coaches has strengthened. As of 2022, 314 Grade C coaches, 49 Grade B coaches, and 6 Grade A coaches have been trained under the Taiwan government’s single sport coaching licence grading system [ ]. Among the current six Grade A coaches, three take turns providing training for the national men’s and women’s teams and leading the teams in international competitions. As a result, the national team’s training conditions have improved greatly since it was first established [Interviewee L]. The lecturers of coaching seminars have begun to be taught by senior sepaktakraw sports team players or coaches, and the quality of the training has improved. However, there remains an urgent need for a breakthrough in the quality of coaching training, such as hiring international coaches to conduct coaching lectures or sending coaches abroad for training [Interviewee O; R].

## Actively participating in and striving to host international competitions
In the early days, when the federation was short of funds and not competitive, bidding for or competing in international competitions was not prioritized [Interviewees H; B; A]. In contrast, the Federation was more interested in developing domestic competitions at that time. To increase the number of participants and attract resources from counties and municipalities, the Federation sought to include sepaktakraw as an official sport in future National Games or National Secondary School Games [Interviewee C; F]. Following the new president’s inauguration in 2018, he began to actively bid for or organize international sepaktakraw tournaments, such as the 2019 YONEX Taiwan International Sepaktakraw Invitational Championships and the 2019 Asian Junior (U19) Sepaktakraw Championships, where national youth teams from Asian countries, such as Malaysia, Thailand, India, Vietnam, Japan, South Korea, and the Philippines, were invited to compete in Taiwan [ – ]. These accomplishments led to his election as Vice President and Executive Committee member of the ASTAF at the 2021 General Assembly [ ] and as Vice President of the ISTAF at the 2022 General Assembly [ ]. In addition, to qualify for the Asian Games, the CTSTF has been actively sending teams to participate in various international sepaktakraw tournaments in recent years, such as the Asia Sepaktakraw Championship [Interviewee O; R]. Currently, Taiwan has bid for, hosted, and participated in international sepaktakraw tournaments. Taiwan has benefited from this by having a voice in international sepaktakraw organizations and achieving positive results in international tournaments. For the sport to be sustainable in Taiwan, the SAME should include it in the National Games and Secondary School Games. By offering players scholarships and incentivizing involvement in the sport in higher education, better young players can be encouraged to participate in national team selection and training.

## Discussion
In our investigation of why Taiwan introduced the emerging competitive sport of sepaktakraw and the strategies used to quickly achieve international sporting success, we identified a few relevant issues for analysis:
Whether the introduction of the emerging competitive sport by the state was accidental or intentional
The trajectory of the state’s development after the introduction of the emerging sport
How the lack of athletes participating in international competitions during the introduction of the emerging sport was addressed
The sustainable development of newly introduced sports

## Contingency and inevitability of the state introducing a new competitive sport
Sepaktakraw was introduced in Taiwan in the 1980s by Southeast Asian labourers as a leisure and entertainment activity, but it did not gain much traction. Competitive sepaktakraw did not begin to develop in Taiwan until the Taiwanese entrepreneur Mr. Huang Chung-Jen visited the 2006 Doha Asian Games and subsequently actively set up the CTSTF and served as its first president, donating money and making efforts to form a team to participate in the Asian Games. From this perspective, the introduction of sepaktakraw to Taiwan seems to be deliberate.
However, since 1990, when sepaktakraw was recognized as an official sport of the Asian Games, the Taiwanese government has been trying increase medal wins in the Asian and Olympic games; sepaktakraw, kabaddi and other sports included in the Asian Games have naturally attracted the attention of entrepreneurs and the government. In particular, sepaktakraw not only serves as a means for Taiwan to win medals in the Asian Games but also has the advantages of being low cost and low barrier for entry into international sports organizations. Therefore, when Mr. Huang Chung-Jen expressed his intention of introducing and forming a team to participate in the Asian Games, the government immediately responded and gradually increased its support for developing competitive sepaktakraw. Using sepaktakraw as a breakthrough point for the Asian Games is, to some extent, consistent with the findings of Houlihan and Zheng’s study on the primary motivations behind small countries’ investments in competitive sports. The authors noted that small countries with limited resources must use and deploy their resources more efficiently in the hope of increasing the number of Olympic medal contenders. More pragmatically, this approach also allows them to enter important global fields, such as sports NGOs and megasports events [ ]. In this context, especially for small countries, the introduction of emerging competitive sports such as sepaktakraw to prominence in the international competitive sports arena is intentional. The development of niche sports in some small countries or regions has also achieved good results worldwide, such as Samoa, Tonga and New Zealand in men’s rugby unions and Slovenia and Croatia in men’s handball [ ]. In fact, some influential competitive sports countries have similar practices. Zeng and Chen noted that China’s continued success in the Olympic Games has been due to prioritizing resources in specific sports, such as diving and table tennis, which are less popular globally and less competitive internationally [ ]. Like China, at the recently concluded Paris 2024 Olympic Games, Japan won multiple gold medals in specific sports that fewer countries have invested in developing and participating in, such as men’s and women’s skateboarding [ ].

## Developmental trajectory of a new competitive sport by the state
Since the disintegration of the Soviet Union, countries worldwide have gradually extended their military and political competition to competitive sports competition. The competition has become increasingly fierce, and "the global sporting arms race" has taken shape [ ]. Under these circumstances, introducing emerging Asian and Olympic sports and competing for medals in Asian and Olympic sporting events have become critical issues. From the developmental trajectory of the introduction of competitive sepaktakraw to Taiwan, we understand the importance of resource supply and system establishment. In terms of resources, this covers basic elements such as funds, venues, and talent (players, coaches, referees). When Taiwan introduced competitive sepaktakraw, it relied heavily on the government to provide these infrastructure resources, especially funding subsidies from the SAME; the provision of training and competition venues in various counties, municipalities, and schools at all levels; and sport-related university talent resources (e.g., players, coaches, and referees). The institutional establishment covers organizations, competitions, talent selection, training, and other elements. In Taiwan’s case, since the new CTSTF president took office in 2018, many changes have occurred, including reorganizing and refinement of the organisational structure, hosting and competing in domestic and foreign events, selecting and training talented individuals, and providing specialized training for coaches and referees. Establishing an institutionalized system will lay a foundation for the sustainable development of competitive sepaktakraw in Taiwan. Perhaps when a country introduces new competitive sports, it will inevitably go through a "first have, then refine" development trajectory. We must first identify and develop certain infrastructures (funding, venues, talent) and then pursue establishing an enhanced system (organization, competitions, talent selection, training).

## Using a cross-sports discipline talent selection strategy
To solve the problem of selecting and participating in international competitions in the early stages of competitive sepaktakraw, Taiwan directly selected or recruited players from sports requiring similar skills (such as football and badminton) to participate in the events. This approach was not unusual because past research has also revealed that when a newly developed competitive sport is introduced, players with similar sports skills are usually selected to train and participate in international competitions to solve the problem of player shortages. For example, when Japanese judo first spread to other countries, local combat sports players, such as wrestlers, were the first to participate in judo training and events [ ]. Similarly, after Norway and Germany, China ranked third in the 2022 Winter Olympics. In addition to the host country’s advantages, selecting talent across disciplines is one key to success. For example, Xu Meng-Tao, a Chinese freestyle skiing aerial gold medallist in the Winter Olympic Games, noted that her early gymnastics training had a transfer effect on her freestyle skiing aerial training [ ].

## Sustainable development issue concerning the introduction of a new competitive sport
As mentioned, Taiwan’s sepaktakraw development strategy prioritizes the seven key factors in the SPLISS model for the success of competitive sports. For example, universities are used as a means to extend sports to the grassroots level and rely heavily on school badminton venues. However, development strategies for athletic and postcareer support and scientific research are still lacking. It was hoped that Taiwan would make rapid progress in the early phase of spaktakraw introduction. However, Taiwan also the problem of limited resources. Therefore, its strategies focused on the necessary conditions for developing competitive sports (i.e., financial support) and the initial elements of the development of competitive athletes (i.e., talent identification and development systems and training facilities) rather than prioritizing the subsequent aspects of competitive athletic performance (i.e., athletic and postcareer support and sports science) [ ]. From this perspective, we can see that, except for athletes’ careers, postcareer support, and scientific research, almost all aspects have entered a relatively prosperous developmental stage, but there remains a long way to go before success and sustainable development are achieved. In other words, Taiwan should have other sources of funding, full institutionalization and implementation of organisational decisions, greater numbers of people participating in sepaktakraw, comprehensive selection mechanisms, a wide range of dedicated venues, higher-quality training systems for coaches, and official competition in the National Games at different levels. Continuing to strengthen the use of the SPLISS model to review and revise the sepaktakraw development strategy may be necessary for Taiwan’s future successful and sustainable development of competitive sepaktakraw. For other countries that want to introduce or have recently introduced emerging competitive sports, Taiwan’s experience in developing competitive sepaktakraw may serve as a reference.

## Conclusions
This study explored the reasons and strategies for introducing and developing sepaktakraw in Taiwan and essential related issues. This study revealed the primary reasons for the introduction of competitive sepaktakraw to Taiwan: the lower cost and greater feasibility of introducing competitive sepaktakraw, making it easier to win medals in the Asian Games and facilitating Taiwan’s entry into the sports leadership of international organizations. Taiwan’s sepaktakraw development strategy prioritizes seven aspects: (1) obtaining government financial support; (2) institutionalizing organisational decision-making; (3) using universities as a catalyst to and gradually shifting towards popularization at the grassroots level; (4) selecting players on the basis of competition results; (5) using school badminton courts; (6) strengthening coach training; and (7) actively participating in and striving to host international tournaments. Four main issues merit attention: (1) the contingency and intentionality of introducing a new competitive sport by the state; (2) the developmental trajectory of a newly introduced competitive sport by the state; (3) the use of a cross-sports talent selection strategy; and (4) the sustainable development of a new competitive sport.
In the increasingly fierce "global sporting arms race," how to create new shortcuts for developing competitive sports has become increasingly important. The reasons and strategies for introducing and developing sepaktakraw in Taiwan may provide a reference for existing competitive sports research and related policy formulation and implementation groups in other countries. When introducing emerging competitive sports at the national level, more references to policy experiences, innovative policy ideas and new shortcuts for developing competitive sports are feasible.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0317451.r001Decision Letter 0
GongYueAcademic Editor© 2025 Yue Gong2025Yue Gonghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
19 Jul 2024

PONE-D-24-14953A new shortcut for competitive sports development? The purpose and strategy of developing and introducing sepaktakraw in TaiwanPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tan,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================Please carefully read the review comments and respond accordingly. 
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by Sep 02 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Yue Gong
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. In the online submission form, you indicated that "The datasets generated and analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request."
All PLOS journals now require all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript to be freely available to other researchers, either 1. In a public repository, 2. Within the manuscript itself, or 3. Uploaded as supplementary information.
This policy applies to all data except where public deposition would breach compliance with the protocol approved by your research ethics board. If your data cannot be made publicly available for ethical or legal reasons (e.g., public availability would compromise patient privacy), please explain your reasons on resubmission and your exemption request will be escalated for approval.
3. When completing the data availability statement of the submission form, you indicated that you will make your data available on acceptance. We strongly recommend all authors decide on a data sharing plan before acceptance, as the process can be lengthy and hold up publication timelines. Please note that, though access restrictions are acceptable now, your entire data will need to be made freely accessible if your manuscript is accepted for publication. This policy applies to all data except where public deposition would breach compliance with the protocol approved by your research ethics board. If you are unable to adhere to our open data policy, please kindly revise your statement to explain your reasoning and we will seek the editor's input on an exemption. Please be assured that, once you have provided your new statement, the assessment of your exemption will not hold up the peer review process.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This manuscript investigated the introduction and development of a new sport, sepaktakraw, in Taiwan. The SPLISS model was appropriately used. This study provided detailed insights as several key members of the sport were interviewed. This study also identified a major reason for the local government to support this sport, ie, winning medals in international competitions. This aspect is different from many western countries.
Several minor points need to be addressed.
1. The sentence ‘after the new president took office in 2018’ has been used multiple times throughout the manuscript. Please modify or simply.
2. Line 124: Chinese Taipei ‘Sepak Takraw’ Federation or Chinese Taipei ‘SepakTakraw’ Federation? Also in line 183-184.
3. Line 133: Sports Administration, Ministry of Education.
4. Line 218: In 2010, sepaktakraw received widespread attention. Please be more specific on ‘widespread attention’, such as the number of participating countries or athletes.
5. Line 230-231: 2018 World Sepaktakraw Championships of ‘division’ 1…?
6. Line 233: …government funding has increased dramatically. Please be more specific on the number of funding.
7. Line 234-236: The best international competition result was achieved in 2015, but the government budget peaked in 2019 and was decreasing since. Please clarify.
8. Line 268: sending athletes to PE departments and serving as club coaches seem to be unrelated. Please clarify.
9. Line 270: …ensure these athletes will become PE teachers…Attending normal universities does not guarantee these athletes will become PE teachers. Please revise.
10. Line 283-285: please be more specific on which year(s) was ‘now’ and ‘early years’.
11. Line 351: …countries were widely invited to compete in Taiwan. Please be more specific on the number of countries invited.
12. Line 384: …Mr. ‘Huang’ Chung-Jen…
13. Figure 1: the background and numbers in Y-axis can be modified according to the Journal’s style.
Reviewer #2: Dear Author！
After careful review of this article. Read through, this article explores why Taiwan introduced an emerging sport, rattan ball (sepaktakraw), and how it achieved international sporting success in the short term. The study uses the sport policy model proposed by De Bosscher et al. as a framework for analysis. Using official government and sports federation documents, media reports, and semi-structured interviews with 18 key stakeholders, the study identified three main reasons for the introduction of rattanball: (1) low cost of introduction; (2) medal breakthrough at the Asian Games; and (3) facilitating access to the leadership of international sports organizations. The development strategy of rattan in Taiwan includes seven aspects: obtaining government financial support, institutionalizing organizational decision-making, using universities as a breakthrough point and gradually expanding to the grassroots level, selecting players based on tournament results, utilizing school badminton courts, enhancing coach training, and actively participating in and striving for the hosting of international tournaments. In addition, the study raises four concerns: the contingency and inevitability of the introduction of new competitive sports, the trajectory of development, the strategy of cross-sport talent selection, and the issue of sustainability. However, the article's argumentation process is too uncritical and there are areas that need to be revised.
1.Clarity and conciseness: in the abstract, improve scholarship.
Abstract required before introduction section also required to write properly. It should be written in the following steps;
a) Write the concept as per your paper title (2 lines minimum).
b) Objective (2 lines)
c) Tools (2 lines)
d) Output (3 lines)
e) Output with application in real life or in the industry (mandatory)
2.Deepening of the theoretical framework: to consider further generalising and expanding the existing theoretical framework, it is recommended that a more in-depth literature review of existing research be conducted to highlight the importance and innovation of this study in the current field of academic research.
In this section,
a) the background of this research domain is way sufficing and the justification for this research (add some proper implication fig./picture in the background)
b) research gap, weakly presented.
c) the proposal of this research does not seem to be clearly presented to address the research gap. Please revise the Introduction section accordingly.
d) Literature review shall be comprehensive (rather than brief) to discuss the right breadth of knowledge and recent works in the area.
e) Better to add more recent work in the contribution table.
f) Author should provide the real case study with an appropriate diagram/picture to explain with details.
g) Managerial implications would be useful.
In conjunction with analysing articles in related fields, you can refer to relevant literature on public participation and public complaints to enhance the theoretical support of the introductory section, highlight the theoretical orientation, focus on the argument from a theoretical perspective, and put forward relevant theoretical support. The following articles can be highlighted for reference:
①Di, K., Chen, W., Shi, Q., Cai, Q., & Liu, S. (2024). Analysing the impact of coupled domestic demand dynamics of green and low-carbon consumption in the market based on SEM-ANN. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 79, 103856.
②Di, K., Chen, W., Zhang, X., Shi, Q., Cai, Q., Li, D., ... & Di, Z. (2023). Regional unevenness and synergy of carbon emission reduction in China's green low-carbon circular economy. Journal of Cleaner Production, 420, 138436.
③Di, K., Chen, W., Shi, Q., Cai, Q., & Zhang, B. (2024). Digital empowerment and win-win co-operation for green and low-carbon industrial development: Analysis of regional differences based on GMM-ANN intelligence models. Journal of Cleaner Production, 141332.
3.Clarity and Structure:The article is well-structured, with a clear introduction, methodology, results, and discussion sections. However, some parts could benefit from more explicit transitions between sections to improve the overall flow.
4.Literature Review:While the study adopts De Bosscher et al.'s model as the analytical framework, a more detailed explanation of this model and its relevance to sepaktakraw's introduction in Taiwan would strengthen the theoretical foundation.
5.Data Collection and Analysis:The use of semistructured interviews with 18 key stakeholders is appropriate, but more information on the selection criteria for these stakeholders and the interview process would enhance the credibility of the findings. Additionally, detailing how media reports and official documents were analyzed could provide more transparency.
6.Findings and Discussion:The three main reasons for introducing sepaktakraw in Taiwan are clearly stated, but providing more context or examples for each reason would make the findings more compelling. For instance, elaborating on the specific costs saved, or success stories of other countries in similar positions, would add depth.
7.Development Strategy:The seven prioritized aspects of the development strategy are comprehensive. However, the article could benefit from discussing potential challenges or limitations associated with each aspect. For instance, the practical difficulties in using school badminton courts or obtaining sustained government financial support could be addressed.
8.Issues of Concern:The four issues of concern raised are critical and thought-provoking. To enhance the discussion, incorporating comparative examples from other countries that have introduced new sports could provide a broader perspective on the contingency and inevitability, developmental trajectory, cross-sports talent selection strategy, and sustainable development issues.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0317451.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
17 Sep 2024

Dear Reviewers,
Thank you so much for your letter.
A statement about the openness and accessibility of our research data has been reintroduced. Our apologies for any misunderstandings about this statement in the past. We thought we should copy the example sentence in this section regarding our case. Our intention is to include all relevant data within our manuscript.
We look forward to hearing from you soon.
Sincerely,
Tien-Chin Tan
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0317451.r003Decision Letter 1
GongYueAcademic Editor© 2025 Yue Gong2025Yue Gonghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
6 Nov 2024

PONE-D-24-14953R1A new shortcut for competitive sports development? The purpose and strategy of developing and introducing sepaktakraw in TaiwanPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tan,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please respond to Reviewer 2 comments and return your revision on time.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 21 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Yue Gong
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors have answered all of my comments. There is no further comment. The authors have answered all of my comments. There is no further comment.
Reviewer #2: Dear Author！
After a careful review of this article. After reading through the article, the argumentative process is too uncritical and there are areas that need to be revised.
1... The deepening of the theoretical framework is an important part of ensuring that the research is scholarly and theoretical. In further generalizing and expanding the existing theoretical framework, a more in-depth literature review of the existing research is needed to highlight the importance and innovation of this study in the current field of academic research. To further provide the theoretical and scholarly nature, a more in-depth literature review of existing studies is recommended to highlight the importance and innovations of this study in the current field of scholarly research.
. Combined with the analysis of articles in related fields, it can refer to the relevant literature on public participation and public complaints to enhance the theoretical support of the introductory section, highlight the theoretical orientation, focus on the argument from the theoretical perspective, and present the relevant theoretical support. The following articles can be highlighted for reference:
①Sun, T., Di, K., & Shi, Q. (2024). Digital economy and carbon emission: The coupling effects of the economy in Qinghai region of China. Heliyon, 10(4).
②Sun, T., Di, K., Shi, Q., Hu, J., & Zhang, X. (2024). Study on the development path of low-carbon retail clusters empowered by digital empowerment. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 81, 104006.
③Wang, J., Qiao, L., Zhu, G., Di, K., & Zhang, X. (2025). Research on the driving factors and impact mechanisms of green new quality productive forces in high-tech retail enterprises under China's Dual Carbon Goals. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 82, 104092.
④Xue, H., Cai, M., Liu, B., Di, K., & Hu, J. Sustainable development through digital innovation: Unveiling the impact of big data comprehensive experimental zones on energy utilization efficiency. Sustainable Development.
⑤Liu, S., Cai, Q., Wang, M., & Di, K. (2024). Urban public services and fertility intentions of internal migrants in China. Plos one, 19(3), e0300345.
⑥Cai, Q., Chen, W., Wang, M., & Di, K. How Does Green Finance Influence Carbon Emission Intensity? A Non-Linear fsQCA-ANN Approach. Polish Journal of Environmental Studies.
2.To increase the framework diagram of this article to enhance the readability and wholeness of the level of the article. In order to enhance the readability and wholeness of the level of the article, the framework diagram of this paper can be added. The framework diagram clearly displays the existing theoretical framework, the extension and innovation points of this study, and the research methodology, which helps readers to understand the study more intuitively. The addition of such diagrams not only improves the visual effect of the article, but also makes the complex theoretical framework easier to understand.
3. Strengthen the revision of academic language to improve the rigor and scientificity of academic papers. In order to improve the rigor and scientificity of academic papers, it is necessary to strengthen the revision of academic language. The academic level of the paper can be improved by refining the expression, ensuring the accuracy of terminology and logical rigor. Avoiding colloquial expressions and using appropriate academic terminology and structured sentences can help highlight the theoretical and academic nature of the research. In addition, maintaining a consistent academic style and standardized citation are key to enhancing the quality of the paper.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0317451.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
21 Nov 2024

Dear Reviewer 2, 
Thanks for your valuable modifications suggestions. We have already amended the article based on your suggestions. The following are our responses and amendments to reviewer's comments.
Q1: The deepening of the theoretical framework is an important part of ensuring that the research is scholarly and theoretical. In further generalizing and expanding the existing theoretical framework, a more in-depth literature review of the existing research is needed to highlight the importance and innovation of this study in the current field of academic research. To further provide the theoretical and scholarly nature, a more in-depth literature review of existing studies is recommended to highlight the importance and innovations of this study in the current field of scholarly research.
Answer 1: Your suggestions are greatly appreciated. To provide a deeper understanding of the existing theoretical framework, we have re-examined the relevant literature and added relevant content to the literature review section. Corrections can be found on lines 114-122.
Q2: Combined with the analysis of articles in related fields, it can refer to the relevant literature on public participation and public complaints to enhance the theoretical support of the introductory section, highlight the theoretical orientation, focus on the argument from the theoretical perspective, and present the relevant theoretical support. The following articles can be highlighted for reference.
Answer 2:Thanks for your suggestions. Following the reviewer’s recommendation, we have included citations in the introduction to articles in the relevant fields and rediscussed the research gaps. For changes, please refer to lines 50-56.
Q3: To increase the framework diagram of this article to enhance the readability and wholeness of the level of the article. In order to enhance the readability and wholeness of the level of the article, the framework diagram of this paper can be added. The framework diagram clearly displays the existing theoretical framework, the extension and innovation points of this study, and the research methodology, which helps readers to understand the study more intuitively. The addition of such diagrams not only improves the visual effect of the article, but also makes the complex theoretical framework easier to understand.
Answer 3: Thank you very much for your suggestions. To improve the visual appeal of the article, we added a diagram of the framework of this article to the introduction section as suggested by the reviewers (Table 1). The nine pillars of the SPLISS model and a summary of the case results (Table 3) have been added to the literature review and findings sections. Please refer to lines 64-68, 101-102, and 318-322 for corrections.
Q4: Strengthen the revision of academic language to improve the rigor and scientificity of academic papers. In order to improve the rigor and scientificity of academic papers, it is necessary to strengthen the revision of academic language. The academic level of the paper can be improved by refining the expression, ensuring the accuracy of terminology and logical rigor. Avoiding colloquial expressions and using appropriate academic terminology and structured sentences can help highlight the theoretical and academic nature of the research. In addition, maintaining a consistent academic style and standardized citation are key to enhancing the quality of the paper.
Answer 4: Thank you for the suggestion. We have amended the article to make it more academic by re-examining the terminology throughout. The article has also been reviewed by an academic editing company for accuracy, scholarship, and consistency in terminology and citations.
We look forward to hearing from you soon!
Yours Sincerely, 
Tien-Chin Tan
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0317451.r005Decision Letter 2
GongYueAcademic Editor© 2025 Yue Gong2025Yue Gonghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
29 Dec 2024

A new shortcut for competitive sports development? The purpose of and strategy for developing and introducing sepaktakraw in Taiwan
PONE-D-24-14953R2
Dear Dr. Tan,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Yue Gong
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: It has been modified to be very good and agreed to be published。Overall, the content is detailed and scientifically rigorous
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0317451.r006Acceptance letter
GongYueAcademic Editor© 2025 Yue Gong2025Yue Gonghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
2 Jan 2025

PONE-D-24-14953R2 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tan, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Yue Gong 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE