pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11232998PMC11232998.111232998112329983898085510.1371/journal.pone.0306852PONE-D-23-299421Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesRNA virusesRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineVirus TestingMedicine and health sciencesPublic and occupational healthPreventive medicineHIV preventionResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchSurveysPeople and placesGeographical locationsSouth AmericaPeruMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineProphylaxisPre-Exposure ProphylaxisPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsMedical PersonnelPractices and preferences for HIV testing and treatment services amongst partners of transgender women in Lima, Peru: An exploratory, mixed methods study
HIV testing and treatment for partners of transgender women in Lima, PeruKazmirakClaudiaFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – original draft https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6901-1854TollefsonDeannaConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4769-7242LankowskiAlexanderFunding acquisitionInvestigationProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing SanchezHugoConceptualizationInvestigationProject administrationResourcesWriting – review & editing GonzalesIvanInvestigationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0002-0431-6961EspinozaDianneInvestigationWriting – review & editing DuerrAnnConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States of America2
Vaccine Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA, United States of America3
Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States of America4
Epicentro Salud, Lima, Perú5
Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, PerúVall-llosera CampsMiquelEditor , ], which means their sexual partners are also at higher risk for acquiring HIV than the general population [ ]. While recent years have seen an increase in efforts to improve HIV prevention and care delivery for TW, the need to prioritize their sexual partners in HIV programs has only recently gained attention [ , – ]. Partners of transgender women (PTW) are a hidden population who frequently identify as heterosexual cisgender males and often do not identify with the LGBTQ+ community [ , – ]. Additionally, many PTW may not be publicly open about having TW partners due to stigma surrounding these relationships [ , ]. As such, PTW tend to be missed by HIV prevention programs in countries with concentrated HIV epidemics, like Peru, which tend to target the LGBTQ+ community [ , , , , ].
In Peru, one-third of TW are estimated to be living with HIV, resulting in high levels of HIV transmission within their sexual networks (i.e., with PTW) [ , ]. Extensive research by Long et al. has demonstrated that PTW in Peru are at high risk for HIV, and that research is required to understand how to best reach them with HIV prevention and treatment services, as they are not part of the MSM community [ – , ]. The invisibility and heterogeneity of PTW has made it difficult to assess their knowledge of HIV, self-perceived HIV risk, and history of, or preferences for, HIV testing services [ , , , ]. This is problematic, as such information is key to developing effective programs tailored to the needs of this historically underserved population. Traditional HIV testing, prevention, and treatment services in Peru are offered to anyone through the national health system at CERITS (government-run STI clinics) and there has been substantial outreach to reach TW through non-traditional services (community-based or venue-based testing) [ , ]. However, neither traditional nor non-traditional HIV services have specifically targeted PTW, thus past research must be expanded to understand how to best reach this population with HIV prevention and care services [ – , ]. In addition, the heterogeneity of PTW in Peru, as highlighted by past research [ , ], highlights the additional need to explore how such services should be tailored to reach PTW based on the type of relationship they have with TW. The need to understand how to best reach PTW in Peru is especially urgent, as the inclusion of PrEP to the country’s national HIV prevention guidelines in June 2023 ushers in opportunities to offer HIV prevention services to both TW and PTW [ ].
We therefore conducted this study to describe the practices and preferences that PTW in Peru have for HIV testing and treatment services and to determine how such practices and preferences (1) compare to those of TW and (2) compare amongst PTW based on the type of relationship they have with TW. These results can be used to tailor HIV prevention and care programs to best reach PTW, including those that focus on PrEP initiation and continuation.

## Methods

## Study design
We conducted a cross-sectional mixed methods study using an explanatory sequential design (QUAN→QUAL) to assess healthcare-seeking behavior and service preferences for HIV testing and treatment among PTW and TW in Lima, Peru. This entailed conducting surveys using respondent driven sampling with PTW and TW, followed by interviews with a subset of survey participants. We analyzed surveys and interviews separately, then merged the findings, using the qualitative data to explain the quantitative survey results.

## Setting
The study was conducted in Lima, Peru, a city of 11 million people, including an estimated 22,500 TW [ , ]. Recruitment of TW occurred at casas trans, informal living spaces for TW in Lima, primarily located in the central Cercado de Lima district. All study procedures were carried out by Epicentro, a community-based organization focused on LGBTQ+ health promotion, with over a decade of experience engaging with TW in Lima for research and HIV service delivery.

## Study population
Eligible individuals self-identified as a TW or reported to be a PTW, were at least 18 years old, and were literate in Spanish. TW were defined as individuals who reported being assigned male sex at birth but self-identified as female [ ]. PTW were defined as individuals who reported having a sexual relationship with a TW in the last 6 months. While prior studies indicate that most PTW are cisgender men [ , , , ], we did not exclude cisgender women or transgender men from the study.

## Sampling
We used a single round of respondent-driven sampling (RDS). We first recruited TW “seeds” to participate in a survey. After completing the survey, TW were invited to refer up to five of their recent sexual partners (PTW) to participate in the study by sending them a unique URL link to the same survey. There was no onward distribution of surveys from PTWs, yet we considered this a modified RDS approach as we retained the dual incentive structure typical of RDS by providing incentives for survey completion and an additional incentive to TW for successfully recruiting their partners [ ]. All participants who completed the survey were given the option to leave their contact information if they were interested in participating in a follow-up interview. The study team attempted to contact all such participants, and in-depth interviews were scheduled with all who could be reached and remained interested.

## Data collection
We collected quantitative data from July 4–October 25, 2022 using a self-administered, web-based survey in REDCap, hosted at the Institute of Translational Health Sciences. TW participants could choose to complete the survey either on their personal cellphone or using a study tablet. Study staff assisted TW in loading the survey and were available for in-person technical support, as needed. PTW accessed the survey via a unique link sent by the referring TW “seed” and could complete the survey at their own convenience from any internet-capable personal device, without supervision from study staff. The survey links for PTW were programmed to expire after a single use, but there was no limit on the amount of time participants had to open and complete the survey. Participants provided their DNI number (8-digit unique Peruvian national identification) to prevent duplicate enrollment in the survey. A trained qualitative researcher (HS) conducted semi-structured interviews via phone from August–November 2022.
Both the survey and interview guide were developed in English and translated to Spanish by the study team (AL, CK) then edited for accuracy and local appropriateness by a native Peruvian Spanish-speaker on the team (HS). All interviews were audio recorded, transcribed in Spanish, then translated to English using professional translation services in Lima. Members of the study team (CK, HS) further reviewed translations to ensure accuracy prior to analyzing the data.

## Variables
The survey collected information on participant demographics, sexual behavior, HIV testing history, self-perceived HIV risk, experience with the healthcare system, and preferences related to either HIV testing or HIV treatment services, depending on the participant’s self-reported HIV status (See ). Questions on preferences for HIV testing and treatment covered three categories: location, convenience, and confidentiality/privacy. Within each category, questions assessed different factors that respondents rated on a Likert Scale, with 1 corresponding to “extremely important”, 2 to “somewhat important,” 3 to “neither important nor unimportant,” 4 to “somewhat unimportant,” and 5 to “extremely unimportant”.
Interviews collected information on perceptions of individual HIV risk and interactions with the healthcare system, specifically in relation to HIV testing and linkage to HIV care (among those who identified as being HIV-positive). Interviews were designed to provide opportunities to explore topics covered in the survey in more depth.
Surveys and interviews also denoted the type of relationship PTWs had with the TW who referred them to the study (henceforth referred to as “partner type”): stable, casual, or transactional. PTW were classified as stable partners if they self-reported the referring TW to be their “stable partner/spouse”. Casual partners were those who described their relationship with the referring TW as any of the following: “friends-with-benefits”; punto (colloquial term for a one-time partner); or someone with whom they occasionally had sex but not in exchange for money, goods or services. PTW were classified as transactional partners if they either sold sex to, or purchased sex from, the referring TW partner.

## Analysis
We conducted a primarily descriptive analysis of survey data. For questions using a Likert scale, we calculated means and frequencies; while presentation of frequencies is often best practice for Likert scales, calculation of means is also viewed as an acceptable approach to increase interpretability of results [ ]. We assessed differences between TW and PTW responses to each question using two-sample t-tests (means) and chi-square (frequencies). To compare frequencies, we collapsed responses to the 5-point Likert scale questions and expressed these as dichotomous variables (“extremely important” vs. all other responses), given the unexpectedly high frequency of participants responding “extremely important” across all questions. Finally, we used ANOVA to assess for differences comparing the three different PTW partner types (stable, casual, transactional). We conducted all analyses in Stata 17.0 (College Station, TX).
Respondent driven sampling lacks a gold standard method to account for clustering in the analysis [ ], but as our study used only one round of invitations (i.e., TW reaching out to their partners), we conducted a sensitivity analysis in R 4.1 (R Core Team, Vienna, Austria) using routine methods to adjust for clustering (packages “lme4”, “lmerTest”, “CR2”, and “performance”). We did this for two sets of outcomes: difference in mean responses for TW and PTW preferences for (1) HIV testing and (2) HIV treatment. This analysis for HIV testing outcomes revealed very low ICC values, and there was no difference in significance for either HIV testing or treatment outcomes. As sensitivity analyses did not alter interpretation of results, we did not conduct adjusted analyses for other outcomes.
After analyzing survey data, we conducted a rapid thematic analysis of the interview data in English using the framework method [ ]. Two analysts (CK, DT) independently reviewed all transcripts, then met to discuss any differences in their reviews, come to consensus, and identify key themes that emerged from the data; Spanish-language transcripts were consulted if questions arose over meaning of the text. Key themes were reviewed and agreed upon by the researcher who conducted the interviews (HS). Data integration occurred through merging qualitative and quantitative results, with the qualitative findings used to explain and expound on key findings from the quantitative survey.

## Ethics, consent, and permissions
The study was approved by ethics boards at Via Libre (Lima, Peru) and University of Washington (Seattle, USA). Via Libre is a non-governmental organization dedicated to conducting research and providing services for people affected by HIV in Peru; its IRB is frequently used for review of HIV studies amongst sexual minorities occurring in Lima [ ]. Participants provided written consent before engaging in surveys and verbal consent prior to engaging in interviews. All consent was provided in Spanish. Participants were compensated 25 Soles ($7 USD) for completion of surveys and 50 Soles ($13 USD) for interviews. TW seed participants received additional compensation of 20 Soles ($5 USD) for each referred PTW participant who completed the survey, up to a maximum of three referrals.

## Results

## Participants
A total of 234 surveys were completed and eligible for analysis: 69 from TW and 165 from PTW ( ). The majority of TW (n = 25) recruited 2 or 3 partners; 15 TW recruited no partners, while 12 TW recruited 5 partners. Amongst PTW, 13 (7.9%) identified as stable partners, 84 (50.9%) identified as casual partners, and 68 (41.2%) identified as transactional partners; 158 (95.8%) of PTW identified as cisgender men, 1 (0.6%) identified as a cisgender woman, 3 (1.8%) identified as non-binary or “other”, and 3 (1.8%) identified as transgender men. TW and PTW respondents were similarly aged, but PTW reported higher university attendance, employment, and monthly incomes than TW. Twenty-four participants reported an existing HIV diagnosis (18 TW and 6 PTW).
 We conducted follow-up interviews with 20 survey participants: four with TW and 16 with PTW. Of PTW interviewees, 5 were stable partners, 6 were casual partners, and 5 were transactional partners of the referring TW. All TW interviewees identified as sex workers, compared with one-quarter (n = 4) of PTW. Three-quarters of TW interviewees were living with HIV, compared to one-quarter of PTW interviewees.

## Quantitative findings

## Knowledge and experience with HIV testing/prevention
Within the past year, nearly all TW had taken an HIV test, compared to three-quarters of PTW ( ). Both TW and PTW reported accessing HIV testing predominantly at Ministry of Health (MINSA) facilities, as well as state-sponsored sexually transmitted infection clinics (Centros de Referencia de Infecciones de Transmisión Sexual, or “CERITS”). Among PTW, the proportion who reported having ever previously taken an HIV test was similar across all partner types; however, stable PTW partners expressed higher interest in HIV testing compared to casual or transactional partners. Overall, satisfaction with HIV testing services was high among both TW and PTW. TW reported higher satisfaction than PTW in general for all clinic types, but more TW reported discrimination at health facilities ( ). Notably, few TW, and even fewer PTW, had heard of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP).
 

## Preferences for HIV testing services
When asked to rate the importance of different options for how HIV testing services could be delivered (i.e., related to location, convenience, and confidentiality/privacy), the majority of TW and PTW rated most of these as “extremely” or “somewhat” important; no specific option was preeminent as the most (or least) important for either TW or PTW ( ). Compared to PTW, TW rated more options as “extremely important”, a difference which was statistically significant for most responses, whether comparing means ( ) or frequencies ( ). Among PTW subtypes, transactional partners were significantly most likely to rate any given option as “extremely important”, while stable partners were the least likely to do so ( ).
 

## Preferences for HIV treatment services
Among participants who reported they were living with HIV, preferences for HIV treatment services demonstrated a slightly different pattern than what was observed for HIV testing. Almost all TW and PTW responded “extremely important” to all options presented in the survey, with no one option being clearly distinguishable as most or least important for either group ( ). We observed no statistically significant differences between TW and PTW regardless of whether the Likert scale means ( ) or frequencies ( ) were used for these comparisons.
 

## Qualitative findings
Qualitative interviews revealed four key themes that PTW and TW highlighted when discussing their experiences and preferences for HIV testing and treatment, which are described below. Additional details and supporting quotations are provided in .

## Theme 1: Increase efficiency of HIV testing and treatment services
The most common issue both TW and PTW interviewees mentioned when discussing HIV testing and treatment was long wait times, specifically excessive time required to secure appointments, long wait times during visits (whether scheduled or walk-in), and long wait times to receive test results. Several participants remarked that from start to finish, appointments for HIV testing could take 2 to 4 hours, which resulted in them missing work or other obligations. When asked about improvements they would recommend for HIV testing and treatment services, participants overwhelmingly reported wanting faster service.
“Generally, those are fast tests, they say: ‘40 minutes and the results are out.’ But sometimes I think they exceed the capacity and there’s too many people so you get to wait two-and-a-half-hours for the results and that’s not the time they said.” (PTW-5, Transactional partner)

## Theme 2: Focus on confidentiality, privacy, and discretion in HIV testing services
Both TW and PTW highlighted the importance of HIV testing services being delivered in a discreet fashion. For example, interviewees often described mobile testing vans as a convenient and preferable option for HIV testing, but they remarked on the lack of privacy these offered. Notably, the desire for privacy specifically while standing in line outside of the mobile testing vans was mentioned more among the casual and transactional PTW, while stable partners were less likely to discuss this. While mobile HIV testing vans are unmarked, respondents explained that many people know their purpose. They often have long lines and wait times, and participants described how standing in line outside of such vans was frustrating, as it offered no discretion or privacy.
“There are things we don’t like people to find out. As there in that square there are many comments from everyone. That’s why I went to Patrucco [a CERITS clinic in central Lima]… Because one enters that mobile [testing van]. You know that this motive is for those results." (PTW-11, Transactional partner)
Other interviewees discussed being frustrated with situations they experienced in which providers demonstrated little respect for confidentiality, such as a patient’s HIV status being discussed with others and sensitive questions being asked to patients while in a waiting room. Interviewees, specifically PTW, tried to report such instances to a manager or address the perpetrator directly, but there was no evidence of change.
“There was a guy leaving and it was my turn after him, so I got in there and there was the nurse with the doctor and they didn’t even care that I was there, they started saying ‘‘Oh, the boy that left, he was positive” and stuff like that. I called them out saying that it wasn’t proper for me that they were making those comments and it was worse that someone that had nothing to do with it was there, right? Because I didn’t have the right to know if the guy was positive or not.” (PTW-5, Transactional partner)

## Theme 3: Discrimination experienced in healthcare settings
While less discussed than Theme 2, several interviewees described witnessing or experiencing blatant discrimination in healthcare settings. Discrimination was most noted against TW, but one PTW interviewee noted he experienced discrimination stemming from his relationships with TW. PTW who witnessed discrimination often reported addressing the perpetrators or talking to management, even if they did not know the TW who was discriminated against. Stable partners were particularly attuned to discrimination faced by TW.
"I’ve seen that they keep them [TW] waiting, don’t attend to them fast enough, and don’t make things easier for them…. I mean, like they exclude them. They minimize them." (PTW-3, Stable partner)
"…Sometimes they [healthcare workers] did it to laugh at you because sometimes they saw that you were a trans girl, they called you by the name that is on your ID. And you know there are people in the hospital; there are boys and ladies; everyone turns to look at you with your name; it’s a shame for us." (TW-2)

## Theme 4: Limited knowledge about PrEP
The final theme that emerged was that there was limited knowledge about PrEP among interviewees, particularly amongst PTW. Most interviewees had never heard of, or knew very little about, PrEP. Several PTW expressed disbelief that such a medication existed. After being presented with a brief description of PrEP, most interviewees were very enthusiastic about taking PrEP and recommending it to friends, if it were to be available.
"If I had known that five years ago, I would have been all in. If possible, the rest of my life would have continued with that. But, if nothing else, I believe it is a good thing that these pills are now available. You know what? I’m going to recommend that to my friends because a lot of my friends, when they lose their minds, [they] just have bareback sex and that’s it" (PTW-1, Casual partner)
This enthusiasm for PrEP was similar across all partner types, but reasoning for it differed. Stable partners related their enthusiasm for PrEP to the fact that either they or their TW partners were engaged in sex work, and that PrEP would offer protection in instances of failed barrier protection during work. On the other hand, casual and transactional partners framed their enthusiasm for PrEP in terms of personal safety when engaging in sexual intercourse with different partners.

## Integrated findings
We used qualitative findings to explain survey results ( ). While surveys did not distinguish any key preferences for HIV service delivery amongst TW or PTW, follow-up interviews revealed that convenience (specifically length of time it took to access testing or treatment services) and privacy (specifically confidentiality) were paramount for both TW and PTW when accessing HIV testing or treatment. Interviews also highlighted the challenge of discrimination against TW by healthcare providers in certain settings; while only a minority of survey participants reported experiencing discrimination in healthcare settings, those who did experience or witness discrimination had profoundly negative experiences. Furthermore, both surveys and interviews highlighted the limited knowledge TW and PTW had about PrEP, while interviews demonstrated the extreme interest these populations, particularly PTW, had in using PrEP, should it become available.
 

## Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to document the experiences and preferences that PTW have accessing HIV testing and treatment and how these compare to preferences of transgender women. While PTW and TW reported similar experiences and preferences for HIV services across the spectrum of service delivery assessed in our survey, there were notable differences between these two groups, namely PTW’s lower overall interest in taking an HIV test, especially in non-traditional settings, and TW’s experience of discrimination in healthcare settings. Moreover, our study expanded upon past studies that revealed PTW are not a monolithic group [ , ], as PTW had different practices/preferences for HIV services varying by the type of relationship they had with transgender women. Interviews enabled us to better discern the relative importance of PTW preferences for HIV services and that they often aligned with needs expressed by TW—namely, that services should be offered more efficiently, privately, and free from discrimination. An unexpected finding of this study was the low level of PrEP knowledge, particularly amongst PTW.
We found it surprising that TW and PTW rated almost all potential options for HIV service delivery presented to them in the preference survey as important. This may be an artefact of how the participants were inclined to answer Likert scales (i.e., past research suggests there is a strong tendency for acquiescence when using Likert scales in surveys conducted in Latin America) [ ]. While this limits the utility of the survey to guide the design of HIV service delivery to meet the needs of PTWs, the survey did offer valuable insight into how PTW experiences and preferences compare to those of TW. Most notably, similarities in responses between PTW and TW suggest that HIV services targeting PTW may be appropriate to offer alongside those targeting TW. Differences in experiences highlighted by the survey, such as PTW’s lesser interest in taking an HIV test and more limited knowledge of PrEP, may highlight how PTW have likely been missed by current HIV prevention outreach efforts. Other slight differences noted between TW and PTW may be due to the power differential between these populations. Power differences between TW and their partners have been well-noted in the literature, largely due to cis males being in the greatest position of power in many societies [ , , , ]. This power differential between PTW and TW was observed in our survey findings, as PTW appeared to be of higher socioeconomic status than TW, evidenced by PTW generally having higher levels of education, employment, and income than their TW partners. Because PTWs have more power in society than TWs, we hypothesize that PTWs may be able to be more flexible in accessing HIV services and thus feel less strongly than TW about how, when, or where services are provided.
Another noteworthy finding from our study is that PTW are not a monolithic group and, as such, HIV prevention outreach and services may need to be tailored to meet each subgroup’s specific needs. We hypothesize that differences observed in responses by PTW partner type could be explained by differences in their closeness to TW. For example, transactional sexual partners may have significantly stronger preferences than other PTW partner types on how HIV testing occurs because their relationships with TW are most likely to be clandestine, and thus they feel a greater need for confidentiality and convenience [ ]. In contrast, the relational bonds between TW and their committed partners may provide a sense of security and community that leads them prioritize HIV testing/treatment, regardless of convenience and confidentiality.
Ultimately, the qualitative interviews in this study were most useful in highlighting how HIV services could be tailored to better reach PTW in Lima. The overarching principles important to PTW also rang true for TW, suggesting a focus on these core elements could improve reach to both PTW and TW: implementing procedures to reduce wait times for testing and results, and strengthening sensitization for healthcare workers on patient privacy and transgender care.
These suggestions speak to the specific challenges of accessing and interacting with the local health system in Lima and align with key challenges noted in the literature, namely an under resourced primary health care system and the need to address stigma surrounding HIV in the healthcare setting [ – ]. Interestingly, interviews also highlighted a core difference in how PTW may wish to interact with HIV services, in comparison to TW. PTW, specifically those not in stable relationships with TW, voiced concern over the lack of privacy offered by some non-traditional testing events, namely on-site, mobile HIV testing units; such concerns were not voiced by TW in our study. While this finding is based on a small number of interviews, it echoes findings in past qualitative research conducted in Peru [ ], suggesting that while PTW and TW have similar preferences for many aspects of HIV testing, PTW, specifically those not in stable relationships with TW, may be better reached through traditional testing venues.
Finally, we were surprised to discover the limited knowledge that both TW and PTW had about PrEP. While limited PrEP availability and low rates of persistent PrEP use among key populations in Peru have been well-documented [ , ], the low level of PrEP awareness we found among TW and PTW in this study is alarming. Although the World Health Organization has recommended PrEP for at-risk populations since 2015 [ ], PrEP was only adopted as part of Peru’s national HIV prevention guidelines in June 2023 [ ]. As such, there is now an urgent need to tailor PrEP education and demand creation to at-risk populations in Peru, including TW and PTW. While doing so, our research, building upon past research, suggests we must recognize that PTW may be quite heterogenous in their needs, and their needs likely differ from those of gay-identifying MSM and, to a lesser extent, from TW [ – , ]. The overwhelming enthusiasm that participants expressed towards PrEP offers encouragement that PrEP uptake could be widespread once it is accessible in Peru, but concerted efforts are likely needed to ensure adherence [ , ].

## Limitations
This study was subject to several limitations. Firstly, we relied on convenience sampling to recruit initial TW participants for the survey, as well as to select participants for qualitative interviews. TW were recruited only at casas trans, which may limit the generalizability of our findings, as these individuals may not be representative of the broader TW population in Lima. Secondly, we did not adjust for clustering for all comparisons between PTW and TW as our sensitivity analysis of mean preferences for HIV testing and treatment between PTW and TW suggests adjusted analyses would not change interpretation of the results. Furthermore for “testing” outcomes, ICC values were very small, suggesting limited impact of clustering; for “treatment” outcomes, the impact of clustering appeared to be greater, but there were too few observations for any results to be significant in the adjusted or unadjusted analysis. Thirdly, limitations of Likert scales are well-recognized; responses were skewed towards acquiescence (“extremely” or “somewhat” important). In the future, a ranked scale could be better to identify the importance of each factor to participants [ ]. Our qualitative findings helped elucidate such distinctions in this study, but additional research—namely a discrete choice experiment—is needed to better ascertain the order and relative magnitudes of importance among these preferences. Finally, due to the few people living with HIV included in this study, our findings on preferences for HIV treatment services should be interpreted with caution.

## Conclusion
This mixed methods study found many aspects of HIV services were important to PTW and generally aligned with TW preferences, but that PTW are a heterogeneous group whose individual preferences may vary based on their relationship with TW. Improving efficiency (e.g., reducing waiting time), increasing privacy while accessing HIV services, and eliminating discrimination based on gender and sexual preferences in healthcare settings should be prioritized to better reach both PTW and TW. There is also a need to increase awareness about PrEP, particularly amongst PTW. These results should be considered when designing HIV testing and prevention programs for PTWs. Moving forward, a discrete choice experiment amongst PTW should be conducted to ascertain the relative importance of aspects considered in this study and to understand how PTW make decisions about accessing HIV services.

## Supporting information
S1 Annex

## Survey questions administered to TW and PTW.
(DOCX)
S1 Table

## Satisfaction with HIV testing among TW and PTW by facility type.
(DOCX)
S2 Table

## Service preference means for HIV testing and treatment services (TW vs PTW).
(DOCX)
S3 Table

## Frequency of “extremely important” responses (TW vs PTW).
(DOCX)
S4 Table

## Service preference means for HIV testing services by PTW type.
(DOCX)
S5 Table

## Themes regarding service preference from qualitative interviews.
(DOCX)

 10.1371/journal.pone.0306852.r001Decision Letter 0
ChanAlex Siu WingAcademic Editor© 2024 Alex Siu Wing Chan2024Alex Siu Wing Chanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
18 Oct 2023

PONE-D-23-29942Practices and preferences for HIV testing and treatment services amongst partners of transgender women in Lima, Peru: an exploratory, mixed methods studyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tollefson,  Upon reviewing the findings, it is evident that there is significance. In alignment with the reviewers' comments, I concur that major revisions are necessary.,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 02 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Alex Siu Wing Chan
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
1. When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for stating in your Funding Statement: 
Research reported in this publication was supported by the Fogarty International Center of the National Institutes of Health under grants 5D43TW009345-10 and 2D43TW009345-11 awarded to the Northern Pacific Global Health Fellows Program. We acknowledge support related to the use of ITHS REDCap to carry out this study (UL1 TR002319, KL2 TR002317, and TL1 TR002318 from NCATS/NIH). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not represent the views of the National Institutes of Health.
Please provide an amended statement that declares all the funding or sources of support (whether external or internal to your organization) received during this study, as detailed online in our guide for authors at http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submit-now.  Please also include the statement “There was no additional external funding received for this study.” in your updated Funding Statement. 
Please include your amended Funding Statement within your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. We note that you have indicated that data from this study are available upon request. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For more information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. 
In your revised cover letter, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
Additional Editor Comments:
Thank you for submitting this intriguing study to PLOS ONE. Upon reviewing the findings, it is evident that there is significance. In alignment with the reviewers' comments, I concur that major revisions are necessary.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the opportunity to review, “Practices and preferences for HIV testing and treatment services amongst partners of transgender women in Lima, Peru: an exploratory, mixed methods study.” The authors present results of a mixed-methods survey of transwomen (TW) and their sexual partners (PTW) in Lima, Peru regarding their preferences and practices for HIV testing and treatment. The results are interesting and important, presenting a relatively large sample of PTW (a population that has been understudied to date) addressing differences in attitudes towards and use of HIV prevention and testing services. The analysis is well done and the manuscript well written. There are a few points for clarification or elaboration prior to publication:
1) The authors describe their sampling method as Respondent Driven Sampling (RDS) but do not use any of the analytic methods inherent to RDS, and the single-wave of recruitment from seeds selected through convenience sampling is not consistent with RDS methods. It may be preferable to describe recruitment as peer recruitment or snowball sampling to avoid methodological disputes over terminology.
2) In the abstract, it would help to specify the numbers of TW and PTW recruited for the study.
3) The Background is brief and does not provide any context for understanding why the authors chose to address differences among PTW according to their partnership status or partner type with TW. Given that Jess Long’s papers, cited in the manuscript, provide a great amount of detail on this topic, it would help to have some discussion of this work in the Background to set the stage for the rest of the analysis.
4) In the Methods, participants are required to have been “literate in Spanish.” Does this comment mean that participants who were unable to read or write were excluded from participation?
5) What were the recruitment patterns for TW seeds and the PTWs (i.e., were a few seeds responsible for a great majority of the PTWs, what was the distribution of PTW characteristics in relation to TW seeds, etc.)?
6) What were the demographic and other characteristics of the subset of participants in the qualitative interviews?
7) Please specify in the Methods how “Stable partners” were defined in the survey (similar to the explanations provided for casual and transactional partners).
8) Was the qualitative data analyzed in the original Spanish or in English translation?
9) Why was Via Libre’s IRB used for this study (a brief explanation would be useful)?
10) The right side of Table 2 is cut off in the current formatting.
11) In the Discussion, the authors suggest that power differentials in the relationships between TW and PTW are partly due to the higher SES of PTW. However, in this sample, over 95% of all participants (and 94% of PTW) report earning less than $400 USD/month. It is more likely that other factors, like gendered power differentials between cis-men and transwomen, and the high frequency of sex workers in the TW sample, play a greater role in defining power differentials in these relationships.
12) The authors seem to gloss over a potentially fascinating observation in their qualitative data, where PTW complained about on-site HIV testing with vans or mobile units as these can increase visibility of individuals waiting outside the van for testing, and some stating that they prefer to attend traditional testing venues as they provide greater privacy and discretion, while the TW interviewed did not have similar complaints. This observation could have critical implications for how HIV testing and treatment is provided to these different groups, and merits greater discussion.
Reviewer #2: In article ‘Practices and preferences for HIV testing and treatment services amongst partners of transgender women in Lima, Peru: an exploratory, mixed methods study’ submitted for review at PLOS One, the authors conducted a cross-sectional mixed methods study among Partners of Transgender Women (PTW) and Transgender Women (TW) in Lima, Peru using an explanatory sequential design where online surveys were administered followed by interviews. Based on the findings, practices and perspectives on HIV testing and treatment were compared quantitatively and qualitatively between PTW and TW participants. Firstly, I want to congratulate the authors for targeting an extremely hard to reach population (PTW) for some very timely research, since the global drive to end the HIV epidemic would not be successful without HIV prevention and care access for all hidden, vulnerable, hard to reach (and understand) populations like the TW and PTW. The article is well written, easy to follow, and the conclusions seem generally plausible given the results of the statistical analyses. However, I do have a few comments:
Major Comments
1. The authors mentioned this as one of their limitations, but I wonder how much of the perceived differences in demographic characteristics between TW and PTW are driven by the difference in recruitment of the respective groups. TW were recruited from clinics and can potentially be more vulnerable than the average TW population in Lima, and PTW were recruited by the TW seeds, by virtue of the definition, were probably from a more general pool of PTWs in Lima.
Do the researchers have any data to support or refute that claim? For example, one metric might be HIV prevalence among recruited TW versus the general TW population, which seems to be similar in this case (30% in GP vs 26.1-37.7% in the study). Another important factor might be sex work status. Sex work is a known risk factor for HIV and other STIs as well and is known to be correlated with lower income and lower education. Can the researchers track the sex work status of all survey TW participants, and compare them with the TW population average in Lima? Any other metric to use perhaps?
2. Another limitation that the authors mention about the statistical analysis is the following:
‘Secondly, we did not adjust for clustering present from respondent driven sampling because this was an exploratory study and there is no gold standard for analysis for this sampling method.’
The authors are probably correct in pointing out that there is no gold standard method for analysis of RDS data in the literature as of yet, however, note that a typical RDS has multiple waves of recruitment with a few initial seeds, which makes statistical modeling quite challenging because of the hierarchy of the different waves. However, the study design pursued here only employed one wave of RDS, and thus the ensuing data can be conceived as clustered, where each cluster consists of a TW seed and the PTWs they recruited. The authors should at least look whether such clustering exists (with respect to outcomes in Tables S3 and S4), for example, one can estimate the intra-cluster correlation coefficient (ICC). If indeed the ICC is high, one can pursue adjusted t-tests/chi-square tests for clustered data or regression approaches like LME to see if the inference is any different from the unadjusted analyses.
Minor Comments
1. Page 11, line 180, Table 1 – Median and IQR are probably better metrics for ‘Age’ than mean and SD.
2. Page 13, line 197, Table 2 – Not fully visible for review. A third of the table seemed to be cut-off, probably that page needs to be in landscape format.
Reviewer #3: The authors evaluated practices and preferences for HIV services in partners of TW, a highly at-risk hidden population.
The paper is clearly written and only minor edits are needed.
For readers who are not familiar with the Peruvian health system and current standard of care, I consider the paper could benefit from the following changes/additions:
-The authors described in the discussion that PrEP was implemented in Peru in June 2023. Since this question arose at the time of the results, I suggest moving this explanation to the introduction.
-On page 3, line 17, the authors mentioned “non-traditional HIV testing options”. I suggest adding in the introduction a short explanation about the standard of care for HIV testing in Peru and clarifying what are the “non-traditional HIV testing options” available.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Jesse Clark
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0306852.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
21 Feb 2024

Response to reviewers is included in the attached MS Word document.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: KazmirakTollefson_ResponseToReviewers_Feb9_2024.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0306852.r003Decision Letter 1
ChanAlex Siu WingAcademic Editor© 2024 Alex Siu Wing Chan2024Alex Siu Wing Chanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
1 Apr 2024

PONE-D-23-29942R1Practices and preferences for HIV testing and treatment services amongst partners of transgender women in Lima, Peru: an exploratory, mixed methods studyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tollefson,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================

ACADEMIC EDITOR:

While the reviewers have already provided their comments, here are my suggestions and concerns:
1. Choose either an English or Spanish abstract.
2. Even though you've discussed the transgender situation globally, please clarify the correlation between your topic and the research question in the introduction.
3. I suggest revising the aim of this study to articulate how this research will make a significant contribution.
4. It appears you are using a mixed-methods approach; please be more specific in the data analysis section.
5. The table 1 presents a detailed breakdown of the characteristics of study participants, including age, education level, nationality, employment status, income, sexual attraction, number of sex partners, and self-reported HIV status, differentiated between TW (transgender women, n=69) and PTW (presumably non-transgender participants, n=165). regarding Education and Employment: Could the authors delve into the factors contributing to the educational and employment disparities observed, particularly the barriers TW face in these areas?
6. How does the cultural and national context influence the study's findings, especially regarding social support systems and healthcare access?
7. The authors are invited to explore how the sexual attraction and partner preferences among TW and PTW inform our understanding of HIV risk and prevention needs within these communities.
8. Given the marked HIV status disparity, what specific, actionable recommendations do the authors propose to mitigate this risk among TW?
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by May 16 2024 11:59PM.   If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Alex Siu Wing Chan
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: The authors have done an excellent job addressing all the comments left by the Reviewers. I just have one minor comment that is mainly about consistency in presentation of results.
1(i) In Supplementary Tables S3 and S5 (and possibly others), the authors have presented standard deviations (I presume for the data distribution), however, given they present results from hypothesis tests conducted on the means, the more relevant metric would be standard errors for these parameters. Can you present standard errors instead of SDs (or in addition to the SDs) in the Tables?
1(ii) Additionally, to be consistent, can you please add the cluster-adjusted standard errors in Supplementary Table S3-2?
Reviewer #3: the authors have addressed most reviewers comments, corrected tables format and the manuscript is now clear
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0306852.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
22 Apr 2024

We have provided the full response to the editor and reviewer #2 in an attached Microsoft Word document. In addition, we have pasted our response below.
Response To Academic Editor
1. Choose either an English or Spanish abstract.
Response: Thank you for your comment. We have removed the Spanish abstract from the submission. 
2. Even though you've discussed the transgender situation globally, please clarify the correlation between your topic and the research question in the introduction.
Response: Thank you for your observation and this suggestion. We have modified the wording in the introduction section to better highlight the connection between the topic (HIV testing and prevention services amongst PTW) and the research question at hand. Most prominently, we have adjusted the first sentence of the paper to include mention of the partners of transgender women to emphasize to the readers that partners of transgender women (PTW), not transgender women, are the focus of this paper. 
The research question for this paper is: What are the practices and preferences for HIV testing and treatment amongst the sexual partners of transgender women in Lima, Peru? This is included in statement form in the manuscript in lines 49-52, where we define the goals of this study: “We therefore conducted this study to describe the practices and preferences that PTW in Peru have for HIV testing and treatment services and to determine how such practices and preferences (1) compare to those of TW and (2) compare amongst PTW based on the type of relationship they have with TW.”
We have described the importance of understanding the preference of HIV testing amongst partners of transgender women in lines 25-48 in the Introduction section. In particular, we have described the need to examine this issue in Peru in lines 34-48. 
3. I suggest revising the aim of this study to articulate how this research will make a significant contribution.
Response: Thank you for this suggestion. We have modified our statement about how this research will make a significant contribution in lines 52-53. This now reads: “These results can be used to tailor HIV prevention and care programs to best reach PTW, including those that focus on PrEP initiation and continuation.”
In addition, we have added a sentence to the conclusion to highlight the importance of this work (see line 365): “These results should be considered when designing HIV testing and prevention programs for PTWs.”
4. It appears you are using a mixed-methods approach; please be more specific in the data analysis section.
Response. Thank you for this comment. 
▪ Per best practice, we have included our study design in the title of this study (“an exploratory, mixed methods study”). 
▪ We have followed best practices to describe the mixed methods design in this study in the first paragraph of the methods section (under study design, see lines 57-61). Here we state that we used an explanatory sequential design (QUAN�QUAL). Per best practices for reporting qualitative data, we have now also clarified that data integration happened through merging of the data: “We analyzed surveys and interviews separately, then merged the findings, using the qualitative data to explain the quantitative survey results.” (Lines 60-61).
▪ We have also clarified this in the ‘data analysis’ section of the results, specifically calling out “merging” as the form of data integration. This section in our manuscript now reads: “Data integration occurred through merging qualitative and quantitative results, with the qualitative findings used to explain and expound on key findings from the quantitative survey.” (Lines 144-145)
As reference, below is a document that describes some of the practices for mixed methods research: 
NIH Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences. (2018). Best practices for mixed methods research in the health sciences (2nd ed). Bethesda: National Institutes of Health. Accessed via https://implementationscience-gacd.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Best-Practices-for-Mixed-Methods-Research-in-the-Health-Sciences-2018-01-25-1.pdf

5. The table 1 presents a detailed breakdown of the characteristics of study participants, including age, education level, nationality, employment status, income, sexual attraction, number of sex partners, and self-reported HIV status, differentiated between TW (transgender women, n=69) and PTW (presumably non-transgender participants, n=165). regarding Education and Employment: Could the authors delve into the factors contributing to the educational and employment disparities observed, particularly the barriers TW face in these areas?
Response: Thank you for this thoughtful comment. We agree that it is interesting to consider the differences between TW and PTW. Unfortunately, delving into the specifics of these differences goes beyond the scope of our paper and involves much speculation. While we do not think it is the place of this study to specifically explore this difference, we do provide some speculation as to why these differences exist: the power differential between cis male PTW and TW (see lines 300-307). We use our qualitative findings, and past studies, to support this hypothesis. 
We have rephrased this discussion in lines 301-305 to read as follows: “Power differences between TW and their partners have been well-noted in the literature, largely due to cis males being in the greatest position of power in many societies [1,3,7,10]. This power differential between largely cis-gender male PTW and TW was observed in our survey findings, as PTW appeared to be of higher socioeconomic status than TW, evidenced by PTW generally having higher levels of education, employment, and income than their TW partners.” 
6. How does the cultural and national context influence the study's findings, especially regarding social support systems and healthcare access?
Response: Thank you for this question. We have provided discussion on how the local cultural context influences findings in the discussion section. For example: 
▪ In the second paragraph of the discussion (Lines 292-307) ,we discuss (1) how local culture could have made the Likert scales used in the study ineffective, thus limiting what we could conclude from our survey, and (2) the power differential that likely exists between PTW and TW due to the local context, and how this could affect their access to health care. 
▪ In the fourth paragraph of the discussion, we discuss specific recommendations for improving access to HIV treatment services: decreasing wait time and strengthening sensitization for healthcare workers on patient privacy and transgender care. These are both directly related to the local context of how HIV testing services are delivered in Peru. We have added new additional language (and additional citations) into the text to make note of the influence local context has on this issue (Lines 322-324). 
“These suggestions speak to the specific challenges of accessing and interacting with the local health system in Lima and align with key challenges noted in the literature, namely an under resourced primary health care system and the need to address stigma surrounding HIV, including in the healthcare setting (28–31).”
7. The authors are invited to explore how the sexual attraction and partner preferences among TW and PTW inform our understanding of HIV risk and prevention needs within these communities.
Response: Thank you for this suggestion. We agree that this is an important topic of research. Unfortunately, the discussion of partner preference and risk is outside the scope of our current study, which seeks to describe the practices and preferences that PTW in Peru have for HIV testing and treatment services. 
However, we have addressed this in our past research, which we cite in this paper. For more information on this topic, please see these other papers published by our research group (which we have also referred to in this manuscript): 
Long JE, Montaño M, Sanchez H, Huerta L, Calderón Garcia D, Lama JR, et al. Self-Identity, Beliefs, and Behavior Among Men Who Have Sex with Transgender Women: Implications for HIV Research and Interventions. Arch Sex Behav. 2021; 50(7):3287–95. 
Long JE, Ulrich A, White E, Dasgupta S, Cabello R, Sanchez H, et al. Characterizing Men Who Have Sex with Transgender Women in Lima, Peru: Sexual Behavior and Partnership Profiles. AIDS Behav. 2020; 24(3):914–24. 
Long JE, Sanchez H, Dasgupta S, Huerta L, Calderón Garcia D, Lama JR, et al. Exploring HIV risk behavior and sexual/gender identities among transgender women and their sexual partners in Peru using respondent-driven sampling. AIDS Care. 2022;34(9):1187–95. 
Long JE, Sanchez H, Dasgupta S, Huerta L, Garcia DC, Lama JR, et al. Self-Reported Knowledge of HIV Status Among Cisgender Male Sex Partners of Transgender Women in Lima, Peru. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2022 May 1;90(1):1–5. 
Long JE, Tordoff DM, Reisner SL, Dasgupta S, Mayer KH, Mullins JI, et al. HIV transmission patterns among transgender women, their cisgender male partners, and cisgender MSM in Lima, Peru: A molecular epidemiologic and phylodynamic analysis. Lancet Reg Health Am. 2022; 6.
8. Given the marked HIV status disparity, what specific, actionable recommendations do the authors propose to mitigate this risk among TW?
Response: We appreciate this question. The goal of this paper was to describe the practices and preferences for HIV prevention amongst partners of transgender women. TW were not the focus of our paper. We did not conduct HIV testing in this study, or compare the prevalence of HIV amongst TW, PTW, or the broader population, so we believe proposing actionable research to mitigate the risk of HIV amongst TW is outside the scope of this paper. 
Response To Reviewer
Reviewer #2: The authors have done an excellent job addressing all the comments left by the Reviewers. I just have one minor comment that is mainly about consistency in presentation of results.
▪ In Supplementary Tables S3 and S5 (and possibly others), the authors have presented standard deviations (I presume for the data distribution), however, given they present results from hypothesis tests conducted on the means, the more relevant metric would be standard errors for these parameters. Can you present standard errors instead of SDs (or in addition to the SDs) in the Tables?
▪ Additionally, to be consistent, can you please add the cluster-adjusted standard errors in Supplementary Table S3-2?
Response: 
Thank you for this note. This was a descriptive study, so we are describing the sample population in all the data presented in the supplemental tables. We are not seeking to make inference on the overall population. 
As standard deviations are used to describe the sample, while standard errors are used when making inference on the broader population, we believe that inclusion of standard deviation, not standard errors, is the most appropriate choice for these tables. 
We now uniformly presented means and standard deviations in the relevant supplemental tables (S3 & S5). 
Relevant sources: 
Nagele P. Misuse of standard error of the mean (SEM) when reporting variability of a sample. A critical evaluation of four anaesthesia journals. Br J Anaesth. 2003. 90(4): 514-6. doi: 10.1093/bja/aeg087
Kim H-Y. Statistical notes for clinical researchers: Understanding standard deviations and standard errors. Restor Dent Endod. 2013. 38(4): 263-265. doi: 10.5395/rde.2013.38.4.263
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PLOS_ResponseToEditor_April8.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0306852.r005Decision Letter 2
Vall-llosera CampsMiquelStaff Editor© 2024 Miquel Vall-llosera Camps2024Miquel Vall-llosera Campshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
26 Jun 2024

Practices and preferences for HIV testing and treatment services amongst partners of transgender women in Lima, Peru: an exploratory, mixed methods study
PONE-D-23-29942R2
Dear Dr. Tollefson,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Miquel Vall-llosera Camps
Senior Staff Editor
PLOS ONE
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Authors addressed comments for the first revision round. No additional comments for this second review
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0306852.r006Acceptance letter
Vall-llosera CampsMiquelStaff Editor© 2024 Miquel Vall-llosera Camps2024Miquel Vall-llosera Campshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
28 Jun 2024

PONE-D-23-29942R2 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tollefson, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Miquel Vall-llosera Camps 
Staff Editor
PLOS ONE