pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC12273937PMC12273937.112273937122739374067996210.1371/journal.pone.0327052PONE-D-25-050251Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineCancer Detection and DiagnosisMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancer Detection and DiagnosisMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsCancer Risk FactorsMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancer Risk FactorsMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsInvasive TumorsBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesSocial SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineCancer Detection and DiagnosisCancer ScreeningMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancer Detection and DiagnosisCancer ScreeningMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsBreast TumorsBreast CancerBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorSedentary BehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorSedentary BehaviorExploring how and why attributes of existing and emerging early cancer detection tests influence experiences and participation among individuals at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage: A qualitative interview study
Cancer detection test preferences among those at risk of socioeconomic disadvantagehttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7513-2575BonfieldStefanieConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draft ]. Early cancer detection offers more promising prevention and treatment options and greater chances of survival. However, approximately 29–38% of eligible individuals do not participate in asymptomatic cancer screening programmes [ ], and over 5% of individuals do not attend urgent symptomatic referral appointments [ ]. Individuals experiencing poorer socioeconomic conditions make up a greater proportion of these groups who do not attend [ , ], yet face greater incidence and lower survival rates across several types of cancer [ , ]. It is crucial to consider the ways that early cancer detection tests are offered and delivered to provide more equitable opportunities to take part.
The COM-B model and the integrated screening action model (I-SAM) postulate that individuals need the capability (such as the knowledge of how to test, self-efficacy, physical mobility, financial resources), opportunity (such as the convenience, access, social norms and support) and motivation (based on previous experiences, habits, perceived risk and beliefs about harms and benefits) to take part in cancer testing [ , ]. Evidence suggests that individuals experiencing socioeconomic deprivation face additional barriers to taking part, including negative perceptions of cancer testing such as the invasiveness of tests (perceived threat), lower confidence in their ability to take part (self-efficacy), and fatalistic beliefs about cancer and the potential for curative treatment (response efficacy) [ – ]. However, adapting attributes of existing cancer tests has improved participation or attitudes towards testing among those who previously chose not to take part [ – ].
Preference research can guide test developers, policy makers and healthcare professionals in delivering early detection tests in ways that align with public and patient needs and optimise uptake. In turn this can reduce the burden of late diagnosis on patients and healthcare systems. This is important given that several new test modalities to support early cancer detection are under development, including sample tests such as blood, breath and urine tests to detect cancer biomarkers of multiple different types of cancer [ ]. These novel tests could be used to triage individuals invited to undergo more invasive forms of testing in symptomatic and asymptomatic pathways [ ]. It is important to evaluate the potential impact and promise of these cancer tests on inequalities in uptake within early cancer detection pathways before (as well as during and after) their implementation, as emphasised by the CanTest framework [ ].
Existing public and patient studies have commonly explored preferences for attributes of a single type of cancer test or groups of tests delivered through a single cancer pathway such as cancer screening programmes [ , ]. This makes their results less applicable to emerging modalities which could be implemented at different stages and within more than one early cancer detection pathway. In addition to experiencing barriers to engaging with cancer tests, individuals experiencing socioeconomic deprivation also face additional challenges to taking part in health research [ ]. Consequently, there have been calls to ensure that targeted efforts are made to include these groups in future research to narrow cancer disparities [ , ]. A holistic approach to examining preferences among this population for attributes that are relevant across different modalities and cancer pathways is needed to inform equitable implementation of new early detection tests. This qualitative interview study used a vignette task and think-aloud protocol to explore how and why attributes of existing and emerging early cancer detection tests influence testing experiences and participation among those at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage in England.

## Materials and methods

## Study design and setting
Qualitative semi-structured interviews were conducted and supplemented with written descriptions of cancer detection tests, a vignette task (where hypothetical test scenarios were presented) and an adapted think-aloud protocol (where participants were encouraged to deliberate between different test attributes while thinking out loud). Interview materials were developed in consultation with two public and patient representatives. The study was designed and conducted using a critical realist approach [ , ]. It was assumed that observable attributes of early cancer detection tests are perceived and experienced differently depending on an individual’s subjective reality and lived experiences. Ethical approval was granted by Queen Mary Ethics of Research Committee (01/02/2023: QMERC22.318). The research was conducted in compliance with relevant guidelines and with respect to participants’ privacy. All participants provided written informed consent except for one participant who preferred to provide audio-recorded verbal consent documented using an encrypted Dictaphone (approved by the ethics committee in advance). The methods and results are reported according to the consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ checklist), see [ ]. The study protocol is available in .

## Recruitment and sample
People living in London were recruited via community-based methods between 1st February 2023 and 1st February 2024. Community organisations (such as community centres, social housing associations, public health authorities, libraries, sports centres, food banks, large employers, and organisations supporting community outreach initiatives) were approached in areas associated with greater deprivation to assist with recruitment. Individuals were invited to take part in the study directly either by a researcher (SB) or community gatekeeper at community groups and events, or indirectly using flyers in community venues and online adverts posted in local WhatsApp (by community gatekeepers) and Facebook (by the researcher) groups.
Participants were sampled purposively. Individuals who expressed interest in taking part were asked to provide information to check that they were eligible before arranging an interview based on the following inclusion criteria: 1) Aged 50 years or older (an age group that accounts for 90% of new cancer cases [ ], and is likely to have already been or will soon be invited for cancer screening); 2) Living in the top 30% most deprived postcodes nationally (measured by the Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) 2019 which ranks residential postcodes according to seven domains of deprivation [ ]); 3) Met an individual-level measure of socioeconomic disadvantage (measured by low household income [ ], social housing tenure [ , ], or a current or most recent manual or routine occupation [ ]); 4) No previous cancer diagnosis in the last five years; 5) Good understanding of written and spoken English. Information about participants’ gender and ethnicity were monitored using a sampling matrix to inform the recruitment strategy and maximise the diversity of the sample.
The aim was to recruit approximately 30 individuals to capture a broad range of experiences and attitudes among the target population based on considerations of information power and previous qualitative studies exploring related topics with similar target populations [ – ].

## Interview materials
A semi-structured topic guide was developed consisting of questions about individuals’ attitudes towards specific attributes of cancer detection tests. These related both to tests they had previous experience making decisions about (i.e., had been invited to consider before or had taken part in the test before) and/or cancer tests that might be offered to them in the future. Questions were designed to be open-ended (e.g., ‘What was your experience of being able to get to the test?’) to allow individuals to reflect on how attributes influenced their decision to test or their experiences (e.g., preferences for a test location) and/or why they held those views (e.g., preferred a local location because they were less mobile). Interview questions and prompts were loosely based on the COM-B model of behaviour change [ ], to understand how and why attributes influenced their capability, opportunity and motivation to take part in testing. The subsequent analysis interpreted interviewees’ accounts to identify attributes that appeared to be instrumental in driving test decision-making and participation.
To help individuals consider which attributes of tests would be important, particularly those without previous experiences of being invited to take part in testing, two sets of interview materials were designed to introduce individuals to attributes of existing and emerging cancer detection tests. This included example test descriptions and a vignette task. Vignette tasks are a contemporary research tool that involve presenting participants with a hypothetical scenario to elicit individuals’ opinions and preferences [ ]. It was expected that an individual’s first impressions and deliberations between test options would highlight which attributes were important for decision making and why, as well as which, if any, attributes were considered irrelevant or unimportant. For this reason, individuals were encouraged to read each set of materials and express their first impressions, thought processes and feelings out loud while engaging with each task, known as an adapted think-aloud protocol [ ].
The first set of materials included descriptions of five different types of tests that may be used to find signs of cancer: sample tests (e.g., blood, breath, urine, faeces or saliva tests), physical and visual inspection tests, imaging tests (e.g., CT scans, x-rays, MRI scans, ultrasound), biopsy and endoscopy. These were adapted from the NHS website and described briefly what each type of test involves from a patient perspective [ – ].
The second set of materials included two vignette tasks where individuals were asked to place themselves in the position of a fictional individual at risk of cancer. In one vignette, an individual was described as experiencing fatigue and weight loss. In another, a different individual was asymptomatic but had been identified at risk of cancer based on their age and family history. Each vignette included four test options that varied by different attributes such as the location of the test, whether it would be comfortable and how long it would take to receive the results. Attributes were informed by a narrative review and stakeholder consultations with experts in early cancer detection testing including six healthcare professionals, seven academic experts, four test technology/pathway experts, three public health professionals, one policy expert and one cancer research funder. Vignette tasks are appropriate for facilitating the discussion of sensitive topics [ ]. It was expected that the inclusion of vignette scenarios described in the third person would allow individuals to share their preferences for attributes of tests without feeling obliged to share personal experiences or reasons for taking part in health testing if they did not wish to.
The interview topic guide including interview materials and the think-aloud protocol were used flexibly depending on participants’ experiences with tests and preferred topics of discussion and are available in .

## Public and patient involvement
Two public and patient involvement representatives with previous experience of taking part in cancer testing were recruited through existing contacts to inform the design and conduct of the study. They reviewed the topic guide and interview materials for acceptability, task difficulty, comprehension and timing and suggested methods for recruiting participants. They were not involved in the analysis or interpretation of the findings.

## Data collection
Interviews took place between 10th March 2023 and 8th February 2024 and were conducted in person in private rooms in community settings close to where participants lived. The interviewer (SB) was a female behavioural science PhD student with previous experience conducting qualitative interviews. No one else was present. Participants were previously unknown to the research team. All participants were told that the aim of the research was to improve how tests are offered. The researcher made it clear at the beginning of each interview that they did not work for the National Health Service or have any clinical training and could not provide medical advice. Each interview was audio recorded using an encrypted Dictaphone.
After reading the participant information sheet and providing verbal or written informed consent, participants were asked to fill in a short, optional survey about their socio-demographic information. Participants were given a choice of whether to fill this in themselves or for the researcher to ask them the questions and record their responses. The audio-recording was then switched on and participants were asked questions about their previous experiences of having or being invited to have tests for cancer and which attributes of the tests they would find off-putting if they were invited to have a test in future.
Participants were asked to read the descriptions of different types of early cancer detection tests and to think aloud while considering if anything about each test could be potentially off-putting from a patient perspective. Then participants were asked to engage with the vignette task and to think-aloud while arranging the tests in order of preference that they thought the individual in the vignette would choose. The interviewer (SB) offered to read written materials aloud to participants if they preferred. When shown examples of different types of cancer tests, participants were informed that tests were not always used to look for cancer and may be used in many different medical contexts. During the vignette tasks, participants were told that they could look at one test option at a time if they preferred and did not have to examine all test options if they did not wish to. Lastly, participants were asked about any other aspects of testing that they felt would be important if they were offered a cancer test in the future.
After each interview, the interviewer (SB) noted down initial impressions and field notes of key factors influencing each participant’s experiences and engagement with tests. The final order of the vignette test options was recorded for each participant. Participants were given a debrief sheet including a reminder of the aims of the research and contact details of support services in case they were negatively affected by the sensitive nature of the discussions or desired medical advice. All participants were provided with a £25 Love2Shop voucher to thank them for their contribution.

## Data analysis
The data were analysed in NVivo (version 12) using framework analysis and guided by seven recommended stages: Transcription, Familiarisation, Coding, Developing a working analytical framework, Applying the analytical framework, Charting the data into a framework matrix, Interpreting the data [ , ]. This method does not dictate whether data is analysed inductively or deductively and allows this to be informed by the research topic [ ]. This was considered appropriate for systematically identifying similarities and differences in attitudes towards attributes of tests before interpreting thematic associations [ – ]. Other analytical approaches which are predominantly informed by the data (e.g., Grounded theory) were not selected because the researchers were interested in exploring attitudes towards pre-defined attributes of cancer detection tests. The focus of the analysis was to explore which attributes contributed to negative experiences or attitudes towards taking part in testing and why. It was expected that the influence of attributes on experiences and participation would both be relevant to future engagement with tests. The COM-B model was used as a lens to explore the influence of attributes across experiences and participation. Analysis of responses to the third person vignette tasks was focused on the reasons individuals cited for preferred attributes based on their own beliefs (e.g., ‘I think most people would prefer’) or personal circumstances (e.g., ‘If it was me..’). The analysis also considered the asymptomatic and symptomatic context of the vignette being discussed.
Interview recordings were transcribed verbatim and personally identifiable data omitted by a professional transcription company. Three members of the research team (SB, EK, SLQ) familiarised themselves with and independently coded 10% of the data inductively before meeting to discuss initial impressions and a potential coding framework. SB then applied the analytical framework to the remaining transcripts, meeting regularly with the rest of the research team to discuss the suitability of the framework and make appropriate revisions.
The research team held substantial knowledge and previous research experience of qualitative methods, behavioural science and health psychology, cancer screening and cancer diagnosis in primary care. FMW is also a qualified General Practitioner (GP). SB took notes during meetings with the research team to discuss insights and reflections and kept a reflexive diary throughout data collection and analysis. The reflexive diary was revisited several times during analysis to inform iterations of data organisation and interpretation. In addition to the COM-B model [ ], the I-SAM [ ] was used to arrange the data into sub-themes describing factors related to attributes of early cancer detection tests that influenced individuals’ capability, opportunity and motivation to take part. The I-SAM was considered useful for informing how sub-themes should be arranged and labelled given its outline of factors influencing screening behaviour specifically, including but not limited to the attributes of tests. Participants who consented were provided with a summary of the findings.

## Results

## Sample characteristics
Approximately 200 individuals were invited to take part in the study directly by the researcher (SB) in community centres. The number of individuals invited to take part using indirect recruitment methods such as through flyers, social media adverts and invitation by community members is unknown. Of the 166 individuals who expressed interest in taking part and answered the eligibility questions, thirty-nine (23.5%) were eligible based on the inclusion criteria. Nine did not take part; three were uncontactable and six decided not to take part due to being too busy (n = 3), changing their mind (n = 2) or not wishing to consent (n = 1).
Interviews were conducted with 30 individuals (20 females) living across 11 London boroughs. The interviews lasted a mean duration of 35 minutes (SD = 5.7, range: 23–45). Participants were aged from 52 to 86, with a mean of 63.8 years (SD = 8.9). The majority (n = 22) had previous experience of having cancer tests and a few (n = 4) had received a previous cancer diagnosis over 5 years ago. Over half were from White ethnic backgrounds (n = 18), and some belonged to Asian (n = 2), Black (n = 4) and Mixed (n = 5) ethnic groups. Sample characteristics are shown in .
 

## Thematic framework
The thematic framework, shown in , was developed by using the COM-B model to explore how and why attributes of early cancer detection tests appeared to influence participants’ experiences and participation [ ]. The first theme describes how and why test attributes were interpreted to prevent equitable access to early cancer detection tests by lowering individual’s capability and opportunity to take part. The second theme presents an interpretation of how and why test attributes influenced participants’ motivation to take part in testing. Sub-themes are supplemented with numbered illustrative quotes (e.g., Quote 1 is denoted by Q1). Further quotes are available in . Case studies are presented to illustrate the cross-cutting theme of lived experiences and their importance when considering the influence of test attributes on participation.
 

## Theme 1: Attributes can prevent equitable access to cancer detection tests
Individuals discussed several attributes of early cancer detection tests that influence their capability and opportunity to take part based on their individual circumstances. This included the required time commitments, accessibility of the test location and environment, stigma, privacy and support, confidence to take part and physical and psychological discomfort.

## Required time commitments.
For some, the time required to take part in testing was inconvenient due to competing commitments such as work, caring responsibilities and childcare that they could not afford to miss (Q1). Participants voiced concerns about the duration beyond the test procedure itself, including time spent getting to the location and in the waiting room. Participants associated hospital locations with requiring more time to attend than mobile units and GP surgeries.
Q1: “I was looking after my mum who was bedridden, also my little boy’s special needs.... I can’t really leave him very much on his own because he is autistic… I’ve got no family over here …. and I can’t go just pay a babysitter £20, it’s just not possible on part time wages and a single parent with the cost of living” Female, age 50–59, Mixed

## Accessibility of the test location and environment.
Many said they would prefer a ‘local’ test and a particular venue due to the location in relation to where they live, often citing GP surgeries or mobile units. Participants discussed the importance of needing accessible transport options such as nearby car parking spaces or bus stops and accessible venues, particularly for those who are less mobile with one individual highlighting that stairs on mobile units are ‘not easy to get up and down’. Test locations that were not easy to access were cited by a few participants as the reason for not attending screening appointments (Q2).
Participants also discussed the importance of the test environment. While one participant described the hospital environment as ‘cold’, another described mobile units as ‘uncomfortable’ and ‘cramped’. One participant also disliked being exposed to ‘uncontrolled loud noise’ in waiting rooms, stating that it could reduce their likelihood of taking part.
Q2: “I didn’t, haven’t been --Which is naughty, but I don’t know, it seemed a lot more effort to get there than it used to” Female, age 60–69, White

## Stigma, privacy and support.
Many expressed concerns that mobile units parked in a supermarket made testing more visible to others (Q3). Some were worried about the lack of privacy in the waiting room or test room and liked the privacy afforded by self-sample tests conducted at home.
Many participants described the importance of receiving information, support and reassurance from healthcare professionals and family members when engaging with cancer testing. Concerns about being stigmatised by healthcare professionals were commonly discussed for tests that involved undressing such as cervical screening, mammograms and colonoscopies (Q4). A few preferred a healthcare professional of the same sex to carry out tests to minimise embarrassment. Some described previous cancer testing as a dehumanising experience and recounted feeling like ‘a piece of meat’. Participants explained that this feeling was exacerbated by a lack of compassion from the person conducting the test and called for more empathy and communication.
Q3: “People’s lining up and you might see someone that you don’t want them seeing you or thinking, oh, he’s gone for a cancer scare or something.” Female, age 70–79, White
Q4: “Some people are very negative on, when they are examining you. And it’s sort of like, you know, we can’t all walk in here a size 10.” Female, age 60–69, White

## Confidence to take part (self-efficacy).
Many participants had positive views of tests that were considered ‘standard’ and ‘normal’ or ‘to be expected’. Participants preferred attributes of tests that were ‘familiar’ such as their local GP surgery or knowing the individual healthcare professional doing the test. Many said that familiarity with testing due to previous experiences made subsequent testing easier.
Many participants raised concerns about having the confidence to complete self-sample testing correctly, particularly when testing for cancer, and the worry about whether they had ‘done it right’. Participants held positive attitudes towards self-sample tests that were ‘easy to do’. Although, some highlighted that individuals who are less mobile may need the support from a relative (Q5).
Those who described the challenges of engaging with tests valued the chance to ask questions and a choice of how test procedures were carried out to accommodate personal circumstances.
Q5: “Especially if you’re not mobile enough to get out of your house, how are you going to do your testing at home safely and accurately?” Male, 50–59, White

## Physical and psychological discomfort.
Many described the anticipated or experienced pain and invasiveness of testing as off-putting as well as the potential for side effects and complications. Participants explained that getting older and physical changes increase the pain and discomfort they experienced during cervical and breast cancer testing. Some said that they could ‘not tolerate’ it anymore so had stopped attending, particularly if they knew friends who had also decided to stop (Q6). Some participants discussed phobias such as needle phobia and claustrophobia which contributed to negative experiences of tests, particularly for MRI scans (Q7). A few said they would only take part in more invasive tests in future if they were offered sedation.
Q6: “I don’t want to go back, because my friend also said that it’s painful and then she doesn’t want to go any more.” Female, age 50–59, Asian
Q7: “You don’t know what that person has been through in the past … then if you’re going to get stuck in the tunnel for the MRI scan, it’s giving me flashbacks of being confined and scared.” Female, age 50–59, Mixed

## Theme 2: Attributes are associated with the perceived risk, harms and benefits of cancer testing and diagnosis
Individuals reflected on attributes in relation to their motivation to take part. Some explained that motivation was influenced by the perceived risk of a cancer diagnosis, which in some cases was based on the reason they were offered a test or the type of test involved. Some did not want to take part in testing due to the harms associated with attributes of testing such as the burden of waiting for or receiving a cancer result. Others were inclined to test when cancer risk was high and prioritised attributes that were associated with greater accuracy and/or shorter time to receiving a diagnosis, even when these were unfavourable in other ways. Some wanted clearer information to make an informed decision.

## Attributes associated with perceived risk of a cancer diagnosis.
Participants associated attributes of tests with the risk of a cancer diagnosis. Some described sample tests as ‘general tests’ in contrast to biopsy, endoscopy and imaging tests, as well as tests conducted in a hospital or by a doctor, which were perceived as ‘more serious’ and as indications that ‘there’s something wrong with you’ (Q8). Some described low perceived risk of having cancer as a reason for not taking part such as when they were not experiencing symptoms or if they had recently undergone symptomatic investigations where they received a clear result (Q9).
Q8: “The fact that the test is done by a doctor rather than say a nurse or a nurse practitioner suggests it’s a bit more serious.” Male, 50–59, White
Q9: “Bowel cancer test kit came in the post. I didn’t ask for it, I don’t know why it came. … my half-sister’s had bowel cancer ….. just because she’s had it doesn’t mean I’m going to have it… I just didn’t feel I wanted to engage with that…. I think I more or less threw it away.” Age 60–69

## Attributes associated with harms of waiting for or receiving a cancer result.
Anxiety and fear about being diagnosed with cancer were commonly reported in the lead up to testing, during the test and when waiting for the result; most participants preferred to receive the results quickly. Some described the anxiety caused by being called for follow-up tests because ‘your head goes to cancer straight away’. Participants described experiences or expectations of the emotional or financial consequences of receiving a cancer diagnosis and the burden that it might inflict on friends and family, particularly if they had caring responsibilities (Q10).
Q10: “I wouldn’t want to know if I had got cancer, because then I’d have to tell my family, and I don’t know whether I could do that. Not right now while my mum’s still alive, because she’s got her own health issues and stuff …. she’d just get too upset.” Female, age 50–59, White

## Attributes associated with benefits of an accurate or quick cancer result.
Many participants were motivated to test if there was a higher risk of cancer being found. In this situation, many preferred attributes that were associated with perceived accuracy. Some participants were concerned about the accuracy of self-sample tests and a few were concerned about the impact of false positive results such as needing a further unnecessary test ‘for nothing’. For many, the hospital was perceived as the best place to get tested because it is a ‘medical environment’ and is where the ‘cancer specialists’ and ‘proper tests’ are (Q11). These attributes were associated with being ‘further along the line’ and an accurate diagnosis was preferred to facilitate early detection and treatment. A few believed it was worth waiting longer for an appointment or for test results, or tolerating a painful test if it meant they got a ‘proper result’ (Q12). Some individuals preferred attributes that they perceived would shorten the time to receiving a diagnosis and starting treatment such as tests that could be conducted or deliver results more quickly.
Q11: “especially like a, something like cancer, you just, I do take it straight to the professionals.” Male, age 50–59, Black
Q12: “If you feel uncomfortable when the test is being done, if it’s, if we’re talking about cancer, then I guess you put up with it, don’t you?” Female, age 60–69, White

## Preferences for informed choice about cancer testing.
Participants varied in what they discussed when asked about cancer testing. When asked if they had ever been invited for and/or had a test for cancer, some reflected on previous experiences of symptomatic investigations for cancer or attending cancer screening programmes. Others asked ‘does screening count?’ or initially reported that they had not experienced cancer testing before, but subsequently discussed previous experiences of cancer screening or being referred for investigations. Some described experiencing frustration in the past when they were not informed about ‘what they’re looking for’ and wanted it to be made explicit if cancer concern was a reason for being offered a test. Participants wanted to make an informed decision about testing by being given clear information about the about what a test would involve, and the harms and benefits (Q13).
Q13: “I’d really like to know all the steps involved in terms of what the test is, how long it will take, when I’d get the results and all that information …. is my particular demographic more susceptible to a particular type of cancer and that’s why I’m being offered the test? Is it a mass screening?” Female, age 70–79, Mixed

## Lived experiences as a cross-cutting theme
It was common for participants to describe links between their lived experiences and the impact of multiple test attributes on their experiences and engagement with cancer tests over time. Two case studies are presented in to illustrate the relationship between lived experiences and the role of test attributes in preventing equitable access (Theme 1) and influencing the perceived risk, harms and benefits of taking part (Theme 2).
 

## Discussion
This qualitative study with individuals at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage indicated that certain attributes of early cancer detection tests can prevent equitable access due to conflicts with lived experiences. Emerging tests to support early cancer detection such as blood, breath and urine sample tests could improve individuals’ capability and opportunity to take part by requiring fewer time commitments (e.g., due to less travel required to locations, shorter procedures and potentially more varied appointment times), being available in more accessible locations and environments (e.g., community based settings), offering greater familiarity and privacy (e.g., not requiring individuals to remove clothing, although community settings may cause concerns about being seen by others), and imposing fewer physical and psychological demands (e.g., compared to physical and psychological discomfort associated with imaging, endoscopy and biopsy tests). This may be particularly welcomed by individuals who have had negative previous experiences with more invasive tests conducted in the traditional hospital setting. It is likely that these findings extend to those who face similar barriers to participation regardless of socioeconomic disadvantage, underlining the value of achieving equitable access to improve uptake across the population.
The findings are corroborated by previous research exploring barriers to engagement with cancer detection testing including cancer stigma [ ], transport issues [ ], and caring responsibilities [ ]. The results also support previous studies which have reported positive attitudes towards less invasive sample tests for estimating cancer risk and for multi-cancer early detection alongside concerns about test accuracy [ , ]. In our study, individuals were asked to consider and compare attributes related to various types of cancer detection tests. When comparing different testing contexts, the convenience of taking part was not always a priority when individuals considered the potential risk of a cancer diagnosis, which some inferred from attributes of the test. For example, more invasive forms of testing conducted by a doctor in a hospital setting were associated with a greater risk of there being something wrong.
In support of theoretical models of fear responses and protection motivation theory [ , ], when perceived risk or salience of a cancer diagnosis was high, participants evaluated the effectiveness of testing in dealing with the threat. Some were reluctant to do a self-sample test for cancer; they were concerned about doing the test correctly (self-efficacy) and a few doubted the accuracy and diagnostic capability of sample tests (response-efficacy), preferring a test conducted by a doctor in a hospital to ensure an accurate diagnosis. This suggests that the increased accessibility of sample tests for cancer detection may not lead to greater motivation to take part if individuals doubt the value of a test such as its importance or accuracy. Alternatively, tests may be taken up but induce greater concerns about false negatives and frustration about not being eligible for referral. It is not clear from this study whether these perceptions are more prominent among those at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage or also persist across the population.
The findings raise an important question about how emerging early detection tests for single and multiple types of cancer would be introduced to and perceived by eligible individuals. Participants seemed to vary in what they considered to be a test for cancer. This ambiguity is intuitive given that many tests used in early cancer detection pathways are used to detect physiological changes that are risk factors for several health conditions and diseases besides cancer. Additionally, previous research has found that GPs did not always make the reason for referral to a cancer pathway explicit to symptomatic patients [ ]. However, the association of sample tests with cancer may become more explicit in future if innovations lead to improvements in test accuracy and detection capability. This suggests that during the implementation of novel, less invasive tests, it will be important to communicate the aims of testing, the accuracy of the results and implications for further testing and diagnosis to support informed decision making. Further research will be needed to understand the perceived risk of a cancer diagnosis associated with sample tests used to rule out single and multiple types of cancer in specific contexts such as risk stratification and triage, and the most effective methods of communicating cancer risk information.

## Strengths and limitations
This study focused on the perspectives of individuals at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage; the majority had low household income (80%), lived in social housing (70%) and were living in the top 20% most deprived postcodes nationally (83%), aligning with NHS England’s CORE20 approach to narrowing health inequalities [ ]. However, there are some limitations. Firstly, all participants were aged 50 or over and living in urban settings. Preferences among younger individuals and those living in rural settings may differ, as has been found in previous research [ , ]. Individuals with lower educational background, those in employment and individuals from Asian backgrounds were also relatively under-represented in the sample, despite efforts to approach community organisations with links to these groups.
Secondly, participants were asked to arrange hypothetical test options in order of preference from the perspective of a fictional individual. In practice, an individual would be offered a single test and could decide not to take part. Consequently, individuals may have been reluctant to disclose negative attitudes towards cancer detection testing. It is also possible that stated preferences for specific attributes were influenced by other attributes that appeared within the hypothetical test descriptions. Importantly, there is limited evidence for the validity of behavioural intentions reported in vignette tasks in relation to actual behaviour [ ]. Further work is needed to understand which attributes relevant to emerging sample test modalities would influence real world participation.

## Conclusions
Attributes of early cancer detection tests present numerous barriers to taking part for individuals at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage, who report inequitable experiences and uptake due to varied lived experiences and personal circumstances including caring responsibilities, reduced physical capability, psychological trauma and concerns about being stigmatised. While emerging early cancer detection tests may offer more accessible opportunities to take part, inequitable uptake may persist if individuals do not perceive there to be a sufficient reason to test, are not confident to take part or doubt the accuracy of sample tests and their ability to facilitate diagnosis and treatment.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Study methods and results reporting according to COnsolidated criteria for REporting Qualitative research (COREQ) checklist.
(DOCX)
S2 File

## Protocol.
(DOCX)
S3 File

## Interview materials.
(DOCX)
S4 Table

## Illustrative quotes.
(DOCX)

The authors would like to thank Dr Georgia Black for her advice and expertise during the design of the interview materials and Margaret Ogden and David Holden (public and patient representatives) for providing valuable feedback for refining the interview topic guide and materials. They would also like to thank the staff from local community centres who offered their help in recruiting individuals to take part in the study and provided private spaces for the interviews to be held in.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0327052.r001Decision Letter 0
PepitoVeincentAcademic Editor© 2025 Veincent Pepito2025Veincent Pepitohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0PONE-D-25-05025Exploring how and why attributes of existing and emerging early cancer detection tests influence experiences and participation among individuals at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage: a qualitative interview studyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bonfield,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by May 16 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Veincent Christian Pepito
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
1. When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. We note that you have indicated that there are restrictions to data sharing for this study. For studies involving human research participant data or other sensitive data, we encourage authors to share de-identified or anonymized data. However, when data cannot be publicly shared for ethical reasons, we allow authors to make their data sets available upon request. For information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
Before we proceed with your manuscript, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially identifying or sensitive patient information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., a Research Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board, etc.). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. Please see http://www.bmj.com/content/340/bmj.c181.long for guidelines on how to de-identify and prepare clinical data for publication. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories. You also have the option of uploading the data as Supporting Information files, but we would recommend depositing data directly to a data repository if possible.
Please update your Data Availability statement in the submission form accordingly.
3. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Dear authors, thank you very much for a well-written manuscript. However, the reviewers have identified some issues which I hope you will address.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Dear Authors,
The investigation of users’ preferences regarding cancer detection tests among people at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage can contribute to overcoming barriers to access those tests. Please see my comments below.
When you respond to the comments, please provide your answers in a table with two columns, one with comments and the other with your answers. In the answer column, for each comment separately, include the revised text, in addition to your answer.
“Over 40% of individuals in the United Kingdom (UK) are diagnosed with cancer at an advance stage.(1)” Do you mean that 40% of the population is sick or that 40% of the diagnosed people are already in an advanced stage? Please revise the sentence to improve clarity.
Please correct the citation style. Insert the citation in the appropriate place: with the associated text, not after it (before “.” or “,”, not after them).
Please explain why it is important to know people’s preferences. It is important to motivate the usefulness of your study.
Who cares about people’s preferences? From a supply-demand perspective, when the supply (tests) is much lower compared to the demand (need for tests), the supply side doesn’t care what the consumers (patients) want. If there are 100 pairs of shoes on the market and 1 million barefoot people needing shoes, who cares what color they like or even what size?
Also, mention who should consider these preferences (scientists who create the tests, professionals who use it on patients, etc.).
Why did you focus only on people at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage? Do they represent the majority of sick people? What about the rest? Are they unimportant?
Can the results be extrapolated to people who are not at risk? Why/ Why not?
Please explain why the vignette task and think-aloud protocol are suitable for this study.
Please mention what data analysis methods you used and motivate your choice.
“This qualitative study aimed to use a vignette task and think…” The interview is not mentioned. Please add it. Also, it should be written that the study “used” instead of “aimed to use”.
“Qualitative semi-structured interviews supplemented with written descriptions of cancer detection tests, vignettes of tests scenarios and an adapted think-aloud protocol as participants were encouraged to deliberate between different test attributes” The predicate is missing. Please revise.
“People living in London were recruited via community-based methods between 01/02/2023 – 08/02/2024.” It is not clear what the month and the day are. Please use words for the months.
Please briefly explain what a vignettes task and a think-aloud protocol are.
Please explain what framework analysis is and why this was considered suitable and preferred to other methods for qualitative data.
“Participants were asked to read the descriptions of different types of early cancer detection tests and to think aloud while considering if anything about each test could be potentially off-putting from a patient perspective. Then participants were asked to engage with the vignette task and to think aloud while arranging the tests in order of preference that they thought the individual in the vignette would choose…. ” In addition to this description, please provide the interview script, the list with all questions used in the interview. Include the main questions, helping questions, etc. When presenting the questions, indicate the specific objective to which they respond. For example, it is mentioned that the study objective is to find out “how and why attributes of …. tests influence testing experiences and participation”. Show what questions focused on “how”, “why”, “experiences”, and “participation”.
This information supports the replication of the study.
“FMW is also a qualified GP.” What does GP mean?
The text in Fig is very blurred. Please improve it.
“Individuals discussed several attributes of early cancer detection tests that influence their capability and opportunity to take part based on their individual circumstances…..(the rest of the text)”. Vignettes are about imaginary people, Alex and Sam. The manuscript text presents the interview results as they were about the interview participants. This creates confusion. Please provide the necessary information to remove the confusion. How can you know they referred to themselves when they answered the questions about Alex and Sam and not to some imaginary people? What did you do to ensure that?
What do Q1, Q2, .. mean? Q from quote, or is this a code for each person? Please explain.
“Although, some highlighted that individuals who are less mobile may need the support from a relative (5).” Does “(5)” refer to the quote mentioned below this sentence? If yes, please write Q5.
The study objective is to find out “how and why attributes of …. tests influence testing experiences and participation”. Please present the results in a way that responds to the how and why, and highlights the experiences, and participation.
Reviewer #2: Thank you for the opportunity to review this manuscript, which is timely regarding the likely future direction of cancer early detection, and in considering it from the perspective of those (inverse care law) least served by current cancer screening/early detection (or with the most to potentially benefit).
It was great to see the involvement of public/patient members in the research material development - were they involved in any of the analysis or interpretation (I think from the coding description that they were not?). Was any other health literacy lens used for the materials given the target audience?
Thank you for the COREQ this was also useful.
I wasn't familiar with Think-Aloud Protocols - it would be useful if the description and a little more detail on this was provided at first use of the term.
It wasn't clear to me why participants needed a debrief sheet (line 164) - this is usually used in studies which involve deception?
It wasn't clear to me why framework analyses was used over other types of qual analyses (line 168) - another sentence or two justification would be helpful to the reader.
Appropriate limitations were outlined including the nature of the sample being relatively highly educated, urban, and white/english speaking.
I have two broad questions to the authors to consider whether any further clarification/detail in the manuscript may be useful:
The I-SAM (which includes COM-B) and CanTest are about informing/designing equitable screening/integrated programmes - from the protocol it appears the research wasn't originally designed using either framework - were these selected as part of the presentation of results? COM-B (the third part of I-SAM) appears to be the main aspect used in the results for this paper. Thinking about inequities, SES inequities as the focus of this work, the I-SAM proposes ways that theory and research can improve screening access in particular via patient and environmental factors - the background and the findings/discussion indicate a strong attention to the participant/patient factors but less on the opportunity side (particularly the environmental aspect/framing - opportunities to design programmes/approaches using these findings eg improving systems health literacy/information accessibility, how tests are offered and who by, ways to improve trustworthiness etc.
The second question was about including both screening (asymptomatic) and early detection (symptomatic) vignettes - do you think there was any confusion about this for the participants, and whether the symptomatic vignette impacted the perspectives/preferences more? Were the responses analyses separately for the different vignettes?
It was interesting that this study was about a broad range of test types across a broad set of potential screening/early detection settings - however one key note in the discussion (line 413) was that further research will be needed to understand perceived risk associated with tests in specific contexts. Given the potential nature of MCEDs/panels used for risk stratification/eligibility/screening/early detection do the authors think that studies in context will be possible?
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0327052.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
15 May 2025

Dear Veincent Christian Pepito,
We are very grateful to you and the reviewers for taking the time to review the paper and provide meaningful feedback. We have addressed the journal requirements including updating the file labels, manuscript format and data availability statement. We have also changed the reference numbered 45 (a report published by Cancer Research UK) to the more recently published and associated journal article. The reference numbered 48 has been updated to an alternative publication as the previous article had been redacted.
We have now addressed each comment from the reviewers below and believe these revisions have significantly strengthened the clarity, replicability and impact of the study. We hope that you will now consider this acceptable for publication in PLOS ONE.
Yours sincerely,
Stefanie Bonfield, MSc
PhD student, Centre for Cancer Screening, Prevention, and Early Diagnosis, Wolfson Institute of Population Health, Queen Mary University of London
Dr Samantha Quaife, PhD CPsychol
Reader in Behavioural Science, Centre for Cancer Screening, Prevention, and Early Diagnosis, Wolfson Institute of Population Health, Queen Mary University of London
No. Comment Response
Reviewer#1
1. Dear Authors, The investigation of users’ preferences regarding cancer detection tests among people at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage can contribute to overcoming barriers to access those tests. Please see my comments below.
When you respond to the comments, please provide your answers in a table with two columns, one with comments and the other with your answers. In the answer column, for each comment separately, include the revised text, in addition to your answer.
R1: Thank you very much for your helpful comments, please see your responses laid out below as you request.
2. “Over 40% of individuals in the United Kingdom (UK) are diagnosed with cancer at an advance stage.(1)” Do you mean that 40% of the population is sick or that 40% of the diagnosed people are already in an advanced stage? Please revise the sentence to improve clarity.
R2: Thank you, this has been revised for clarity:
Over 40% of individuals with cancer in the United Kingdom (UK) are diagnosed at an advanced stage.(1)
3. Please correct the citation style. Insert the citation in the appropriate place: with the associated text, not after it (before “.” or “,”, not after them).
R3: This has now been amended for all in-text citations.
4. Please explain why it is important to know people’s preferences. It is important to motivate the usefulness of your study.
Who cares about people’s preferences? From a supply-demand perspective, when the supply (tests) is much lower compared to the demand (need for tests), the supply side doesn’t care what the consumers (patients) want. If there are 100 pairs of shoes on the market and 1 million barefoot people needing shoes, who cares what color they like or even what size?
Also, mention who should consider these preferences (scientists who create the tests, professionals who use it on patients, etc.).
R4: Thank you, the benefit of preference research for those who receive tests as well as the healthcare systems involved in their delivery has been outlined in the introduction as follows:
Preference research can guide test developers, policy makers and healthcare professionals in delivering early detection tests in ways that align with public and patient needs and optimise uptake. In turn this can reduce the burden of late diagnosis on patients and healthcare systems. This is important given that several new test modalities to support early cancer detection are under development …
5. Why did you focus only on people at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage? Do they represent the majority of sick people? What about the rest? Are they unimportant?
R5: Thank you, the increased cancer risk and mortality facing these groups has been outlined in the first paragraph:
Individuals experiencing poorer socioeconomic conditions make up a greater proportion of these groups who do not attend(3, 4), yet face greater incidence and lower survival rates across several types of cancer (5, 6).
The reason for focusing on this group based on their under-representation in previous research is now reiterated in the final paragraph of the introduction:
In addition to experiencing barriers to engaging with cancer tests, individuals experiencing socioeconomic deprivation also face additional challenges to taking part in health research.(20) Consequently, there have been calls to ensure that targeted efforts are made to include these groups in future research to narrow cancer disparities.(21, 22)
6. Can the results be extrapolated to people who are not at risk? Why/ Why not?
R6: Thank you, we have now acknowledged the validity of extending the findings beyond the population in the discussion section for the first theme:
It is likely that these findings extend to those who face similar barriers to participation regardless of socioeconomic disadvantage, underlining the value of achieving equitable access to improve uptake across the population.
And the second theme:
It is not clear from this study whether these perceptions are more prominent among those at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage or also persist across the population.
7. Please explain why the vignette task and think-aloud protocol are suitable for this study.
R7: Thank you, the reasons for including the vignette task and think-aloud protocol have now been outlined in the ‘Interview Materials’ section:
To help individuals consider which attributes of tests would be important, particularly those without previous experiences of being invited to take part in testing, two sets of interview materials were designed to introduce individuals to attributes of existing and emerging cancer detection tests. This included example test descriptions and a vignette task. Vignette tasks are a contemporary research tool that involve presenting participants with a hypothetical scenario to elicit individuals’ opinions and preferences.(36). It was expected that an individual’s first impressions and deliberations between test options would highlight which attributes were important for decision making and why, as well as which, if any, attributes were considered irrelevant or unimportant. For this reason, individuals were encouraged to read each set of materials and express their first impressions, thought processes and feelings out loud while engaging with each task, known as an adapted think-aloud protocol(36).
8. Please mention what data analysis methods you used and motivate your choice.
R8: Thank you, this has been expanded in the Data analysis section as follows:
The data were analysed in NVivo (version 12) using framework analysis and guided by seven recommended stages: Transcription, Familiarisation, Coding, Developing a working analytical framework, Applying the analytical framework, Charting the data into a framework matrix, Interpreting the data(41, 42). This method does not dictate whether data is analysed inductively or deductively and allows this to be informed by the research topic.(41) This was considered appropriate for systematically identifying similarities and differences in attitudes towards attributes of tests before interpreting thematic associations.(40-42) Other analytical approaches which are predominantly informed by the data (e.g. Grounded theory,) were not selected because the researchers were interested in exploring attitudes towards pre-defined attributes of cancer detection tests.
9. “This qualitative study aimed to use a vignette task and think…” The interview is not mentioned. Please add it. Also, it should be written that the study “used” instead of “aimed to use”.
R9: Thank you for highlighting this, the sentence now reads:
‘This qualitative interview study used a vignette task and think-aloud protocol to explore…’
10. “Qualitative semi-structured interviews supplemented with written descriptions of cancer detection tests, vignettes of tests scenarios and an adapted think-aloud protocol as participants were encouraged to deliberate between different test attributes” The predicate is missing. Please revise.
R10: Thank you, this now reads as follows:
‘Qualitative semi-structured interviews were conducted and supplemented with written descriptions of cancer detection tests, a vignette task (where hypothetical tests scenarios were presented) and an adapted think-aloud protocol (where participants were encouraged to deliberate between different test attributes while thinking out loud).’
11. “People living in London were recruited via community-based methods between 01/02/2023 – 08/02/2024.” It is not clear what the month and the day are. Please use words for the months.
R11: This has been amended:
‘People living in London were recruited via community-based methods between 1st February 2023 and 1st February 2024.’
12. Please briefly explain what a vignettes task and a think-aloud protocol are.
R12: The ‘Study design and setting’ section now reads as:
‘Qualitative semi-structured interviews were conducted and supplemented with written descriptions of cancer detection tests, a vignette task (where hypothetical tests scenarios were presented) and an adapted think-aloud protocol (where participants were encouraged to deliberate between different test attributes while thinking out loud).’
This is further explained in the ‘Interview Materials’ section, see comment #7.
13. Please explain what framework analysis is and why this was considered suitable and preferred to other methods for qualitative data.
R13: Thank you, this has been expanded in the Data analysis section as follows:
The data were analysed in NVivo (version 12) using framework analysis and guided by seven recommended stages: Transcription, Familiarisation, Coding, Developing a working analytical framework, Applying the analytical framework, Charting the data into a framework matrix, Interpreting the data(41, 42). This method does not dictate whether data is analysed inductively or deductively and allows this to be informed by the research topic.(41) This was considered appropriate for systematically identifying similarities and differences in attitudes towards attributes of tests before interpreting thematic associations.(40-42) Other analytical approaches which are predominantly informed by the data (e.g. Grounded theory,) were not selected because the researchers were interested in exploring attitudes towards pre-defined attributes of cancer detection tests.
14. “Participants were asked to read the descriptions of different types of early cancer detection tests and to think aloud while considering if anything about each test could be potentially off-putting from a patient perspective. Then participants were asked to engage with the vignette task and to think aloud while arranging the tests in order of preference that they thought the individual in the vignette would choose…. ” In addition to this description, please provide the interview script, the list with all questions used in the interview. Include the main questions, helping questions, etc. When presenting the questions, indicate the specific objective to which they respond. For example, it is mentioned that the study objective is to find out “how and why attributes of …. tests influence testing experiences and participation”. Show what questions focused on “how”, “why”, “experiences”, and “participation”.
This information supports the replication of the study.
R14: Thank you, the topic guide, including questions and prompts, has now been included in the supplementary file alongside the interview materials and instructions for the think-aloud protocol. We hope this improves the replicability of the study.
Questions were designed to be open-ended to allow individuals to reflect on the influence of attributes on their decisions to take part or their experiences of taking part, both of which were expected to be relevant to how and why attributes influence participation. This is now described in the interview materials section using examples to illustrate these objectives:
A semi-structured topic guide was developed consisting of questions about individuals’ attitudes towards specific attributes of cancer detection tests. These related both to tests they had previous experience making decisions about (i.e., had been invited to consider before or had taken part in the test before) and/or cancer tests that might be offered to them in the future. Questions were designed to be open-ended (e.g. ‘What was your experience of being able to get to the test?’) to allow individuals to reflect on how attributes influenced their decision to test or their experiences (e.g. preferences for a test location) and/or why they held those views (e.g. preferred a local location because they were less mobile). Interview questions and prompts were loosely based on the COM-B model of behaviour change(7), to understand how and why attributes influenced their capability, opportunity and motivations to take part in testing. The subsequent analysis interpreted interviewees’ accounts to identify attributes that appeared to be instrumental in driving test decision-making and participation.
15. “FMW is also a qualified GP.” What does GP mean?
R15: Thank you this has been clarified as a General Practitioner (GP).
16. The text in Fig is very blurred. Please improve it.
R16: Thank you, this has been addressed and the revised figure passes checks in PLOS’s NAAS tool and the PACE digital diagnostic tool. We believe the image may remain blurred in the PDF builder of the submission form, but is not when the image is downloaded.
17. “Individuals discussed several attributes of early cancer detection tests that influence their capability and opportunity to take part based on their individual circumstances…..(the rest of the text)”. Vignettes are about imaginary people, Alex and Sam. The manuscript text presents the interview results as they were about the interview participants. This creates confusion. Please provide the necessary information to remove the confusion. How can you know they referred to themselves when they answered the questions about Alex and Sam and not to some imaginary people? What did you do to ensure that?
R17: Thank you for raising this. We have now provided further information about the justification for including a third person vignette task in the ‘Interview materials’ section:
Vignette tasks are appropriate for facilitating the discussion of sensitive topics.(36) It was expected that the inclusion of vignette scenarios described in the third person would allow individuals to share their preferences for attributes of tests without feeling obliged to share personal experiences or reasons for taking part in health testing if they did not wish to.
We have also described the steps taken to ensure the results were reflective of participants’ personal preferences when discussing the vignette tasks in the ‘Data analysis’ section:
Analysis of responses to the third person vignette tasks was focused on the reasons individuals cited for preferred attributes based on their own beliefs (e.g. ‘I think most people would prefer’) or personal circumstances (e.g. ‘If it was me ..’).
18. What do Q1, Q2, .. mean? Q from quote, or is this a code for each person? Please explain.
R18: This has now been clarified in parentheses:
Sub-themes are supplemented with numbered illustrative quotes (e.g. Quote 1 is denoted by Q1).
19. “Although, some highlighted that individuals who are less mobile may need the support from a relative (5).” Does “(5)” refer to the quote mentioned below this sentence? If yes, please write Q5.
R19: Thank you for highlighting this error, this has now been amended to (Q5).
20. The study objective is to find out “how and why attributes of …. tests influence testing experiences and participation”. Please present the results in a way that responds to the how and why, and highlights the experiences, and participation.
R20: Thank you for raising this ambiguity. The reasons for analysin
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers 15.05.25.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0327052.r003Decision Letter 1
PepitoVeincentAcademic Editor© 2025 Veincent Pepito2025Veincent Pepitohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1Exploring how and why attributes of existing and emerging early cancer detection tests influence experiences and participation among individuals at risk of socioeconomic disadvantage: a qualitative interview study
PONE-D-25-05025R1
Dear Dr. Bonfield,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Veincent Christian Pepito
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Dear Authors,
You responded to my comments. I do not have new ones.
Good luck with your research!
Kind regards,
The Reviewer
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0327052.r004Acceptance letter
PepitoVeincentAcademic Editor© 2025 Veincent Pepito2025Veincent Pepitohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-25-05025R1
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bonfield,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Mr Veincent Christian Pepito
%CORR_ED_EDITOR_ROLE%
PLOS ONE