pmcPLOS Glob Public HealthPLOS Glob Public Health4390plosgph9918283779606676plosPLOS Global Public Health2767-3375PLOSPMC12646463PMC12646463.112646463126464634128933010.1371/journal.pgph.0004883PGPH-D-25-013351Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAfricaNigeriaMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesInfectious Disease ControlVaccinesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and health sciencesMedical conditionsInfectious diseasesViral diseasesHepatitisHepatitis BMedicine and health sciencesGastroenterology and hepatologyLiver diseasesInfectious hepatitisHepatitis BSocial SciencesSociologyCultureBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyNeonatesEcology and Environmental SciencesSustainability ScienceImproving training on hepatitis B research in Nigeria: Findings from an innovation bootcamp to strengthen capacity
Innovation bootcamp in hepatitis B researchhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1547-989XAfadapaMaria A.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing OlusanyaOlufunto A.ConceptualizationData curationInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing KaluluPeterConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareVisualizationWriting – review & editing ObodoechinaNkirukaConceptualizationInvestigationProject administrationResourcesVisualizationWriting – review & editing ShahSonam J.ResourcesVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing OjoTemitopeMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing SalakoAbideenConceptualizationData curationInvestigationProject administrationResourcesWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0001-7074-3788OgbehJosephConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationProject administrationResourcesWriting – review & editing AkinsoluFolahanmi T.Data curationInvestigationProject administrationResourcesWriting – review & editing NwaozuruUcheomaData curationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing MusaAdesola Z.Data curationSoftwareWriting – review & editing Gbaja-BiamilaTitilolaProject administrationResourcesSoftwareWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0006-1777-0732OlayiwolaOlaitan H.VisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7706-8260OladosuIdris A.VisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7546-8749DaySuzanneInvestigationProject administrationValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9679-9763ThompsonPeytonValidationWriting – review & editing FoleyKristieValidationWriting – review & editing Falade-NwuliaOluwaseunWriting – review & editing WuDanData curationWriting – review & editing LesiOlufunmilayoWriting – review & editing AirhihenbuwaCollins O.MethodologyResourcesValidationWriting – review & editing TuckerJoseph D.Funding acquisitionResourcesSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing EzechiOliverFunding acquisitionResourcesSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing IwelunmorJulietConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Medicine, Washington University in Saint Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America2
Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Lagos State University Teaching Hospital, Lagos, Nigeria3
Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America4
Department of Clinical Research, Nigeria Institute of Medical Research, Lagos, Nigeria5
Department of Implementation Science, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States of America6
Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Oyo, Nigeria7
Department of Infectious Diseases, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America8
Department of HIV, Hepatitis & STIs, World Health Organization Regional Office for Africa, Geneva, Switzerland9
Department of Health Policy and Behavioral Science, Georgia State University School of Public Health, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America10
Department of Clinical Research, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United KingdomBruxvoortKatiaEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
Hepatitis B infection (HBV) is of public health significance as it gives rise to substantial morbidity and mortality. According to the World Health Organization, approximately 254 million people had hepatitis B in 2022, including 12% who were children [ ]. In 2022, there were 1.2 million new infections globally, with over 6000 new cases each day [ ]. Africa bears a disproportionate burden of HBV, with more than 90 million people living with hepatitis B and C in the African Region, accounting for 26% of the global total [ ]. In 2019, Nigeria had an HBV prevalence of 8.1% among adults aged 15–64 years [ ]. HBV is a leading cause of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and is responsible for an annual incidence of 749,000 new cases of HCC and 692,000 mortalities [ ]. HBV vaccine initiated within 24 hours of birth, followed by three additional doses (typically at 6, 10, and 14 weeks after birth), provides durable immunity, substantially decreasing the risk of HBV and the incidence of liver cancer. Hepatitis B vaccines are highly effective in preventing HBV infection. Overall, hepatitis B vaccination produces sero-protection in 98% of healthy term infants. Vaccine response among infants does not vary considerably by maternal HBsAg status or HBIG administration. As a postexposure immunoprophylaxis measure for infants born to an HBsAg-positive birth parent, hepatitis B vaccine without HBIG is 75% effective at preventing perinatal HBV transmission, but when combined with HBIG, the effectiveness is 94% [ ]. Nevertheless, only 15 of the 54 African countries currently incorporate the hepatitis B birth dose (HepB-BD) vaccine into their routine vaccination schedules [ ]. HepB-BD is included in the Expanded Program of Immunization in Nigeria, which ensures that the vaccine is available to newborns at no cost [ ]. However, only half of all newborns are vaccinated against HBV, and the vaccine coverage within 24 hours of birth is 52% [ ]. The failure to engage end-users (caregivers of newborns and expectant mothers) in planning and implementation is a major driver of unsuccessful interventions addressing low vaccination coverage [ ].
Countries in the Global South (LMICs) often adopt intervention strategies from the Global North (HICs) without considering local contexts. Modifying these strategies for local relevance is better than wholesale adoption [ ]. Many projects in the global South have failed or faced problems because the primary beneficiaries were not involved in initiating, designing, and delivering the project [ ]. Community engagement interventions can be sustainable in resource-limited African countries by leveraging local structures and resources. This strategy reduces costs and fosters community ownership. Involving stakeholders, such as community leaders, in designing and implementing these interventions is essential to ensure effectiveness and sustainability [ ]. Recently, interest has grown in harnessing youth (15–29) [ ] to create solutions for public health issues affecting them and their communities [ , ]. While community ownership is important, emphasizing the agency of youth highlights why they are an ideal target audience. The rationale for youth-led intervention in Vaccination Uptake in Nigeria is that young people represent a significant portion of the population; 45.46% were between 15 and 35 years old in a total population of about 209.6 million in 2021 [ ]. Young people are enthusiastic, bring creativity and innovation to outreach, bridge generational gaps, and are future leaders in research. Their ability to mobilize peers, influence social norms, and engage with digital and grassroots platforms positions them uniquely to drive community transformation.
The Participatory Action Research (PAR) and Mega-Designathon approach with youth engagement to address vaccination uptake-related issues is a novel tool ensuring that health interventions are socially and culturally appropriate. By engaging youth in communities, PAR builds trust, empowers participants, creates learning opportunities for the youth, and implements effective, sustainable interventions embraced by the community. This approach strengthens community capacity, promotes leadership, and fosters a collaborative environment for improving health outcomes [ – ]. The PAR approach is informed by an equitable implementation science mindset, which draws explicit attention to the assets, values, and needs of the community in implementing evidence-based interventions with the community rather than just for the community. The Mega-Designathon approach is a time-based, three-stage participatory activity informed by design thinking, intensive collaborative teamwork, and follow-up activities for implementation research. It includes crowdsourcing, intensive collaboration, and an Innovation Bootcamp [ ].
This paper details a five-week NIH-funded For Communities by Communities (4CBYC) Innovation Bootcamp within the C3RISE (Cancer Control Center for Research on Implementation Science and Equity) project.
Despite being freely available, delivery and uptake of the hepatitis B birth dose (HepB-BD) vaccine in Nigeria remain suboptimal. To address this gap, we developed a structured Innovation Bootcamp model to train youth in hepatitis B research and implementation science, including but not limited to the epidemiology, burden, prevention, and public health impact, as well as development of implementation research skills.
This study aims to describe our approach and offer insights into how youth-led, crowdsourced strategies can identify barriers and facilitators to HepB-BD uptake and support sustained vaccine delivery in resource-limited settings.
By outlining our journey from generating ideas to developing implementation strategies to be piloted in the field, we aim to offer important insights for researchers keen on implementing Innovation Bootcamps to broaden health service access tailored to communities.

## Materials and methods

## Innovation bootcamp steps
The bootcamp was held in Lagos, Nigeria, from June 10 to July 21, 2024, with the goal of increasing the uptake of HepB-BD vaccination among newborns in Nigeria. The bootcamp was a five-week training program for young people to learn about research principles, entrepreneurship, and program management skills. The bootcamp brought together various communities of interest in a mutually supportive environment to enhance proficiency for youth participants in research, including ethics training, capacity building in implementation delivery, storytelling, group learning, business model development, and field research. The bootcamp followed a 4-day Designathon with Nigerian youth to generate innovative strategies to increase HepB-BD vaccination uptake in Nigeria.

## Ethics statement
Ethical approval was sought and obtained from the Institutional Review Board of the Nigerian Institute of Medical Research (NIMR #IRB/23/066), a the National eEthics bBody authorized to oversee biomedical research involving human participants. The research team ensured that the study was conducted in full compliance with NIMR IRB requirements, as well as international ethical guidelines such as the Declaration of Helsinki. In preparation for fieldwork, both the research team and participants obtained up-to-date certification in human subjects research.
The participants gave written informed consent to participate in the study. Before the commencement of bootcamp activities, trained study staff explained the purpose of the study, the procedures involved, potential risks and benefits, and the voluntary nature of participation. The information was provided both verbally and in writing to ensure understanding. Participants were given sufficient time to ask questions and make an informed decision. The respondents were assured of strict confidentiality regarding all information obtained throughout the study period.
Inclusivity in global research: Additional information regarding the ethical, cultural, and scientific considerations specific to inclusivity in global research is included in the Supporting Information ( ).

## Step 1: Identification and recruitment of teams.
Using the Participatory Action Research framework, the project began with an open call contest from February 1 to March 17, 2024, inviting interested participants to generate innovative ways to promote HepB-BD vaccination uptake in Nigeria by responding to an open call contest was advertised through flyers, social media, in-person informational sessions, and emails. Applicants were to submit their response to “How might we promote birth-dose hepatitis B vaccination for newborns in Nigeria?” as teams of at least two persons per team.
The research team received 351/362 submissions electronically (WhatsApp, email, and the our 4CBYC website) and 11/362 in person. The entries were evaluated based on relevance, novelty, feasibility, and their potential to promote equity and fairness. All entries were scanned for AI (Artificial Intelligence) usage, and submissions with > 10% of AI usage were automatically disqualified (we used ZeroChatGPT to detect AI-generated content). The top 40 entries were assessed by external judges who narrowed applicants’ submissions to the top 10 finalists. The top 10 finalist teams, after signing an informed written consent, were invited to the Designathon, held from April 3rd to 6th, 2024, at the Nigerian Institute of Medical Research (NIMR) in Lagos, Nigeria. During the event, they were mentored by experts in public health implementation science and members of the research team on co-designing and refining their solutions to enhance the uptake and awareness of HepB-BD vaccination among Nigerian communities. At the end of this event the ten teams pitched their implementation ideas to the judges and the five top teams moved to the next stage, being the bootcamp. The stages of the Designathon are shown in .
 From the Designathon, each team presented a prototype of their HepB-BD vaccination promotion strategy. They addressed the low uptake of the HepB-BD vaccine among Nigerian newborns, outlined the components of their promotional strategy, described team roles and responsibilities, provided a plan for pilot field implementation, and shared projections for implementation outcomes. The five teams that made it past the Designathon and qualified to move to the next stage which was the bootcamp, completed a pre-bootcamp application form that included demographics (e.g., age, place of residence, highest level of education, occupation) and a project proposal (e.g., innovation name and components of the HepB-BD vaccination promotion strategy). The teams ranged in size from two to five individuals, and one team facilitator was assigned to each team to mentor and support them in achieving the boot camp deliverables as needed. The team facilitators were key stakeholders in public health research, communication, entrepreneurship, social innovation, design thinking, youth engagement, social media management, product development, and marketing.

## Step 2: Organization of the pre-boot camp activities.
Preparation for the bootcamp began six months before the event and was guided by a modified lean startup journey [ ], offering an alternative to traditional academic approaches focusing on translating public health knowledge into practical, sustainable, and scalable solutions. It favors experimentation over elaborate planning and iterative design over traditional “big design up front” development. The process included: (1) formation, (2) validation, and (3) growth. Formation involved the teams further developing their innovation prototypes from the Designathon. The validation phase involved the teams utilizing the “Build, Measure, Learn” feedback loop that took them through the journey of building a Minimum Viable Product (MVP) using ideas generated from the Designathon. Lastly, growth involved working with the teams to identify ways to expand their ideas before the bootcamp. In addition, the research team and facilitators worked with the teams to identify the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT analysis) of the teams’ proposed solutions from the Designathon. Other pre-bootcamp activities included recruiting mentors for the instructional component of the bootcamp, recruiting judges for the project evaluations, and event planning logistics (e.g., acquisition of bootcamp venue, organizing transportation for participants, meals, and refreshments, scheduling field trips, and creating the schedule for the bootcamp). The timing of the bootcamp was carefully selected to accommodate the participants’ schedules, given that most were university students. Food, transportation, and accommodation were provided for all bootcamp participants.

## Step 3: Implementation of bootcamp activities.
The bootcamp consisted of three main components: (1) virtual instructional seminars and workshops, (2) community assessment field research, and (3) iterative concept development supported by mentors and facilitators. The instructional seminars and workshops laid the foundation for participants to engage in research and transform their ideas from the Designathon into HepB-BD vaccine promotion strategies that could be implemented and tested for feasibility and preliminary efficacy within community settings. Workshops were conducted by subject-matter experts with experience working with young people. The speakers included entrepreneurs, researchers, communication specialists, youth ambassadors, and community leaders. At the end of the boot camp, teams were expected to deliver four main items: a Practice brief, a completed PLAN (People, Learn, Adapt, Nurture) worksheet, a detailed Persona page, and a Pitch (the 4Ps). The last two days of the bootcamp (July 20–21, 2024) were dedicated to pitching and judging. The judges comprised of community leaders, professionals in the field of research, public health physicians, vaccine advocates, and youth ambassadors. Overall, the teams were encouraged to establish contacts with stakeholders who are integral to the pilot implementation of the HepB-BD vaccination promotion strategies in their communities, complete an innovation plan and study protocol, and present a minimum viable product representing their HepB-BD vaccination promotion innovation at the time of the presentation. The presentation of prizes was performed immediately after the pitch. The Bootcamp training schedule is shown in .
 The pitch involved a team presentation addressing the problem, the solution components of the HepB-BD vaccine promotion strategy, team information and responsibilities, a plan for pilot implementation, and implementation outcome projections, cost model, pilot implementation budget, performance metrics, and sustainability plans. The ranking of the teams was based on the average scores by the judges (60) and average innovation plan scores (40) from the research team. The teams’ ideas and presentations were evaluated according to the four criteria, each accounting for 15 points of the total score:
1) Desirability: Does the innovation appeal to the target populations? Does it address the challenges (e.g., low cost, accessibility, acceptability)?
2) Impact: Will the innovation strategy significantly support and champion mothers in vaccinating their newborns? When available, will it reach all or most newborns in Nigeria?
3) Feasibility: Is the innovation feasible/easy to implement? Are the resources available to execute it?
4) Teamwork: How effective are the participants in working as a team, sharing responsibilities, communicating within, and providing mutual support, with effective problem-solving and time-management skills?
Seed funding (Prize money) was provided to the teams immediately after the pitch presentation (HEPCRUSADER, HEXA, M-CHILD, HEROMOMS and HEPRECIATE) towards the pilot of their proposed strategies: NGN 1,000,000 (≈ 700 USD) for first place, NGN 750,000 (≈ 500 USD) for second place, NGN 500,000 (≈ 350 USD) for third place, and NGN 250,000 (≈ 150 USD) for the fourth and fifth place positions each. All but one out of five (Team HEPRECIATE did not submit a proposal) submitted study proposals that were reviewed and approved by the research team. Although the Innovation Bootcamp was designed to build research capacity among youth, one team (HEPRECIATE) was represented by an older participant (aged 53) due to the lead member’s initial difficulty in recruiting a youth collaborator. Her temporary involvement ensured the team’s participation during the co-creation, however the team exited the project at the end of the bootcamp.

## Step 4: Post-bootcamp assessment.
A post-evaluation was conducted using a self-administered questionnaire with open-ended questions to assess participants’ overall experience with the bootcamp. Participants were recruited to complete the survey during the closing ceremony and while exiting the bootcamp venue the following day. Informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to data collection. The respondents were assured of strict confidentiality regarding all information obtained throughout the study.
From September 18–20, 2024, the four teams participated in a virtual refresher course focused on designing and conducting a pilot study. The research team delivered online lectures, covering topics such as implementation plans, community engagement, data management, research ethics, and conflict resolution. Each team developed a protocol to implement its pilot study, which obtained NIMR Institutional Review Board approval.

## Step 5: Data collection and analysis.
Sociodemographic characteristics, including age, sex, religious affiliation, highest education level attained, and participants’ employment status, were obtained before the start of the training. Pre- and post-survey data were collected on changes in knowledge of HBV and research skills, using a structured questionnaire with a 5-point Likert scale (See supplementary file ) adapted from our previous projects. Specifically, we utilized 12-item (12 questions) 5-point Likert scale questions to assess changes in knowledge of HBV with responses ranging from 1 = Not at all knowledgeable to 5 = Extremely knowledgeable. To assess research skills, we used a 22-item (22 questions) 5-point Likert scale with responses ranging from 1 = not at all skilled to 5 = very skilled. We used the default items that had been developed for prior projects. The survey was then tailored by our Nigerian team to ensure that the HBV-focused components were easily interpretable. Qualitative data about bootcamp participants’ preferences and needs were collected pre-training using a semi-structured, open-ended questions, such as: “what specific content would you like to covered during the bootcamp training?” and “what support would you need to have successful training at the bootcamp?”. Qualitative data collection proceeded until saturation, defined as the point at which additional interviews yielded no novel insights.
Data analysis was conducted using RStudio version 4.4.2. Descriptive statistics, such as frequencies and proportions, were calculated for socio-demographic variables. For age, both means and medians were reported. We summed the scores across rows for each participant for the different knowledge and research questions to obtain knowledge and research skills scores. Knowledge scores ranged from 12 to 60, while research skills scores fell between 22 and 110, with higher scores reflecting greater improvement. A comparative analysis was conducted using the pre- and post-intervention data to evaluate participants’ changes in knowledge and research skills. The Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test (Exact) was used to compare pre- and post-training data, and results were reported as mean and median differences at 5% level of significance. The qualitative data from the participants’ preferences were manually organized into themes and applied to the bootcamp activities.
Moreover, the thematic analysis framework was used to analyze qualitative data from the community needs assessment in a step-by-step process, identifying and synthesizing emerging themes from the pre-intervention survey developed by the teams using Clarke and Braun’s (2013) Six-Step Data Analysis Process [ ] as shown in . The initial coding was conducted by two members of the research team, and themes were iteratively refined through regular discussions and consensus-building. While formal inter-coder reliability measures were not calculated, the process involved collaborative checking and resolution of discrepancies to enhance credibility.
 Emerging themes from the implementation strategies proposed by the four teams were categorized utilizing the concepts of the PEN-3 cultural model for the pilot studies. shows some of the teams’ quotes.
 

## Conceptual framework
PEN-3 cultural model, an equity-centered framework that focuses on Perceptions (beliefs), Enablers (resources), and Nurturers (peers, family, community) within a cultural context that can be used as assets to improve health outcomes, was used by the teams to implement the proposed strategies in the community. PEN-3 ensures interventions are not only evidence-based but also equity-driven, responding to the unique contexts and lived experiences of specific communities; it moves beyond a one-size-fits-all approach, situates health within cultural and social realities, which enhances both its clinical applicability and practical relevance for developing effective and sustainable community-based interventions. PEN-3 model highlights factors within a setting that are positive, existential (inherent to the community, without harmful health consequences), or negative and may influence key stakeholders’ and respondents’ participation in interventions. The framework comprises three dimensions. The first dimension of the framework, cultural identity, defines the target audience (person, extended family, and neighborhood). The second dimension of the PEN-3 model consists of relationships and expectations, factors like perceptions, enablers, and nurturers. While perceptions represent the knowledge, attitudes, values, and beliefs that play a significant role in the motivation of individuals, enablers are social, system, or structural influences that enhance health beliefs and practices. Nurturers are the role of family and peers in making changes. The third dimension is cultural empowerment. Here, beliefs and customs about health outcomes are identified as positive, negative, or existential [ ]. The PEN-3 model is illustrated in .
 The three conceptual frameworks used in this study are illustrated in .
 

## Results
Five teams, comprising 15 individuals with 2–4 participants per team, completed the bootcamp. As a result, our teams were from the South-West Region and one from the South-East of Nigeria. The mean age was 25.5 years with 14 participants aged 20–28, and one 53-year-old; there were 14 females and one male. Most participants had a secondary school (high school) certificate (53.3%) or a bachelor’s degree (40%). Two-thirds of the participants were unemployed at the time of the bootcamp, and 60% had never participated in a bootcamp before the current one. The socio-demographics are shown in .
 The pre- and post-bootcamp evaluations of participants’ responses from the five teams were compared using the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test, and the results indicated that the specific indicators improved after the bootcamp, which we report here. The median (IQR) score for participants’ research skills at the pretest was 57.0 (48.0 – 64.5), compared to 74.0 (70.0 – 81.5) at the post-test (p < 0.001). Similarly, the median (IQR) score for HBV-related knowledge at the pretest was 42.0 (37.0 – 44.5), compared to 47.0 (43.0 – 52.5) (p = 0.010) at the post-test. According to the survey, participants’ skills in conducting research (methods, proposal writing, completing SWOT analysis, engaging stakeholders, ethical considerations, and conducting field pilot studies) and knowledge about hepatitis B (HBV, HepB vaccination, HBV complications) improved significantly compared to the pre-bootcamp evaluation, with increases of 29.82% (p < 0.001) and 11.90% (p = 0.010), respectively. Descriptive statistics of research skills and HBV-related knowledge are shown in .
 The results from the analysis of the participants’ preferences on the content of the training at the bootcamp included immunization history and latest vaccine development, vaccine policies, developing and refining ideas, field research, feasibility of implementation, health promotion and education strategies, data collection, and analysis. The detailed descriptive statistics are found in the supplementary .

## Proposed HBV-BD vaccination promotion strategies
The thematic analysis framework analyzed qualitative data in a step-by-step process to identify and synthesize emerging themes [ ]. The key themes emerging from the qualitative analysis of the pre-intervention survey are as follows:
Knowledge of the people living in the community about the importance of HepB-BD vaccination (caregivers, mothers, their families, pregnant women).
Awareness and knowledge about HBV and its vaccine among traditional birth attendants (TBA), healthcare workers (HCW), educators, and community leaders.
The facilitators and barriers that influence the uptake of the HepB-BD vaccination.
The effectiveness, acceptability, and feasibility of the health intervention in increasing the uptake of the HepB-BD vaccination.
Beliefs, perceptions, and attitudes regarding HepB-BD vaccine.
The proposed strategies addressing the key themes were diverse among the teams, such as training community health workers and traditional birth attendants, educating and sensitizing women in the community, creating a referral system, dialogue with community leaders, and involving families in decision-making, among other strategies, are shown in .
 This figure presents the community-driven strategies to improve hepatitis B birth dose vaccine uptake developed by four youth-led teams, HEPCRUSADER, HEROMOMS, HEXA, and M-CHILD during the innovation bootcamp. Each team proposed culturally informed, community-based interventions aimed at improving linkage between pregnant women, mothers, traditional birth attendants (TBAs), and formal health systems, increasing public awareness, and strengthening vaccination adherence through education, referral systems, and digital tools. Detailed strategies with reference to the PEN-3 Model are found in the supplement file .
The PEN-3 cultural model emphasizes the relationships and expectations domain, which culturally empowers the community to harness its positive assets. These include the safety of vaccines for newborns and their role in preventing illnesses, the availability of free and accessible vaccines, and the support mothers receive from family, peers, and healthcare workers when vaccinating their newborns. Existential perceptions, enablers, and nurturers are unique to the community and deeply embedded in cultural and societal norms, such as the preferred place of giving birth, the language of communication, spirituality and religion, respect for elders’ opinions, and beliefs that hospitals are costly. Negative beliefs lead people to think that foreign medical interventions are harmful, that newborns are too frail to receive any vaccination, that vaccines are expensive, that hospital staff are unfriendly, that hospitals are overcrowded, and that immunization schedules are inconvenient. The items to be addressed by the proposed strategies in the bootcamp participants’ communities are categorized into the PEN-3 model domains shown in .
 

## Discussion
This study demonstrated how a youth-led bootcamp generated community-centered strategies to promote HepB-BD vaccination uptake in Nigeria. Drawing on the PEN-3 cultural model and participatory action frameworks, the bootcamp supported the development of tailored interventions that recognized the complexity of cultural, structural, and informational barriers to timely newborn vaccination. All strategies developed by youth participants highlighted the importance of healthcare facility-based and community-based births for Nigerian newborns. This reflects that the teams comprehended the needs of the target populations in Nigeria. The results align with previous studies, indicating that involving the audience in design ensures culturally relevant and logistically feasible outputs that meet community needs [ , ]. Additionally, some proposed innovations included a linkage-to-care element, which is often seen as a barrier to prompt vaccination [ ]. Overall, to enhance community awareness and uptake of the HepB-BD vaccine, the teams recommended training and capacity building for traditional birth attendants, educating community health workers, conducting community outreach, hosting workshops, running awareness campaigns, and fostering partnerships between TBA and primary healthcare facilities. One team also suggested an innovative chatbot tool to remind mothers to vaccinate their newborns, expecting that this method would be user-friendly and accessible to Nigerian mothers. Another team proposed implementing a referral system from TBAs to immunization services at primary health centers. The proposed strategies by the four teams converged around three major themes:

## 1. Community engagement and education
Community engagement and education are recurring themes in the proposed teams’ strategies. HEPCRUSADER emphasized mobilizing and educating community gatekeepers as HepB-BD vaccine ambassadors to conduct workshops in community health centers and other public sites to reach health workers, pregnant women, and family members. The goal was to educate them on the need for HepB-BD vaccination to prevent liver cancer and dispel any existing misconceptions. Educational materials for these engagements would also be developed. HEROMOMS developed culturally tailored educational materials, including visual aids for TBAs to use during counseling sessions with pregnant women in local languages. Educational materials, such as flyers, would be developed to serve as visual aids for the already trained TBAs during counseling sessions with pregnant women in their local communities’ languages. HEXA proposed community dialogues, town hall meetings, and sensitization events while partnering with the Medical Women’s Association of Nigeria (MWAN) for advocacy and training. In addition, collaboration with the Medical Women’s Association of Nigeria (MWAN), Osun State Chapter will train TBAs, develop resource materials, provide funding, and advocate for policies. Similarly, M-CHILD planned health talks in maternity homes and community events, promoting awareness using the slogan “One Life, One Liver.” These strategies reflect the role of tailored, consistent education and community-driven awareness efforts in overcoming vaccine hesitancy and misinformation.

## 2. Training of traditional birth attendants
All four teams recognized TBAs as influential stakeholders for improving newborn vaccination rates. Training TBAs to understand HBV transmission, vaccine benefits, and counseling techniques was prioritized. HEPCRUSADER, HEROMOMS, and HEXA proposed structured workshops to empower TBAs with knowledge and practical tools for community education. M-CHILD integrated TBA engagement with digital innovations, notably using “Ayanfe,” a chatbot designed to remind mothers about vaccine schedules. Strengthening the capacity of TBAs is crucial because they often serve as the first and most trusted point of care for pregnant women in Nigerian communities.

## 3.Structured referral systems
Another primary focus was building formal referral pathways between TBAs and primary healthcare centers. HEROMOMS and HEXA proposed linking every TBA home with a specific health facility, with referral cards or tracking systems to ensure newborns are vaccinated promptly. M-CHILD planned to involve local vaccination officers directly in maternity homes to provide on-site HepB-BD vaccination within the first 24 hours. These referral systems aim to bridge gaps between informal birth settings and formal health services, improving continuity of care and ensuring timely immunization.

## Comparison of proposed strategies to scientific literature
Community-based participatory research has gained ground since the 20th century when designing solutions to ensure they fit into the context of the communities for which they are being designed [ ]. However, the participatory research approach is not just a list of strategies for community outreaches, but more of a “systematic effort to infuse community participation in decision-making, local theories of etiology and change, and community practices into the research” [ ]. The efforts used for this participatory research were employed in this study by having the interventions designed by young people who belong to the community. Most of the strategies proposed by the teams are found in various literature and have been used in several participatory research studies. One of the teams proposed the use of a chatbot described in the literature, which has shown its feasibility [ ]. Three of the four teams have proposed to develop educational materials in collaboration with the TBAs and other key stakeholders in the intervention community as part of their implementation strategy. This has also been utilized by the Community Health Improvement in Milwaukee’s Children Project (CHIMC) and fits into one of the key principles of community participatory research; co-learning ensures that input from both the researchers and members of the communities will be used to develop the educational material [ , ]. HEXA intends to leverage the influence of MWAN to push for increased funding and policies that support the integration of TBAs in vaccination programs. This strategy of using community participation to push for policy has been explored by Lucero et al in 2018 [ ].

## Potential benefits of youth-driven solutions
Youth-driven research is suited for a larger share of the population, as Nigeria has a large youth population. Also, sustainability becomes more feasible as an increasing number of youths are interested in participating in community projects to enhance their personal and professional development. The use of modern technology can be best understood and developed by the youth, such as the Ayanfe Chatbot by M-CHILD, the tracking and referral system.

## Challenges in implementation
While the proposed interventions by the teams in the Designathon and bootcamp offer promising approaches to improve HepB-BD vaccination uptake among newborns, various challenges across policy, facility, and community levels may make their implementation difficult [ ]. Sociocultural factors such as religious practices and beliefs, misconceptions about vaccines, bad experiences with previous vaccination interventions, and the dynamics of decision-making in Nigerian households, where male heads of household heavily influence critical decisions regarding their children’s health, may make communities more reluctant to accept the interventions at the community level [ , , ]. As a limited-resource country, Nigeria faces significant barriers, including shortages of trained personnel, erratic vaccine supplies, unreliable cold chain systems, and long distances between families and healthcare facilities [ , , ]. Policy and governance issues further complicate implementation, as existing HBV-BD vaccination policies are poorly enforced and inadequately documented [ , ]. A lack of sustained funding and innovation to culturally tailor interventions discourage the long-term implementation of many HBV vaccination initiatives [ , ].
Despite these challenges, discussed during the training, participants rated the bootcamp experience positively. They valued the opportunity to develop research plans, strengthen communication skills, and engage communities through field visits. Beyond enhancing their entrepreneurial and research competencies, participants valued the collaborative and supportive environment fostered by the bootcamp. This participatory approach enhanced technical skills and real-world application, preparing participants to work closely with communities in designing and implementing public health interventions.
Our study had some limitations. Although the pre- and post-improvements in knowledge and skills are statistically significant, the differences observed could be affected by variability or chance, as shown by the overlapping IQRs and the small sample size. It is also important to note that no adjustments were made for multiple comparisons in this study, which may influence the interpretation of the results. Also, the interpretation of pre-post improvements may not be generalizable, given the absence of comparator group, long-term follow-up, and small sample size. The number of finalists was determined pragmatically based on available resources, event logistics, and the capacity to provide meaningful mentorship and support during the bootcamp. The judges selected, to the best of their ability, the most innovative, relevant, feasible, and equitable strategies. Another limitation was that none of the participants originated from the Northen Nigeria; however, the open call was open to all Nigerian youth and the research team did not have control over the origin of the applicants. To reduce potential selection bias, the contest was promoted both online and offline through various channels, such as webinars, live media sessions, advertisements, radio and television interviews, flyers, banners, and interviews at Nigeria’s university campuses and religious centers. This method aimed to reach a diverse audience across different regions, educational levels, and socio-economic backgrounds, including those without reliable internet or social media access. Although some degree of self-selection is unavoidable in open-call models, this inclusive strategy was intended to expand reach and minimize selection bias. The project had only one in-person submission location (Lagos, South-West Nigeria), which may have also contributed to the distribution of entries.
Our findings hold implications for both research and practice. The bootcamp approach extends beyond the conventional idea-generation phase of other participatory methodologies by emphasizing the development and possible execution of intervention strategies. This model integrates elements of capacity-building and field research training programs with the dynamic, collaborative nature of Designathons [ ]. From a research standpoint, this study illustrates how the innovation bootcamp model can provide a structured platform for engaging young people, equipping them with skills to design and implement health interventions. The model provides a structured platform for engaging young people and leveraging local knowledge to foster public health innovation. The insights from this study can also guide future interventions and policies, ensuring they are culturally informed, tailored to community needs, and leverage existing community assets and competencies, essential factors for community empowerment and intervention sustainability. This would also strengthen policies implementation.

## Conclusion
Our bootcamp model was practical and leveraged the youth’s resourcefulness, capabilities, and resilience to generate community-centered and community-sensitive interventions to promote HepB-BD vaccination. The bootcamp led to the development of four community-centered and participatory social innovations to promote the uptake of HepB-BD vaccination among newborns in Nigeria. The four emerging bootcamp teams are piloting their strategies in their selected communities. The timeline for the screening, recruitment, and implementation of the pilot studies is six months. Findings from the pilot studies will ultimately inform additional research focused on increasing the reach, uptake, and long-term sustainability of youth-derived HepB-BD vaccination service delivery strategies in Nigeria, and reinforce the implementation of the existing policy on HepB-BD vaccination.
Our findings add to the growing body of evidence highlighting the importance of active youth involvement in bridging the HepB-BD vaccination gap among newborns in resource-limited settings such as Nigeria [ ]. We contribute to the literature by employing a bootcamp model as a framework to deliver hands-on training and engage youth in designing youth-driven vaccination service delivery strategies for Nigerian newborns. This approach underscores the practicality and benefits of leveraging youth skills and ingenuity to develop health interventions. Such initiatives are more likely to gain community acceptance and sustainability, as they are informed by local experiences, priorities, challenges, perspectives, and solutions.[ ].

## Supporting information
S1 Checklist

## Inclusivity in global research.
(DOCX)
S1 Table

## Summary of pre- and post-surveys assessing skills of bootcamp participants.
(DOCX)
S2 Table

## Implementation Strategies proposed by four teams in relation to the PEN-3 Model.
(DOCX)

We acknowledge the Nigerian Institute of Medical Research’s efforts in supporting the field work, participants’ recruitment, and on-site logistics.
 10.1371/journal.pgph.0004883.r001Decision Letter 0
BruxvoortKatiaAcademic Editor© 2025 Katia Bruxvoort2025Katia Bruxvoorthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
23 Jul 2025

PGPH-D-25-01335
Improving training on hepatitis B research in Nigeria: Findings from an innovation bootcamp to strengthen capacity
PLOS Global Public Health
Dear Dr. Afadapa,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Global Public Health. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Sep 06 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at globalpubhealth@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pgph/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Katia Bruxvoort, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS Global Public Health
Journal Requirements:
1. Please include a complete copy of PLOS’ questionnaire on inclusivity in global research in your revised manuscript. Our policy for research in this area aims to improve transparency in the reporting of research performed outside of researchers’ own country or community. The policy applies to researchers who have travelled to a different country to conduct research, research with Indigenous populations or their lands, and research on cultural artefacts. The questionnaire can also be requested at the journal’s discretion for any other submissions, even if these conditions are not met. Please find more information on the policy and a link to download a blank copy of the questionnaire here: https://journals.plos.org/globalpublichealth/s/best-practices-in-research-reporting. Please upload a completed version of your questionnaire as Supporting Information when you resubmit your manuscript.
2. If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise. 
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Does this manuscript meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria?>
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?-->?>
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: I don't know
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: Summary and Significance:
This manuscript describes a youth-centered, innovation-driven bootcamp conducted in Nigeria aimed at improving research capacity and promoting uptake of the hepatitis B birth dose (HepB-BD) vaccine. The intervention was framed using Participatory Action Research (PAR) and the PEN-3 cultural model, and the outcomes include both knowledge/skills gains among participants and the development of implementation strategies for real-world pilot testing.
Significance:
This is a promising and timely contribution to implementation science, particularly in LMIC contexts. The use of participatory frameworks and youth engagement offers a novel capacity-building model. However, the paper in its current form has serious methodological and reporting limitations that must be addressed to meet the standards of empirical rigor and replicability required for publication in PLOS Global Public Health.
Title and Abstract
•The abstract lacks structured headings, which limits clarity. Consider using a structured format (e.g., Background, Methods, Results, Conclusion).
•The study objective is unclear; the abstract shifts between describing the bootcamp and reporting pre-post results. Clarify whether the manuscript primarily evaluates outcomes or describes the intervention design.
•The phrasing of effectiveness is somewhat overstated given the small sample size and lack of a comparator.
•Key terms like "participatory action research," "PEN-3 model," and "designathon" are introduced without context or brief explanation, which may confuse non-specialist readers.
Introduction
•The public health significance of low HepB-BD coverage is clearly articulated with recent data. However, the introduction does not clearly define the research gap. It would help to explicitly state what has not been done before and how this bootcamp fills that gap.
•Several frameworks (PAR, PEN-3, Mega-Designathon) are introduced, but their relationships and rationale are not well synthesized. A visual model or conceptual diagram could help orient readers.
•The study objective, while stated, is buried in the final paragraph. Consider rephrasing it as a concise, standalone aim statement.
Methods
•Study Design: The manuscript claims a "mixed methods design informed by PAR," but the structure lacks coherence. The study more closely resembles a descriptive implementation study with embedded pre-post assessments and thematic analysis. No formal mixed methods integration is presented.
•Sample Selection: Participant recruitment is described in detail, but several concerns arise:
oSelection appears based on submission to an open call, which may introduce self-selection bias.
oThere is no description of how applicants were screened for eligibility or how representativeness was considered.
oNo justification is provided for the final sample size (N=15), and it is unclear whether this was considered sufficient to detect meaningful changes in pre-post metrics.
•Data Collection:
oThe structure and validation of the pre-post knowledge and research skills survey are unclear. Was the tool piloted? What is the scoring rubric? Were questions validated in a similar setting?
oThe 5-point Likert scales and score ranges (e.g., 1 – 45 for knowledge) need explanation. Composite scores should be justified.
oThe qualitative data collection is described in vague terms (“open-ended questionnaires,” “community needs assessment”), with no mention of interview guide development, piloting, or whether data saturation was achieved.
•Analysis:
oQualitative analysis is said to use Braun & Clarke’s six-step process, but key steps such as theme validation or inter-coder reliability are not described. While the six-step thematic analysis process is referenced, the manuscript does not report whether multiple coders were involved, how disagreements were resolved, or whether any measure of inter-coder reliability was assessed - steps that are critical to ensuring trustworthiness of qualitative findings.
oThe PEN-3 model is presented as a post-hoc framework for organizing results, but the rationale for its application during vs. after coding is not explained.
Results
•Participant Demographics: The sample size is very small (N = 15), heavily skewed by gender (93% female) and age (mean age 25.5). The generalizability of findings is extremely limited and should be acknowledged. The tables are misnumbered – jumping from Table 3 to Table 5.
•Quantitative Results:
oThe pre-post improvements in knowledge (+21.6%) and skills (+36.4%) are statistically significant, but raw score ranges and IQRs suggest considerable overlap. Although the authors report statistically significant improvements in knowledge and skills, the overlapping interquartile ranges and small sample size suggest that observed differences may be due to variability or chance. A more cautious interpretation is warranted, particularly in the absence of a comparator group.
oNo adjustment was made for multiple comparisons, which should be acknowledged.
oResults focus on statistical significance, but clinical or practical relevance is not discussed.
•Qualitative Findings:
oThemes are clearly organized and relevant, but there is no illustrative data (e.g., participant quotes) to ground them.
oThe integration of the PEN-3 model is conceptually sound but would benefit from clearer mapping between themes and PEN-3 components. Figure 3 and Table 5 are helpful, but interpretation is superficial.
•Innovation Strategies:
oOnly four out of five teams completed proposals. This missing data point (HEPRECIATE) should be discussed.
Discussion
•The discussion appropriately emphasizes the potential of youth-led, participatory design for improving public health outcomes. However:
oThere is little reflection on study limitations, including sample size, lack of a control group, non-random selection, and limited external validity.
oInterpretation of pre-post improvements may be overstated, given the absence of a comparator arm or long-term follow-up.
oThe conclusion hints at broader implications for implementation science, but these are not well-developed. How scalable or sustainable is this bootcamp model? What policy implications arise?
oThere’s no discussion of potential biases (e.g., social desirability, recall) or confounders. Given the non-random selection of participants and reliance on self-reported measures, results may be subject to selection and social desirability biases. In addition, without a control group, improvements in knowledge and skills cannot be causally attributed to the bootcamp alone.
Reviewer #2: 1. General Assessment
This manuscript presents a valuable and innovative approach to engaging youth in Nigeria to develop contextually relevant strategies aimed at improving uptake of the hepatitis B birth dose (HepB-BD) vaccine. The participatory action research framework, supported by the PEN-3 cultural model, provides a strong theoretical foundation. The study is commendable for its focus on community-based intervention, youth empowerment, and cultural responsiveness.
2. Originality and Relevance
The manuscript introduces an innovation bootcamp model informed by Participatory Action Research (PAR) and Designathon methodologies—rarely described in the Nigerian public health setting and particularly novel in the context of HBV vaccination.
The study is well-timed, addressing a key challenge in global hepatitis elimination efforts—birth dose vaccine uptake in LMICs, where health system barriers and sociocultural factors remain under-addressed. By emphasizing youth leadership, this study adds a new lens to capacity-building frameworks that typically overlook younger demographics.
Strengths:
a. Grounded in implementation science and cultural theory.
b. Strong cross-sectoral collaboration between Nigerian and US-based institutions.
c. Relevant to the journal’s mission of advancing global public health equity.
3. Methodology
The methodology is comprehensive, detailing each phase of the bootcamp from team recruitment, pre-bootcamp preparation, instructional components, and field implementation to evaluation.
Commendable Aspects:
a. Mixed-methods approach enhances data triangulation.
b. Use of the PEN-3 model is contextually apt for Nigeria.
c. Clear and ethical participant recruitment processes.
d. Pre/post knowledge assessments, use of Wilcoxon tests, and thematic qualitative analysis are appropriate.
Areas for Clarification:
a. Sample Size Justification: Only 15 participants completed the bootcamp. Please elaborate on how this small sample impacts generalizability or whether this was a pilot by design.
b. AI Screening: The manuscript mentions screening for “>10% AI use” during submission evaluation. This is commendable but would benefit from detail—e.g., what tool was used and the rationale for the cutoff?
c. Qualitative Data Saturation: Was thematic saturation reached in the needs assessments?
4. Data Presentation and Analysis
Tables and figures are effectively used. The statistical analyses are appropriate, particularly the use of Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for paired comparisons.
Suggestions:
a. Consider visualizing pre- and post-knowledge scores to enhance interpretation.
b. Include a schematic or visual summary of the PEN-3 mapping for each proposed strategy.
5. Ethical Considerations
The manuscript demonstrates adherence to ethical standards:
Ethical approval and informed consent were obtained.
Participant support (e.g., travel, meals) was provided.
Clarifications Needed:
a. Confirm whether pilot proposals underwent independent IRB review.
b. Address any risk of dual publication: the manuscript cites prior 4YBY bootcamps funded by NIH. Are any datasets or textual components overlapping?
6. Interpretation and Discussion
The discussion is thoughtful and well-grounded in theory and practice. The authors compare their findings to relevant global health and implementation science frameworks and acknowledge both strengths and limitations.
Suggestions:
a. The gender balance was highly skewed (93.3% female). Could this have influenced strategy design, especially in patriarchal settings where male decision-makers may dominate?
b. Further discussion on how the model could be institutionalized (e.g., through government health departments or university curricula) would strengthen the policy implications.
7. Conclusion
The manuscript ends with a strong, practical call to action. The authors provide clear next steps and a justification for further investment in youth-led capacity building for immunization and public health innovation.
8. Additional Comments
a. Language & Editing: The text is clear and well-written; minor grammatical improvements may be needed, please proof read the manucript.
b. Supplemental Files: Ensure all referenced figures/tables (e.g., S1–S4) are uploaded and correctly formatted.
Reviewer #3: Thank you for the opportunity to review this study. Overall, this manuscript described an innovative approach to engaging the community, specifically the youth, to generate creative solutions to addressing barriers to hepatitis B birth dose vaccine uptake among newborns. The approach was a 5-week bootcamp that comprised of activities aimed at building research capacity among young people and supporting the implementation of developed strategies. Though this approach was unique, it is unclear if the authors achieved the study aim, specifically if youth implemented develop strategies as this is not described in the manuscript. Please find attached a detailed list of suggested revisions to help strengthen this manuscript.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes:  Darlington Faijue
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PGPH-D-25-01335_reviewer_comments.pdf
10.1371/journal.pgph.0004883.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
5 Sep 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Rebuttal Letter PLOS.docx
10.1371/journal.pgph.0004883.r003Decision Letter 1
BruxvoortKatiaAcademic Editor© 2025 Katia Bruxvoort2025Katia Bruxvoorthttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
20 Oct 2025

Improving training on hepatitis B research in Nigeria: Findings from an innovation bootcamp to strengthen capacity
PGPH-D-25-01335R1
Dear doctor Afadapa,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Improving training on hepatitis B research in Nigeria: Findings from an innovation bootcamp to strengthen capacity' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Global Public Health.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact globalpubhealth@plos.org.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Global Public Health.
Best regards,
Katia Bruxvoort, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS Global Public Health
***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):