pmcPLoS Comput BiolPLoS Comput Biol328ploscompplosPLOS Computational Biology1553-734X1553-7358PLOSPMC11838891PMC11838891.111838891118388913991389110.1371/journal.pcbi.1012816PCOMPBIOL-D-24-009051Research ArticleComputer and Information SciencesSystems ScienceDynamical SystemsPhysical SciencesMathematicsSystems ScienceDynamical SystemsPhysical SciencesMathematicsAlgebraLinear AlgebraEigenvaluesComputer and Information SciencesSystems ScienceNonlinear DynamicsPhysical SciencesMathematicsSystems ScienceNonlinear DynamicsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitionDecision MakingResearch and Analysis MethodsSimulation and ModelingResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesMathematical FunctionsResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesCluster AnalysisHierarchical ClusteringPhysical SciencesMathematicsProbability TheoryProbability DistributionIdentification of recurrent dynamics in distributed neural populations
Identification of recurrent dynamics in distributed neural populationshttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4952-2470Osuna-OrozcoRodrigoConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing CastilloEdwardMethodologyWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3716-6173HarrisKameron DeckerConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7352-5081SantacruzSamantha R.ConceptualizationMethodologyResourcesWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 
1
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, United States of America

2
Department of Computer Science, Western Washington University, Bellingham, Washington, United States of America
Balaguer-BallesterEmiliEditor ]. Developing efficient analytical tools to gain well-principled insights from such data remains a fundamental challenge for modern neuroscience. This is in no small part due to the high-dimensional, complex, nonlinear, and nonstationary dynamics of the neural activity that they capture [ , ]. Linear dynamical systems (LDS) are a common approach to model neural time series as observations of underlying dynamic variables which are often assumed to be of lower dimension than the data [ , ]. Commonly, LDSs are further considered to be time-invariant [ , , ], an assumption that makes them more tractable. Nonetheless, time-invariant models are often too restrictive to deal with the complex nonstationary data observed in most neural recordings. For instance, time-invariant LDSs cannot capture multistable dynamics as observed in resting state [ ] or as hypothesized to underlie decision-making [ ]. Time-invariant LDSs also cannot account for the possibility of chaotic behavior [ ] or describe varying spectral power commonly observed in neural field data [ , ].
A natural candidate to overcome some of these limitations is a time-varying model. Such a model allows for a unique LDS at each time point. However, this comes at the cost of vastly increased complexity as well as reduced interpretability and usability for prediction of unseen data. To leverage benefits between these two time-invariant and time-varying alternatives, recurrent switching LDSs allow for a prescribed number of linear systems that describe the evolution of the system at different times [ – ]. However, unsupervised determination of both the existence of switching dynamics as well as of the appropriate number of subsystems remains challenging. Most existing approaches assume a fixed number of underlying dynamical systems to describe observed data and hence do not directly address the issue of how many underlying dynamical systems are appropriate for a given data set [ , , ]. Alternatively, likelihood-based detection of dynamical breaks can be costly for large-scale neural data with rich temporal structure [ ].
To address this problem, we leverage a highly scalable method for time-varying autoregression named Time-Varying Autoregression with Low-Rank Tensors (TVART) [ ]. TVART separates a multivariate time series into non-overlapping windows and considers a separate affine model parametrized by a system matrix and a constant vector. By stacking the matrices into a tensor and enforcing a low-rank constraint, TVART easily scales to high-dimensional data. Moreover, this method provides a low-dimensional representation of the dynamics by using the canonical polyadic decomposition [ ]. The low-dimensional representation can then be leveraged for clustering the dynamical system matrices.
Our previous work has demonstrated the use of TVART for the characterization of nonstationary dynamics in simulations and non-human primate electrophysiological data [ ]. Nevertheless, a major gap remains in establishing the validity of switching linear dynamical systems models as meaningful representations of neural activity. It is well known that neural activity, from single neurons to networks of brain areas, is inherently non-linear [ , ]. Here, we aim to establish whether identifying time-varying dynamics results in linear systems with a meaningful correspondence to the properties of an underlying non-linear system. We are interested in whether the identified linear systems correspond to attractors. Attractors of neural dynamics have been posited to correspond to important qualitative states such as memory representations and decisions [ , ]. Concretely, we test the sensitivity of this identification approach to increasing stochastic forcing and increasing complexity of the attractor landscape since significant stochasticity and complex high-dimensional dynamics are commonplace for large-scale neural data. Thus, by demonstrating that TVART recovers the attractor structure and timing of switching between attractors, we establish it as a robust basis for switching linear dynamical systems representations of neural activity. Moreover, TVART also allows us to determine whether or not switching linear systems are an appropriate approximation to observed neural dynamics.
In this study, we explore in detail the capabilities of TVART as an unsupervised and parsimonious (given the low-dimensional representation of the fitted linear systems) approach to identifying different dynamical neural regimes. To this end, we focus on simulations of neural mass models that exhibit multiple stable fixed-point attractors. Such models have been shown to be a biophysically sound and accurate description of human whole brain activity [ , , ]. We focus on two main cases where these neural mass models have been applied to neuroscience problems. The first entails two interacting neural populations whose activity can be used to model decision-making [ ]. The second case is based on whole-brain human structural connectivity where the neural mass model can be used to study functional connectivity dynamics [ , ]. For both cases, we explore simulations with varying numbers of attractors and at increasing noise levels. Increasing the value of either of these variables makes identifying well-separated switching linear dynamical systems a more dubious endeavor.
Moreover, stochastic forcing is essential for neural mass models to account for the variability inherent to populations of spiking neurons [ ]. It also influences the probability distribution of neural states, the frequency of switching across attractors, and how far from equilibrium the system is on average. In the context of decision-making, more attractors would correspond to more possible choices, while more stochasticity could correspond to higher uncertainty. Here, we demonstrate that clustering based on the low-dimensional representation of neural activity obtained by TVART can extract the exact number and timing of different attractor dynamics even in the presence of strong stochastic forcing. TVART is also used to gain insights regarding the temporal variability of the dynamics of models based on human brain connectivity matrices for connection strengths that lead to different attractor landscapes. Whole-brain dynamics can potentially sustain a vast number of attractors with ensuing dynamics that are very far from equilibrium. For such a scenario, it is vital to determine whether a recurrent linear systems approach faithfully captures the dynamics or if including the nonlinearity is essential. The results presented here illustrate how TVART produces insights that go beyond offering an accurate forecast model.
Furthermore, we explore the role of prediction delay in both prediction error and attractor recovery. We demonstrate that the prediction error scales exponentially with the prediction delay, with exponents given by the eigenvalues of the underlying stable fixed points. Through our simulations, we show that there appears to be an optimal prediction delay for the identification of different attractors in noisy settings. We show how increasing stochastic forcing degrades the capability to identify attractors for a given prediction horizon. Our results suggest that approximating neural time series with a set of linear dynamical systems can greatly benefit by optimizing prediction delay to balance error and dynamical regime identification.
In the following sections, we first describe the neural mass model used for our simulations and show the possible multistable regimes it can support. Then we describe how optimizing the prediction horizon helps tackle increasing dynamic complexity (e.g. increasing the number of attractors) and stochastic noise for attractor recovery. We then demonstrate how prediction error converges exponentially with prediction delay and analytically derive an expression that explains this convergence. Subsequently, we show how identifying temporal variability of dynamics also necessitates optimization of prediction delay and illustrate when increased temporal resolution can overcome rank penalties (which make for simpler models). We also describe the clustering of high-dimensional multistable dynamics via TVART. Finally, we discuss our results and their relevance for data-driven explorations of brain dynamics.

## Results

## Neural mass model
Neural mass models have been used to explain whole brain observations, with their capacity for multistability offering insights into resting state functional connectivity dynamics [ , , ]. We investigate the multistable dynamics of interacting populations of neurons using a biophysical neural mass model [ , , ]. Here, the term population refers to groups of neurons whose activity can be approximated by a collective firing rate [ ]. This model consists of the following system of stochastic differential equations (SDEs):
 dSdt=-1τsS+γ(1-S)⊙R+ση(t),
(1)
 Ri=axi-b1-exp[-d(axi-b)],
(2)
 x=wJNS+GJNCS+I0,
(3)
where S and R are the average synaptic gating (unitless) and firing rates (Hz) for all populations, respectively; x represents the total synaptic input for a population; η = dW/dt is the derivative of the Wiener process, W, and the noise amplitude is given by the scalar σ [ ]. Here we use the symbol ⊙ to denote the Hadamard product (element-wise multiplication). The neural populations interact via the structural connectivity matrix C, and the strength of the coupling can be modulated via the parameter G. Complete parameter values are provided in (see ).
 To test the proposed approach to identifying recurrent dynamics, we first simulate models of two interacting neural populations. We adjust parameters w, JN, and G, so that the attractor landscape varies in complexity (see in Methods). In particular, we consider a case with two stable fixed-point attractors ( ) and a case with four stable fixed-point attractors ( ). The case with two fixed-point attractors was originally proposed by Wong and Wang to explain binary choice decision-making [ ].
 We then consider simulations based on the structural connectivity matrix of a healthy human subject derived from MR images [ ] comprised of 90 regions of interest ( ). To explore the attractor landscape prescribed by the structural connectivity matrix, we fix the values of all parameters except for the coupling strength G. The values of the other parameters are similar to previous work where the mean field model ( ) was used to reproduce functional connectivity dynamics [ ].
For the chosen parameters, the number of fixed point attractors, their average activity, and their variability, vary quite substantially as a function of the coupling strength ( ). Notably, mean fixed point activity increases monotonically with the coupling strength ( ). At the lowest coupling strength, there is a single fixed point with low average activity, and all neural populations, being effectively decoupled and having the same parameters, have the same level of activity. At the highest coupling strength, there is a single fixed point but different populations have different levels of activity, so that the overall variance is nonzero ( ).
 Moreover, for the regime where there is multistability, there is a transition in the neural populations that exhibit high variance. Namely, at low coupling strength, it is the populations with strong total incoming connections that have high variance across their stable fixed points. In contrast, at high coupling strength, it is the neural populations with weak total incoming connections that exhibit high variance across their stable fixed points ( ). For this study, we considered in detail the values G = 0.08 and G = 0.55. We considered these two cases, as both exhibit multistability, but the first one does so in a low mean activity regime while the second one does so in a high mean activity regime ( ). The choice of these values is discretionary and similar comparisons would hold for simulations in comparable regimes.

## Attractor recovery benefits from an increased prediction horizon
TVART estimates affine models for non-overlapping windows [ ], describing the evolution of the system according to:
 x(t+Δt)=Akx(t)+bk+Error,
(4)
where there is a unique system matrix, Ak, and offset vector, bk, for every time window k. The prediction delay, Δt, is typically given by the sampling frequency in a given data set. Both the system matrix and the offset vector depend on the prediction delay even for the same data set. In the case of neural dynamics that exhibit multiple stable states, we aim at recovering system matrices that faithfully reflect this attractor landscape.
In TVART the system matrix fit to window k is expressed as the product of three matrices as follows:
 Ak=U(1)D(k)U(2)T,
(5)
where , and is the kth row of the temporal mode matrix ; and U(1), are called the left and right spatial modes, R is the imposed rank constraint, and the time series is split into T windows of equal duration M. The spatial modes are constant for the whole time series [ ]. We can identify switching dynamics by examining the temporal modes, . Specifically, we look for clusters of TVART temporal modes, which indicate temporal windows with similar linear dynamics. Such similar linear dynamics may occur within segments of the time series that exist within the same attractor. Therefore, TVART can facilitate the identification of attractor dynamics.
We first consider simulations for a choice of parameters that results in two attracting fixed points ( ). TVART was able to recover the correct attractor with high accuracy even for simulations subject to high noise amplitude. We illustrate this point with results for simulations with a high noise amplitude of σ = 0.5 ( ). For this noise amplitude, the probability density of the dynamic variables has two well-separated peaks around the two stable fixed points ( ), and the time series shows easily identifiable transitions between the two attractors ( ).
 For these two population simulations, it is possible to depict the temporal modes since they are two-dimensional vectors. We illustrate the clustering of the temporal mode vectors for a few simulations for short ( ) and long ( ) prediction delays. For these examples, we can see that increasing the temporal delay prediction improves the identification of the attractors. This is apparent from the separation between clusters ( ), as well as from the correspondence between cluster identification and underlying attractor over the time series windows ( ).
To measure how accurately identified clusters capture attractor hopping, we index each time series window by their proximity to fixed point attractors. Thus, the attractor index represents the attractor the trajectory is closest to on average for a given window. The prediction accuracy quantifies the match rates between the attractor and cluster indices. ( ). We matched temporal mode cluster indices to attractor indices by choosing the permutation that minimizes the difference between the two. We also quantify the mean posterior cluster probability as the mean over all observations of each observation’s maximum posterior probability, so that with perfect clustering we obtain a mean posterior cluster probability of one ( ). In all cases both the posterior cluster probability and the classification accuracy decrease with increasing noise amplitude ( ). Nonetheless, for all noise amplitudes the classification accuracy remains above chance level (50%) and is near 100% under low noise conditions.
Interestingly, both the mean posterior cluster probability and the classification accuracy show maxima as functions of prediction delay ( ). Initially, increasing the time delay of the prediction resulted in bigger differences among the fitted system matrices. Thus, increasing prediction delay results in clusters of temporal mode vectors that are more clearly separated, allowing better classification accuracy ( ). But as the prediction delay grows too large, switching between the attractors impacts the results. We computed the average time for attractor hopping and it has a strong dependence on the stochastic forcing. The mean time for transitions between different attractors spans between 2700 steps for the lowest stochastic forcing in the two attractor case and 19 steps for the highest stochastic forcing in the four attractor case. This means that for long enough delays the fitted model would try to predict observations between different attractors, with dynamics that correspond to neither.
To explore the impact of a more complex attractor landscape, we perform simulations involving four fixed point attractors ( ). For the same noise level, σ = 0.5, the four attractor case does not show very distinct peaks in the probability density function ( ) and the transitions between the different attractors are harder to detect in the time series ( ). Nonetheless, increasing the prediction delay yielded similar trends with respect to temporal mode clustering and attractor identification. As in the two attractor case, increasing prediction delay results in better separation between temporal mode clusters ( ). Similarly, increasing the prediction delay improved the classification accuracy ( ).
 Naturally, as the number of attractors increases, accurate classification becomes more challenging. We indeed observe lower classification accuracy in this case ( ), although performance is always above chance level (25%). In contrast to the two attractor case, for the four-attractor system, only the classification accuracy shows a clear maxima as a function of the prediction delay ( ).
It is worth emphasizing that the maxima of the classification accuracy always occur at values that are suboptimal in terms of prediction error (as computed by the mean squared error for the autoregressive model prediction and the observed time series values). As is expected from stochastic simulations, fitting models to the shortest time delays yields the lowest prediction errors. In the following sections, we illustrate how TVART produces predictions that are consistent with errors due to linearization and inherent stochastic forcing.
We also observed a similar effect on the classification of dynamics using an alternative approach. Decomposed linear dynamical systems (dLDS) [ ] describe dynamics using coefficients for a dictionary of linear systems. So, the system matrix is a linear combination of dictionary matrices, with coefficients specified at each time step. We fit the simulations explored in (2 populations, 2 equilibria simulations) and found that classification accuracy can also be improved with longer prediction delays ( ). Moreover, taking the absolute value of the dynamics coefficients and smoothing them (moving average centered boxcar filter over 100 steps) in time substantially improved the classification accuracy for attractor identification ( ). Similarly, we replicated the results in (2 populations, 4 equilibria simulations) using dLDS with four dictionary elements. In the case of the four attractor simulations, clustering based on dLDS coefficients only fared slightly above chance levels in identifying attractor occurrence ( ). In this case, taking the absolute value and smoothing the coefficients markedly increased classification accuracy ( ).
 

## Prediction error converges exponentially with prediction delay
The results in the subsection above indicate that looking at prediction delays longer than the sampling period may be beneficial for identification of the attractor dynamics. Since time-varying autoregressive models describe continuous dynamics by discrete approximations, they are sensitive to the delay between the observations that define the regression. For our TVART models, the prediction error for the full rank autoregressive models is observed to increase with increasing prediction delay, with a scaling behavior of the mean square error (MSE) that can be approximated by:
 MSE≈-σ22λ¯(1-exp(2λ¯Δt)),
(6)
where is the mean eigenvalue for the Jacobians of all the fixed points. This expression holds not only for the low-dimensional simulations ( ), but also for simulations based on the human brain structural connectivity ( ). Although human brain simulations have a large number of eigenvalues and attractors, and the dynamics are often far from the fixed points of the system, this approximation method ( ) still faithfully captures the error scaling. This result is robust to variations in the fitting window width and choice of regularization method, spline or total variation, for the chosen regularization strengths ( ) [ ]. Moreover, we observe that the errors estimated by TVART fall close to the curves of the form of , but with the mean eigenvalue replaced by the minimum and maximum eigenvalues (solid black lines, ).
 For the two population simulations, the scaling in holds independently of the number of attractors or the stochastic noise level ( ). For simulations based on the human brain connectivity matrix, we tested how well TVART fits with different window sizes. Although the error increases with decreasing window size, the error remains within the bounds suggested by for the prediction delays studied. Similarly, increasing the weight of the regularization term increases the MSE while preserving the scaling behavior. These results suggest that TVART approximates the true dynamics as the prediction error from the fitted models are bound by the intrinsic stochastic variation of the dynamics.
We also validated the error scaling using alternative approaches SLDS [ ], rSLDS [ ], and dLDS [ ]. We see that in many cases the errors scale according to the exponential trend described by as seen by curve fitting ( ). In the case of TVART, the errors follow remarkably well with R2 values of 0.95 ( ), 0.97 ( ), 0.99 ( ), and 0.95 ( ). For SLDS, the errors follow well only for the two population simulations with R2 values of 0.77 ( ) and 0.96 ( ). Similarly for rSLDS, the errors follow well only for the two population simulations with R2 values of 0.88 ( ) and 0.90 ( ). Both SLDS and rSLDS had mean squared errors much larger than those described by for simulations based on human connectivity with ninety neural populations ( ). This was the opposite for dLDS where only described well the results for the 90 population simulations with R2 values of 0.997 ( ), and 0.99 ( ). In the case of dLDS, the errors where much lower than those described by , which suggests that dLDS is able to recover a more accurate linearization of the nonlinear dynamics away from fixed points.
 

## Derivation of MSE around a single stable fixed point
To make sense of the sources of error, we now analytically derive an expression similar to . Consider the nonlinear system of stochastic differential equations:
 dxdt=F(x)+σdWdt.
(7)
Linearizing about a fixed point, x0, F(x0) = 0, and letting , we obtain:
 dxdt=dx˜dt≈J(x0)x˜+σdWdt,
(8)
where J is the Jacobian . defines a multivariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. Integrating [ ], we get:
 x˜(t)=eJ(x0)tx˜(0)+σ∫0teJ(x0)(t-t′)dW(t′),
(9)
 x(t)=eJ(x0)tx(0)+(I-eJ(x0)t)x0+σ∫0teJ(x0)(t-t′)dW(t′).
(10)
To make the comparison to time-varying linear dynamical systems more transparent, we rewrite . We consider a time series where the state at time t + Δt is predicted from the observed state at time t. In this case, we know our initial condition is x(t), so by a change of variables t → t + Δt we can write:
 x(t+Δt)=eJ(x0)Δtx(t)+(I-eJ(x0)Δt)x0+σ∫0ΔteJ(x0)(Δt-t′)dW(t′).
(11)
We can thus compare the terms in to those in . That is, , , and .
Upon inspection, is consistent with what we would expect for stochastic dynamics around a stable fixed point; namely, the expected value tends to approximate the fixed point x0. In the limit as Δt → 0, the system matrix exp(J(x0)Δt)) → I, where I is the identity matrix. On the other hand, as Δt → ∞, if the eigenvalues of J(x0) have negative real part (as they ought to for a fixed point attractor) the system matrix vanishes and the expected value of the prediction is simply the stable fixed point.
To make sense of the prediction error in an autoregressive process, we can look at the conditional variance associated with the random process expressed in :
 Var[x(t+Δt)|x(t)]=⟨[∫0ΔtσeJ(x0)(Δt-t′)dW(t′)][∫0ΔtσeJ(x0)(Δt-t′)dW(t′)]T⟩,=σ2∫0ΔteJ(x0)(Δt-t′)eJ(x0)T(Δt-t′)dt′,
(12)
where the angled brackets denote the expectation relative to the noise process and the last equality is given by the Itô Isometry [ ].
If we assume the Jacobian is normal so that J(x0)J(x0)T
 = J(x0)TJ(x0), then there exists a unitary matrix S(SST
= I) such that SJ(x0)ST
= Λ and STΛS = J(x0) for the eigenvalue diagonal matrix Λ. Hence, we obtain:
 ∫0ΔteJ(x0)(Δt-t′)eJ(x0)T(Δt-t′)dt′)=ST∫0ΔteΛ(Δt-t′)eΛ(Δt-t′)dt′S,
(13)
 Var[xt+Δt|xt]=-(σ22)STΛ-1(I-exp(2ΛΔt))S.
(14)
This expression can be further related to the predicted MSE by taking the trace:
 MSE=-(σ22)∑i1λi(1-exp(2λiΔt)).
(15)
Although we derived for linearization around a single fixed point, we can compare it to the error scaling observed in our TVART models, . For the case of multistable systems, we expect the MSE to be approximated by a linear combination of terms of the form of the right hand side in .

## Prediction delay behavior uncovers temporal variability of dynamics
As we consider systems that involve many brain areas, model complexity becomes a concern. Perhaps the two most critical parameters for the TVART model are the choice of window width, M (i.e., the number of observations included in a window), and the maximum rank of the dynamical model. Since both parameters affect model complexity, there is a trade-off between the two when model sparsity is desirable. In this subsection, we consider results for simulations based on a human connectivity matrix comprised of 90 different neural populations.
The trade-off between model rank and temporal resolution is also sensitive to prediction delay ( ). For very short prediction delays, increasing the temporal resolution (i.e. decreasing window width) marginally improves the prediction error. For a short time delay, decreasing the window width by a factor of 100 decreased the prediction error by less than 1% for both low and high coupling simulations ( ). Thus, increasing the temporal resolution cannot overcome the error penalty incurred by reducing the rank of the approximation. However, as the prediction time delay increases, the improvement due to the reduction in window size (increase in number of windows and consequently system matrices) becomes apparent ( ). For a long time delay, decreasing the window width by a factor of 100 decreased the prediction error by about 22% and 16% for the low and high coupling simulations, respectively.
 The simulations at low coupling strength exhibited larger errors and smaller R2 values relative to the high coupling strength condition due to greater variance ( ). It is worth noting that there is a more marked change in the trends in RMSE and R2 for the high coupling strength case with increasing prediction time delay, despite this condition exhibiting a lower number of attractors and with lower variance among the attractors’ fixed point values. This can be attributed to the dynamics of the high coupling case being faster than those of the low coupling case. The faster dynamics are reflected in eigenvalues of larger magnitude, and errors in estimating larger magnitude eigenvalues result in worse predictions.
The timescale that determines what is a short and long prediction delay is given by the eigenvalues of the Jacobian, with the mean eigenvalue for the low coupling strength simulation being around 4 Hz and for the high coupling strength around 27 Hz. The product of the longest prediction time delay (0.15 s) considered with these eigenvalues yields values of about 0.6 and 4, respectively. This disparity in the eigenvalues of the Jacobians between the low and high coupling strength simulations helps explain the different convergence rates of the mean squared error, with the asymptotic behavior we expect based on Eqs and ( ). With high coupling strength, there is a stronger dependence on temporal resolution and less dependence on rank as the delay is longer relative to the timescale of the dynamics.

## Clustering of high-dimensional multistable dynamics
As we consider high-dimensional simulations with an increasing number of attractors, the recovery of the attractor landscape becomes more challenging for two main reasons. First, the temporal modes are higher dimensional, thus requiring longer time series for accurate clustering. Second, fixed point attractors’ coordinates may differ only in one dimension, thus appearing close in terms of their vector norm. Nonetheless, we observe that the clustering for human connectivity-based simulations and the clustering for the two population simulations follow a similar qualitative trend with increasing prediction delays ( ).
 We observe that, for a given distance separation cutoff among clusters, increasing the prediction delay increases the number of temporal mode clusters ( ). For low coupling strength, G = 0.08, simulations of the number of clusters increased with increasing delay, whether total variation (TV) regularization ( ) or spline regularization was used ( ). However, the choice of regularization did impact the overall number of clusters found, as well as the convergence of the clustering curves. TV regularization results in fewer clusters and clustering curves that converge at a delay value around 26 time steps ( ). No convergence for delays of up to 31 time steps is observed for the curves corresponding to spline regularization ( ). In the case of the high coupling strength dynamics, the number of clusters for a given cutoff distance converges for delays of 26 or more steps for both the TV ( ) and spline ( ) regularizations. The faster convergence of the clustering curves as a function of delay could be due to the faster dynamics of the high coupling case. Consistent with and , faster dynamics result in faster convergence of the MSE.
The trend of an increasing number of clusters for increasing prediction delays is observed independent of the regularization scheme used for TVART ( ). These results indicate that the regularization method can impact the identified clusters, with the total variation regularization resulting in fewer clusters overall. However, the clustering for longer prediction delays differs more markedly between simulations with different coupling strengths than the clustering for short delay predictions, irrespective of regularization method ( ). An appropriate choice of time delay can be guided by the convergence of hierarchical clustering, indicating a balance between error and separation between system matrices.
The results presented in this study underscore the importance of accounting for the impact of the time delay between observations when fitting autoregressive models of neural activity. In a manner analogous to attractor reconstruction through time delay embedding, for the identification of time-varying dynamics, an appropriate choice of time delay is a crucial part of the analysis. Our results indicate that the choice of time delay impacts all other metrics, and thus should be optimized along with the other model parameters.
When dealing with multistable systems, such as those arising from neural population dynamics, it is crucial to choose an optimal time delay that allows for the separability of the system matrices while not increasing too much noise. We suggest that for the case of TVART, optimizing parameters should start with fitting full-rank models with short time windows for the data at a range of delays. The convergence of temporal mode clusters (e.g. ) along with the MSE curve (e.g. ) provide good indicators for an appropriate time delay. Subsequently, the time window width, M, and model rank can be selected to minimize error (e.g. ).

## Discussion
Identification of different dynamical regimes with potentially similar timescales can be obscured by artifacts that arise from either too fine or too coarse sampling. Conceptually, the autoregressive fitting of stochastic dynamics lies between two extremes. Over infinitesimal time delays, the autoregressive matrix approaches the identity and the error approaches zero. On the other hand, for infinitely long delays the autoregressive matrix approaches zero and the prediction error approaches the variance of the data (R2 = 0). As the results in the previous sections indicate, a single stationary model fits a whole time-varying time series for finely sampled simulations.
For the low-dimensional two population simulations, clustering of TVART temporal mode components is able to recover the attractor dynamics with high accuracy even in the presence of high noise. Moreover, increasing the prediction delay increased the classification accuracy by creating better separated clusters of temporal modes. In the case of simulations based on human brain connectivity, an analogous trend holds. Namely, for a given cutoff distance in hierarchical clustering, a larger delay prediction results in a larger number of clusters, and the effect saturates for the longest prediction horizons.
The choice of Δt affects all parameters of the autoregressive process. Perhaps, critically, it also affects the conclusions one may draw from the time-varying autoregressive process analysis. For a very short prediction delay, the dynamics are full rank and time-invariant based on the mean squared error and the R2 value for all simulated scenarios ( ). As the prediction delay increases, it becomes evident that increasing the temporal resolution by reducing the fitting window width can reduce the error in some cases to a larger extent than an increase in the rank approximation ( ). Following the reasoning in the preceding paragraphs, in the limit as Δt → 0, the system matrix becomes the full rank identity matrix; conversely, as Δt → ∞, the system matrix approaches the zero-rank null matrix. In the latter case, a time-varying affine model may still capture the values of the different fixed points if they are stable enough.
For high-dimensional neural data where the timescale of the dynamics is unknown, fitting curves to , could provide an estimate of said timescale. Preliminary analysis of the timescales of the dynamics can help guide the choice of a time delay for prediction for a parsimonious model that considers prediction based on a single observation from the past. Being cognizant of this timescale allows for a selection of time delays that can enhance the identification of separate dynamic regimes. As indicated by the results presented here, choosing an appropriate time delay can maximize the identification of the attractor structure in time series.
Alternatively, autoregression can be performed based on the multistep prediction error. In general, autoregressive methods, including TVART, can easily accommodate methods that include multiple time lags, although this increases the number of parameters and makes the classification problem harder. Iterating a solution over multiple steps can also be used as a strategy for predicting over longer time horizons; such an approach avoids increasing the number of parameters [ ]. Nonetheless, the iteration of a linear solution may not be optimal if the underlying dynamics are non-linear. This challenge may be addressed by a novel training method named LINOCS (Lookahead Inference of Networked Operators for Continuous Stability) developed by Mudrik et al. [ ]. LINOCS utilizes multiple lookahead estimations to improve the stability and accuracy of dynamical system inference. Future work could explore the combination of LINOCS and TVART in the recovery of attractor dynamics in multistable neural systems.
Moreover, inference by looking further into the future has been shown to be more broadly beneficial. In the case of chaotic neural dynamics, time delay embedding and piecewise linear recurrent neural networks have been leveraged for faithful reconstruction of dynamics [ ]. Such an approach in combination with generalized teacher forcing was leveraged by Hess et al. [ ] for learning chaotic dynamics. Similarly, RNN-transducers have been shown to benefit from using lookahead tokens, for instance by reducing error in speech to text conversion tasks [ ]. These studies, along with the results presented here, underscore the importance of considering the forecast horizon when inferring interpretable neural dynamics. A combination of approaches will probably be required to deal with the full complexity of full brain dynamics, which may include the existence of multiple chaotic attractors [ ] as well as a plethora of external stimuli.
In the context of neural time series data, the challenges of high-dimensional nonlinear dynamics, stochasticity, and noise are also compounded by the need to have interpretable dynamics. The results presented here indicate that the locally linear dynamics that can capture the temporal evolution of neural activity accurately can also reveal a broader structure given a parsimonious representation of said dynamics. Such a parsimonious representation can be in terms of the temporal modes of TVART or coefficients from dLDS. In any case, the judicious use of these methods requires more than a goodness-of-fit approach. Just like in the case of attractor reconstruction through time delay embedding, a choice of an appropriate time delay can help extract relevant dynamic features in time-varying auto-regressive models. Moreover, analyzing error scaling as a function of prediction delay can also reveal global time scales inherent to the dynamics.
One important limitation of the present work is the assumption that observations capture the full state of the system. Another limitation is the assumption of a uniform window length. Moreover, we did not consider the impact of external inputs on the system or the possibility that the underlying nonlinear dynamical system is non-stationary. The TVART model can be extended to address the first three limitations [ , ], whereas non-stationarity could be inferred after the classification of the system matrices. Alternative tensor-based methods have addressed some of the shortcomings of TVART. For instance, the work by Zhang et al. [ ] offers an approach to automatically determine the rank of the tensor decomposition. Also, recent work by Lee et al. [ ] offers a novel approach for fitting multiple low rank tensor models, which may be specially useful if the rank if the dynamics varies in the course of a time series (an scenario not considered by TVART).
Although our study mostly focused on using TVART, our findings generalize to other methods of time-varying autoregression (e.g. SLDS, [ ], rSLDS [ ], and dLDS [ ]) insofar as they reveal the importance of balancing dynamic distinguishability with error minimization. Here we demonstrated how both for TVART and dLDS there is an optimal time lag for regression that maximizes attractor identification. Alternative approaches that assume the presence of a finite set of recurring system matrices [ , ] may be better poised to identify transitions between different dynamics. However, our approach directly explores the matter of whether recurring matrices characterize the dynamics of a time series and, if so, to what extent. We note that both approaches are not mutually exclusive and, once the presence of recurrent dynamics has been identified, it may be beneficial to refine the TVART models with other more computationally expensive methods.
The analytic and numerical results presented in this study indicate that, rather than minimizing the prediction error, identifying different dynamics requires fitting models with a time delay that balances the unfolding of the dynamics with stochastic forcing. System matrices are then able to be grouped into clusters that correspond to distinct attractors of an underlying non-linear system. Thus, it is possible to extract recurrent dynamics in an unsupervised manner by mapping the transitions between clusters over time.
In this study, we know the ground truth dynamics and have complete control over the sampling frequency. This is rarely the case for experimental studies of brain activity, where ground truth dynamics are unknown and there are limitations on measurement resolution and precision. In practice, brain recordings can vary several orders of magnitude in terms of both their temporal and spatial resolutions [ ]. In that context, our approach can be applied to elucidate whether the dynamics are under-resolved relative to the time-scale of dynamics (as quantified by the eigenvalues) by exploring prediction error convergence. Thus, sparse identification of dynamics can determine whether a time-varying linear dynamical system model is appropriate for a given data set. Our method also provides an unsupervised technique for obtaining different dynamical regimes while capturing the differences and timing between these regimes. In this manner, it provides a robust tool to identify and characterize recurrent dynamics from neural recordings. Our approach has two major advantages over switching linear dynamics models: it has minimal assumptions about the observed dynamics, and it can find the number and occurrence of recurrent linear systems in an unsupervised manner. Additionally, our approach can test the validity of locally linear assumptions in time-series data by looking at error scaling and inter-cluster distances. Consequently, we believe our method significantly enhances the characterization of dynamic patterns in neural time series, without introducing biases from the experimenter’s labeling of the data or from strong assumptions inherent to the model.

## Conclusion
Intuitive, interpretable, and parsimonious characterization of complex dynamics enacted by interacting neural populations remains an elusive goal. In this contribution, we present results that suggest that time-varying autoregression with low rank tensors is a promising tool for identifying different dynamical regimes in the presence of multistable dynamics. This is especially useful when used alongside judicious consideration of the prediction time delay and the inherent timescales of the dynamics. Methods that leverage parsimonious tensor representations of the dynamics jointly with multistep prediction optimization may yield improved insights as to the presence of different dynamical regimes. Moreover, robust methods are crucial for high-dimensional time-varying dynamical systems with multiple dynamical regimes that are subject to strong stochastic forcing. This work shows the crucial role that the timescales of dynamics, noise processes, and attractor switching play in identifying distinct dynamical regimes of neural activity.

## Methods

## Neural mass model simulation details
We summarize the meaning and values of the constants appearing in in . For the two population simulations, the coupling strengths were 0.32 and 0.03, for the two and the four attractor cases, respectively. For both cases the connectivity is given by .
The trajectories from the SDEs are generated using the second order stochastic finite difference Heun scheme [ ]. The integration time step was 0.1 ms (τs/1000) and for analysis the resulting trajectories were down-sampled to a 2 ms and 5 ms sampling period for the low and high-dimensional simulations, respectively. Down-sampling drastically reduced the computational cost of the ensuing analysis and was done with a period faster than that of the fastest dynamics, which are in the order of 100 ms (the timescale set by τs). The two population dynamics were simulated for a length of 120 seconds and the 90 population dynamics were simulated for a length of 600 seconds (the first ten seconds of the simulation were dropped to eliminate initial transients).
For human connectivity, the fixed-point attractors are identified by numerical integration of without the additive noise process starting from the initial conditions specified by Latin hypercube sampling of the phase space until convergence of the state variable S. Convergence was considered to be achieved when the derivative was two orders of magnitude smaller than the integration time step. After convergence, to better approach the fixed point value, the converged value was passed as an initial estimate to MATLAB’s “fsolve” function using a central finite difference estimator.

## Time varying autoregression with low rank tensors
Time-varying autoregression is a widely used time series analysis technique with many applications and implementations [ , ]. In this work, we consider the TVART technique [ ]. The TVART method fits affine models to a sequence of nonoverlapping segments of a time series while imposing a rank constraint to the third order tensor formed by the stack of system matrices via the rank R canonical polyadic decomposition. The rank constraint is a free parameter of TVART and it remains possible to opt for a full rank tensor. Two significant advantages of the TVART approach is that it scales well to problems with many state variables (as is the case for whole brain dynamics) and that it offers a low-dimensional representation of time-varying dynamics. Thus, TVART may be an ideal framework for identifying distinct dynamical regimes in high-dimensional dynamical systems.
For a time-series of N variables (represented as state vector ) segmented into T windows we aim to find a unique dynamic model for each time window:
 x(t+1)=Akx(t)+bk,
(16)
where the matrix Ak is the system matrix for the kth time window. TVART uses the rank R canonical polyadic decomposition [ ] to represent the tensor formed by the stack of system matrices. Thus, the system matrix fit to window k can be expressed as:
 Ak=U(1)D(k)U(2)T,
(17)
where , and is the kth row of the temporal mode matrix ; and U(1), are called the left and right spatial modes. The spatial modes are constant for the whole time series and the number of non-zero modes can serve as an indication of the true rank of the underlying dynamics [ ]. Additionally, the inner product of the rows of the left and right spatial modes determines the overall scale of the interaction of two dynamic variables (for our application the interaction of two neural populations). The system matrix for a given window is uniquely specified by its spatial and temporal mode vectors. This enables a low-dimensional comparison of the dynamics; whereby temporal modes can be clustered to identify similar recurring dynamics.
We used three sets of parameters to apply TVART to our synthetic data sets. For the two population simulations we used parameters η = 0.5, β = 0.5, spline regularization, and a window size of 100 observations. For the two population simulations, we used two sets of parameters depending on the regularization scheme. For spline regularization, we used η = 10, β = 0.1 and a variable window size as indicated in the results. For total variation (TV) regularization, we used η = 90, β = 1 and a window size of 100 observations. Spline regularization was used since the underlying non-linear dynamics are smoothly varying without sharp breaks. The choice of hyperparameters was informed by previous work [ ], selecting values for problems of similar size although with relatively weak temporal smoothing regularization.
In order to reduce the computational cost, we did not perform extensive hyperparameter tuning for each TVART fit. However, focusing on two test cases revealed that there is no strong sensitivity to the values of the regularization parameters η and β. We recall the regularized cost function, C, used in TVART [ ]:
 C=12∑k=1T∥Yk-AkXk∥F2+12η(∥U(1)∥F2+∥U(2)∥F2+∥U(3)∥F2)+βR(U(3))
(18)
where the F subscript denotes the Frobenius norm, and the operator denotes either a total variation or a spline penalty used for temporal smoothing [ ]. Stronger regularization can result from decreasing η (i.e. increasing 1/η) or from increasing β.
For a parameter sensitivity study we focused on the simulations shown in Figs and with TVART fits with 31 step ahead prediction (the same as used for Figs and ). For both cases, we sampled twenty logarithmically spaced values of η and β spanning four orders of magnitude (between 10−2 and 102). Moreover, for each hyperparameter pair we fit TVART ten times.
We focus on six metrics to describe the sensitivity of TVART fits to hyperparameter variation. We use R2 as a simple measure of prediction goodness of fit. We consider the log-likelihood of the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), in particular we computed the difference in the log-likelihood values of models with one and either two or four components:
 ΔLn=loglikelihood(ncomponents)-loglikelihood(1component)
(19)
we used this to quantify whether a GMM with the same number of components as the number of underlying attractors was more likely than a model with a single Gaussian component. We also compute the average posterior probability of a data point belonging to its assigned cluster, as well as the classification accuracy based on attractor labels. We add two common measures of clustering quality. The Davies-Bouldin index, which is based on the ratio of distances within clusters and between clusters [ ], yields smaller values for better clustering. Finally, we computed the Dunn index which is the ratio of shortest distance between observations not in the same cluster to the highest intra-cluster distance [ ].
We present the results of this sensitivity study for the two attractor simulations in . Although we spanned four orders of magnitude in both hyperparameters, the R2 value barely changed, from 0.81 to 0.89 ( ). In the case of the log-likelihood, only for the strongest Tikhonov regularization (highest 1/η) did the 1 component GM model perform better than the two component model ( ). The trends in the mean posterior probability and classification accuracy also showed very robust for a wide range of hyperparameter values ( ). Similarly, both the Davies-Bouldin and Dunn indices varied over a small range. As an illustration, we show the clustering results for hyperparameter values very close to those used for the main analyses (η = β = 0.48, ), as well as for much larger hyperparameter values (η = β = 100, ). Although clustering is clearly better for η = β = 0.48, at much higher hyperparameter values clustering was still possible.
 Results for simulations with four attractors were only slightly more sensitive to hyperparameter variation, as shown in . R2 varied merely between 0.87 and 0.91 ( ). For all the hyperparameter values the log-likelihood of the four component model was greater than that of the one component model ( ). Both the mean posterior probability and the classification accuracy were more sensitive to hyperparameter variation than they were for the two attractor case ( ). This can be expected given the larger number of clusters in this case. Nevertheless, for the mean posterior probability, the range is still small and close to one. And the classification accuracy only showed large gradients for high values of eta and β (near the lower right corner of ). The Davies-Bouldin and Dunn indices only varied by a factor of three, even though the hyperparameters spanned four orders of magnitude ( ). The illustrative clustering examples in , suggest that assigning observations to a cluster was clearly more challenging in this scenario, which may account for the increased sensitivity to hyperparameter variation.
 

## Clustering
We perform clustering on the temporal mode coefficients via Gaussian Mixture Models [ ] for the two population simulations. Gaussian mixture models provide a good metric to evaluate the number of clusters in the data by computing the posterior probability that a point belongs to a given cluster. However, these models do not scale well for a larger number of clusters in high-dimensional data, especially if the clusters are not well-separated. Thus, we used hierarchical clustering [ ] for the high-dimensional simulations based on a human connectivity matrix. The hierarchical clustering is based on the Manhattan distance computed between all possible pairs of the 90-dimensional temporal mode vectors. Hierarchical clustering can inform the number of clusters based on a distance threshold. An optimal number of clusters may be inferred if there is a discontinuity in the curve of number of clusters versus distance threshold. Manhattan distance was considered appropriate since the TVART modes do not constitute an orthonormal basis [ ].

 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012816.r001Decision Letter 0
Balaguer-BallesterEmiliAcademic EditorMarinazzoDanieleSection Editor© 2025 Balaguer-Ballester, Marinazzo2025Balaguer-Ballester, Marinazzohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
13 Aug 2024

Dear Osuna-Orozco,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Identification of Recurrent Dynamics in Distributed Neural Populations" for consideration at PLOS Computational Biology.
As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. In light of the reviews (below this email), we would like to invite the resubmission of a significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments.
The reviewers agreed on the methodological relevance of the study and its potential for neuroscience; they also praised the level of detail of the analyses on a range of dynamical regimes.
Reviewers have questions about the breadth of the experimental validation and request further comparison with competing approaches in a neuroscientific context.
Along this line, they expect further clarification on the relationship with neural data and, more broadly, its potential for providing biological insights.
In addition, reviewers home in on the need to clarify concrete methodological aspects. The reviews are constructive and specific, pease find them below. The third review is in a PDF file; please let the editorial staff know if you have difficulty accessing this information.
We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Emili Balaguer-Ballester, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Daniele Marinazzo
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************
Dear authors,
My apologies for the delay in the decision about your manuscript.
The reviewers agreed on the methodological relevance of the study and its potential for neuroscience; they also praised the level of detail of the analyses on a range of dynamical regimes.
Reviewers have questions about the breadth of the experimental validation and request further comparison with competing approaches in a neuroscientific context.
Along this line, they expect further clarification on the relationship with neural data and, more broadly, its potential for providing biological insights.
In addition, reviewers home in on the need to clarify concrete methodological aspects.
We cannot promise publication at this stage, but the reviews are constructive and specific. Please find the reviews below. The third review is in a PDF file; please let the editorial staff know if you have difficulty accessing this information.
Kindly address these queries and submit an updated version if you wish to. Thank you very much.
Best wishes,
Emili Balaguer-Ballester, PhD
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: Review for Identification of Recurrent Dynamics in Distributed Neural Populations
Overview: This work explores the TVART dynamical systems model through a series of empirical simulations based on neuroscience models and neural data analysis. TVART, previously presented by Harris et al. (2021), models nonstationary dynamics as switching between a set of dynamics that have a low-rank tensor representation when stacked in a single 3D array. This representation enables a concise description of the dynamics with the assumptions of 1) low-rank dynamics over each window, and 2) locally static linear dynamics that switch between time windows. The primary contributions of this work is a set of experiments that explore the properties of TVART in different contexts and over different dynamical regimes. The rank, stability, and attractor dynamics are specifically studied. While this paper does present interesting analyses of the model, there are several significant weaknesses to the study. For one, the actual experiments are limited compared to the statements in the introduction and the conclusions drawn in the discussion. More significant analyses should be run to justify these statements, such as comparisons to other algorithms or studies of how to better quantify/address some of the properties shown. Furthermore, the analyses are largely circumstantial and some actually tend to suggest that the assumptions in TVART might not best match the data analyzed, reinforcing that comparisons to other methods would be valuable. Finally, as the venue is PLoS CompBio, the link with biology can be strengthened. These points and others are listed with more details below, and I think should be addressed before this work can be considered for publication.
Major points:
1. Clarity of the core analysis: The main analysis of the work is the attractor analysis. The introduction is written such that there was an expectation of a broader analysis of the system properties that was not addressed. My recommendation to the authors is to better align the motivation with the main analysis driving the specific conclusions.
2. Connections to Biology: The connections to biology are primarily through simulation of neurally-motivated synthetic data. It would significantly help the paper in terms of the PLoS Comp Bio community to be more explicit on what the conclusions drawn from these simulation results in terms of neural data analysis.
3. Sparsity vs. Low-rank: The TVART assumes low-rank representations of the dynamics, as emphasized in some of their experiments. The abstract, however, mentions a sparse representation, which is significantly different in terms of underlying model assumptions. Both are low dimensional but are completely different mathematically. What do the authors mean here? Is this different from the sparsity assumption mentioned in the discussion with respect to future work? Is this sparsity different from what was done in the dLDS model or the effective 1-hot sparsity in SLDS?
4. Model Clarity: Understanding the TVART model is pretty critical to understanding the results presented. It would improve the paper a lot to have the explicit form of the model (at least the core equations) presented and described earlier for clarity. This would also help mitigate issues with variables being used that are not defined until the methods.
5. Metrics used: Why do the authors focus on attractor convergence and not the full = trajectory. There can be many dynamical systems with similar attractors but very different paths to get there. Trajectory MSE or other metrics might help measure this.
6. Attractor Hopping: On lines 172-177, the authors state:
“Initially, increasing “the time delay of the prediction resulted in bigger differences among the fitted system matrices. Thus, increasing prediction delay results in clusters of the temporal mode vectors that are more clearly separated, allowing for better classification accuracy (Fig. 3H). But as the prediction delay grows too large, the fit for the system matrices degrades, consequently impacting classification accuracy”
Can this observation be due to the system hopping into another well of attraction? Including an additional analysis that narrows down the possible sources of this effect would be very helpful.
7. Limitations: The limitations of TVART vs other methods in light of the simulations is not sufficiently discussed in the context of the experiments. Low rank A’s seem like they might be more of a significant assumption than authors state in the discussion: “it [TVART] has minimal assumptions about the observed dynamics” as opposed to, e.g., SLDS. In the example in Fig 6, however, large jumps in R^2 for rank changes are observed, seemingly indicating that the data might have a mis-match with the low-rank assumption. Moreover, is this statement in the discussion correct?
“Alternative approaches assume the presence of a finite set of recurring system matrices [12, 17, 28] and thus may be better poised to identify transitions between different dynamics.”
From my understanding TVART also has finite dynamics that are one of a set, finite, linear combination of a smaller set of dynamics (i.e., the low-rank assumption).
8. Other Literature & comparisons: There is minimal discussion of other models and no comparisons to the most relevant methods: SLDS/rSLDS and dLDS.
Additional literature the authors should consider is the work done in developing methods to incorporate longer time-delays into learning, [1-4], which includes work that targets locally linear models similar to TVART [4]. These models all make the same basic observation about time-scales of learning of dynamical systems (and more generally beyond one model) and offer a number of solutions.
On lines 411-412, the authors say “Thus, sparse identification of dynamics can determine whether a time-varying linear dynamical system model is appropriate for a given data set.” Is this not what dLDS already does (Mudrik et al. 2024 in the manuscript’s references).
The authors say that TVART can “can find the number and occurrence of recurrent linear systems in an unsupervised manner.” This statement and others are not demonstrated in the experiments. Comparisons to SLDS on the datasets described would enable these statements to be motivated.
Minor points:
- Fig 3G: Why is 0.9 above 1 on the y axis? If the y-axis is probability it might make sense to scale it to [0, 1] for clarity (as with Fig. 4G/H))
- Line 466: approach is that it is scales
- ‘x’ is not well defined in the first experiment
- Line 152: forgot ‘Fig’ in the \\ref
- This sentence might be better rephrased for clarity: “We quantify prediction accuracy by comparing the clustering results to
- indices representing which attractor the trajectories in a given window are closest to.”
- Consider a log-scale in Figures 3H,3G to highlight the maxima
- In Figure 7 - what is the ground truth number of clusters? Did you also run this example on synthetic Data as well?
- Line 397: no need for commas
References:
[1] Hess, F., Monfared, Z., Brenner, M. and Durstewitz, D., 2023, July. Generalized Teacher Forcing for Learning Chaotic Dynamics. International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 13017-13049). PMLR.
[2] Massimiliano Marcellino, James H Stock, and Mark W Watson. A comparison of direct and iterated multistep ar methods for forecasting macroeconomic time series. 2006. Journal of econometrics, 135(1-2): 499–526.
[3] Vinit S Unni, Ashish Mittal, Preethi Jyothi, and Sunita Sarawagi. Improving rnn-transducers with acoustic lookahead. 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05006.
[4] Mudrik, N., Yezerets, E., Chen, Y., Rozell, C. and Charles, A., 2024. LINOCS: Lookahead Inference of Networked Operators for Continuous Stability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18267.
Reviewer #2: This MS presents simulations aimed to validate TVART, an autorregressive technique to fit low-rank linear models A: X(t+delay) = A X(t) to multivariate timeseries X. The authors use a established neural-mass model to produce two synthetic, one 2-dimensional and one high-dimensional, noisy datasets, and show that TVART can infer the correct attractor dynamics with better-than-chance performance. Moreover, they show that the performance of the autorregressive fit depends non-trivially on the parameter using the delay. Intriguingly, the delay that yields the best performance is not the one yielding the lower prediction error of the fitted model. The authors outline a strategy to identify a regime of near-optimal time-delays for problems where the ground truth is unknown.
The positive outcome of TVART's validation is, in my view, not surprising, given that the original paper validates the technique using several synthetic and real data, including neural data. The non-trivial dependency of performance with the delay, on the other hand, seems new and potentially relevant for researchers that are considering using TVART to analyse high-dimensional multivariate data.
The MS is well written and the methods and results are, to the best of my knowledge, formally correct. However, I am not familiar with autoregression or the analysis of multivariate nerual data so my confidence on this review is limited. I also wonder whether the study would be of interest to the relatively broad readership of PLoS CompBio, or would rather fit better in the journal that published the TVART method (SIAM J Appl Dyn Syst).
I have a few minor suggestions, but the authors should feel free to ignore them if they are not useful.
- As someone not familiar with autoregressive models I had to imagine what "prediction delay" refers to when reading the subsection starting in 144. Given its central role in the results and the scope of PLoS CompBio, it might be worth to introduce the model of Eq.~4 a bit earlier (optimally, before it's used) in the Results section.
- Authors state that they "matched temporal mode cluster indices to attractor indices by choosing the permutation that minimises the difference between the two" (line 163). Although I do not anticipate any methodological problem with this approach, I believe this results in a higher chance level than assumed by the authors. The accuracy in a trial would be sampled from a distribution low-truncated at the original chance level (i.e., no sample could result in an accuracy lower than 1/N_attractors); therefore, the mean would be shifted towards higher accuracies, with chance-level accuracy monotonically increasing with the variance of the single-trial accuracy. If the authors agree with my reasoning, they could account for this by either analytical computation of the mean of the truncated distribution, or by simulating the chance-level accuracy by using uniform random sampling to decide on the attractor and then choosing the most favourable permutation for each trial. This could be important to determine if lower recognition accuracies are indeed above chance levels.
- In the same vein, the authors could compute the chance level as a distributions to show up to what extend their above-chance results could have resulted from the chance distributions.
- Language:
161 grammatically correct, but the preposition at the end makes the sentence a bit difficult to read: consider rephrasing
192 revise the comma
303 missing word (probably "one")
Reviewer #3: Please see attached PDF.
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: None
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Alejandro Tabas
Reviewer #3: No

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example in PLOS Biology see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PLOS_CBIO_review.pdf
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012816.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
22 Oct 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012816.r003Decision Letter 1
Balaguer-BallesterEmiliAcademic EditorMarinazzoDanieleSection Editor© 2025 Balaguer-Ballester, Marinazzo2025Balaguer-Ballester, Marinazzohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
27 Nov 2024

PCOMPBIOL-D-24-00905R1
Identification of Recurrent Dynamics in Distributed Neural Populations
PLOS Computational Biology
Dear Dr. Osuna-Orozco,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Computational Biology. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Computational Biology's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript within 30 days Jan 27 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at ploscompbiol@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pcompbiol/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Emili Balaguer-Ballester, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Daniele Marinazzo
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Feilim Mac Gabhann
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Computational Biology
Jason Papin
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Computational Biology

Additional Editor Comments (if provided):

Dear authors,
The reviewers appreciate your detailed and comprehensive modifications and do not suggest any substantial change. However, please note that reviewer #1 is still concerned about the insufficient citation of previous work.
Yours sincerely,
Emili Balaguer-Ballester, PhD.

Reviewers' comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: I would like to thank the authors for their thorough and extensive additions to their paper. I believe that the new manuscript, with the additional baselines and clearer discussion, is much improved. However, there are some points that are important and insufficiently addressed. In particular, in the prior comments I had mentioned both additional models (which were in fact included and discussed further by the authors) but also other training methods that address the same challenge/aspect of the work that the authors make one of their main points: the benefit of predicting farther into the future.
Prediction farther into the future (termed look-ahead in prior works) has been studied in multiple models, including in LDS, SLDS, and dLDS models similar to TVART, as well as more general nonlinear systems (RNNs). These need to be discussed as they present significant prior art. I am putting these references here again [1-4]
I also regret that I was not precise about the log-scale for Panels G and H: I meant the y-axis should be on a log scale, not the x-axis. This will emphasize the location of the peak by highlighting subtle height differences into the upper range of values.
References:
- Hess, F., Monfared, Z., Brenner, M. and Durstewitz, D., 2023, July. Generalized Teacher Forcing for Learning Chaotic Dynamics. International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 13017-13049). PMLR.
- Massimiliano Marcellino, James H Stock, and Mark W Watson. A comparison of direct and iterated multistep ar methods for forecasting macroeconomic time series. 2006. Journal of econometrics, 135(1-2): 499–526.
- Vinit S Unni, Ashish Mittal, Preethi Jyothi, and Sunita Sarawagi. Improving rnn-transducers with acoustic lookahead. 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05006.
- Mudrik, N., Yezerets, E., Chen, Y., Rozell, C. and Charles, A., 2024. LINOCS: Lookahead Inference of Networked Operators for Continuous Stability. Transactions of Machine Learning Research 2024.
Reviewer #2: The authors have satisfactorily replied to all my comments, many thanks for your work.
Two notes:
1) I am still not convinced this work will be of true relevance for the audience of PLoS CompBio, but I believe this is a decision that needs to be made by the editor; from my side I can only say that I do not perceive any methodological issues.
2) This is not my field of expertise, so please interpret my endorsement as conditional on the endorsement of other reviewers that do work in this field. I might have overseen potential methodological issues.
Reviewer #3: Thank you for the thoughtful revisions to the paper in response to the comments provided. In particular,
• I appreciate the additional discussion of the TVART model and key terminology at the beginning of the relevant subsection. This clarification enhances the paper significantly. However, I believe that lines 166-171 could benefit from further editing to improve sentence clarity.
• I am pleased to see that relevant methods have been cited and compared. The inclusion of additional experiments to compare TVART with dLDS provides valuable context.
• The discussion of hyperparameters and their selection is very helpful. However, I believe there is still an opportunity to address the sensitivity of TVART to hyperparameter selection in more detail. For example, it would be beneficial if the authors could elaborate on the meaning of “less clear clustering” when beta is increased. A quantitative assessment of clustering quality (and conclusions thereof) as a function of beta (and other hyperparameters) would be helpful.
• I appreciate the expanded discussion on the impact of local minima in TVART model fits.
All in all, I am grateful for the revisions. I believe that the manuscript will be ready for publication with a few minor updates, as described above.
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Alejandro Tabas
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. If there are other versions of figure files still present in your submission file inventory at resubmission, please replace them with the PACE-processed versions.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that authors of applicable studies deposit laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012816.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
23 Dec 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.pdf
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012816.r005Decision Letter 2
Balaguer-BallesterEmiliAcademic EditorMarinazzoDanieleSection Editor© 2025 Balaguer-Ballester, Marinazzo2025Balaguer-Ballester, Marinazzohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
22 Jan 2025

Dear Osuna-Orozco,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Identification of Recurrent Dynamics in Distributed Neural Populations' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Computational Biology. 
Best regards,
Emili Balaguer-Ballester, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Daniele Marinazzo
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************************************************
Dear authors,
Warm congratulations. Kindly remove the bold font from the Figure 7 caption text when you get the proof. Thank you very much.
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: I appreciate the authors work in revising the manuscript. I think the added paragraphs and revised figure are much improved and I'm happy to recommend accepting this manuscript.
Reviewer #3: We thank the authors for addressing all of our comments and concerns. We are happy to recommend the paper for publication!
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: None
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #3: No
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012816.r006Acceptance letter
Balaguer-BallesterEmiliAcademic EditorMarinazzoDanieleSection Editor© 2025 Balaguer-Ballester, Marinazzo2025Balaguer-Ballester, Marinazzohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
31 Jan 2025

PCOMPBIOL-D-24-00905R2 
Identification of Recurrent Dynamics in Distributed Neural Populations
Dear Dr Osuna-Orozco,
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology. Your manuscript is now with our production department and you will be notified of the publication date in due course.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. 
Soon after your final files are uploaded, unless you have opted out, the early version of your manuscript will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting PLOS Computational Biology and open-access publishing. We are looking forward to publishing your work! 
With kind regards,
Zsofia Freund
PLOS Computational Biology | Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge CB4 3DN | United Kingdom ploscompbiol@plos.org | Phone +44 (0) 1223-442824 | ploscompbiol.org | @PLOSCompBiol