pmcPLoS Comput BiolPLoS Comput Biol328ploscompplosPLOS Computational Biology1553-734X1553-7358PLOSPMC13102310PMC13102310.113102310131023104198500110.1371/journal.pcbi.1014196PCOMPBIOL-D-25-011001Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyLearningBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceLearning and MemoryLearningBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceSensory PerceptionVisionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceSensory PerceptionBiology and Life SciencesBiomechanicsMusculoskeletal MechanicsBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyMuscle PhysiologyMusculoskeletal MechanicsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionSensory CuesBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionSensory CuesSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionSensory CuesBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceSensory PerceptionSensory CuesBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceLearning and MemoryLearningHuman LearningBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionProprioceptionBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionProprioceptionSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyPerceptionSensory PerceptionProprioceptionBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceSensory PerceptionProprioceptionPhysical SciencesMathematicsGeometryRadiiPerceptual prediction error supports implicit process in motor learning
Perceptual prediction error supports implicit motor learning.ZhangXiaoyueConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0006-8111-3358WuWenchengData curationMethodologySoftware https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5098-3808WeiKunlinConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health, Beijing, ChinaYangTianmingEditor – ]. A classic example is the basketball player’s effort to improve their jump shot; when a shot lands left of the basket, the player consciously adjusts their aim to the right in subsequent attempts. This explicit learning is complemented by an implicit learning process, which involves subconscious fine-tuning of bodily movements without conscious correction or even awareness of these fine-tunes. While performance error is recognized as a key driver of explicit learning across various motor tasks [ – ], the specific errors that facilitate implicit learning—a defining feature of motor skill acquisition—are still a matter of intense debate.
The debate on motor errors centers around two primary categories: performance error or movement prediction error [ ]. Performance error is typically defined as the discrepancy between movement outcome and the intended goal [ – ], while movement prediction error refers to the discrepancy between the executed movement and its predicted sensory consequences [ – ]. The complexity of dissociating these two errors arises from their simultaneous occurrence during action execution. For instance, when reaching for a coffee cup, the desired trajectory of the hand and the desired final position must both be considered [ ]. The trajectory prescribes a movement prediction error, and the final position prescribes a performance error, both theoretically leading to implicit learning for subsequent movements [ , , , ].
Prominent computational models of motor learning [ – ] and foundational textbooks (e.g., [ ]) have primarily focused on performance error (PE) to explain implicit learning behaviors. In contrast, a growing body of behavioral and neurophysiological research highlights the role of sensory prediction error (SPE) —the difference between the actual movement trajectory and the intended movement trajectory—as a critical factor in driving implicit learning [ , , , – ]. Resolving this theoretical inconsistency in the understanding of implicit motor learning is not only essential for cognitive science [ ] but also promises to translate algorithmic insights from human procedural learning into applied fields such as robotic control and artificial intelligence [ ].
In this study, we harness the classical visuomotor rotation (VMR) adaptation paradigm —an established framework for investigating error processing in motor learning—to elucidate the competing error signals that contribute to implicit learning [ , ]. During the VMR task, participants encounter a hand cursor that moves in a skewed direction relative to their actual hand motion, prompting them to re-aim their movements away from the intended target. This dissociation between movement prediction (aiming) and goal attainment (cursor motion) allows us to separate PE and SPE within a single action ( ): PE is the deviation of the final cursor position from the target, while SPE is characterized by the deviation of the visual cursor motion from the re-aiming movement. Importantly, SPE is based solely on visual feedback, with the implicit assumption that the motor system adapts itself based on the visual consequence of actions, i.e., the skewed cursor motion. However, spatially locating one’s moving body effector is the foundation of motor control [ – ]. We thus propose a novel third category of error: perceptual prediction error (PPE), which represents the discrepancy between the perceived hand movement from the predicted re-aiming movement. Previously, the discrepancy between the perceived hand movement and the intended movement has been proposed to drive error-clamp adaptation [ , ], a special case of VMR where explicit learning is absent. However, in the error-clamp adaptation, the predicted direction and the target direction are spatially aligned, and thus PE and PPE are indissociable. In VMR adaptation with explicit learning, the re-aiming direction naturally dissociates these two errors, enabling an opportunity to critically examine their roles.
 Here we designed a series of six experiments that systematically manipulated VMR perturbations, revealing distinct characteristics of implicit motor learning. Through comprehensive behavioral analyses and modeling, we present compelling evidence that perceptual prediction error, rather than performance error or sensory prediction error, serves as the primary driver of implicit motor learning. This finding offers a parsimonious explanation for our new results while reconciling them with established literature in the field.

## Results

## Errors and models
In the VMR paradigm, participants need to move a directionally rotated cursor toward the target, and the directional deviation of the cursor ( ) from the target defines the PE ( ). PE drives the participants to adapt their movements in the subsequent trial by consciously re-aiming away from the target in the opposite direction of the rotation perturbation [ ]. This re-aiming reflects the participant’s prediction of where their hand will move, generating a sensory prediction of the reaching action ( ). The deviation between the actual cursor motion and this prediction is regarded as a sensory prediction error, given its purely visual nature [ , ]. However, we propose that since the predicted variable pertains to the intended hand direction, the relevant feedback should also concern the hand rather than the cursor [ ]. Thus, the perceived hand ( ), rather than the cursor, is compared to the predicted hand ( ), with their discrepancy constitutes a perceptual prediction error. The perceived hand ( ) is derived from a combination of multiple sensory cues, including the visual cue ( ) from the cursor, the proprioceptive cue ( ) from the actual hand, and the motor prediction cue ( ). These cues are integrated in accordance with Bayesian principles, with each cue weighted by its relative reliability. Notably, motor prediction can not only provide a reference for error computation, but also serve as an internal predictive cue that is integrated with sensory feedback cues [ – ].
The three types of errors—PE, SPE, and PPE—exhibit distinct temporal profiles throughout the learning process, such as during a 30° counterclockwise VMR ( and ). When the perturbation is introduced, the cursor initially deviates 30° from the target, and through trial-by-trial gradual learning, the cursor homes back toward the target. This results in an exponential decrease in PE, driven by the gradual correction of hand movement direction. In contrast, re-aiming behavior—which reflects explicit learning—initially rises sharply and then exhibits a small decline over the course of learning [ ]. The re-aiming behavior dictates the dynamics of the prediction errors ( ): SPE remains large throughout the learning process because the re-aiming direction stays consistently offset from the cursor. In contrast, PPE remains relatively small and stable during learning, as the re-aiming direction is close to the perceived hand direction, which is derived from a combination of sensory cues ( , , and ; ).
To determine which error best explains the diverse learning phenomena observed in motor adaptation, we implemented a unified model framework. State-space models, which have been successfully used to model error-based learning in visuomotor adaptation [ , , , ], were applied to test whether implicit learning is driven by PE, SPE, or PPE (see Methods for model details).
The perceptual estimation of hand location is contingent on the relative reliability of the individual sensory cues. Importantly, visual uncertainty increases with larger SPEs [ ], as participants tend to fixate not on the target but closer to their aiming direction during the movement ( ; [ ], [ ]), as shown in our eye-tracking experiment ( ). This results in the cursor deviating from the fixation point by an angular separation equivalent to the magnitude of the SPE. Our previous work demonstrated that visual uncertainty regarding cursor motion increases linearly with this eccentricity [ ]. We also confirmed that a nonlinear, instead of a linear, eccentricity effect on visual uncertainty would not affect model comparison results ( and ). While a large visual perturbation induces both large SPE and PE (at least during early learning; ), its effect on PPE is dampened due to the high visual uncertainty associated with large perturbations. Visual uncertainty reduces the influence of the visual feedback on the perceived hand direction ( ) according to Bayesian principles of perception [ ]. By incorporating the perceptual estimate of hand direction into the prediction error, the dynamics of PPE diverge significantly from those of PE and SPE, thus predicting implicit learning differently, as we show below in a series of experiments.

## Experiment 1: Perturbation size-dependency of implicit learning reflects the dynamics of PPE, not PE or SPE.
Manipulating the size of visual perturbations is a straightforward way to probe error-based learning and to differentiate between distinct error signals. In VMR, larger perturbations increase overall and explicit learning, but implicit learning remains stable across a broad range of perturbation sizes [ , , , ]. This classical finding has been interpreted as a hard limitation of implicit learning [ , , , ] or a result of competition of explicit and implicit learning, where the explicit learning “siphons” away performance error [ ].
The three error types—PE, SPE, and PPE—behave differently during early learning. Both PE and SPE increase with larger perturbations, but PPE remains small ( ). Previous studies have often overlooked early learning, focusing on late learning [ ]. We examined the entire learning process using various perturbation sizes (15°, 30°, 60°, and 90° VMR) by analyzing a prior dataset first [ ] ( ). To show the distinct size-dependency and dynamics throughout learning, we calculated the PE and SPE from empirical data and estimated PPE from PPE model predictions ( ). As expected, larger perturbations led to an increase in both PE and SPE during early learning, but the scaling effect maintains during late learning only for SPE, not for PE ( , middle and right; ). Remarkably, implicit adaptation did not scale with perturbation size. Instead, it remained unchanged or even slightly decreased, both in early and late learning ( ; one-way ANOVA, early: F(3,36) = 0.2, p = 0.897; late: F(3,36) = 1.44, p = 0.247). Neither the PE nor SPE model captured this pattern, as both models predicted a linear increase in early implicit learning with perturbation size. The SPE model also incorrectly predicted a linear increase in late implicit learning ( ). In contrast, the PPE model successfully explained across perturbation sizes for both early and late stages ( and ), as PPE remains largely invariant across perturbation sizes ( left and 2D). Model comparison showed that the PPE model significantly outperformed both the PE and SPE models (R2 = 0.708, 0.177, and -0.730, BIC = 182.04, 260.69, and 528.63 for PPE, PE, and SPE models, respectively; ). Note here we fitted all three models to the observed implicit learning data with identical procedures, ensuring that the models are evaluated on equal footing.
 The fact that PPE does not exhibit a linear increase with perturbation size, unlike PE and SPE, stems from the nature of perceptual estimation. PPE is based on the perceived hand direction, which integrates visual, proprioceptive and motor prediction cues, each weighted by its uncertainty. Prior models based on PE and SPE have overlooked the fact that visual uncertainty increases with perturbation size [ ]. During VMR learning, participants tend to fixate near their re-aiming direction, not on the target [ , ]. We confirmed this through a control experiment where we measured eye fixations during VMR learning ( ). Larger perturbations had larger explicit learning with fixation further away from the target. This greater angular separation between the cursor and the fixation point increases visual uncertainty, reducing the influence of visual perturbation on hand localization ( ) according to Bayesian principles [ ]. By incorporating visual uncertainty into the PPE model, we captured the classical finding of invariant implicit adaptation over perturbation size. This result suggests the apparent limit on implicit learning is not a reflection of a fundamental constraint in the motor learning system, nor is it due to competition for performance error, but a result of changing PPE.
The trial-by-trial aiming reports in Bond & Taylor., 2015 enabled quantification of PE and SPE throughout learning. However, frequent aiming reports can alter the composition of explicit and implicit learning ([ , , , ]). To minimize this potential confound, we conducted Experiment 1, which largely replicated Bond et al.’s study but removed the trial-by-trial aiming reports. Instead, we inserted a small number of exclusion trials during late learning to specifically measure implicit learning [ – ]. Additionally, the PPE model predicts a biased perceived hand localization after each movement, which cannot be directly measured. In Experiment 1, we measured this bias indirectly by requiring the participants to judge the location of their passively moved hand immediately after an adaptation trial [ ] ( ). People’s judgment should be biased in the direction of the visual perturbation, an effect termed as proprioceptive bias [ – ]. Importantly, we hypothesized that the magnitude of proprioceptive biases should correlate with the PPE and the implicit learning estimated by the model.
 Experiment 1 recruited four independent groups of participants (n = 15 per group) to adapt to 15°, 30°, 60°, or 90° VMR ( ). The overall learning patterns were consistent with previous studies [ , , ]. Implicit learning, measured through exclusion trials during late adaptation, exhibited a slightly nonlinear dependency on perturbation size ( ). A one-way ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of perturbation size in implicit learning (F(3,56) = 7.15, p = 0.0004). Post-hoc tests showed that implicit learning was significantly smaller for the 90° perturbation compared to both 15° (p = 0.046) and 30° (p < .0001), suggesting a concave size-dependency when continuous aiming reports were not required.
Despite reasonable fits to total and explicit learning ( ), the PE and SPE models incorrectly predicted a scaling effect of implicit learning with perturbation size. This discrepancy arose PE and SPE scaled with the perturbation size ( ), as observed in Bond & Taylor’s study ( ). In contrast, the PPE model accurately predicted implicit learning, showing that PPE first increased and then decreased with perturbation size, leading to a concave pattern that matches the empirical data ( and , R2 = 0.969; ). The model’s parameters aligned with previous estimates, with implicit and explicit learning rates (Bi = 0.151 and Be = 0.513) comparable to previous studies [ , ]. The slope of visual uncertainty with perturbation size (k = 0.204) was slightly lower than that in the error-clamp paradigm (k = 0.31; [ ]), likely because participants in the VMR paradigm focus more on the cursor to ensure accurate performance. The results of our eye-tracking experiment supported that participants tended to fixate back on the cursor after completing their movements ( ). This contrasts with the error-clamp paradigm, where participants are instructed to ignore the cursor and fixate on the target, resulting in higher visual uncertainty. We also conducted two complementary analyses, i.e., parameter recover and confusion matrix analysis for model discriminability, to further demonstrate the reliability and robustness of our modeling results (see and ).
The proprioceptive biases significantly correlated with implicit learning, as predicted by the PPE model. During late adaptation, participants’ right hands, the hand used for reaching adaptation, were passively moved to a random position near the target, and they were asked to indicate the direction of the right hand using their left hand. This passive localization test revealed a proprioceptive bias towards the visual perturbation, a phenomenon known as proprioceptive recalibration [ , , , , ]. Importantly, the bias followed a concave trend across perturbation size, mirroring the pattern of implicit learning ( ). A one-way ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of perturbation size (F(3,56) = 3.700, p = 0.017), with a post-hoc test revealing a higher bias for 30° than for 90° perturbations (p = 0.011). A correlation analysis across participants showed a significant positive correlation between proprioceptive bias and implicit adaptation ( ; R = 0.41, p = .001). This high correlation aligns with the PPE model, as both measures are driven by the misperceived hand direction under visuomotor rotation ( , ). In the proprioception test trial, the proprioceptive judgment is biased by the misperception of the hand location experienced after the preceding adaptation trial ends [ ], resulting in a small but consistent perceptual bias in the direction of visual perturbation.
In summary, implicit learning exhibited either a concave size-dependency (Experiment 1; [ ]) or invariance [ ] across perturbation sizes, depending on the task specifics, such as the presence of frequent aiming reports. Neither the PE nor SPE model could account for these size-dependencies, as their error sources did not follow a similar size-dependency ( and ). Interestingly, although PE converges a small value across different perturbation sizes during late learning, enabling the PE model to capture late learning size dependencies [ ], it fails to account for early learning, where it erroneously predicts a size-scaling effect. Only the PPE model provides a parsimonious explanation of the size dependencies of implicit learning across both early and late learning phases ( and ).

## Experiment 2: Stepwise perturbations enhance implicit learning due to increased PPE.
The differences between the three competing errors are most pronounced at the time when a perturbation is initially introduced ( , and ). Therefore, if the perturbation size changes during learning, we expect these errors to have diverging effects. A previous study has shown that, compared to a single large perturbation (e.g., a 60° VMR, referred to as one-step perturbation herein), incrementally increasing perturbations (e.g., a 15 → 30 → 45 → 60°, referred to as stepwise perturbation) boosts implicit learning while reducing explicit learning [ ]. The reduction in explicit adaptation is expected due to smaller PE in stepwise conditions. However, the increase of implicit learning challenges the conventional view that implicit learning is stereotypical and unaffected by various manipulations [ , , , ], and its mechanism remains unclear. Importantly, stepwise adaptation offers a critical test of the three error models. For both PE and SPE, one-step perturbation generates larger errors than stepwise perturbation during early learning, predicting greater implicit learning for the one-step condition ( , middle and right). In contrast, the PPE model predicts the opposite: smaller PPE for one-step perturbation due to the discounting effect of visual uncertainty, and thus, less implicit learning ( , left).
 To test these predictions in Experiment 2, we recruited two groups of participants: one group experienced a one-step 60° VMR perturbation (n = 15), while the other group experienced a stepwise 15° → 30° → 45° → 60° VMR perturbation (n = 15; ). Implicit learning was assessed using exclusion trials during late learning. Both groups achieved similar steady-state performance by the end of learning (two-sample t-test, t(28) = -1.117, p = 0.274), but their implicit learning patterns diverged ( ). The stepwise group showed increasing implicit learning with each perturbation step (F(3,21) = 11.639, p < 0.001), while the one-step group showed no significant change in implicit adaptation over time (F(3,21) = 1.938, p = 0.154). Notably, from the second exclusion trial block onward, the stepwise group exhibited significantly greater implicit learning than the one-step group (p = 0.011). By the final exclusion trial block (at 60° VMR), implicit learning in the stepwise group was nearly double that of the one-step group (26.33° ± 2.74° vs. 12.74° ± 1.45°; p = .001). In contrast, explicit learning was consistently larger for the one-step group for each exclusion trial block (p < 0.001).
All three models predict the gradual increase in implicit learning with stepwise perturbations, as all errors increase incrementally ( and ). However, only the PPE model correctly captures the relatively smaller implicit learning for the one-step perturbation compared to stepwise adaptation ( ). The PE and SPE models erroneously predict the opposite. Model comparison confirmed the superior performance of the PPE model (R2 = 0.960, 0.933, and 0.925; BIC = 264.81, 309.59, and 317.67 for PPE, PE, and SPE models, respectively; more model comparisons, see Table A in ). The superior performance of the PPE model was obtained even though we used the visual uncertainty parameter (k) estimated from Experiment 1, which also involved a one-step perturbation.
As in Experiment 1, proprioceptive bias in this experiment correlated with implicit learning, further supporting the PPE model. Proprioceptive bias increased with stepwise perturbation ( , F(3,25) = 8.874, p < 0.001), but remained unchanged during the one-step perturbation (F(3,25) = 0.538, p = 0.661). These proprioceptive bias patterns mirrored those of PPE and implicit learning ( ). To analyze the individual difference, we used a mixed linear model to isolate the between-subject variability and revealed a significant positive correlation between proprioceptive bias and implicit learning ( = 0.91, p < 0.001; ). This result was consistent with previous studies on proprioception and motor adaptation [ , , , ], supporting that implicit adaptation and proprioceptive bias are driven by the same error source, i.e., PPE.
One might argue that the one-step perturbation amplifies explicit learning compared to the stepwise perturbation, while the model-based analyses above assume fixed explicit learning parameters across both conditions. Indeed, when faced with a large, salient perturbation, individuals may rely more heavily on explicit learning strategies [ , ]. To address this, we allowed the explicit learning parameters to vary between the two conditions and re-evaluated the models ( and Table B in ). As expected, the explicit learning rate was higher in the one-step condition across all models. However, even with varying explicit learning parameters, both the PE and SPE models still failed to account for the observed differences between conditions ( ) and yielded unrealistic model parameters (Table B in ; [ , , ]). In contrast, the PPE model continued to provide excellent fits across both conditions, yielding the best overall fit ( and Table B in ).
We further validated the models using cross-validation, fitting each model with data from the stepwise group and testing it on the one-step group. Again, the PPE model outperformed the other two models with a large margin in cross-validation ( and Table C in ).

## Experiment 3: Suppression of explicit learning uncovers nonlinear implicit learning compatible only with PPE.
When a visual perturbation is first introduced, PE and SPE equal the perturbation size, as the participant has not yet developed a re-aiming strategy. In contrast, PPE is less than the visual perturbation because it derives a multisensory cue combination for hand localization ( ). Thus, the learning to the very first perturbation can highlight the key differences between errors: both PE and SPE predict a linear learning function relative to perturbation size, while PPE predicts a nonlinear function, as larger perturbations increase visual uncertainty, reducing its own influence on hand localization [ , ].
In Experiment 3 (n = 18), we used trial-by-trial random perturbations to suppress explicit learning and isolate the single-trial implicit learning. Unlike blocked perturbations as in Experiments 1 and 2, random perturbations prevent the accumulation of implicit learning. The participants performed single-target reaches, but each perturbation trial was perturbed by a visuomotor rotation with a pseudo-random size and direction (0, ± 4°, ± 8°, ± 16°, ± 32°, and ±64°), and was flanked by two no-feedback null trials ( ). Participants were instructed to aim directly at the target in the null trials, thus discouraging explicit learning. Implicit learning was measured by comparing hand movement directions between the pre- and post-perturbation null trials [ ]. The perturbation sequence, though it appeared random, was identical for all participants. The perturbation sequence had a zero mean, allowing any residual explicit learning to average out.
 The participants displayed adaptive changes immediately after the perturbation sequence was introduced, as evidenced by increased variability in hand directions ( ). We fit the learning data with the three competing models. Since PE and SPE are equal to the perturbation size in single-trial learning, we compared only the PPE model and PE model. The PPE model outperformed the PE model in explaining the learning response to random perturbations ( , R2 = 0.471 vs -0.683; BIC = 46.56 vs 82.00). As predicted by the PPE model, implicit learning follows a nonlinear pattern: it increased with perturbation size until a point, then perturbation size grew larger ( ; repeated-measure ANOVA: F(3.2,53.8) = 45.897, p < .0001; 4° vs 8°: p = 0.005; 8° vs 32°: p = 0.001; 32° vs 64°: p < .0001). This nonlinear pattern was consistent with previous findings from various motor adaptation paradigms [ , , , ]. In contrast, the PE (SPE) model predicted a linear pattern (linear regression: y = a + bθ, with a = -0.007 and b = -0.064, R2 = 0.908, F = 89.1, p < .0001), that drastically deviated from the observed data ( ; R2 < 0, RMSE = 2.449°), while the PPE model captured the nonlinear pattern well (R2 = 0.954, RMSE = 0.684°). Despite the randomness of the perturbations, the slope of visual uncertainty (k) estimated in this experiment was consistent with that from the block-design experiments ( ), further supporting the robustness of the PPE model across different experimental designs.
Despite the task instructions, participants might have strategically re-aimed away from the visual target in the null trials, potentially “contaminating” the estimates of implicit learning with explicit learning. To assess this, we employed a model-based analysis to include an explicit learning component. The results from the PPE model revealed that the estimated explicit learning parameters were quite small (learning rate Be = 0.047 and retention Ae = 0.037), indicating a negligible contribution from explicit learning. Additionally, incorporating explicit learning into the model only marginally increases the R2 but results in a higher BIC for the PPE model (R2 = 0.471 vs. 0.500; BIC = 46.56 vs. 52.82). When we constrained the lower limit of Ae to typical values (> 0.5), the inclusion of explicit learning actually worsened the model fit (R2 = 0.471 vs. 0.453, BIC = 46.56 vs. 57.26). Similarly, the fit of the PE/SPE models deteriorated when explicit learning was added ( ). Notably, the PPE model still substantially outperformed the PE and SPE models even with the inclusion of explicit learning ( ). Overall, we conclude that random perturbations primarily lead to implicit learning with a nonlinear size dependency, which can only be explained by the PPE model.

## Experiment 4: Implicit learning elicited by instructed re-aiming is driven by PPE.
One of the seminal studies in motor neuroscience supporting the role of SPE employed the instructed re-aiming paradigm in VMR [ ]. In this paradigm, participants are instructed to re-aim at a neighboring target whose angular deviation from the original target matches the imposed visual perturbation (e.g., 45°; ). This re-aiming nullifies performance error (PE) immediately. Intriguingly, despite this, participants begin to drift away from the re-aiming target involuntarily over repeated trials, increasing PE. This drift has been interpreted as evidence that SPE drives implicit learning [ ], as PE-based theories cannot explain the implicit drift when PE is nullified. Recently, Albert et al. (2022) proposed an alternative explanation based on the PE framework by introducing a new PE formulation (PEre-aiming)—a form of PE that arises between the cursor and the re-aiming target rather than the original target ( ). Notably, this PEre-aiming is equivalent in magnitude to SPE, thus enabling PE-based models to account for the drift phenomenon. Our PPE model can explain this drift without requiring any new concepts: the perceived hand position is “pulled” toward the visual cursor, deviating from the re-aiming target, thus generating a PPE that drives implicit learning. Model fits to the previous dataset [15] indicate that all three error models (PE, SPE, and PPE) can account for the original findings ( ). However, the models make distinct predictions when the re-aiming offset size changes. If the angular separation between the re-aiming and original targets increases (e.g., from 45° to 90°), both SPE and PEre-aiming would predict a larger implicit drift, as the errors increase with the offset. In contrast, the PPE model predicts a reduction in implicit drift because larger visual perturbations reduce the influence of PPE due to increased visual uncertainty.
 To test these diverging predictions, Experiment 4 recruited two groups of participants who adapted to either a large (90°, n = 15) or small (45°, n = 15) re-aiming offset. Upon re-aiming, participants’ movements began to drift in the opposite direction of the perturbation. Critically, the drift for the 90° group was significantly smaller than that for the 45° group ( ). The final drift in the 90° condition was considerably smaller than in the 45° condition (13.17° ± 1.29° for 45°, 8.44° ± 1.22° for 90°; two-sample t-test: t(28) = 2.58, p = 0.016). The PPE model readily explains this condition difference, as it predicts smaller implicit drift for larger re-aiming offsets due to the reduced influence of visual perturbations on hand localization. In contrast, both the PE and SPE models incorrectly predict that the drift should increase in the 90° condition ( and ). The visual uncertainty parameter (k) estimated from this experiment (0.211) was similar to those in previous experiments, further supporting the robustness of the PPE model. In addition, we conducted parameter recovery and confusion-matrix analyses, as we did in Experiment 1. The results showed high concordance between simulated and recovered parameters (CCC > 0.7 for all parameters, ), and strong discriminability with perfect model recovery achieved across all three alternative models ( ), demonstrating the reliability and robustness of our modeling approach.

## Experiment 5: Performance error based on spontaneous re-aiming fails to induce implicit learning.
In Experiment 4, participants were instructed to re-aim, preventing the spontaneous formation of explicit learning. However, one might argue that PE and SPE could still account for implicit drift if re-aiming occurred spontaneously rather than being explicitly instructed. To address this, Experiment 5 introduced a re-aiming target after participants had fully developed their own explicit learning. In this experiment, participants (n = 20) adapted to a 45° VMR, with explicit learning intermittently measured using aiming reports during adaptation ( ). After reaching a steady-state learning phase (spontaneous re-aiming in ), we presented a re-aiming target that aligned with each participant’s last reported aiming direction. Participants were instructed to aim for this re-aiming target for 30 additional trials to assess potential implicit drift (instructed re-aiming in ). Since this re-aiming target was consistent with the participants’ spontaneous re-aiming direction, both SPE and PPE should remain unchanged ( ), and both models would predict no further implicit learning. In contrast, the PE model predicts that the introduction of the re-aiming target would create a new performance error (PEre-aiming), leading to further implicit learning beyond the learning asymptote ( ).
 Participants reported an average explicit learning of 29.53° ± 1.63° in their last aiming report, consistent with previous studies [ , ]. However, no further increase in implicit learning occurred after the re-aiming target was introduced. The hand deviation from the original target with the re-aiming target (43.01° ± 0.50°) was statistically indistinguishable from the level before introducing the re-aiming target (43.25° ± 0.79°, t(19) = 0.327, p = 0.747, BF = 0.24). Moreover, implicit learning, as measured by exclusion trials, did not change when comparing the last exclusion trial cycle before re-aiming target introduction to the first trial cycle of the washout phase (9.04° ± 0.84° vs. 7.44° ± 0.66°, t(19) = 1.888, p = 0.075; ). These findings show that introducing a re-aiming target after explicit learning has been formed does not induce further implicit learning, contradicting the PE model’s predictions. Instead, the null result aligns with the prediction of the PPE model ( ), which also provided a better fit to the data (R² = 0.882 vs. 0.337 for the PE model, ).

## Experiment 6: Direct measures of PPE reveal its correlation to implicit learning.
Thus far, PPE has been implicated through model analysis or indirectly measured by proprioceptive bias in Experiments 1 and 2. In Experiment 6, we directly measured PPE by asking participants to locate both their aiming and produced movement. Our model simulation indicates that PPE should remain small throughout the learning process ( ), and should exhibit a similar perturbation size-dependency as proprioceptive bias and implicit learning ( and ). To test these predictions, we randomly assigned 30 participants to three conditions with 15°, 30°, and 90° VMR, respectively (n = 10 each). For a probe trial, a reaching movement was preceded by a pre-movement aiming report and followed by a post-movement report of perceived hand direction ( ). The direction difference between these two reports reflects the perceived error. Indeed, when the visual perturbation was turned on, the perceived hand direction deviated away from the aiming direction and towards the visual perturbation ( ). Thus, the PPE was significantly negative (15°: -1.99° ± 0.84°, t(9) = -2.36, p = 0.042; 30°: -4.39° ± 0.47°, t(9) = -9.42, p < 0.001; 90°: -1.86° ± 0.65°, t(9) = -2.87, p = 0.018), in the opposite direction of implicit learning ( ). Notably, the size of PPE was rather small and remained small throughout learning, consistent with our initial model simulations ( ). Importantly, PPE followed a nonlinear concave function of perturbation size (F(2,27) = 4.52, p = 0.020, post-hoc test: 30° vs. 90°: p = 0.038), resembling the model-estimated PPE based on data from Bond 2015 and Experiment 1 ( and ) and the proprioceptive bias measured in Experiment 1 ( ). Furthermore, the concave PPE pattern revealed here was accompanied by a similar concave pattern in implicit learning ( ; F(2,25) = 5.04, p = 0.015, post-hoc test: 30° vs. 90°: p = 0.012). Across participants, PPE also positively correlated with implicit learning ( ; R = 0.41, p = 0.031). Hence, the direct measures of PPE provide further support for the driving role of PPE in implicit learning.
 

## Discussion
Using a combination of systematic behavioral experiments and computational modeling, our study provides converging evidence that explicit and implicit processes in sensorimotor learning are driven by distinct error signals. Explicit learning is driven by performance error, while implicit learning is governed by perceptual prediction error. By leveraging the classical visuomotor rotation paradigm, we disentangled three potential error signals for implicit learning—performance error, sensory prediction error, and perceptual prediction error—across five experiments. Our findings demonstrate that implicit learning exhibits a perturbation size-dependency that can only be explained by PPE, not by PE or SPE (Experiments 1 and 2; [ ]). The perceptual prediction error can be indirectly measured by proprioception tests, which show people’s perceived hand is biased and this bias is correlated with implicit learning (Experiments 1 and 2). When explicit learning is suppressed using random perturbations, implicit learning follows a nonlinear size-dependency, again consistent only with PPE (Experiment 3). When explicit learning is constrained by instructed re-aiming (Experiment 4), implicit learning develops in a pattern that directly contradicts the predictions of SPE-based learning [ ]. When a re-aiming strategy is introduced after explicit learning has already been established, no further implicit learning occurs, refuting the predictions of PE-based learning (Experiment 5). Directly measured by probe trials, PPE is found to remain negative with a small yet significant offset from the aiming direction (Experiment 6), a pattern drastically different from PE and SPE yet matching the model predictions ( and ). Individual analysis reveals a positive correlation between PPE and implicit learning. Similar to implicit learning and proprioceptive bias, the measured PPE shows a concave dependency on perturbation size, further supporting its role in driving learning and biasing proprioceptive judgment. Overall, these results challenge the prevalent theories that attribute implicit motor learning to either performance or sensory prediction errors. Instead, they highlight the critical role of perceptual prediction error, defined as the deviation of the perceptual estimate of hand motion from the predicted (desired) motion, in driving implicit motor learning.

## Performance error does not drive implicit motor learning
Performance error is a well-established signal for learning in various domains, including perceptual learning [ ], reinforcement learning [ , ], decision-making [ , ], and the explicit components of motor learning [ – , , ]. However, whether performance error also underlies the implicit component of motor learning—traditionally associated with procedural learning—remains a topic of heated debate. While the dominant view posits that sensory prediction error drives implicit learning [ , , , , , ], all the influential state-space models endorse performance error as the key driver [ – , ]. A major challenge in this debate is the difficulty of dissociating performance error from movement prediction error, as performance error relates to goal attainment and is often tightly coupled with the movement itself. Previous studies have attempted to separate these errors by introducing “target jumps” during movement [ , – ], thus creating a performance error that is less correlated with the movement. However, such manipulations tend to distract participants, affecting both explicit and implicit learning [ , , ]. Furthermore, the target jump is likely to be interpreted as an environmental change, which leads to minimal learning within the motor system [ , ]. Indeed, the target jump has been shown to be ineffective in eliciting implicit learning [ , ]. In contrast, our study employed the classical VMR paradigm, which does not require additional manipulations of the perturbation feedback. The presence of explicit re-aiming—whether spontaneously learned or instructed—naturally separates the predicted movement from the goal-seeking cursor, allowing us to dissociate movement prediction error from performance error ( ). Our findings strongly suggest that performance error cannot account for the various patterns of implicit motor learning observed, despite its clear role in explicit learning.
It is worth noting that Albert and colleagues (2022) also employed a similar modeling approach using extensive datasets from VMR paradigms, but they reached the contrasting conclusion that both implicit and explicit learning are driven by the same performance error. However, their analysis focused exclusively on late learning (final learning extent) without considering the entire adaptation process. In late learning, performance error and perceptual prediction error tend to converge in size ( , and ), potentially leading to misleading model results. In our study, we demonstrated that early learning—where PE and PPE differ significantly—reveals the limitations of the PE model ( ). Additionally, Albert et al. did not compare stepwise adaptation with one-step adaptation, a critical contrast that highlights the erroneous predictions of both PE and SPE models ( ). In summary, by analyzing the full learning process, rather than selective learning segments, our study refutes the notion that performance error drives implicit motor learning.
We also considered the possibility that implicit learning is driven by sensory prediction error and performance error simultaneously. Previous research has suggested that implicit adaptation may comprise a fast and a slow component [ ]. We constructed an alternative model where implicit learning’s fast and slow components are driven by performance error and sensory prediction error, respectively. However, we found that this two-implicit-state model failed to explain the major findings of the key experiments here ( and ). We want to emphasize that these results do not argue against the possibility that implicit learning contains multiple components with different time scales. Rather, they suggest that the two visual errors, i.e., SPE and PE, are unable to drive the two time-scale components for implicit adaptation. Future studies are needed to examine whether perceptual prediction error identified here can adequately model the potential fast and slow components in implicit adaptation.

## Motor prediction error from multisensory integration, not a single modality
Our findings call for a shift in how prediction error is conceptualized in the context of motor control and learning, emphasizing its perceptual nature rather than a strictly sensory one. Traditional models of motor prediction error have largely focused on visual prediction errors derived from the discrepancy between predicted and actual visual feedback during movements [ , ]. This approach has been applied not only to visual perturbations such as visuomotor rotation and saccadic adaptation [ , ], but also to non-visual perturbations such as force [ , – ] and inertial perturbations [ , ]. However, accumulating evidence suggests that learning of force and inertial perturbations can occur without visual feedback [ – ], contradicting the idea that visual errors alone drive motor adaptation in these contexts. Defining prediction error solely in terms of visual metrics is increasingly seen as inadequate, as several recent studies have noted [ , ]. Despite this, the field continues to label prediction errors in motor control as sensory prediction errors, reinforcing their unimodal, primarily visual nature [ , ]. Our study provides strong evidence that visual prediction error (SPE) cannot adequately capture the dynamics of implicit learning, even when the perturbation itself is visual. In contrast, perceptual prediction error (PPE), which is derived from multisensory integration, can parsimoniously explain both our data and key findings in the literature [ , , ]. Notably, PPE and SPE share the same prediction, i.e., both assume that the prediction is about where the hand intends to be (aiming direction for VMR). However, they differ in the definition of feedback: SPE uses the visual cursor as feedback to compare with the hand prediction, while PPE uses the perceived hand direction (resulting from multisensory integration) as feedback. Thus, prediction and feedback for SPE do not refer to the same entity (hand vs. cursor), whereas for PPE, they both refer to hand direction. The term “perceptual” in PPE highlights the fact that the feedback used to compute this prediction error is a percept, a posterior estimate of effector localization in Bayesian terms.
Our findings suggest that perceptual prediction error drives implicit learning beyond upper-limb movements, as supported by emerging evidence from other motor learning paradigms. One such example is saccadic adaptation, which explores how the oculomotor system adapts to spatial perturbations of gaze targets [ , , ]. In this domain, performance error (i.e., the retinal distance between the post-saccadic target and the fovea) does not seem to support implicit learning [ , ]. Similar to reaching studies, saccadic adaptation research has traditionally focused on sensory prediction error (i.e., the deviation between the post-saccadic visual error and an internally predicted visual error [ , , ]. However, recent modeling work suggests that both motoric and perceptual changes in saccadic adaptation are better explained by a postdiction-based error [ ]. This postdiction error refers to the discrepancy between the eye-muscle motor command and the perceived target location, the latter arising from a combination of the actual saccadic error and the predicted saccadic displacement. This concept mirrors our perceptual estimate of hand localization in reaching adaptation, wherein multiple sensorimotor cues are integrated to inform the perceptual error driving adaptation. Notably, saccadic adaptation assumes a stable target location across saccades, reflecting the oculomotor system’s assumption of spatial stability [ – ]. Similarly, in reaching tasks, the manual control system assumes that the hand should consistently and accurately reach the intended target. In this light, implicit learning functions to recalibrate the motor system to ensure the maintenance of stability and accuracy, aided by perceptual prediction error.
Perceptual prediction error may also underlie implicit learning in speech adaptation, where the articulatory system adapts to auditory perturbations [ , ]. Most studies in speech adaptation emphasized auditory prediction error, a modality-specific form of sensory prediction error [ – ]. However, recent modeling work has demonstrated that a state estimate of the task, rather than sensory prediction error, best explains the observed learning patterns [ , ]. This state estimate is derived from a combination of the previous articulatory state, an efference copy of the motor command, and auditory feedback, creating a multimodal perceptual estimate that updates the articulatory-to-task transformation—essentially, an internal model. Thus, even in the context of auditory perturbations, a multimodal perceptual estimate, rather than a unimodal auditory prediction error, appears to drive speech adaptation.

## Theoretical advance of the PPE model relative to previous work
Tsay and colleagues have recently proposed that implicit adaptation should be understood as a process of proprioceptive re-alignment of the hand towards the target (Proprioceptive re-alignment model, PReMo) [ ]. They challenged the traditional visual-centric view and emphasized the critical role of localizing one’s effector in motor learning. However, as shown in our previous work [ ], the assumption of the PReMo, i.e., the effect of visual perturbation on proprioceptive feedback follows a ramp function of perturbation size, is not supported by empirical findings [ , ]. The PReMo model also predicts that the perceived hand direction should be unbiased in late learning (i.e., re-aligned), contradicting our findings in Experiment 6 which revealed a persistent perceptual error in late learning. In the present study, we further show that PPE is not only applicable for a specific motor learning paradigm, i.e., error-clamp paradigm that invokes implicit adaptation only, but also for more generic motor learning scenario where both explicit learning and implicit co-exist [ ].
As stated in the Introduction, the VMR paradigm employed here enabled us to dissociate task goal from aiming direction. Previous works using error-clamp adaptation [ , ] confounded task goal and aiming, preventing us from determining which one serves as motor prediction. The VMR paradigm dissociates participants’ aiming (intended movement direction) from the target, thereby enabling dissociation of performance error and sensory prediction error. Nevertheless, our data and model comparisons revealed that neither PE nor SPE can adequately explain error-based implicit learning.

## Dual learning reflects the dual imperatives of motor control
The dual learning based on the two distinct error signals could reflect the dual imperatives of motor control: achieving action goals and resolving sensory conflicts. Researchers have shown that unconscious movements tend to resolve multisensory conflicts, as opposed to achieving explicit goals [ – ]. For instance, in the rubber hand illusion paradigm, participants exhibit subtle, unconscious movements to align visual and proprioceptive cues, not to achieve a specific goal but to reduce sensory conflict [ , ]. This suggests that the motor system, apart from controlling explicit actions, implicitly adjusts movements to minimize sensory mismatches [ , ]. Similarly, in the VMR learning task, sensory feedback from different modalities (e.g., visual and proprioceptive) creates a perceptual error relative to the predicted hand movement, leading the motor system to implicitly recalibrate movements to resolve the conflict. Here explicit learning corresponds to the goal-directed imperative of motor control, driven by PE. In contrast, implicit learning aligns with the imperative of minimizing sensory conflict, driven by PPE.

## The relationship between explicit and implicit learning
Our findings on PPE provide new insights into the relationship between explicit and implicit learning, a central question in motor learning. Previous studies have suggested that these two processes either complement each other [ , ] or compete [ , , , ]. However, our PPE model suggests that explicit and implicit learning are functionally independent, driven by distinct error signals, and their relationship is task-specific. In tasks where PE and PPE are in the same direction, explicit and implicit learning can work synergistically, as seen in typical adaptation tasks (Experiments 1 and 2). However, when these errors diverge, the two learning processes can conflict. For example, in Mazzoni & Krakauer (2006) and Experiment 4, when participants were instructed to re-aim explicitly, implicit learning caused a drift away from the re-aiming target, paradoxically worsening performance, i.e., creating a PE in the opposite direction of PPE ( ; clockwise PE and counterclockwise PPE in the illustrated example). This conflict reveals that implicit learning, driven by PPE, can sometimes undermine explicit learning, especially when their errors differ. Only when performance error grows large enough and sustains for an extended period of time do individuals adjust their explicit strategy to correct for performance error [ ]. Similar conflict or decoupling between explicit and implicit learning also occurs in the mirror-reversal paradigm, in which implicit learning initially worsens performance [ , , ], even after a few days of training [ , , ]. Only after sufficient exposure to this conflict, people slowly develop explicit re-aiming strategies to override implicit learning and thus improve the overall performance [ , ]. Interestingly, in cases of conflict, implicit learning—driven by the minimization of PPE—tends to be prioritized over performance error correction. This is reminiscent of the competition between Type I (unconscious, fast) and Type II (conscious, slow) cognitive processes in human decision-making [ , ].
Past research has reported that better explicit learners tend to exhibit less implicit learning, implying a competitive relationship between the two processes [ , , , ]. However, this conclusion is often based on inter-dependent learning measures, as implicit learning is typically measured using exclusion trials, while explicit learning is inferred by subtracting implicit learning from total learning [ , , , ]. Given that most participants reach a learning ceiling, this subtraction method risks producing a false negative correlation. When explicit and implicit learning are measured independently—e.g., using aiming reports for explicit learning and exclusion trials for implicit learning—their relationship does not show a consistent negative correlation but varies depending on the context ( ). In some cases, there is even a positive correlation between the two [ ]. Additionally, during early learning, when learning is not yet complete with a relatively large PE, the negative correlation between explicit and implicit learning disappears (Experiment 5; ), challenging the notion that these processes compete for a shared performance error signal.
PPE is defined as the discrepancy between the predicted and perceived hand localization, and the predicted hand localization is determined by explicit learning, i.e., the re-aiming in the case of VMR paradigm. In this sense, explicit learning provides an anchor for deriving the error signal for the implicit learning. This anchoring role of cognitive learning echoes recent findings that the generalization of implicit learning is centered at the re-aiming direction [ , , ]. In summary, our findings suggest that explicit and implicit learning are independent processes that can interact in a task-specific way. Their relationship is not inherently competitive but rather context-dependent, driven by the alignment or misalignment of the underlying error signals.

## Proprioceptive bias resulted from perceptual bias related to perturbed action
Proprioceptive bias observed in motor adaptation highlights how motor learning can modify perception. Our findings suggest that both motoric and perceptual changes during motor learning might follow the principles of Bayesian cue integration. In implicit motor learning, PPE arises from a misperception of the hand’s position ( ). Similarly, in proprioception tests, biased judgments result from the same biased cue (provided by previous adaptation trials. Consistent with this model, our results show that both proprioceptive bias and implicit learning are modulated by ongoing adaptation ( and ). The model further explains the varied effects of perturbation size on proprioceptive bias, which can be either linear [ , ] or constant [ ], an inconsistency left unexplained. A linear dependency emerges with stepwise perturbations, where each step-up of perturbation incrementally increases the perceived hand position [ , ] (Experiment 2). In contrast, a constant dependency is associated with one-step perturbations, leading to similar across perturbation sizes [ ] (Experiment 1). The significant correlation between implicit learning and proprioceptive bias further supports the idea that changes in perceived hand position underlie these perceptual shifts (Experiments 1 and 2). The concept based on PPE model aligns with the view that proprioceptive bias results from multisensory integration [ , – ]. A few studies have theorized that the internal model formed by motor adaptation underlies proprioceptive bias [ , , ]. However, the internal model typically develops slowly, but proprioceptive bias develops rapidly with perturbation [ , , , ] and diminishes rapidly without it [ ]. This makes the internal model an unlikely explanation. Thus, Bayesian cue combination provides a unified explanation for both implicit motor learning and accompanying perceptual changes.
One interesting finding regarding the role of proprioception in implicit adaptation is that the deafferent patients, surprisingly, exhibited normal implicit adaptation [ ]. This appears contradictory to our PPE model predictions: the increase in proprioceptive uncertainty among deafferented patients should increase PPE and thus enhance implicit learning if all other factors remain the same. However, deafferented patients undergo lifelong compensatory changes for their proprioceptive loss in both perception and action. For instance, they relied exclusively on efference-based central sense of effort to judge force and weight [ ], and they preserved and even exaggerated their anticipatory grip-force scaling and predictive strategies for object manipulation, while their feedback corrections are impaired [ ]. These findings suggested that they re-weight efference-related or predictive cues for sensorimotor control after lifelong compensation. We thus postulate that the observed intact implicit adaptation among deafferented patients might be related to their re-weighting of sensory cues and predictive cues. This hypothesis can be tested by measuring PPE indirectly (using the passive localization tests in our Experiments 1 and 2) or directly (our Experiment 6) among them in future investigations.

## Implications for neurophysiological studies
The compositional nature of motor learning—wherein explicit and implicit learning are driven by distinct error signals—offers a new framework for exploring their neural underpinnings. Traditionally, neurophysiological studies have focused on the neural correlates of total learning, implicating both sensorimotor regions (e.g., cerebellum and sensorimotor cortex [ , – ], and regions associated with cognitive control and decision-making (e.g., prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia [ – ]). By decomposing total learning into explicit and implicit components, future research can better delineate the neural circuits underlying these distinct processes [ ], with particular focus on the cerebellum and posterior parietal cortex (PPC) involved in learning acquisition [ , , , , ]. Furthermore, most previous studies have used either sensory prediction errors [ , – ] or performance errors [ – ] to identify neural correlates of motor learning. Our finding that perceptual prediction error underlies implicit learning, with a distinct temporal profile from other errors, suggests that more tailored neural assays could be developed [ ]. Behavioral paradigms that effectively modulate perceptual prediction error, like the stepwise perturbations in Experiment 2, could be particularly useful for future investigations. Additionally, our results emphasize the importance of localizing one’s effector in motor control and learning, requiring integration of motor prediction, visual, and proprioceptive cues on a trial-by-trial basis ( ). The neural substrates for encoding and integrating these cues overlap with key networks involved in visuomotor learning, including the premotor cortex for intended cursor movement [ , ], PPC for learning-related visual representations [ ] and visuomotor transformation [ ], the cerebellum for error processing and acquisition of internal models [ – ], and the somatosensory cortex that contributing to the acquisition and retention of motor learning [ – ]. The interplay between motor learning and minimizing position errors of body effectors warrants further examination with neurophysiological approaches. By incorporating insights from our findings, future studies can better understand the neural mechanisms that support the distinct yet interconnected processes of explicit and implicit motor learning.

## Methods

## Ethics statement
The study was approved by the Ethical Committee of the School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences at Peking University. All participants provided written informed consent to participate in the study and received monetary compensation upon completion of the experiment.

## Participants
We recruited 204 college students from Peking University (118 females, 22.76 ± 2.53 years, mean ± SD). All participants were right-handed and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Participants were naïve to the purpose of the experiment.

## Apparatus
In Experiments 1 and 2, we used the KINARM planar robotic manipulandum with a virtual-reality system (BKIN Technologies Ltd., Kingston, Canada). Participants sat in a chair and held the two robot handles with their left and right hands, respectively. The right hand performed the reaching task, and the left hand indicated the perceived direction of the right hand if required. A semi-silvered mirror positioned below eye level displayed visual stimuli and obscured the participants’ view of their hands and the robotic manipulandum. The sampling rate of the KINARM was 1,000 Hz.
In Experiments 3, 4, and 5, we used a horizontally placed digitizing tablet (48.8 x 30.5 cm, Intuos 4 PTK-1240, Wacom, Saitama, Japan) to measure people’s hand movements. Participants sat in front of a vertically-placed LCD screen (29.6 x 52.7 cm, Dell, Round Rock, TX, US) with a customized wooden blinder placed over the tablet to occlude the vision of the hand. Using a stylus with their right hand, participants performed the reaching task on the tablet. The sampling rate of the tablet was 200Hz. Procedures and data acquisition were custom-coded (Psychtoolbox-3-3.0.19.2 in MATLAB).
The eye-tracking experiment used a similar setup to Experiments 3, 4, and 5, with the addition of eye tracking. A slightly smaller digitizing tablet (31.1 x 21.6 cm, Intuos M, Wacom, Saitama, Japan) was used. The vertically-placed LCD screen was positioned approximately 50 cm in front of a chin rest, with a bracket occluding the participants’ view of the tablet and their hands. Movement trajectories were sampled at 200Hz by the digitizing tablet. Eye movements were continuously tracked at 500Hz using a video-based eye tracker (Eyelink 1000, SR Research), which was placed beneath the LCD screen.

## Experiment 1.
Sixty participants were randomly assigned to one of four groups (n = 15 each). Each group adapted to visuomotor rotation of one of four possible sizes (15°, 30°, 60°, or 90°). Participants made reaching movements from a central start position towards an upright (defined as 45°) target located 10 cm away. The start position, target, and cursor were displayed as filled circles, with a 5-mm radius purple circle for the start position, a 5-mm radius blue circle for the target, and a 3-mm radius white circle for the cursor. Each trial began with participants holding their right hand at the start position for 800ms. The target then appeared and signaled participants to make a quick, straight sliding movement through it. The trial ended when the distance between the hand and the start position exceeded 10 cm. If the movement duration from leaving the start position to reaching 10 cm exceeded 300 ms, a warning message, “too slow”, would appear on the screen.
The experiment included three phases: a 35-trial baseline phase with veridical feedback, a 75-trial adaptation phase with VMR feedback, and a 20-trial washout phase without cursor feedback. The direction of the VMR perturbation was counterbalanced across participants. To assess implicit learning at the asymptote of learning, we inserted exclusion trials at the 50, 55, 60, and 65th trials during the adaptation phase. In these exclusion trials, participants were instructed to move their hand straight to the target without any strategy. The washout phase used the same exclusion instruction, which the experimenter emphasized during data collection.
To measure proprioceptive bias, we inserted proprioception test trials at the 15, 20, 25, 30, and 35th trials during the adaptation phase ( ). Additional proprioception test trials were conducted at the 5, 10, 15, and 20th trials during the baseline phase to assess baseline proprioceptive bias. In the proprioception test trial, participants were instructed to relax their right arm, which was then passively moved to one of four locations (± 5° and ± 15° away from the reaching target). The passive movement lasted for 1000 ms and followed a straight path with a minimum-jerk speed profile. During this movement, a white ring, centered at the start position, expanded in sync with the hand’s center-out displacement to indicate the movement distance. After the right hand reached the target location, participants held their right hand steady and used the left robot handle to indicate the perceived position of their right hand. Moving the left handle controlled the rotation of a visual “dial” displayed along an arc that passed through the proprioceptive targets [ ]. Participants held the dial at their perceived location for 1,000 ms, which was recorded as their perceptual judgement.

## Experiment 2.
Experiment 2 used the same task setup as in Experiment 1. We recruited two groups of participants: one group experienced stepwise perturbations (n = 15), while the other group experienced a one-step perturbation (n = 15). The stepwise group experienced a stepwise 15° → 30° → 45° → 60° VMR perturbation, with each perturbation presented for 40 trials. The one-step group experienced a 60° perturbation for 160 consecutive trials ( ). Within each 40-trial perturbation block, we inserted exclusion trials at the 30 and 35th trials to measure implicit learning, and proprioception test trials at the 5, 10, 15, and 20th trials to measure proprioceptive bias. Before the adaptation phase, all participants completed a 35-trial baseline phase with veridical feedback. After the adaptation phase, they went through a washout phase without visual feedback, following the same exclusion instruction.

## Experiment 3.
Experiment 3 investigated the size-dependency of implicit learning when explicit learning was suppressed by the randomness of perturbations. To prevent cumulative learning over trials, three targets (25°, 45°, and 65° at an 8 cm distance) were used. Participants (n = 18) began with a baseline phase consisting of 15 veridical-feedback trials and 15 interleaved no-feedback null trials. In the subsequent adaptation phase, trials were organized into 6-trial mini blocks, where each target was presented once randomly and each perturbation trial was flanked by two no-feedback null trials ( ). During perturbation trials, participants were instructed to control the cursor to hit the target, while null trials served as exclusion trials. Visuomotor rotation of 0°, 4°, 8°, 16°, 32°, and 64°, either clockwise or counter-clockwise was randomly used in each perturbation trial. These 11 perturbations were repeated nine times, leading to a total of 99 perturbation trials and 99 null trials in the adaptation phase. The wide range of rotation sizes enabled us to uncover the linear or nonlinear size-dependency of implicit adaptation [ , ]. The randomness of perturbation size and direction would prevent participants from forming an adaptive strategy. Single-trial learning was quantified as the difference in movement direction between the two adjacent null trials before and after a perturbation trial. Of note, despite the randomness of the perturbations, we emphasize to participants that the cursor is task-relevant and they need to use the cursor to hit the target despite the perturbation. Although this task-relevant instruction could make the task challenging, it emphasizes the task-relevance of visual feedback, which could affect adaptive learning. A previous study has shown that under these instructions and with random perturbations, participants can fulfil the task without any re-aiming strategy [ ].

## Experiment 4.
Experiment 4 examined VMR adaptation with instructed re-aiming, as in the seminar study by Mazzoni & Krakauer, 2006. However, two different sizes of VMR were used for two separate groups of participants, i.e., 45° (n = 15) or 90° VMR (n = 15). The target, presented as a 5-mm radius white circle, would appear at one of eight possible locations (0°, 45°, 90°, 135°, 180°, 225°, 270°, and 315°) 8 cm away, randomly in an eight-trial cycle. In the baseline phase, participants were instructed to control the cursor to hit the target with veridical feedback. In the adaptation phase, a new re-aiming target was introduced starting from the first perturbation trial. The re-aiming target, which was either 45° or 90° but in the opposite rotation direction of the imposed VMR, was presented as a 5-mm radius green circle, distinct from the original target. For a consecutive series of 120 trials, participants were required to move their hand to the re-aiming target to make the cursor “hit” the original target. Half of the participants in each group experienced clockwise perturbations and the other half counterclockwise perturbations. Typically, people could maintain their aim at the re-aiming target despite their hand implicitly drifting away from it, across the span of 120 trials [ ].

## Experiment 5.
Experiment 5 examined the instructed re-aiming introduced at the end of VMR adaptation, as opposed to at its beginning (as in Experiment 4). Four targets were used, located at 45°, 135°, 225°, and 315°, 8 cm away, with trials organized into 4-trial cycles. The baseline phase consisted of 3 trial cycles with veridical feedback trials and 1 trial cycle without feedback. The subsequent adaptation phase consisted of 60 cycles with a 45° VMR. Within the adaptation phase, we intermittently measured the explicit adaptation through aiming reports at the 5, 19, 33, and 47th cycles. In these trials, the target was surrounded by a ring of 63 numbered visual landmarks spaced 5.625° apart, with 0° centered on the target. Before the reach, participants verbally reported the landmark number they planned to reach. Their reported aiming directions were recorded by the experimenter. To measure implicit adaptation, we inserted exclusion trials with no visual feedback at the 6, 20, 34, 48th cycles. In the ensuing re-aiming phase, we presented a re-aiming target at the last reported aiming direction, tailored to each participant. Participants were required to move their hand straight to this re-aiming target for 40 cycles. Note that the re-aiming target would still make the cursor reach the original target since it was aligned with the participant’s spontaneous explicit learning asymptote. We inserted exclusion trials at the 1st, 11, and 21st cycles in the re-aiming phase. In the final washout phase, participants completed an additional 15 cycles of exclusion trials.

## Experiment 6.
Experiment 6 aimed to directly measure PPE, defined as the difference between the intended movement direction (aiming direction) and the perceived hand direction. Using a similar setup and procedures as Experiments 1 and 2, Experiment 6 recruited thirty participants and randomly assigned them to learn one of three VMR perturbations (15°, 30°, and 90° VMR; n = 10 each). Participants went through three learning phases, i.e., baseline (20 trials), adaptation (44 trials), and washout (20 trials). Every four trials, they performed a probe trial for measuring PPE ( ). The first eight adaptation trials were not probed to avoid affecting participants’ formation of strategic re-aiming during this critical initial learning phase [ ]. For each probe trial, participants held their right hand at the start position for 800 ms, and then a target (a 5-mm radius blue circle), a white arc, and a purple visual marker were displayed. Participants were asked to report their intended aiming direction (“Where will your right hand go?”) by moving the left KINARM handle to dial the visual marker, just as in Experiment 2. Participants subsequently performed the reaching movement, with or without the cursor perturbation, by their right hand. After the reach, their right hand was passively returned to the starting position by the robotic manipulandum. The arc and visual marker reappeared to prompt participants to report the perceived direction of their actual hand movement (“Where was your right hand?”), again using the left KINARM handle to dial the visual marker. PPE was computed as the angular difference between these two reported directions.

## Eye-tracking experiment
The eye-tracking experiment examined whether people fixate in the aiming direction during reaching movements in typical VMR adaptation. Participants (n = 16) learned 45° and 90° VMR perturbations in two consecutive sessions, with the order counterbalanced. Each session included a baseline, adaptation, and washout phase, as in Experiment 1, with 40, 160, and 20 trials, respectively. Each trial began when the participant moved the cursor (a 3-mm radius white circle) into the starting position (a 5-mm radius purple circle) using a stylus. After holding the position for 500ms, a target (a 5-mm blue circle) was presented 10 cm away at a random direction between 0° and 360°. Participants started to reach the target with the cursor once the target disappeared. The target presentation duration followed a uniform distribution from 800 to 1200 ms, making the movement trigger less predictable. If the movement was initiated before the target disappearance, the trial was aborted and a text message “reacting too fast” would appear on the screen. Veridical or perturbed cursor feedback was shown during the movement and the target reappeared once the movement ended and lasted for 1000 ms. The disappearance of the target prevented some participants from keeping their fixation at the starting position without a change to their aiming direction. To avoid slow movements, a text message “moving too slow” would appear if the movement time exceeded 400ms.

## The three error models
Perceptual prediction error (PPE) model The PPE model hinges on the perceptual estimation of effector position that is dynamically updated through Bayesian cue combination. For reaching, the perceptual estimate of the hand movement direction ( ) results from the integration of three sensory cues: the visual cue ( ) from the cursor, the proprioceptive cue ( ) from the hand, and the sensory prediction of the reaching action ( ). Following Bayesian principles [ ], the perceptual estimate is

 x^hand=∑iWixi, with   Wi=1σi2 ∑j1σj2, i,j=u,p,v 
(1)
where the weight of each cue is determined by its uncertainty (𝝈) relative to each other. Notably, in the VMR paradigm, the predicted reaching direction is the aiming direction. The rotated cursor ( ) biases the hand estimate ( ) toward the cursor’s direction. The deviation from the predicted (aiming) direction constitutes the perceptual prediction error, which drives implicit adaptation on the subsequent trial ( ). We assume that learning proceeds on a trial-by-trial basis thus a state-space framework is used. Explicit learning is driven by performance error as in existing models ( ; 8, 9, 10, 40, 147). For each trial, the learning is updated by

 xt+1i=Aixti−Bi(x^Hand,t−xu,t)
(2)

 xt+1e=Aexte−BeetPE
(3)

 xt+1=xt+1e+xt+1i
(4)
Where total learning ( ) is the sum of explicit learning ( ) and implicit learning ( ). A is the retention rate capturing the inter-trial forgetting and B is the learning rate capturing the proportion of error correction.
As individuals fixate near the aiming direction during the movement [ , ], the visual cursor directionally differs from the fixation by an amount of ( ). This eccentricity linearly increases visual uncertainty about cursor motion direction, as shown both in visual perception studies and in our previous work [ ]. Thus, the visual uncertainty ( follows a linear function:

 σv=k*|xv−xu|+b
(5)
where k and b are the slope and intercept of the visual uncertainty, respectively.
Performance error (PE) model The performance error (PE) model, also called the competition model [ ] or the two-state model [ ], has been widely used to explain motor adaptation [ – ]. The in the PPE model is replaced by

 xt+1i=Aixti−BietPE
(6)
Sensory-prediction error (SPE) model Implicit motor learning has been suggested to be driven by sensory prediction error [ , , ]. In the VMR paradigm, SPE is defined as the deviation of the perturbing cursor from the aiming direction [ ]. Therefore, the SPE model replaces in the PPE model by

 xt+1i=Aixti−Bi(xti−r),
(7)
where is SPE and is the VMR size.

## Data analysis
Hand kinematics: In Experiments 1 and 2, hand positions and velocities were directly acquired from the KINARM robot at a fixed sampling rate of 1,000 Hz. The raw kinematic data were smoothed using a fifth-order Savitzky-Golay filter with a window length of 50 ms. In Experiments 3, 4, and 5, hand positions were recorded at a sampling rate of 125 Hz. The movement direction was determined by computing the direction of the vector spanning from the starting position to the hand position at the peak outward velocity. We defined the direction to counter the perturbation as the positive direction.
Gaze: The gaze position obtained in the eye-tracking experiment was first preprocessed to remove blinks. Consistent with previous studies [ ], we used the last fixation before movement onset to quantify the participants’ aiming direction. Trials were excluded if the fixation before movement onset was missing (due to a blink), or near the start position (< 40% of target distance), or beyond the target (>150% of target distance). These exclusions amounted to 1.67% of the trials in the 45°-VMR condition and 3.61% in the 90°-VMR condition. Other direction measures, such as the gaze position at movement onset, yielded similar results.
Statistical analysis: For the dataset from Bond & Taylor 2015, we quantified early and late learning by using the data from the first 5 cycles and the last 5 cycles in the adaptation phase, respectively. Total learning was defined as the hand’s directional deviation from the target. Explicit learning was quantified as the direction deviation of the aiming report from the target. Implicit learning was calculated by subtracting explicit learning from total learning. Group differences were examined using one-way independent-measure ANOVAs. In Experiments 1 and 2, implicit learning was quantified as the average hand deviation from the target in the four exclusion trials. Total learning was calculated as the average hand deviation from the target in the last cycle during the adaptation phase. Explicit learning was calculated by subtracting implicit learning from total learning. Proprioceptive bias was quantified as the average angular difference between the perceived (reported) and actual hand directions over the six proprioception test trials. Group differences were examined using one-way independent-measure ANOVAs, with pairwise post-hoc comparisons conducted using Bonferroni correction. For Experiment 2, two-way mixed ANOVAs were performed, with group as the between-group factor and learning time as the within-group factor. For the correlation analysis of Experiment 2, we used a mixed linear model: , where is implicit learning, is proprioceptive bias, is the random factor of subject, and is the residual error. In Experiment 3, single-trial learning was defined as the angular difference in movement direction between two consecutive no-feedback null trials before and after a perturbation trial. Given the symmetry between CW and CCW perturbations, we pool the data to quantify the size dependency on the absolute perturbation size. Repeated-measures ANOVAs were used to examine the effect of perturbation size on single-trial learning. In Experiment 4, independent t-tests were used to compare implicit learning between 45°-VMR and 90°-VMR conditions. In Experiment 5, we used paired t-tests to compare implicit learning before and after introducing the re-aiming target. Implicit learning was quantified by both subtraction and exclusion methods. In Experiment 6, we used one-sample t-tests to examine whether PPE was significantly negative, and used one-way ANOVAs to examine group differences in PPE and implicit learning. Post-hoc comparisons were conducted with Bonferroni correction. In the eye-tracking experiment, we used paired t tests to compare condition differences (90° vs. 45°) in the re-aiming direction. We used a mixed linear model for analyzing the correlation between explicit learning and eye-fixation direction: , where is explicit learning, is eye-fixation direction, is the random factor of subject, and is the residual error. For all experiments, we excluded the trials with movement time exceeding 400 ms or below 150 ms, as well as the trials with systematic movements to the incorrect direction (i.e., movement direction less than -20° or exceeding 120°). These criteria resulted in the removal of less than 1% of trials on average for each experiment.

## Model analysis
Both PE and SPE models have four parameters Θ = [ , , , ]. The PPE model has one additional parameter: the slope of visual uncertainty as a function of visual eccentricity (k). Other parameters related to sensory uncertainty ( , , b) are fixed parameters derived from our previous work using the error-clamp paradigm [ ] ( = 5.05°, 
= 11.12°, b = 1.853°). These parameters represent systematic properties of the sensorimotor system that are not task-dependent and thus should remain constant across paradigms. But we left k as a free parameter because the previous work used the error-clamp paradigm, which reinforced fixation on the reach target rather than on the cursor. In contrast, participants in the VMR paradigm here, look at the cursor at the end of the reaching movement, which presumably reduces the effect of eccentricity on visual uncertainty. Not all the experiments need the full models (as detailed below).
Bond & Taylor, 2015. We fitted the trial-by-trial average implicit learning data from all the four perturbation conditions simultaneously ( ). The PPE model had three free parameters Θ = [k, , ], while the PE and SPE models each had two free parameters Θ = [ , ]. Bootstrapping was used to estimate the standard deviations of the model fits. Participants in each group were resampled with replacement 5000 times, each time producing a new average learning sequence.
Experiments 1 and 2. The trial-by-trial learning data include total learning and implicit learning (intermittently measured during the adaptation phase) from all the four conditions (Experiment 1; ) or the two conditions (Experiment 2; ). The PPE model had five free parameters Θ = [k, , , , ]. Since the one-step condition in Experiment 2 was identical to the conditions in Experiment 1 (only differing in the duration of the adaptation phase), we applied the k value estimated from Experiment 1 to the one-step condition in Experiment 2. The stepwise condition, however, retained k as a free parameter (kstep in ) since the participants would be attracted by the sudden stepwise change in cursor rotation, which would reduce visual uncertainty. Through fitting the data from both two conditions ( ), we obtained the value of kstep. We used the values of k and kstep for cross-validation ( ). The SPE and PE models had four free parameters Θ = [ , , , ].
Experiments 3, 4, and 5. We first assumed that the single-trial learning in Experiment 3 was implicit. Thus, the PPE model had three free parameters Θ = [k, , ] to fit the average trial-by-trial changes ( ). The averaging was feasible since the pseudo-random perturbation sequence was identical for each participant. For fitting, we set the lower limit of at 0.7 for all the models. Based on fitting the trial-by-trial learning, we calculated the model-predicted single-trial learning as a function of perturbation size ( ). To examine whether there was explicit learning at work, we then included the explicit learning component and evaluated whether it improved model fitting. In Experiment 4, there was only implicit learning since participants were unaware of their hand drifting away from the instructed re-aiming target. Thus, only implicit learning was fitted for the 45°- and 90°-VMR conditions at once. The PPE model had three free parameters Θ = [k, , ], while the SPE and PE models had two free parameters Θ = [ , ]. For Experiment 5, the data used for model fitting included the trial-by-trial changes in total learning as well as the intermittently-measured explicit learning. Models were fitted to the data before introducing the re-aiming target and then used to predict the learning afterwards ( ). The PPE model thus had five free parameters Θ = [k, , , , ], while the other two models had four free parameters Θ = [ , , , ].
All model fittings were conducted using fmincon function in MATLAB (2022b, MathWorks, Natick, MA, US). To ensure the model adhered to established assumptions, we constrained the parameters with < and as commonly assumed for explicit and implicit learning components [ , , ]. All the obtained parameter values, along with quality measures of the model fit, including R2, root mean squared error (RMSE), Akaike information criterion (AIC), and Bayesian information criterion (BIC), were provided in to .

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## The eye-tracking experiment examining the eye fixation pattern during visuomotor rotation adaptation.
(A) Illustration of the experimental procedure. In each trial, participants first held their hand at the start position for 500 ms, awaiting the appearance of a target randomly positioned between 0° and 360°. They were instructed not to move until the target disappeared (~1000 ms after appearance). Visual feedback of the hand cursor was withheld until the trial ended, when it re-appeared together with the target as performance feedback. Eye tracking measurements were taken during reaching. (B) Time course of the gaze direction. Different colors represent different timings of a trial, including target preview, reaction time (RT), movement duration, and terminal feedback. Two representative trials from a participant are shown for the 45°-VMR (upper panel) and 90°-VMR (lower panel) conditions, respectively. The participant fixated on the starting position during the target preview and RT, then shifted fixation toward the re-aiming direction during the movement, maintaining this fixation until the terminal feedback was provided (purple line). The re-aiming direction was less rotated than the imposed VMR. After the movement ended and visual feedback was provided, participants tended to fixate back to the cursor (yellow line). We calculated the probability of fixations in the target area (± 22.5° around the target direction) after movement: 64.28 ± 4.91% in the 45°-VMR condition and 43.23 ± 6.80% in the 90°-VMR condition. (C) Average hand movement and eye fixation directions during adaptation to the 45° and 90° VMR. The fixation direction was defined as the last fixation before movement onset [ ]. The shaded areas denote the standard errors across participants. From early learning, participants started to fixate away from the target direction, closer to their explicit re-aiming direction, and this fixation “strategy” persisted throughout the adaptation phase. Note that the fixation deviated further from the target in the 90°-VMR condition compared to the 45°-VMR condition, consistent with the condition difference in re-aiming and explicit learning. In the washout phase, their fixation returned to the target as instructed. (D) Participants’ fixation direction in the 90°-VMR condition was significantly higher than that in the 45°-VMR condition, during both early (45°: 19.00° ± 2.23°; 90°: 44.49° ± 4.43°; t(15) = -6.38, p < .0001) and late learning (45°: 21.63° ± 2.56°; 90°: 57.88° ± 4.18°; t(15) = -9.21, p < .0001). The larger the fixation direction, the greater the re-aiming deviation away from the target. Early and late learning refer to the first 5 and last 5 trial cycles during adaptation. (E) Participants’ eye-fixation direction was positively correlated with their explicit learning ( = 0.80, p = 0.014), the latter estimated from the first exclusion trial in the washout phase.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## The performance of the PPE model was compared by assuming a linear and an exponential visual uncertainty function.
The observed and model-predicted implicit learning for Bond & Taylor 2015 (A), Experiment 1 (B), and Experiment 2 (C). The two versions of the PPE model similarly explain the data. (D) The visual uncertainty functions are estimated from the three datasets. Note the estimates are similar for the linear and the exponential functions, and they are also close to the visual uncertainty measured in our previous work [ ].
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## Data and model fitting results for total and explicit learning in Experiment 1.
All three models reproduced the scaling effect of perturbation size for total and explicit learning. Error bars represent SEM for data and bootstrapped standard deviations for the model. The black dots represent individual data.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## To demonstrate the reliability and robustness of our modeling approach, we conducted parameter recovery analysis for the PPE model.
We chose Exp.1’s dataset to show the case when the model fits both explicit and implicit learning, and Exp.4’s to show the case when the model only fits implicit learning, as explicit learning is constrained by re-aiming instructions. For each experiment, we employed a bootstrap resampling approach (N = 5,000) to estimate the parameter distributions. We then used the median ± standard deviation of the bootstrapped parameters to define realistic parameter ranges for simulation. Critically, we incorporated motor noise into the simulations, estimated from the baseline movement variability of participants to ensure that our synthetic data reflected realistic noise characteristics. X-axis shows simulated parameters and y-axis shows recovered parameters. Simulated and recovered parameters showed high concordance, with concordance correlation coefficient (CCC) exceeding 0.98 for all three parameters in Exp.1 (A), and strong concordance with CCC exceeding 0.8 in Exp.4 (B). These results show that our fitting pipeline are reliable under realistic noise and sample sizes.
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## To demonstrate the reliability and robustness of our modeling approach, we performed confusion matrix analysis for model discriminability.
Confusion matrices of the three competing models (PPE, PE, and SPE models), using datasets from Exp.1 and Exp.4. We generated synthetic data from each generative model and applied our model selection procedure (the model with the lowest BIC) to these simulated datasets to assess whether the generative model could be correctly identified. The confusion matrices display the proportion of simulations in which each true generative model was recovered as the selected model. The results show strong discriminability among the three models.
(TIF)
S6 Fig

## More model comparison results from Experiment 2, using variable explicit learning and cross-validation.
(A) Implicit learning data in Experiment 2, a reproduction of Fig 4C right panel. (B) Model fitting with varying explicit parameters across the two conditions. Compared to the model fitting in the main text (Fig 4D), here we allowed explicit parameters to vary across the two conditions. The PE and SPE models still failed to reproduce the data, especially the relative size of implicit learning between the two perturbation conditions. The PE model could not capture the implicit learning patterns for small stepwise perturbations (15° and 30°), and it yielded unrealistic model parameters (Table B in ). The SPE model showed minimal improvement, continuing to underestimate implicit learning in the stepwise condition and overestimate it in the one-step condition. The PPE model remained capable of explaining the data well with variable explicit learning parameters. These results suggest that the failure of PE and SPE to explain implicit learning across conditions was not due to an unconsidered potential parametric change in explicit learning. (C) Cross-validation tests for the three models. Each model was fit to the data from the stepwise condition and then used to predict implicit learning in the one-step condition. Neither PE nor SPE model captures the learning pattern: their predictions for the one-step group were highly inaccurate; both models overestimated implicit learning and underestimated explicit learning in the one-step condition. In contrast, the PPE model’s predictions match well with the empirical data across conditions, further reinforcing its robustness in capturing the dynamics of both implicit and explicit learning across different perturbation schedules. In (B) and (C), error bars represent bootstrapped standard deviations (resample size = 5,000).
(TIF)
S7 Fig

## Estimated values of the parameter k (the slope of visual uncertainty as a function of visual eccentricity) of the PPE model across different experiments [ ].
Pink diamond markers indicate median values estimated using bootstrap resampling (N = 5,000), with horizontal error bars representing 95% confidence intervals. Purple line markers represent parameter values estimated by fitting the average learning data, which closely align with the bootstrap median estimates, demonstrating robust and consistent model fits across experiments.
(TIF)
S8 Fig

## Model analysis using a two-state model for implicit learning, which assumes that implicit learning comprises fast and slow components driven by both performance error (PE) and sensory prediction error (SPE), respectively.
We used different datasets to test the model: (A) Bond & Taylor, 2015; (B-D) Our Experiments 1, 2, and 4. The model analysis showed that the two-state model failed to explain the data. Furthermore, parameter estimates (a very small B) from the model fitting suggest that incorporating an additional implicit learning component is unnecessary ( ).
(TIF)
S9 Fig

## Correlation between explicit and implicit learning varies widely when the two learning components are independently measured.
Data from three separate studies are presented, with explicit learning measured by aiming reports and implicit learning measured by no-feedback exclusion trials. (A) Correlations between explicit and implicit learning in different perturbation size conditions, including 15°, 30°, 60°, and 90° VMR (n = 10 for each). Due to the small sample size and variability across conditions, support for a negative correlation was insufficient. Data from Bond & Taylor, 2015. (B) Correlations across perturbation size conditions of 15°, 30°, 45°, and 60° VMR (n = 33, 54, 28, 61, respectively) from D’Amario et al., 2024. With decent sample sizes, positive, negative, or null correlation was observed in these different conditions. (C) Correlations were inconsistent when the format of visual perturbation varied, but with a fixed perturbation size of 45° VMR. Data from D’Amario et al., 2024. Continuous cursor feedback (n = 51) is the conventional feedback format, terminal feedback promotes explicit learning and reduces implicit learning (n = 35), delayed feedback reduces implicit learning (n = 39), and cursor jump feedback usually promotes explicit learning and reduces implicit learning (n = 32). Only the continuous-feedback condition showed a negative correlation; no correlation was detected for the other three feedback formats. (D) Early learning did not show a negative correlation. In our Experiment 5 (n = 20), explicit learning and implicit learning were independently measured four times during the 60-trial-cycle learning period. The two early instances (the 5th and 19th cycles) did not show significant negative correlations, the third instance (the 33rd cycle) showed a marginal effect, and the fourth instance (the 47th cycle) showed a significant negative correlation. Thus, though performance error is most prominent during early learning, there is no evidence that the two learning processes compete for this error and then lead to a negative correlation. Each dot represents an individual’s data.
(TIF)
S1 Table

## Model comparisons and parameters for the dataset from Bond & Taylor, 2015.
(XLSX)
S2 Table

## Model comparisons and parameters for the data from Experiment 1.
(XLSX)
S3 Table

## Model comparisons and parameters for the data from Experiment 2.
(XLSX)
S4 Table

## Model comparisons and parameters for the data from Experiment 3.
(XLSX)
S5 Table

## Model comparisons and parameters for the data from Experiment 4.
(XLSX)
S6 Table

## Model comparisons and parameters for the data from Experiment 5: Cross-validation (Fitting before-re-aiming phase, predicting after-re-aiming phase).
(XLSX)
S7 Table

## Model comparisons of the PPE models, which assume linear, exponential, or power-law visual uncertainty function.
(XLSX)
S8 Table

## Model analysis using a two-implicit-state model, which assumes that implicit learning comprises fast and slow components driven by both performance error (PE) and sensory prediction error (SPE), respectively.
(XLSX)

We would like to thank Dr. Jordan Taylor for providing the raw data from his study [ ].
 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1014196.r001Decision Letter 0
YangTianmingAcademic Editor© 2026 Tianming YangTianming Yang2026Tianming YangTianming Yanghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
5 Nov 2025

Perceptual prediction error supports implicit process in motor learning.
PLOS Computational Biology
Dear Dr. Wei,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Computational Biology. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Computational Biology’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 05 2026 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at ploscompbiol@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pcompbiol/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Tianming Yang
Academic Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Andrea E. Martin
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology

Journal Requirements:

1) Please ensure that the CRediT author contributions listed for every co-author are completed accurately and in full.
At this stage, the following Authors/Authors require contributions: Kunlin Wei. Please ensure that the full contributions of each author are acknowledged in the "Add/Edit/Remove Authors" section of our submission form.
The list of CRediT author contributions may be found here: https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/s/authorship#loc-author-contributions
2) We ask that a manuscript source file is provided at Revision. Please upload your manuscript file as a .doc, .docx, .rtf or .tex. If you are providing a .tex file, please upload it under the item type u2018LaTeX Source Fileu2019 and leave your .pdf version as the item type u2018Manuscriptu2019.
3) Please provide an Author Summary. This should appear in your manuscript between the Abstract (if applicable) and the Introduction, and should be 150-200 words long. The aim should be to make your findings accessible to a wide audience that includes both scientists and non-scientists. Sample summaries can be found on our website under Submission Guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/s/submission-guidelines#loc-parts-of-a-submission

4) Please upload all main figures as separate Figure files in .tif or .eps format. For more information about how to convert and format your figure files please see our guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/s/figures

5) We notice that your supplementary Figures, and Tables are included in the manuscript file. Please remove them and upload them with the file type 'Supporting Information'. Please ensure that each Supporting Information file has a legend listed in the manuscript after the references list.
6) Some material included in your submission may be copyrighted. According to PLOSu2019s copyright policy, authors who use figures or other material (e.g., graphics, clipart, maps) from another author or copyright holder must demonstrate or obtain permission to publish this material under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) License used by PLOS journals. Please closely review the details of PLOSu2019s copyright requirements here: PLOS Licenses and Copyright. If you need to request permissions from a copyright holder, you may use PLOS's Copyright Content Permission form.
Please respond directly to this email and provide any known details concerning your material's license terms and permissions required for reuse, even if you have not yet obtained copyright permissions or are unsure of your material's copyright compatibility. Once you have responded and addressed all other outstanding technical requirements, you may resubmit your manuscript within Editorial Manager.
Potential Copyright Issues:
i) Figures 1A, 5A, 6A, 6B, 7A, 8A, and S1A. Please confirm whether you drew the images / clip-art within the figure panels by hand. If you did not draw the images, please provide (a) a link to the source of the images or icons and their license / terms of use; or (b) written permission from the copyright holder to publish the images or icons under our CC BY 4.0 license. Alternatively, you may replace the images with open source alternatives. See these open source resources you may use to replace images / clip-art:
- https://commons.wikimedia.org
- https://openclipart.org/.
7) Please amend your detailed Financial Disclosure statement. This is published with the article. It must therefore be completed in full sentences and contain the exact wording you wish to be published.
1) State the initials, alongside each funding source, of each author to receive each grant. For example: "This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (####### to AM; ###### to CJ) and the National Science Foundation (###### to AM)."
2) State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."
3) If any authors received a salary from any of your funders, please state which authors and which funders..
Note: If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.

Reviewers' comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Reviewer #1: In this paper, Zhang et al. continue to explore the recent perceptual prediction error ("PPE") model of implicit motor adaptation. To do this, they both re-analyze previously published datasets, and also performed several new experiments to pit the PPE model against other prominent ideas about the errors signals that drive motor learning, the sensory prediction error (SPE) idea, and the performance error (PE) idea. Their experiments involve novel behavioral manipulations, as well as computational modeling, proprioceptive assays, and eye-tracking. Overall, the authors argue that the data best support the PPE model of motor adaptation, which involves a Bayesian weighting of proprioception and vision to estimate hand position given a desired movement and compare it to observations, and argues strongly against the SPE and PE models.
Even though the model presented here has been previously outlined, this study represents a rigorous and expanded testing of that model in a series of novel and impressive experiments and modeling analyses. In general I read this article with great enthusiasm --- by the end of it, I was rather convinced that the authors' PPE model is indeed the current best model of implicit motor adaptation. My critiques are mostly minor. I applaud the authors on a very thorough and rigorous set of experiments.
Strengths:
- the study uses models to make clear predictions, and clever experiments to test those predictions. overall, the results are rather impressive and lend rather strong support to the PPE model
- the figures are clear and nicely detailed
- the methods are clear and the range of control analyses really adds to the robustness of the modeling
- the eye-tracking experiment is a very nice touch
- the broader implications of the study are nicely laid out in the Discussion, especially w/r/t other forms of motor learning (e.g., speech).
Weaknesses:
- i was somewhat confused about the implied framing of SPE as not being "perceptual"; it seems that an SPE model can easily assume that the visual error is routed through the brain's perceptual computations, not just some kind of direct sensory readout (whatever that would be anyway). the nomenclature used thus makes the nature of the SPE model seem somewhat odd. isn't the main advance here that the prediction errors that drive implicit motor learning involve an uncertainty-weighted perceptual estimate of the hand, not just the visual error? Isn't that what primarily differentiates SPE and PPE, rather than "sensation versus perception"?
- there could be more caveats offered for why the PPE model fit in Figure 2C is not particularly strong. i understand that it clearly outperforms the SPE and PE models; but why is it not a better fit here? this is a small point as the fit is better in the later experiments, but still warrants some discussion.
- there are some data with rather low asymptotic implicit learning (~10 degrees or so). why is this the case? considerations of experimental apparatus lag, or temporally volatile adaptation, could be offered to address this (see recent papers by Hadjiosif et al on these two issues). could it be that there are different aspects of implicit adaptation (e.g., volatile and stable) that have different error sources?
- as a discussion point, i'm curious what the authors think about the fact that deafferented patients can show somewhat normal implicit adaptation (Tsay et al., 2024). this seems like an interesting mystery.
Minor points:
- the legend at the top right of figure 4B has incorrect color labels
- the dark versus light gray shadings in figure 4A are hard to distinguish
- the instructions noted in figure 5 to "make the cursor hit the target" are confusing; don't the subjects not yet know the rotation sign/magnitude on such trials? how would they interpret that instruction?
- it would be nice to see a histogram of k values across all experiments, or bar graphs for each experiment.
Reviewer #2: This manuscript reports six experiments that bolster a previously proposed perceptual prediction error (PPE) account of motor learning. The data are solid and the writing is clear. The replication across paradigms is valuable.
That said, I do not see a substantive new computational contribution beyond prior PPE work. More importantly, the paper assumes a division in which implicit learning is PPE-driven and explicit re-aiming is performance/task-error (PE)-driven, but it does not directly test or rule out the possibility that explicit learning also has a PPE component. For PLOS Computational Biology, where advances in computational concepts are expected, I am not inclined to recommend acceptance in the current form. The dataset itself is strong and may fit better at a venue that emphasizes rigorous empirical reports without a new modeling idea (e.g., Journal of Neurophysiology).
Major comments
1. The paper interprets explicit as PE-driven and implicit as PPE-driven, but there is no head-to-head model test. Please add a formal comparison where the explicit state is driven by (i) PE only, (ii) PPE only, and (iii) PE+PPE, with AIC/BIC (or CV) and parameter plausibility. This will address whether explicit learning carries a PPE component.
2. The modeling framework looks very close to earlier PPE formulations. If there is a conceptual advance, make it explicit (state structure, error-to-state mapping, identifiable regimes, or new theory-level predictions). If not, please position the paper as a replication/validation study and adjust the claims accordingly.
3. Provide simulations (parameter recovery/confusion matrices) showing that your fitting pipeline can recover PPE-only, PE-only, and mixed drivers for explicit and implicit under realistic noise/sample sizes.
4. More direct intervention of PPE is necessary. Consider (or discuss) a manipulation that changes PPE while holding PE constant (e.g., altering visual/proprioceptive uncertainty or localization bias), and the converse. This would strengthen the separation claim.
Minor comments
1. Define and use PPE, PE (task/performance error), SPE, and RPE consistently. A schematic (equations + flow/Vector diagram) contrasting these signals would help.
2. Include full fit summaries (LL, AIC/BIC, ΔAIC/BIC, model weights), parameter CIs/posteriors, and basic diagnostics per experiment.
3. Clarify what is replicated vs extended relative to explicit–implicit separation literature (aim reports, clamped feedback, localization shifts).
Reviewer #3: The authors build new theories, design experiments, and report data on how people adapt to visuomotor rotation. Amongst three models tested, a new “perceptual prediction error” model seems to capture elements of human motor adaptation. This work advances theoretical and experimental understanding of human motor adaptation; the importance of these advances are unclear, due to vagueness and internal contradictions in presentation, calculations, and interpretations.
Strengths:
The manuscript identifies gaps in explanations of human visual motor adaptation, when experiments and analyses separate performance into explicit and implicit components. Previously published work seems to indicate that steady state implicit learning shows either no dependence, or nonlinear dependence, on the strength of perturbation. The authors provide sufficient evidence that two extant theories fail to replicate this finding. A new theory posits that implicit adaptation arises from “perceptual prediction error,” (PPR) the difference between the aiming angle and the angle of the multisensory prediction of hand location. The authors draw from prior work, indicating visual uncertainty increases with perturbation angle. Theorized consequences of that result include Bayesian reweighing of multiple inputs, causing proprioception to increase its relative contribution as visual reliability decreases. From these considerations emerges an overall hypothesis: perceptual prediction errors, sensitive to increased visual noisiness and Bayesian reweighing, could drive implicit learning in visuomotor adaptation.
The manuscript provides solid theoretical bases for this construction, and provides several tests of the PPE model for implicit learning, against models driven by performance error (PE) and (visual) sensory prediction error (SPE). Several analyses indicate that the PPE model better predicts human adaptation, in asymptotic levels of implicit learning, dependence on perturbation strength, and trial-by-trial adaptation. PPE model performance is impressive in its mimicking of nonlinearity with respect to perturbation strength, in both overall implicit learning and trial-by-trial adaptation in the random environment.
The experimental testing of proprioceptive bias, through addition of a bimanual component, provides a particularly strong line of evidence for multisensory consequences of visuomotor rotation, irrespective of particular model choice.
The authors build a comprehensive case for their model, complete with analyzing previously published data; full reporting on their equations, computation methods, and fitted parameters; full online sharing of their code and results; and reference to appropriate literature. The authors provide insights into their reasoning, comparison to prior work, and opportunities for checks and balances through future studies.
Weaknesses:
A major concern arises from the enlarged parameter and composite function space of PPE, compared with PE and SPE models. Analysis of the Bond & Taylor 2015 data generates state space model fits for PE and SPE solely from data, while PPE “as an additional four parameters” (lines 1221-1222). Whereas the rationale for this difference becomes apparent later in the manuscript, and some parameters are fixed from prior work, Figure 2 unfairly compares results arising primarily from data vs. deeper dependence on fits. This nuance is under-explained early in the manuscript and builds confusion for the reader.
A deeper problem arises from the Bayesian calculation of “perceived hand” built from combination of visual cue, proprioceptive cue, and the aim of the reach (line 1126). Aim is not a sensory input; it is a motor goal. While the statistical consequence is not equivalent, in spirit the authors seem to be confusing maximum likelihood and MAP calculations. At the very least, the authors need to justify the direct Bayesian combination of two sensory inputs with a motor goal.
It is confusing how this goal was estimated in trials where subjects did not explicitly report a goal. If the aim angle was estimated in these trials, then the authors have constructed a composite model, which conflates data and simulated inputs to subsequent simulations.
It is confusing how this model is proposed as a core learning rule, when “frequent aiming reports can alter the composition of explicit and implicit learning” (lines 250-251), suggesting deeper cognitive elements of learning than suggested here.
More moderate concerns arise from main text that seems to cover many topics all at once, rather than concentrating on key concepts. Around Figures 2 and 3, individual paragraphs jump across many details of behavior and modeling, generating unclear emphases and conclusions. (A counterexample, featuring very clear organization, is the paragraph starting at line 312 which demonstrates the result and importance of proprioceptive biases.)
Experiments 4 and 5 did add some additional data and comparisons, indicating PPE captured features of learning better than PE and SPE. The cognitive elements, however, provide additional layers of processing, that may partially invalidate motor processing purported to be non-cognitive. The interpretation of a new PE in Experiment 5 is particularly troubling and seems to violate the authors’ own definitions from Figure 1.
Experiment 6 is also validating, but renews the major concern noted above, regarding the estimated nature of aim direction in most of this modeling.
The eye fixation results were somewhat interesting on their own, but do not clearly serve as a “control” for the main paper or as a supplemental set of data. Instead, the fixation data raises concern that hypothesized changes in arm motor processing may instead be a consequence of simultaneous eye and arm control, biasing visual processing.
A minor point: "Re-aiming" may be an appropriate term in the sub-literature, but here, "aiming" would work well. "Re-aiming" infers a mid-reach correction or cognitive override, such as instructed in Experiment 5.
Conclusion:
Overall the authors have proposed interesting ideas, developed relevant experiments, and reported interesting data: the proprioceptive bias results seem to be notable regardless of model choice. There is good evidence that a multisensory signal is more likely to drive difference in implicit learning strength, dependent on perturbation size. The authors should more clearly indicate rationale behind the PPE computations, more clearly focus conclusions and discussions, and more clearly indicate the relevance of late experiments and supplementary material.
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: None
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy....
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

Reproducibility:

?>
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1014196.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
26 Dec 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1014196.r003Decision Letter 1
YangTianmingSection Editor© 2026 Tianming YangTianming Yang2026Tianming YangTianming Yanghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
6 Feb 2026

PCOMPBIOL-D-25-01100R1
Perceptual Prediction Error Supports Implicit Process in Motor Learning
PLOS Computational Biology
Dear Dr. Wei,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Computational Biology. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Computational Biology's publication criteria as it currently stands. In particular, we feel that the reviewer’s comment about the role of PPE in driving learning should be addressed. Additionally, please consider shortening the manuscript by moving less essential material into the supplementary section. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 08 2026 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at ploscompbiol@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pcompbiol/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'. This file does not need to include responses to formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Tianming Yang, Ph.D.
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Andrea E. Martin
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology

Reviewers' comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: The authors have done an excellent job responding to my concerns. I think this is a rigorous and impactful contribution.
Reviewer #3: The authors provide appropriate responses to reviewer concerns, through additional analyses and figures, and substantive edits to the text. I find these edits answer several of my identified weaknesses. In particular the authors better explain the additional parameters needed to estimate PPE, the efforts to minimize free parameters by relying on previously published values, and the rationale for including aiming direction as an input to Bayesian integration. Overall the manuscript provides evidence that a state space model using PPE to build implicit learning outperforms models using PE and SPE, in capturing the strength of implicit learning across perturbation strengths, training patterns, and additional tasks. Mid-training tests of proprioceptive bias provide additional confirmation that proprioception plays a role in implicit learning during a visuomotor rotation task.
Whereas the additional text, figures, and supplements do address reviewer comments, I worry that the manuscript is now very long. I will leave it to the editors and authors to discern how much content is needed to communicate the central scientific message.
At this point I have one substantive concern. I ask the editors to determine whether the concern is meaningful, and if so, if the authors address the concern. While the PPE model captures changes in implicit learning across perturbation strengths and task demands, I have trouble seeing how the PPE signal constitutes an “error” that drives learning within a training session.
- The dynamics of PPE do not seem appropriate for a learning process. The authors indicate throughout the persistent values of PPE, remaining quite flat throughout training (e.g. Figures 2B and 3B). This time series does not mimic the asymptotic curves traced by implicit learning. The PPE time series that are less flat seem even less related to learning. Initial simulations reveal a time change in early training (Figure 1B). Sizeable stepwise implicit learning could either accompany slopes in PPE (Figure 4B, between trials 7 and 15) or flat PPE (between trials 23 and 39). I acknowledge that the state space models generate quality fits, but it is difficult to process how PPE could be used as a “error signal” to drive these time series of learning.
- The magnitude of PPE does not seem appropriate for the cumulative learning. Throughout the manuscript PPE size is smaller than the accumulated implicit learning. For example, in Figure 3, PPE ranges from -6 to -3 degrees, but modeled implicit learning learning ranges from (roughly) 7 t0 14 degrees. This amplification does not seem plausible, either from casting PPE as an error signal, or from the state space equations with the listed solutions for A and B.
My current conclusion is that proprioception likely plays a role in implicit learning magnitude, and multisensory integration likely serves as a driver of changes in implicit learning across the experimental conditions. I am unclear why or how, however, this construction of PPE can serve as an “error signal” that drives learning, in an abstract sense or as simulated in these state space models.
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy....
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

Figure resubmission:

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that authors of applicable studies deposit laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1014196.r004Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
16 Mar 2026

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_Reviewers_auresp_2.docx
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1014196.r005Decision Letter 2
YangTianmingSection Editor© 2026 Tianming YangTianming Yang2026Tianming YangTianming Yanghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
2 Apr 2026

Dear Dr Wei,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Perceptual Prediction Error Supports Implicit Process in Motor Learning' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Computational Biology.
Best regards,
CompBiol Staff
Journal Office CompBiol
PLOS Computational Biology
Andrea E. Martin
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************************************************
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1014196.r006Acceptance letter
YangTianmingSection Editor© 2026 Tianming YangTianming Yang2026Tianming YangTianming Yanghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited., which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PCOMPBIOL-D-25-01100R2
Perceptual Prediction Error Supports Implicit Process in Motor Learning
Dear Dr Wei,
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology. Your manuscript is now with our production department and you will be notified of the publication date in due course.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, unless you have opted out, the early version of your manuscript will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
For Research, Software, and Methods articles, you will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
Thank you again for supporting PLOS Computational Biology and open-access publishing. We are looking forward to publishing your work!
With kind regards,
Anita Estes
PLOS Computational Biology | Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge CB4 3DN | United Kingdom ploscompbiol@plos.org | Phone +44 (0) 1223-442824 | ploscompbiol.org | @PLOSCompBiol