pmcPLoS Comput BiolPLoS Comput Biol328ploscomp101238922plosPLOS Computational Biology1553-734X1553-7358PLOSPMC12872022PMC12872022.112872022128720224158720710.1371/journal.pcbi.1013892PCOMPBIOL-D-25-011101Research ArticlePhysical SciencesMaterials ScienceMaterialsPlasticsPhysical SciencesChemistryPolymer ChemistryMacromoleculesPolymersPhysical SciencesMaterials ScienceMaterialsPolymersPhysical SciencesChemistryPolymer ChemistryPolymersPhysical sciencesMathematicsProbability theoryMarkov modelsHidden Markov modelsComputer and Information SciencesNeural NetworksBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeural NetworksBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGenomicsMetagenomicsComputer and Information SciencesArtificial IntelligenceMachine LearningPhysical SciencesMaterials ScienceMaterialsCeramicsResearch and Analysis MethodsDatabase and Informatics MethodsBioinformaticsSequence AnalysisSequence AlignmentPlasticEnz: An integrated database and screening tool combining homology and machine learning to identify plastic-degrading enzymes in meta-omics datasets
PlasticEnz: A tool for plastizyme discovery in metagenomeshttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2259-9344KrzynowekAnnaConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing files, and Zenodo repository (10.5281/zenodo.15395662). PlasticEnz is freely available at https://github.com/msysbio/PlasticEnz. All the raw data, training sets and scripts are available at 10.5281/zenodo.15395662.PLOS Publication Stagevor-update-to-uncorrected-proofPublication Update2026-02-04

## Data Availability
All relevant data underlying the findings of this study, including the raw data used for model training, benchmarking, intermediate files, scripts to generate figures and tables are provided within the manuscript, files, and Zenodo repository (10.5281/zenodo.15395662). PlasticEnz is freely available at https://github.com/msysbio/PlasticEnz. All the raw data, training sets and scripts are available at 10.5281/zenodo.15395662.

## Introduction
Plastic pollution is a growing environmental problem posing serious risks to ecosystems, wildlife, and human health [ – ]. Despite this, only a small fraction of the millions of tons of plastic waste generated each year is recycled or reused, with most ending up in natural environments [ , ]. The capacity of some microorganisms to biodegrade plastic polymers has attracted considerable attention as a potential strategy aimed at mitigating plastic pollution [ – ]. In particular, polyester plastics (e.g., polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polylactic acid (PLA), polycaprolactone (PCL)), which are widely used in textile and packaging manufacturing, are of interest for potential microbial bioremediation due to the presence of repeated ester bonds that can be targeted by various extracellular depolymerases [ , , , ]. Recent advances in bioinformatics combined with decreasing cost of whole-genome sequencing, have greatly improved our ability to screen complex communities for novel enzymes. However, existing computational tools often lack specificity for plastic substrates and involve complex multi-step pipelines that might not be accessible for researchers without bioinformatics expertise.
Several publicly available databases now catalogue protein sequences and associated metadata for enzymes involved in plastic degradation [ – ]. Commonly used approaches to identify candidate plastic-degrading enzymes involve large-scale homology searches against these databases using fast sequence aligners such as DIAMOND [ ], Bowtie2 [ ], or Minimap2 [ ]. Other methods rely on domain-based annotation, such as screening for specific functional domains using tools like InterProScan [ ] or Pfam [ ]. In addition, custom Hidden Markov Motifs (HMMs) [ , ] built from curated enzyme sequences and tailored to specific plastic polymers have been employed before to improve search specificity [ , ]. More recently, the application of machine learning (ML) to protein function prediction is being increasingly explored, enabling the discovery of novel enzyme candidates that lack clear homology to known proteins [ – ]. In this context, ML models have been applied to predict plastic-degrading enzymes, as demonstrated by Jiang et al. [ , ]. However, these models were not tested on real-world metagenomics datasets and are not readily available to be applied to the user’s own data.
To address these limitations, we developed PlasticEnz, an open-access tool that combines homology-based search using custom HMMs with machine learning prediction to improve the detection of plastic-degrading enzymes. In this study, we describe the development, testing, and application of PlasticEnz. The tool accepts protein sequences, genomic assemblies, or contigs as input, and identifies candidate plastic-degrading enzymes using a combination of custom HMMs, DIAMOND-based homology searches, and optional machine learning classification. Specifically, HMM-based screening is available for poly(3-Hydroxypropionate (P3HP), poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT), polybutylene succinate (PBS), poly(butylene succinate-co-adipate) (PBSA), polycaprolactone (PCL), poly(ethylene adipate) (PEA), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV), and polylactic acid (PLA); DIAMOND-based searches are implemented for PBS, PBSA, PCL, PES [polyethersulfone], PHBV, and PLA; and machine learning predictions using XGBoost (default) and a more sensitive neural network model are currently available for PET and PHB ( ). This integrated approach allows PlasticEnz to flexibly detect enzyme homologs across a wide range of plastic polymers with adjustable sensitivity and specificity. To facilitate accessibility, PlasticEnz is implemented as a command-line tool with streamlined output formats that include HMMER/DIAMOND outputs such as bitscore and E-values, ML prediction scores and normalized gene abundances (TPM/RPKM), making the results easier to interpret and compare across diverse metagenomic datasets.
We applied PlasticEnz to both controlled microcosm experiments and diverse field metagenomes, demonstrating its ability to discriminate plastic-exposed from pristine environments. In the Laguna Madre microcosm, PlasticEnz identified a strong enrichment of PHB depolymerase homologs in PHA biofilms, while PETase signals remained consistently low across all treatments, aligning with the findings of the original study. In plastic-contaminated soil samples, those collected in Sewapura and Varamin exhibited the highest abundance and prediction scores for both PET and PHB depolymerases, whereas pristine Kamchatka acid hot springs communities yielded negligible hits. Benchmarking against our test set, the ML classifiers achieved F1 values above 0.7 for PET and PHB, with XGBoost maximizing precision and the neural network showing enhanced sensitivity. Sequence-level analyses further confirmed that predicted homologs clustered closely with experimentally validated reference enzymes.
PlasticEnz offers a streamlined and accessible solution for identifying plastic-degrading enzymes in metagenomic data by combining homology-based and machine learning approaches. By integrating curated reference data with predictive models in a single pipeline, it enables researchers regardless of computational background to explore microbial plastic degradation potential across a wide range of environments.

## Results

## PlasticEnz database
The PlasticEnz database contains 213 unique protein sequences associated with plastic polymer degradation pathways, extracted from 176 peer-reviewed studies. Each database entry includes detailed annotation of the enzyme’s gene name, location (e.g., extracellular or cell-bound), enzyme classification, operon or gene cluster, targeted bond types, and catalytic domains. Enzymes are also linked to their associated reactions (substrate-product) and source organisms, for which marker genes or whole-genome sequences are provided. Furthermore, the database integrates cross-references to external databases (UniProt, NCBI). The comparison with other available Plastizyme databases is shown in .
 

## ML model evaluation
To assess the predictive performance of PlasticEnz, we compared three machine learning models (Neural Network, Random Forest, and XGBoost) for their ability to classify plastic-degrading enzymes across polymer substrates. This comparison aimed to determine which model best balances sensitivity and precision when identifying plastizyme candidates in metagenomic data ( ). Overall, all models struggled to accurately classify PLA, PBAT, PBSA, PCL and PHA polymers. However, for PET and PHB, both the Neural Network and XGBoost models achieved F1 values above 0.7 ( ). The XGboost model demonstrated higher precision (0.95 and 1 for PET and PHB) than the Neural network (0.84 and 0.63 for PET and PHB), indicating a lower rate of false positive classifications (paired t-test, p-value < 0.01, t = -71.0). However, it was overall more conservative in its identification, as reflected by lower recall (0.76 and 0.64 for PET and PHB) than Neural Network (1 and 0.88 for PET and PHB) (paired t-test, p-value < 0.01, t = 59.34).
 The performance differences between the two models largely stem from the class imbalance in the training data, with many more true negatives than true positives. This led XGBoost to adopt a conservative prediction strategy, yielding high precision by minimizing false positives, which is useful when high-confidence predictions are desired. In contrast, the neural network achieved higher recall by detecting a broader range of potential degraders, though with more false positives. Both models are available in PlasticEnz to accommodate different research goals: XGBoost as the default high-confidence predictions and a more sensitive neural network (via the –sensitive flat) for broader candidate detection.
Different machine learning models are represented by distinct colors, and error bars indicate the 95% confidence intervals.

## PlasticEnz tool workflow description, runtime, and performance
PlasticEnz identifies plastic-degrading enzymes from metagenomic data using a two-step search and optional machine learning classification. The tool accepts contigs, genomes, or protein sequences as input and screens them against a curated database using HMMER [ ] and DIAMOND [ ]. Users can specify the target polymer(s) with the --polymer flag. For PET and PHB, predictions can be refined using a machine learning classifier, namely XGBoost (default) or a more sensitive neural network (activated via --sensitive). If paired metagenomic reads or BAM files are supplied, the tool also estimates gene abundances and reports their raw as well as CPM, RPKM and TPM normalized counts. The output is a report containing information about the predicted plastic-degrading enzyme including its protein sequence, normalized abundance values, sequence similarity scores (E-value, bitscore) and ML prediction score (if applicable). The full workflow is depicted and described in .
 During runtime tests, the tool performed well across inputs of various types and sizes ( ). For smaller inputs such as 1.2Mb single genomes or 100Mb protein files, the real runtime remained under 30 seconds. For medium-sized datasets, including genomes and proteins within 600–650Mb range, PlasticEnz workflow completed in under 4 minutes. The runtime for large datasets of nearly 1Gb remained practical, under 5 minutes for proteins and 35 minutes for contigs.
PlasticEnz matches or outperforms existing tools in PHB and PET enzyme annotation on the independent validation set
Benchmarking results against are summarized in .
 For PET-degrading enzymes, PlasticEnz in Sensitive mode achieved the best overall performance across all metrics (precision = 0.98, recall = 0.96, F1 = 0.97, MCC = 0.95). PlasticEnz in Default mode performed comparably to eggNOG-mapper (F1 = 0.86 vs 0.90; MCC = 0.82 vs 0.87), whereas KEGG-based tools (KOfamKOALA and BlastKOALA) failed to identify any PET hydrolases, resulting in zero values for all metrics.
For PHB-degrading enzymes, all tools showed lower performance, reflecting the higher sequence diversity within this enzyme group. PlasticEnz in Sensitive mode again performed best (F1 = 0.67, MCC = 0.65). The Default mode, eggNOG-mapper, and KOfamKOALA achieved similar scores (all F1 = 0.58, MCC = 0.61), while BlastKOALA performed weakest (F1 = 0.30, MCC = 0.39).
Taken together, these benchmarking results demonstrate that while PlasticEnz in Default mode performs on par with established annotation tools such as eggNOG-mapper, the Sensitive mode consistently outperformed all other annotation tools, most notably for PET-degrading enzymes.

## Application of PlasticEnz to PHB and PET-exposed benthic biofilm communities
We evaluated whether plastizyme candidates detected by PlasticEnz reflected expected environmental gradients and showed sequence similarity to experimentally validated enzymes. Specifically, we compared the abundance and confidence scores of predicted plastizymes (HMM E-value and bitscore, and ML prediction score) across PET, PHB, and control biofilm communities to assess whether putative plastic-degrading enzymes were more prevalent in polymer-exposed than in control biofilms, as observed in the original study. We further examined the functional relatedness of these predictions by comparing the top-scoring candidates with known plastizymes from the PlasticEnz database using phylogenetic trees and pairwise evolutionary distance analyses. For this evaluation, we applied PlasticEnz in both the default (XGBoost) and sensitive (Neural Network) modes to assembled contigs from PET, PHB, and ceramic biofilm communities, as well as seawater samples (H₂O), targeting PET and PHB as polymer variables.
First, we compared HMMER bitscores across all biofilm types. PlasticEnz identified 7 putative PETases in the PET biofilm community, with an average HMMER bitscore of 43.9 (SD: 9.6) ( ). In comparison, the average HMMER bitscores for seawater and ceramic samples were 52.0 (SD: 12.8) and 41.7 (SD: 12.1), respectively. Next, we examined ML classifier prediction scores under both model settings. As expected, the sensitive model produced much higher average prediction values than the default model. For PET, seawater, and ceramic samples, average scores under the default model were 0.06 (SD: 0.05), 0.05 (SD: 0.04), and 0.04 (SD: 0.06), respectively, compared to 0.6 (SD: 0.2), 0.43 (SD: 0.2), and 0.3 (SD: 0.2) in the sensitive mode ( ). Finally, we quantified the number of proteins with high-confidence predictions, defined as the number of proteins reaching prediction scores > 0.7. In the default mode, no PETases in any sample met this threshold. However, in the sensitive mode, 3 PETases in the seawater sample (1.48 hits per million proteins) and 2 in the PET biofilm sample (1.45 hits per million proteins) passed this cutoff ( ). No high-confidence putative PETases were detected in the ceramic biofilms under either setting.
 In the PHB biofilm community, PlasticEnz identified 826 putative PHB depolymerases with a high average HMM bitscore of 108.4 (SD: 91.1). In contrast, average HMM bitscores were substantially lower for the seawater (56.7, SD: 29.1) and ceramic communities (60.0, SD: 36.5) ( ).
Classifier prediction scores for PHB homologs were higher than those observed for PET, across all modes. In the default (XGBoost) mode, average prediction scores were 0.2 (SD: 0.3) for the PHB biofilm, 0.07 (SD: 0.1) for seawater, and 0.09 (SD: 0.2) for ceramic samples ( ). Again, these values increased substantially under the sensitive (Neural Network) mode, reaching 0.6 (SD: 0.2) for PHB, and 0.5 (SD: 0.3) for both seawater and ceramic samples ( ).
Similarily to PETases, quantified the number of proteins with high-confidence predictions (score > 0.7). Under the default model, 64 proteins in the PHB biofilm (38.5 hits per million proteins), 3 in seawater (1.48 hits per million), and 5 in ceramic biofilms (3.69 hits per million) surpassed this threshold. In contrast, the sensitive mode yielded more high-scoring predictions: 363 in the PHB biofilm (219 hits per million), 61 in seawater (30.1 hits per million), and 45 in ceramic samples (33.1 hits per million) ( ).
To assess the sequence similarity between PlasticEnz-predicted PETases/ PHBases and experimentally validated plastizymes, we compared the top 10 predictions from each model (PHB-default, PHB-sensitive, and PET-sensitive) with sequences from the PlasticEnz database.
For the PHB-default model ( ), most predicted proteins showed close sequence alignment to several known enzymes, with an average evolutionary distance of 2.84 (range: 0.80–6.66). The closest matches included known PHB depolymerases from Pseudomonas lemoignei (PHB_SEED_3), Alcaligenes faecalis (PHB_SEED_4), and Ralstonia pickettii (PHB_SEED_5, PHB_SEED_26), all with distances below 1.6. The most dissimilar hits were to enzymes from Cupriavidus necator (e.g., PHB_SEED_41, _44, _36), with distances exceeding 4.5.
 In the PHB-sensitive model ( ), predicted homologs were more diverse, with a higher average evolutionary distance of 3.78 (range: 0.51–10.00), indicating broader but less conserved matches. However, some sequences still aligned well with known depolymerases, including those from Ralstonia pickettii (PHB_SEED_5, _26), Burkholderia cepacia (PHB_SEED_18), and Pseudomonas lemoignei (PHB_SEED_24). The most distant predictions again mapped to Cupriavidus necator (PHB_SEED_41, _45, _39) and Paracoccus denitrificans (PHB_SEED_31), with distances above 6.3. No PETases were found under the default model, meanwhile the PET-sensitive model ( ) yielded the least conserved matches overall, with an average distance of 3.99 (range: 0.58–10.00). While most predictions showed weak similarity, a few aligned moderately well with reference enzymes such as PET_SEED_13 (Bacillus subtilis, p-nitrobenzylesterase), PET_SEED_39 (uncultured bacterium), and PET_SEED_7 (Pseudomonas aestusnigri), all showing average distances around 1.2–1.4. The most distant matches were against the fungal PETases from Fusarium oxysporum (PET_SEED_10, _14), Fusarium solani (PET_SEED_23), and Humicola insolens (PET_SEED_22), with distances exceeding 7.4. Furthermore, we compared averaged HMM bit scores and neural network prediction scores for contigs with the highest number of sequence matches to known plastizymes (e.g., contig_593880_1, contig_290381_1, contig_286302_1) and those with the fewest (e.g., contig_1230874_4, contig_541445_1, contig_525814_1). The difference in average HMM scores between the two groups was 48.7 vs. 41.2, meanwhile the ML model prediction scores showed 0.71 vs. 0.50.

## Application of PlasticEnz to microbial communities from plastic-rich and pristine field samples
We applied PlasticEnz to metagenomes from plastic-contaminated soils and pristine hot springs to evaluate whether predicted plastizyme distributions corresponded with environmental exposure gradients. Specifically, we used PlasticEnz to identify putative plastic-degrading enzymes in metagenomic samples from plastic-contaminated urban soils (Varamin, Sewapura, Ghazipur) and compared the results to those from thermophilic sediment samples collected from pristine hot springs (Hot_springs_1, _2, _3).
We first examined the average HMM bitscores of PlasticEnz-identified plastizyme candidates across all polymers: P3HP, PBAT, PBS, PBSA, PCL, PEA, PES, PET, PHA, PHB, PHBV and PLA ( ). Plastizyme candidates from plastic contaminated soil samples consistently exhibited higher average HMMER bitscore values across all polymers. In contrast, candidates from hot spring samples had consistently lower HMMER bitscores, and for several polymers (e.g., P3HP, PEA in Hot_spring_3; PES, PET in all samples; PHB in Hot_spring_1) no candidates were detected at all.
 Next, we quantified high-scoring plastizymes defined as candidates that exceeded HMMER bitscores of 100, 80, and 50, representing high, medium, and low sequence similarity to the PlasticEnz HMM motifs, respectively ( ). Across all thresholds and polymer types, PlasticEnz consistently detected more high scoring plastizyme candidates in plastic-contaminated soils as opposed to hot spring samples. After normalizing for sequencing depth, Sewapura had the highest number of candidates, followed by Ghazipur and Varamin. As expected, relaxing the HMMER bitscore threshold increased the number of candidates. For example, the number of predicted PLA-degrading enzymes in hot spring samples rose from 3 (bitscore > 100), to 23 (bitscore > 80), and 99 (bitscore > 50). At the lowest threshold (bitscore > 50), the total number of predicted depolymerases also increased across other polymer classes in the pristine hot springs, reaching 4 for PBAT, 47 for PBSA, 14 for PCL, 4 for PHBV, and 46 for PLA.
 Next, we examined the PlasticEnz ML prediction module by quantifying the number of plasizyme candidates classified as high-confidence PET or PHB depolymerases (prediction score > 0.7) under the default model ( ). As the highest prediction score for proteins in the hot spring samples was 0.0001, only plastic-contaminated sites were considered. As expected, across all contaminated sites, PHB depolymerases were more abundant than PETases. Sewapura exhibited the highest number of high confidence candidates, with 7.28 and 2.43 classified depolymerases per million proteins for PHB and PET, respectively. Varamin followed with 6.23 and 0.78 for PHB and PET while Ghazipuer showed the lowest abundance of PHB depolymerases (5.16 classified depolymerases per million proteins) and no PETases exceeding the 0.7 prediction threshold.
Finally, we assessed the sequence similarity between PlasticEnz-predicted PETases from contaminated sites and experimentally validated PET-degrading enzymes from the PlasticEnz reference database ( ). Here, we compared two subsets: (i) PETases predicted with high confidence by the default machine learning component (prediction score > 0.7; ), and (ii) PETases identified using the stringent HMM bitscore threshold (> 80; ).
 The ML-predicted candidates from Varamin, Sewapura, and Ghazipur clustered closely with multiple known PETases on the PCoA plot, exhibiting higher sequence similarity (PERMANOVA on the clusters, p > 0.05, R² = 0.020; beta-dispersion < 0.05) ( and ). The ML-predicted candidates displayed strong similarity with diverse PETases from the databse, including PET_SEED_51 (Nocardioidaceae), PET_SEED_60 (Marinactinospora thermotolerans), PET_SEED_53 (Saccharopolyspora flava), PET_SEED_47 (unknown bacterium), and PET_SEED_48 (Micromonosporaceae) ( ). The mean pairwise distance between the predicted candidates and known plastizymes was 0.56 ± 0.12. In contrast, candidates with high HMMER bitscores formed a more distinct clade, with stronger homology to only two known PETases: PET_SEED_13 (p-nitrobenzylesterase from Bacillus subtilis) and PET_SEED_39 (unknown PET hydrolase from an uncultured bacterium) ( ). These sequences were more divergent from known PETases, as reflected by a higher mean pairwise distance (0.74 ± 0.04), and clear separation in the PCoA space ( ).

## Discussion
Our study introduces PlasticEnz, a new bioinformatics tool designed to aid researchers in screening for potential plastic-degrading enzymes in complex metagenomic datasets. At the core of PlasticEnz is a carefully curated database containing experimentally validated plastic polymer degradation enzymes. This database allowed us to generate the polymer-specific Hidden Markov Models (HMM) and provided a resource for training a machine learning (ML) classifier for PETases and PHBases annotation. Benchmarking against common protein annotation tools shows that PlasticEnz’s strategy of combining custom and polymer-specific HMM motifs with pre-trained ML component outperforms common tools like KEGG mapper or eggNOG-mapper in annotation of PETases and PHBases.
A critical step in developing the machine learning component of PlasticEnz was the construction of clearly defined positive and negative datasets. For the positive set, i.e., ground truth sequences shown to degrade plastic polymers experimentally, we used the data from PlasticEnz and PlasticDB [ ] databases. However, creating a reliable negative, defined as a set of sequences of distantly homologous proteins without proven ability to degrade plastic polymers was challenging due to the widespread presence of plastic contamination across all the planet’s environments [ – ]. To overcome this, we used sequences from well-characterized bacteria that depend on hosts or live parasitically, making them unlikely to synthesise extracellular enzymes targeting plastic polymers. Furthermore, given the limited size of our dataset, we avoided deep learning architectures, which are prone to overfitting under data-scarce conditions [ , ]. Instead, we employed simpler, more interpretable models such as decision trees, gradient-boosted trees (XGBoost), and a shallow neural network (single hidden layer). To further reduce overfitting risk and improve generalizability, we incorporated regularization techniques such as early stopping and dropout for the neural network [ , ] and hyperparameter optimization for all models. In line with previous findings [ ], which evaluated thirteen classifiers on plastic degradation enzyme classification problems, XGBoost emerged as the most suitable model. Overall, all models showed strong performance for two polymers: poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) and polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), but consistently underperformed on others like PLA, PBAT, PBSA, and PCL. For these underrepresented classes, precision, recall, and F₁ scores were consistently low and exhibited wide confidence intervals. This is a common effect of class imbalance, where the number of true positive examples is greatly outweighed by negative instances. As the size of the positive set increases, performance metrics such as precision and recall improve accordingly, which is supported by a positive correlation coefficient (Pearson, r = 0.81) between the F₁ score and the number of sequences in the positive set. These results highlight a key limitation in training ML models for plastic degradation classification: the limited number of ground truth sequences. As more enzymes are identified and incorporated into the training set, model performance is expected to improve accordingly. Therefore, to ensure reliable predictions, the PlasticEnz prediction module is limited to PET and PHB, the only polymers with sufficient training data. Users can choose between a default XGBoost model optimized for precision, or a more sensitive neural network model that emphasizes recall, allowing flexibility based on research priorities.
To showcase PlasticEnz capabilities, we applied it to two distinct experimental setups: (1) a controlled microcosm study conducted in a hypersaline lagoon (Laguna Madre), and (2) field samples from plastic-contaminated and pristine environments. In the Laguna Madre dataset, originally analyzed by Pinell et al., 2022 [ ] metagenomic analysis focused on biofilm communities growing on PET, PHA, and ceramic substrates over 28 days. Consistent with the original findings, PlasticEnz did not detect significant enrichment of PET-degrading enzymes in PET biofilms compared to seawater or ceramic controls. No high-confidence PETase was found in any sample under the default mode, and even under the sensitive mode, PET biofilms did not show increased PETase predictions relative to seawater. This aligns with Pinell’s interpretation that the remote location and low plastic exposure likely limited the selection pressure for PET-degrading enzymes in these communities. In contrast, the original study reported that communities extracted from PHA biofilms were significantly enriched in PHB depolymerases in comparison to control biofilms. Using PlasticEnz, we identified over 800 putative PHB depolymerases in these communities, with significantly higher average HMM bitscore and ML prediction scores relative to control samples. Notably, heatmaps showed that many of these predicted enzymes shared high sequence similarity to experimentally validated entries in the SEED database. However, in-vitro assays will be required to confirm their functional activity.
To further demonstrate the capabilities of PlasticEnz, we applied the tool to screen microbial communities from two contrasting environments. While plastic-contaminated urban soils of Varamin, Sewapura and Ghazipur served as representative examples of polymer-enriched ecosystems, identifying a truly pristine, plastic-free environment proved challenging due to the ubiquity of microplastics [ , , – , , ]. We selected the geothermal area of the Mutnovsky volcano in Kamchatka, a remote region with minimal anthropogenic activity, as a proxy for a low-contamination environment. This site is characterized by extreme physicochemical conditions, including broad gradients in temperature and pH [ ]. Due to limited organic carbon sources, these communities are dominated by obligately or facultatively chemolithoautotrophic bacteria and the presence of hydrolytic enzymes capable of degrading complex plastic polymers was expected to be minimal [ , ]. As expected, plastic-contaminated soils contained putative plastic-degrading homologs with higher average HMM bitscores and greater numbers of depolymerases than pristine hot spring samples. The strongest enrichment was seen in Sewapura, followed by Ghazipur and Varamin. Notably, all sites, including hot springs, showed elevated PLA depolymerase signals. This is because most PLA-degrading enzymes belong to the serine protease family, a group of diverse and taxonomically widespread enzymes commonly found across bacterial, fungal, and archaeal taxa [ , – ].
Next, we evaluated the PlasticEnz default prediction module using a classification threshold of 0.7. None of the putative PET or PHB homologs from the hot spring samples met this threshold; in fact, all prediction scores were below 0.1. Among the plastic-contaminated sites, PETase predictions exceeding the 0.7 confidence threshold were observed in communities from Sewapura and Varamin but not in Ghazipur. Meanwhile, high-confidence predictions of PHB depolymerases were common to all sites. This likely reflects underlying biological differences: PHB depolymerases are widespread due to the role of PHA polymers in microbial carbon and energy storage, whereas PET degradation requires evolved adaptations of esterases or cutinases [ , ]. As a result, PET-degrading enzymes remain rare and are typically associated with long-term plastic exposure.
Lastly, we conducted a comparison study by clustering PlasticEnz-identified putative PET homologs to previously reported and functionally validated PETases (SEED sequences). This analysis was split into two comparisons: one including high-scoring homologs (HMM bitscore > 80), and a second including sequences assigned a prediction score greater than 0.7 by the XGBoost classifier (default mode). ML-predicted PETase homologs from plastic-contaminated sites clustered with several known reference PETases, while the high HMM score sequences formed a distinct clade associated with two particular SEED reference enzymes. These results demonstrate that the PlasticEnz prediction module can identify candidate PETases with strong evolutionary ties to a broader range of validated enzymes, extending beyond the reach of traditional homology-based methods like HMMs, especially in complex metagenomic datasets. However, it is also possible that the model may be biased toward well-represented sequence patterns in the training data, potentially reducing its ability to detect PETases that were underrepresented in the training set.
While PlasticEnz offers a streamlined and accessible framework for identifying putative plastic-degrading enzymes, several limitations should be considered. First, the presented analysis focused on high-confidence predictions based on stringent HMM bitscore and ML probability thresholds; users are encouraged to apply similar cutoffs to ensure reproducibility. Additionally, the speed of the pipeline scales with dataset size, and RAM requirements increase accordingly, particularly during ProtBERT embeddings and contigs translation to proteins. To address this, a --gpu option is provided to accelerate tokenization, and the tool allows the use of multiple cpu cores via the --cores flag. However, since prodigal is not optimised to execute on multiple cores, the users are advised to adjust computational resources as needed for bigger datasets (over 1Gb). Importantly, PlasticEnz relies on sequence homology, and its predictions remain putative until validated through in vitro assays. The accuracy and breadth of the tool are ultimately constrained by the number and diversity of experimentally verified plastic-degrading enzymes available for model training. As the field advances and more polymer-degrading enzymes are experimentally validated, PlasticEnz will be continuously updated with expanded HMM profiles and retrained machine learning classifiers, enhancing its predictive accuracy, polymer coverage, and utility for metagenomic screening in diverse environments.

## Materials and methods

## Curation and processing of plastic-degrading enzyme sequence data
We systematically collected data on experimentally confirmed plastic degradation enzymes, including their protein sequences, host organisms, reaction details (including catalysts and conditions), references to relevant publications, and cross-references to external databases such as UniProt [ ], NCBI [ ], and KEGG [ ]. This comprehensive information was extracted from published literature and stored in a PlasticEnz SQL database (available within the PlasticEnz package). To enhance our dataset, we also incorporated data from PlasticDB [ ], a publicly available database specializing in plastic degradation enzymes. In total, the two combined databases resulted in 422 protein sequences of diverse plastic-degrading enzymes. These protein sequences were then pooled together into combined fasta files based on their respective polymer substrate. To eliminate redundancy caused by the database merge, we clustered each combined fasta at 95% similarity using CD-HIT2 [ ]. Following clustering, multiple sequence alignments (MSA) were performed for each grouped set of unique proteins using T-Coffee in expresso mode [ ], which integrates protein structure. The resulting alignments were refined to maintain only those with average to good alignment score (TCoffee alignment score > 50). Sequences that failed to align adequately were pressed into the DIAMOND database [ ] ( ). MSAs were used to generate HMM profiles using the built-in hmmbuild function from the HMMER suite [ ] ( ).

## Preparation of training and test data sets
To build the negative dataset, we used our previously generated HMM profiles to identify homologous sequences in bacterial genomes that are unlikely to be involved in plastic degradation activity. Specifically, we focused on representative Refseq genomes from well-studied host-dependent or parasitic bacteria (e.g., Escherichia coli, Chlamydia trachomatis, Staphylococcus aureus) ( ). The resulting distant homologous sequences formed the negative dataset (410 sequences). For the positive dataset, we used our previous set of experimentally confirmed bacterial plastic-degrading enzymes. Positive and negative datasets were combined and clustered at 95% identity with CD-HIT2 [ ] to obtain 502 unique clusters. To avoid the presence of highly similar sequences between training and test datasets, we randomly split entire clusters into either the training set (80%, 606 protein sequences) or the test set (20%, 200 protein sequences). The feature matrix used for the model training contained one-hot encoded annotations indicating the specific plastic polymer(s) degraded by each enzyme.

## Embeddings generation with ProtBERT
To generate protein embeddings, we used ProtBERT [ ], a pre-trained transformer-based model specifically trained on protein sequences. ProtBERT and its tokenizer were loaded from the Hugging Face Transformers library. Sequences were preprocessed by trimming ambiguous residues (‘X’, ‘x’) from sequence ends, verifying that only standard amino acids (ACDEFGHIKLMNPQRSTVWY) were present, and formatting each sequence by inserting spaces between individual residues. ProtBERT generated contextual embeddings for each amino acid, which were then aggregated into a fixed-length embedding vector for each protein by mean pooling across the sequence length.

## Machine learning model selection and evaluation
Full training procedures, hyperparameter settings, and performance metrics are detailed under ‘Machine Learning Model Selection and Evaluation’ in .
We evaluated three classifiers: neural network, Random Forest, and XGBoost, using precomputed protein embeddings and one-hot encoded features. All models were trained on a multi-label dataset for PET and PHB degradation using an 80/20 train/test split. Hyperparameters were optimized via grid search and validated on held-out data. Final models were retrained on the full training set and evaluated on the independent test set using precision, recall, and F1-score ( ). Model performance (F1-score, precision and recall) was compared between Neural Network and XGBoost classifiers using paired t-tests. Normality of metric distributions was confirmed using Shapiro–Wilk tests (p > 0.05). Mean, standard deviation, test statistics, and p-values were reported for each metric. Models were implemented and trained with PyTorch, scikit-learn, and XGBoost libraries. Prediction scores from XGBoost and neural network models are included in the PlasticEnz module and represent per-class probabilities for each polymer.

## Benchmarking PlasticEnz
To evaluate the performance of PlasticEnz against existing protein tools, we benchmarked PlasticEnz in default (XGBoost) and sensitive (Neural Network) modes against widely used functional annotation platforms: EggNog-mapper (v. 2.1.12)73, KOfamKOALA74 and BlastcKOALA75 ( ). Since no public, gold-standard metagenomics dataset containing experimentally validated plastizymes and reliable negative examples currently exists, we conducted the benchmarking evaluation on the independent validation dataset ( and and files). This dataset comprises of protein sequences that were excluded from model training but utilized for classifier performance assessment in & . In brief, proteins associated with PET and PHB degradation were extracted from the independent validation set and annotated using each platform under their default parameters. A correct annotation for PET-degrading enzymes was defined as assignment to K21104 (polyethylene terephthalate hydrolase), while correct annotations for PHB-degrading enzymes corresponded to K05973 or K03932 (poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase and polyhydroxybutyrate depolymerase, respectively) and were classified as true positives. Any alternative KO assignment or absence of assignment for this set was considered a false negative. The negative control set consisted of proteins containing homologous polyester-degrading motifs but derived from bacteria known to lack plastic-degrading capability (e.g., parasitic or host-dependent organisms). If any of these proteins were incorrectly annotated as K21104, K05973, or K03932, they were classified as false positives; otherwise, they were considered true negatives. Following the same criteria established as during the bootstrap-based performance estimation, predictions with a PlasticEnz score exceeding 0.5 for PET or PHB were classified as positive hits. Proteins with scores below 0.5 or without any annotation were considered negative (no hit).

## Evaluation sets
A full description of datasets, processing steps, and analysis parameters is provided under ‘Evaluation sets ’ in .
In brief, we analyzed paired-end Illumina metagenomes from a 28-day microcosm study by Pinnell et al. (2019) [NCBI: PRJEB15404] [ ], which examined biofilm communities developed on PET, PHA, and ceramic beads in a hypersaline lagoon. Four sample groups were used: PET, PHA (PHB), ceramic, and seawater controls (H2O). Raw reads were quality-filtered with Fastp [ ] (default settings) and assembled using MEGAHIT (default settings) [ ]. Assembled contigs were used directly as an input for PlasticEnz. Hit counts for PHB/PET depolymerases were normalized per million predicted proteins for comparison across samples. To assess functional similarity, top 10 enzyme predictions from PET-sensitive, PHB-default, and PHB-sensitive models were compared to PlasticEnz’s curated SEED reference set (CD-HIT, 90% identity). Sequences were aligned with MUSCLE [ ], trimmed using trimAl (–automated1 setting) [ ], and evolutionary distances were calculated with the LG model [ ] in phangorn (R). Normalized pairwise distances were visualized as similarity heatmaps.
We validated PlasticEnz custom HMM motifs using datasets from environments with contrasting plastic exposure levels. Thermophilic hot spring sediment samples from Kamchatka, Russia (NCBI: PRJNA419239), served as a low-exposure control, while plastic-contaminated soil microbiomes from India and Iran, including Sewapura (NCBI: PRJNA1077790) [ ], Varamin (NCBI: PRJNA924045) [ ], and Ghazipur (NCBI: PRJNA388130), served as high-exposure test sites. Downloaded raw paired-end reads were processed identically to Laguna madre samples. High-confidence PETase predictions (prediction score > 0.7 (default model) or HMMER bitscore > 80) were aligned with SEED references using Clustal Omega [ ]. Sequence similarity was assessed with Fitch distances [ ] (seqinr) [ ] and visualized using Principal Coordinates Analysis (ape) [ ]. Phylogenies were generated with FastTree [ ] using trimmed alignments (trimAl [ ], gap threshold 0.5).
Analyses were performed in R (v4.2) and Python (v3.11.11). Visualizations were generated using ggplot2, ggpubr, patchwork and pheatmap.

## Code availability and supporting information
PlasticEnz is freely available at https://github.com/msysbio/PlasticEnz
All relevant data underlying the findings of this study, including the raw data used for model training, benchmarking, intermediate files, scripts to generate figures and tables are provided within the manuscript, Supporting Information files and zenodo repository (10.5281/zenodo.15395662). No additional restrictions apply.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Supported polymers and available search strategies.
(XLSX)
S2 Table

## Seed sequence counts for hMMER and DIAMOND searches.
(XLSX)
S3 Table

## Description of positive and negative training sequences.
(XLSX)
S4 Table

## PlasticEnz results for Laguna Madre microcosm study.
(XLSX)
S5 Table

## Speed tests results.
(XLSX)
S1 File

## Supplementary Materials & Methods.
(DOCX)
S2 File

## Formulas for Precision, Recall and F1-Score.
(PDF)
S1 Data

## Benchmarking values calculation.
(XLSX)
S2 Data

## Protein sequencs used for benchmarking tests of negative set.
(FASTA)
S3 Data

## Protein sequencs used for benchmarking tests of PET set.
(FASTA)
S4 Data

## Protein sequencs used for benchmarking tests of PHB set.
(FASTA)

We thank Maxime Greffe and Hubert Krukowski for kindly testing the tool.
 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013892.r001Decision Letter 0
Jardón-ValadezEduardoAcademic Editor© 2026 Eduardo Jardón-Valadez2026Eduardo Jardón-Valadezhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
20 Aug 2025

PCOMPBIOL-D-25-01110
PlasticEnz: An integrated database and screening tool combining homology and machine learning to identify plastic-degrading enzymes in meta-omics datasets
PLOS Computational Biology
Dear Dr. Krzynowek,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Computational Biology. As with all papers, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board. Based on our assessment, we have decided that the work does not meet our criteria for publication and will therefore be rejected. If external reviews were secured, reviewers' comments will be included at the bottom of this email.
We are sorry that we cannot be more positive on this occasion. We very much appreciate your wish to present your work in one of PLOS's Open Access publications. Thank you for your support, and we hope that you will consider PLOS Computational Biology for other submissions in the future.
Yours sincerely,
Eduardo Jardón-Valadez
Academic Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Shihua Zhang
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology

Additional Editor Comments (if provided):

Dear Dr. Karoline Faust,
We thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Computational Biology and for considering our journal as a venue for your research. After a thorough review process and careful consideration of the reviewers’ comments, we have reached a decision regarding your submission.
Unfortunately, we regret to inform you that we are unable to accept your manuscript for publication in PLOS Computational Biology. While the study presents interesting findings, the reviewers have raised substantial concerns that may not be properly addressed through revision.
We truly appreciate the effort you have dedicated to this work and the opportunity to evaluate your manuscript. We encourage you to consider the reviewers’ feedback, which we believe may be of assistance in further developing your research for submission to another journal.
Thank you again for your interest in publishing with PLOS Computational Biology. We wish you every success with your future research endeavors.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]

Reviewers' Comments (if peer reviewed):

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: This manuscript presents the PlasticEnz tool, which integrates homology-based searches with machine learning, and validates its ability to detect plastic-degrading enzymes across diverse environmental datasets. However, the work lacks sufficient comparison with existing tools, and the description of polymer coverage and limitations is not sufficiently clear. The following points require clarification:
1. Some abbreviations (e.g., PEA, P3HP, PBAT) are not defined at their first occurrence in the main text; the full names should be provided.
2. Figure 1 presents only bar charts; it is recommended to include confusion matrices for each polymer in the Supplementary Materials to facilitate interpretation of false positives and false negatives.
3. Although the Neural Network section mentions early stopping and dropout, key hyperparameters (e.g., learning rate, number of hidden layer nodes, dropout rate) are not provided; these should be included in the Supplementary Materials.
4. It is recommended to introduce a concise table or a more systematic paragraph summarizing the characteristics of existing tools (polymer coverage, algorithms, usability, validation type) and to clearly state PlasticEnz’s relative advantages in these aspects.
5. The current results compare only HMM and ML (internal methods) without benchmarking against existing tools or general protein function prediction models.
6. The rationale for selecting the XGBoost model in PlasticEnz appears overly simplistic; a more comprehensive evaluation strategy should be considered.
7. The authors propose an effective strategy. In future work, widely developed deep learning techniques and their application to more complex scenarios, such as cancer gene identification (DOI: 10.1038/s41551-024-01312-5) and RNA m6A modification site prediction (DOI: 10.1038/s42003-025-08265-8 and DOI: 10.1016/j.patcog.2025.111541) could be further explored.
Reviewer #2: the article describes a database and and tool/pipeline to identify plastic-degrading enzymes. Whereas the topic is very relevant and interesting, the article is very difficult to read. In addition, there is no proper benchmarking even comparing the the methods described in the manuscript between them (how do we know that a simple similarity search is not enough?) or with other methods ( why your approach is better than others?). Moreover, most of the article describes the application to several datasets but even if the results make sense the lack of benchmarking prevent their actual application.
To solve this issue, in addition to the creation of the dataset already described in the article the authors must carry out a blind test that resembles an actual application case, e.g. a metagenome where plastic-degrading characterized where similarities with the training set have been reduced to a minima. All methods described have to be tested on this dataset considering annotated plastic-degrading genes as positive examples and all remaining coding genes as negative. At least precision, recall and F1, probably MCC, must be reported for each method and compared. Additional analysis on misclassified genes should be also be reported (do methods always fail on the same examples? or is each method better for certain types?). Please ensure DOME-ML guidelines are followed (https://dome-ml.org/).
There are several minor issues to be fixed but these are minor compared to the above. For example, what is the number of sequences used to generate HMMs, are they enough?
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: None
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes:  Alberto J.M. Martin
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013892.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
24 Nov 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Rebuttal Letter.pdf
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013892.r003Decision Letter 1
Jardón-ValadezEduardoAcademic Editor© 2026 Eduardo Jardón-Valadez2026Eduardo Jardón-Valadezhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
6 Jan 2026

Dear Miss Krzynowek,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'PlasticEnz: An integrated database and screening tool combining homology and machine learning to identify plastic-degrading enzymes in meta-omics datasets' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Computational Biology. 
Best regards,
Eduardo Jardón-Valadez
Academic Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
Shihua Zhang
Section Editor
PLOS Computational Biology
***********************************************************
Dear Dr Anna Maria Krzynowek,
After reviewing your revised manuscript, we found that all reviewers’ concerns have been adequately addressed. The revised version now includes benchmarks comparing available annotation tools on related datasets. I believe that the methods you implemented will contribute to the development of novel technologies for mitigating microplastics in the environment.
I therefore recommend your manuscript for publication in PLOS Computational Biology.
Sincerely,
Eduardo Jardón-Valadez
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: All of my concerns have been addressed in this revised manuscript.
**********

Have the authors made all data and (if applicable) computational code underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data and code underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data and code should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data or code —e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: None
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013892.r004Acceptance letter
Jardón-ValadezEduardoAcademic Editor© 2026 Eduardo Jardón-Valadez2026Eduardo Jardón-Valadezhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PCOMPBIOL-D-25-01110R1
PlasticEnz: An integrated database and screening tool combining homology and machine learning to identify plastic-degrading enzymes in meta-omics datasets
Dear Dr Krzynowek,
I am pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Computational Biology. Your manuscript is now with our production department and you will be notified of the publication date in due course.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, unless you have opted out, the early version of your manuscript will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
For Research, Software, and Methods articles, you will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
Thank you again for supporting PLOS Computational Biology and open-access publishing. We are looking forward to publishing your work!
With kind regards,
Judit Kozma
PLOS Computational Biology | Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge CB4 3DN | United Kingdom ploscompbiol@plos.org | Phone +44 (0) 1223-442824 | ploscompbiol.org | @PLOSCompBiol