pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10174530PMC10174530.110174530101745303716722310.1371/journal.pone.0285600PONE-D-22-352911Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorRecreationSportsSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorRecreationSportsBiology and Life SciencesSports ScienceSportsEarth SciencesGeographyHuman GeographyUrban GeographyUrban AreasSocial SciencesHuman GeographyUrban GeographyUrban AreasEarth SciencesGeographyGeographic AreasUrban AreasPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAsiaChinaEarth SciencesGeographyHuman GeographyUrban GeographySocial SciencesHuman GeographyUrban GeographyComputer and Information SciencesData ManagementData VisualizationBiology and Life SciencesPopulation BiologyPopulation MetricsPopulation DensityPhysical SciencesMathematicsProbability TheoryProbability DensityEcology and Environmental SciencesTerrestrial EnvironmentsUrban EnvironmentsA study of the influence of sports venues on the intra-city population layout based on multi-source data—Taking Xi’an city and Zhengzhou city as examples
Influence of sports venues on the intra-city population layout based on multi-source dataZhangShulinConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologyWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing ZhangXuejieData curationResourcesSoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0005-3483-6791LiuYangConceptualizationFormal analysisProject administrationSupervision 1
Physical Education College of Xinjiang Normal University, Urumqi, China2
College of Geography and Environment, Shandong Normal University, Ji’nan, ChinaChengJingEditor ]. The intra-urban population refers to the population in the built-up areas of cities that are closely related to urban activities [ ]. In 2014, "fitness for all" was officially promoted as a national strategy, and China’s sports industry has ushered in the era of "sports for all", with sports and leisure activities becoming an important component of urban activities. As the core foundation and carrier of sports industry development, sports venues have assumed an irreplaceable role in the structural reform of the sports supply side [ ]. With the transformation of people’s life needs, sports venues play an even more important role in society. Therefore, it is important to study the influence of sports venues on the population of urban built-up areas.
International scholars have conducted in-depth studies of sports venues and populations with rich results. In research on sports venues, infrastructure construction and the optimal operation of sports venues have been a long-standing and continuous focus of scholars [ , , ]. The same is also true for the analysis of the operational interaction of sports equipment [ ], utilization value [ ], the operation mode and benefits [ ], and other directions to promote the scientific use and replacement of sports equipment inside sports venues and the smart and low-carbon upgrade of service devices [ , ]. Research also focuses on the role of sports venues in enhancing public health [ ], socio-economic benefits [ ] and the issue of sharing and opening school sports venues [ ]. Research on the urban population is early and ongoing [ , ], and the driving mechanisms [ ] and effects [ ] of population growth and decline are two major components that cannot be ignored. Higher urban productivity [ ], innovation dynamism and output [ ], a high-quality ecological environment [ ], urban welfare [ ], and diverse growth poles and public service provision [ ] can drive population aggregation. At the same time, population is also an active factor in the spatial evolution of cities [ ]. With the improvement in global world sportsmanship, the establishment of the International Day of Sport for Development and Peace, the implementation of China’s national fitness, strong sports and Healthy China initiatives, and the United Nations call for active sports during the COVID-19 pandemic quarantine, the interest of the global public in physical activity is growing. As a vehicle for physical activity, studies have recognized the aggregation of population distribution [ ], residents’ well-being [ ], personal physical activity levels [ ], and regional quality of life [ ]. The improvement in various aspects, such as the density of their distribution and the degree of their input, is increasingly linked.
First, there are relevant studies that point out that the influence of sports venues on populations is gradually becoming significant [ ], and the arrival of the information age provides a new breakthrough for research in this area. Studies based on big data and new technologies are worth further exploration and experimentation. Second, most current research data on urban populations are based on administrative perspectives such as provinces and cities [ , ], the population layout within cities urgently needs to be studied, and the impact of sports and leisure activities on the population distribution from a micro perspective is becoming increasingly obvious. Based on this research, the distribution of sports venues was characterized using reclassified POI data, and population raster data from the WorldPop database were used to visualize the distribution of the intra-city population.
As mega-cities with large populations, Xi’an and Zhengzhou are national central cities in the Yellow River Basin of China, and they attach great importance to the development of public sports. In this paper, we take Xi’an and Zhengzhou cities as examples to map the layout of sports venues and the inner-city population in 2020 based on multiple sources of data using kernel density analysis. Then, we use fitting analysis, OLS, GWR and MGWR to analyse the complex effects of sports venues on the layout of the inner-city population from the global and local dimensions ( ) to improve the reliability and applicability of the results and to provide a scientific reference for the public in other cities. That is, the purpose of this study is to provide a scientific reference for the study of public sports facilities in other cities and to promote the sustainable development of cities.
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a general description of the study area. Section 3 describes the data sources and research methods of this paper. Section 4 presents the results of the study in blocks. Section 5 discusses the results of this study in the context of existing related studies. Section 6 summarizes the findings of this paper.

## 2. Overview of the study area
Xi’an city and Zhengzhou city are the capitals of Shaanxi Province and Henan Province, respectively, and are among China’s 14 mega-cities. Xi’an has 11 districts and 2 counties, with a total area of 10,108 square kilometres, a built-up area of 868.2 square kilometres, and a resident population of 13,163,000 in 2021, making it an important central city in Western China according to the State Council. Zhengzhou city has 6 districts, 5 county-level cities and 1 county, with a total area of 7,567 square kilometres, a built-up area of 1,342.11 square kilometres and a resident population of 12,742,000 in 2021.
Xi’an city and Zhengzhou city are high-capacity national central cities that are clearly pointed out in the "13th Five-Year Plan for the Rise of Central Region" issued by the National Development and Reform Commission of China. They are also national central cities in the middle reaches of the Yellow River ( ). They are modern metropoles that lead regional development and represent the national image. Taking Xi’an and Zhengzhou as examples to study the relationship between sports venues and population has high representativeness and scientificity.
 

## 3. Materials and methods

## 3.1. Data sources
The study data consist mainly of stadium data and population data for 2020.
(1). The POI data for sports venues in Xi’an and Zhengzhou in the study were obtained from Baidu Map. These data include basic information such as the name, address, and geographic coordinates. After data cleaning, the number of sports venues in the two cities was obtained by combining the public information from the websites of the Xi’an and Zhengzhou Sports Bureaus and other websites: 12,316 and 14,972, respectively.
(2). The population data were obtained from WorldPop grid data and the resident population data of the 7th National Population Census. Census data are usually aggregated by administrative units on a cascading basis, and they are authoritative, systematic and standardized [ ]. However, the administrative units on which such data rely do not coincide with the boundaries of the natural units in the actual study. These, these data are prone to the "variable element problem" [ ] if the spatial distribution information of the population characterized by the average density of administrative districts cannot represent the spatial distribution characteristics of the population at a small scale. In contrast, WorldPop raster data downloaded from the official website of WorldPop (https://hub.WorldPop.org/), with a spatial resolution of 100 m and high precision, can tap the spatial characteristics at the microscopic scale.

## 3.2. Data pre-processing
The study attempts to explore the impact of the distribution of sports venues on the inner-city population. Thus, the identification of the inner-city study area and the processing of open data are crucial.

## 3.2.1. Determination of the inner-city study area
The built-up area is the most densely populated area in a city, accounting for the largest proportion of the population. It is also a concentrated area for the distribution of sports venues. Taking the built-up area of cities as the final study area can improve the scientificity and reliability of the study. First, we convert the .tiff data from Landsat into vector data and extract the built-up area, build a 1 km*1 km fishing grid within the built-up area, and extract the part whose actual area is greater than or equal to one-half of the grid area to construct the inner-city study area ( ).
 

## 3.2.2. Stadium data
The study uses Python 3.9 to crawl the POI data from the Baidu Open Platform 2020, performs data cleaning and data reclassification to extract the stadium data, and obtains 10,554 data points from Xi’an city and 10,035 data points from Zhengzhou city.

## 3.2.3. Population raster data
To better represent and explore the distribution pattern of the population, this study adopts the population raster data of WorldPop and uses county-level census data to correct and check the population data from the WorldPop database through partitioning so that the fitted value of each district is greater than 95% to ensure the rigor of the raster data. Finally, the population data were assigned to the fishing network within the study area based on the ArcGIS software platform to realize spatial visualization within the cities.

## 3.3. Research methodology

## 3.3.1. Kernel density estimation
Kernel density estimation (KDE) can estimate the probability density of the given sample data and is typically used to measure the density values of adjacent point-line elements to represent the spatial characteristics of the study object. Thus, it is widely used in spatial distribution research. In this paper, we use KDE to measure the spatial density of sports venues in Xi’an and Zhengzhou to obtain the spatial distribution maps of sports venues in Xi’an and Zhengzhou. The higher the value obtained is, the more clustered the sports venues are in the area; in contrast, the lower the value obtained is, the more dispersed. The formula is shown as follows [ ]:

 f^(x)=1nh2π∑i=1n[1−(x−xi)2+(y−yi)2h2]2
(1)

where h is the threshold value and n is the number of points in the threshold range and indicates the deviation from the interval.
In the calculation process, the search radius of the kernel density calculation is selected as the optimized default value, and the resulting image data have better smoothness and obvious local features. The default value is calculated as follows:

 SearchRadius=0.9*min(SD,1ln(2)*Dm)*n−0.2
(2)

where SD is the standard distance, Dm is the median distance, the weight of each point is not set in the study of sports venues, and n represents the number of points.

## 3.3.2. Multi-scale geographically weighted regression (MGWR)
Geographically weighted regression (GWR) is a local regression model based on the construction of a spatial weight matrix. It takes into account the non-stationarity of space and is commonly used for spatial influence factor analysis. Multi-scale geographically weighted regression (MGWR) relaxes the assumption that all processes to be modelled are at the same spatial scale, which can solve the problem of smoothing the variables at their respective spatial levels, as well as the problem of using a specific bandwidth for each variable as an indicator of the role of each spatial process. The use of a multi-bandwidth approach can produce a spatial process model that is closer to reality and more useful. The formulation is expressed as follows [ ]:

 yi=∑j=ikβbjw(ui,vi)xij+εi
(3)

where yi is the dependent variable of element i, xij is the attribute value of independent variable j at location i, βbjw is the bandwidth used for the regression coefficient of the first variable j, (ui, vi) is the spatial coordinate of the first element i, and εi is the residual.

 ε^=y−∑j=1kf^j
(4)
MGWR sets the initial state with classical GWR and then calculates the initialized residual , followed by an iterative calculation to find the optimal bandwidth.
In , the initial residual , additive term and independent variable xi are GWR weighted on i = 1⋯n to find the optimum βbjw. Then, the computation is continuously iterated until all variables k are traversed. Finally, this cycle is iterated and repeated until the estimation converges to the convergence criterion.

## 4. Results

## 4.1. Spatial differentiation of sports venues based on POI data
The data on sports venues in Xi’an and Zhengzhou were used for density calculation by the kernel density analysis tool in ArcGIS10.2, the obtained density images were classified using the natural break method, and each of the two places was divided into five categories ( ).
 Xi’an’s sports venues show an obvious single-core centre-periphery concentric circular structure, with the highest value reaching 623,574. Additionally, the larger the value is, the more sports venues are distributed in the area. The centre is concentrated in the new city, Beilin District and Lianhu District, and continues to spread to the periphery. Zhouzhi County, the Eyi District and other peripheral districts and counties have a lower-density stadium distribution. Zhengzhou city sports venues form a clear multi-centre, multi-level distribution, with the highest value of density reaching 575,401. Higher density areas are concentrated in the Zhongyuan District, Jinshui District, Erqi District and Guanchenghuizi District, and the same Zhengzhou city district. The overall distribution corresponds to one main area (main urban area), one city (aviation city), three districts (western new urban area, southern new urban area and eastern new urban area) and four clusters (Gongyi, Dengfeng, Xinmi and Xinzheng) in the Zhengzhou city master plan (2010–2020).
Regarding the comprehensive distribution of sports venues in both Xi’an and Zhengzhou, we find that within the built-up area is the hot area where the sports venues are located. Urban construction land with basically complete municipal utilities within the built-up area of a city has convenient transportation, a high urbanization rate, and strong social vitality, and sports venues are densely distributed to promote the accessibility and convenience of mass sports and leisure activities.

## 4.2. Spatial distribution of the population within a city based on WorldPop data
To make the visualization results of the population distribution within a city scientific and reliable, the study rigorously corrected the population data based on the ArcGIS software platform and at the same time visualized only the population within the built-up area in a 1 km grid. Doing so made the spatial characteristics of the population distribution significantly clear ( ).
 As shown in , the high-value area of the population in the inner city of Xi’an is similar to the distribution of its sports venues and shows a centre-periphery structure, mainly concentrated in the eastern part of the Lianhu District, the northern part of the Beilin District and the western part of the new city. Additionally, the whole high-value area coincides with the area within the city walls of Xi’an. The area within the city walls is the central part of Xi’an, which is the earliest area in Xi’an to have the shape of a city. The area has well-developed transportation, with the Xi’an Railway Station, the Shaanxi Bus Station, several subways and several buses located within the city walls. It has a thriving economy and is home to several important commercial buildings.
The population within the city of Zhengzhou is concentrated in the Zhongyuan District, Jinshui District, Erqi District, and Guanchenghuizi District in a rhombus shape. All of this area is the main urban area of Zhengzhou, and it is worth noting that outside of the main urban area, the Shangdi District appears to be a high-value area for population distribution. The Shangjie District is not connected to the main urban area of Zhengzhou and is separated from Xingyang city. However, its core Shangjie village has rich aluminium resources and is the largest aluminium industrial base in China. Additionally, it is accompanied by the Shangjie Railway Station and is also the "throat of the Yellow River Journey". Thus, the population inside the city is large and concentrated.

## 4.3. Correlation analysis of sports venues and the intra-city population layout

## 4.3.1. Overall correlation analysis
Sports and leisure activities that enrich the spare time of the general public can represent people’s aspiration for a better life and are closely related to the development of cities. Therefore, as a carrier of residents’ leisure and sports activities, sports venues not only have the function of leisure and entertainment but also have certain social symbolic functions. Additionally, studies have proven that the distribution of sports venues is closely related to the size of the population [ , , ]. To explore the influence of the density of the stadium distribution on the intra-city population distribution in Xi’an and Zhengzhou cities, scatter plots were created based on normalized data from Xi’an and Zhengzhou cities using Stata 16 and Origin 2018 software ( ).
 As shown in , the models of Xi’an and Zhengzhou cities fit better based on the overall perspective, and the slopes of the fitted lines are positive. This means that the distribution of sports venues in both Xi’an and Zhengzhou cities can promote the growth of the intra-city population at the global scale. The slope of the fitted line is higher in Zhengzhou, which means that the intra-city population in Zhengzhou is more sensitive to the distribution of sports venues.

## 4.3.2. Spatial heterogeneity analysis
In this study, three regression analyses were attempted, namely, OLS, GWR, and MGWR. As shown in , the R2 values of MGWR for both Xi’an and Zhengzhou cities were larger than those of the OLS and GWR models, at 0.68 and 0.71, respectively. Additionally, among the AICc values, for the value based on the MGWR model for Xi’an city, 1256.85, was much smaller than those based on the other two traditional models. The AICc values for Zhengzhou city were also smaller than those of the GWR and OLS models. The sum of the squared residuals of MGWR in Xi’an and Zhengzhou are also smaller than those of the traditional GWR and OLS models, indicating that the regression results of the MGWR model are more scientific and reliable, and the fit is better.
 Combining the parameter ratios of the above models, the MGWR model is better than the traditional GWR model and OLS model in this study. Therefore, the MGWR model was selected for the study ( ).
 The distribution of the regression coefficients in Xi’an shows a centre-periphery structure. Additionally, the regression coefficient values from the centre to the periphery change from a negative to a positive correlation, showing an increasing trend. The negative correlation area expands from the Beilin District to the periphery, and it is distributed in the Lianhu District, Xincheng District, Yanta District, Weiyang District, and Lintong District. In this area, the distribution of sports venues resists the growth in the inner-city population, i.e., the more sports venues there are, the more the inner-city population tends to decrease. The Xi’an City Wall, which is the largest and best preserved ancient city wall in China, is a national 5A scenic spot, has tourist attractions such as the Xi’an Bell Tower, the Drum Tower, the Xi’an Bilin Museum, the Yongxing Square and other municipal facilities such as the Shaanxi provincial Government, and is the core area of the Xi’an CBD distribution, whose main functions are tourism, commerce and administration. The high density of stadium distribution occupies its main area. The high density of sports venues will take away the distribution of their main functions and therefore slow down the agglomeration of population. In the Beilin District and Yanta District, there are more higher education institutions (Xi’an Jiaotong University, Shaanxi Normal University, etc.), and there are better sports and recreation areas in the universities. Thus, the demand for public social sports venues is low. It is noteworthy that the central part of the Lianhu District and the eastern part of the new city have high positive correlation values. Both districts have similar properties, with the layout of old workers’ family homes, low rents and a strong living atmosphere. The increase in sports venues optimizes the living environment of the district, improves the quality of life of district residents, and promotes an increase in the inner-city population.
Compared to Xi’an city, Zhengzhou city has the opposite distribution of regression coefficients, despite also having a centre-periphery structure. However, the regression coefficients change from a positive to a negative correlation from the centre to the periphery. The high-value area is located at the junction of the Zhongyuan District, Erqi District, Jinshui District and Guanchenghuizi District, and the distribution of sports sports venues in this area contributes to population agglomeration. The area is distributed across numerous residential neighbourhoods and is also the location of the Zhengzhou Railway Station, which has an enormous number of migrant and permanent residents and a high demand for sports venues. As important support for public sports services, sports sports venues have a significant role in enhancing residents’ well-being to residents’ happiness. Additionally, sports sports venues have a positive effect on the intra-city population in areas with a high layout of settlements in the Shangdi District, Gongyi District and Xinmi City. The negative areas are located in the Zhongyuan District, Huizi District, Jinshui District, and Guancheng Huizu District. The Zhongyuan District is the gathering place of the Zhengzhou municipal government as well as other municipal units, and it is also the political and cultural centre of Zhengzhou. The low-value areas of the Huizi District, Jinshui District and Guancheng Huizuzizhi District are distributed with urban functional areas such as the Comprehensive Administrative Business Centre, Zhengzhou International Convention and Exhibition Centre, Yinji Trade City and Bairong World Trade Centre.
Overall, the distribution of sports venues in densely populated residential areas and transportation hub areas has a catalytic effect on the intra-city population, while the over-distribution of sports venues in CBDs, tourist attractions, and university gathering areas where special functions such as administration, business, tourism, and education are the main functions will slow down the increase in the intra-city population.

## 5. Discussion

## 5.1. Significance of research on urban built-up areas
The urban built-up area is the population agglomeration area within a city, and by the end of 2021, 559 million people in China were distributed within the built-up area. In this area, there are many human activities and strong social vitality. Moreover, the main contradiction of Chinese society is the contradiction between people’s growing demand for a better life and unbalanced and insufficient development, and sports and leisure activities are one of the important factors in enhancing people’s happiness in life. Therefore, studying the impact of the distribution of sports venues in built-up areas on the population holds great practical significance.

## 5.2. Complexity of the impact
From the results, it is clear that, in general, the increase in sports venues per unit area can attract an increase in population size. Synthesizing previous studies [ – ], sports venues, as the spatial carrier of diversified sports industries, are the foundation and pioneer industries for the development of sports industries. The construction and development of sports venues have a certain promoting effect on other sports industries. Sports venues provide venues for event operations and earn a certain amount of rent from them. This rent is used for daily maintenance and upgrades, and sports venues provide a place for consumers to watch games. Events provide content for consumers to watch games in the venue, and they also drive the development of related industries, such as sports training, sports brokerage, sports insurance, and sports advertising. These industries will ultimately provide corresponding services for event operations and obtain the corresponding service fees from event operations, laying the material foundation for the development of this industry. Event operations in sports lottery, sports goods, and sports tournaments provide opportunities for the derivation of industries such as sports lottery, sports goods, tourism, and sports games. A tournament will facilitate the advertising and promotion of brands and will obtain sponsorship from advertisers to maintain team management, tournament operations and tournament promotion. The construction of a stadium represents not just the development of a single industry; it will radiate to other sports industry sectors, forming a sports industry chain with the stadium as the core ( ). This shows that sports venues play an important role in serving public sports, building the public sports service system and improving people’s livelihood. Additionally, the scale and level of their development reflect the level of economic development of China’s national and regional social civilization.
 However, it is worth noting that the distribution of sports venues does not simply have a facilitating effect on the population, and their spatial heterogeneity is prominent. In areas where administrative, business, tourism and educational functions are the main functions, sports sports venues play an opposite role in population agglomeration. The over-distribution of sports venues increases the competition for land in the CBD, tourist attractions and other areas where they are located. Combined with "population push-pull theory" [ , ], the distribution of sports venues enhances the well-being of residents and attracts an increase in the foreign population, thus forming a "population pull". At the same time, the distribution of sports venues causes a decrease in land resources and an increase in land rent, creating a "population pull". Within a region, the distribution of sports venues causes the "population push" to be greater than the "population pull", while in other regions, the "population pull" is greater than the "population push".

## 5.3. Advantages of the MGWR model
During the analysis, the study used three regression models, OLS, GWR, and MGWR. The OLS model, as a benchmark model, is simple and easy to operate and runs faster. The GWR model, as a spatial analysis technique, is more accurate because it takes into account the local effects of spatial objects in its calculation. The MGWR model, similar to the GWR model, is also a local regression model, but it is one in which the coefficient values can vary across space. Additionally, the bandwidth used to define the neighbourhood around each element can vary across the explanatory variables, which allows the model to capture different proportions of the relationship between the explanatory and dependent variables. Through comparative analysis, the MGWR model has higher scientific validity and better fits the needs of this study due to its multi-scale characteristics, which form the corresponding bandwidths based on different degrees of data point clustering. At the same time, it is found that the model fits better, so it is worth promoting and using the MGWR model in research related to the distribution of sports venues and the population distribution to obtain more realistic and reliable research results.

## 5.4. Limitations of the study
At the same time, there are still some shortcomings in this study. First, most of China’s population is still distributed in areas outside built-up urban areas, and this paper does not explore the effect of sports venues on the population in such areas. Second, this study focuses on the impact only in 2020, and the mechanism of the impact can be explored in the future by expanding the time series of the study and considering the joint effect of other control variables, such as the economic, ecological, and industrial structures, on the intra-city population. This study conducts a preliminary exploration of the impact of the stadium distribution on the intra-city population. Therefore, this research paradigm can be extended to relevant studies in other regions to obtain a larger range of empirical cases and then make more in-depth progress in studies related to the distribution of sports venues to ensure scientific and reliable urban planning.

## 6. Conclusions
Based on the POI data of sports sports venues in Xi’an and Zhengzhou cities and WorldPop population data, this study uses FDE and MGWR to explore the impact of the sports stadium distribution on the intra-city population in Xi’an and Zhengzhou cities, and the following conclusions are obtained.
(1). The spatial distribution of sports sports venues and the intra-city population in Xi’an and Zhengzhou have a "centre-periphery" structure. Additionally, both sports sports venues and the intra-city population have a high density of distribution within built-up areas, but the distribution of each city has its own characteristics. Xi’an has a single centre-periphery structure with concentric circles, with the Xincheng District, Beilin District and Lianhu District as the centres, spreading to the peripheral districts and counties, and gradually decreasing in density, while Zhengzhou has formed an obvious multi-centre, multi-level structure. The high-value area of Xi’an is related to the high-value area of the city. The high-value population area in Xi’an city coincides with the area within the city walls of Xi’an. The high-value area in Zhengzhou city has a rhombus shape, mainly concentrated in the Zhongyuan District, Jinshui District, Erqi District, and Guanchenghuizi District.
(2). From the global perspective, the distribution of sports venues and the intra-city population in both Xi’an and Zhengzhou have a positive correlation, the model fits well in both places, and the slope of the fitted line is positive in both places. The slope of the fitted line is higher in Zhengzhou city, which indicates that the intra-city population in Zhengzhou city is more sensitive to the distribution of sports venues.
(3). The distribution of sports venues in Xi’an and Zhengzhou is spatially heterogeneous in terms of its effect on the intra-city population, and the range of its contribution is relatively large. The areas where sports venues have a deterrent effect on population clustering within the built-up area of Xi’an are mainly located within the city walls of Xi’an (Beilin District, Lianhu District and Xincheng District), while they are scattered in the Yanta District, Weiyang District and Lintong District. The areas where the distribution of sports venues in Zhengzhou has a negative effect on the population are located in the Zhongyuan District, Huizi District, Jinshui District and Guancheng Huizu District. The analysis found that the distribution of sports sports venues makes a significant contribution to the population size within a city, except for areas with special functions such as administration, business, tourism and education.
Therefore, it is recommended that in the planning of sports sports venues, on the basis of fully considering the relationship between the distribution of sports sports venues and the inner-city population in a certain area, great attention should be paid to the spatial heterogeneity of the two, and more sports sports venues should be planned appropriately due to the need in the area of the positive correlation between the two to maximize the role of sports sports venues in inner-city population agglomeration, driving population growth in the relevant areas and driving regional development.

We express our sincere thanks to the editor and anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions, which considerably helped to improve the quality of this study. We are solely responsible for the opinions expressed in this study.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0285600.r001Decision Letter 0
ChengJingAcademic Editor© 2023 Jing Cheng2023Jing Chenghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
14 Feb 2023

PONE-D-22-35291A Study of the Influence of Sports venues on the Intra-City Population Layout based on Multi-Source Data—Taking Xi'an City and Zhengzhou City as ExamplesPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Liu,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 31 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Jing Cheng
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf.
2. Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse.
3. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
4. PLOS requires an ORCID iD for the corresponding author in Editorial Manager on papers submitted after December 6th, 2016. Please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field. This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager. Please see the following video for instructions on linking an ORCID iD to your Editorial Manager account: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_xcclfuvtxQ.
5. We note that Figures 2-5 and 7 in your submission contain [map/satellite] images which may be copyrighted. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For these reasons, we cannot publish previously copyrighted maps or satellite images created using proprietary data, such as Google software (Google Maps, Street View, and Earth). For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright.
We require you to either (1) present written permission from the copyright holder to publish these figures specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license, or (2) remove the figures from your submission:
a) You may seek permission from the original copyright holder of Figures 2-5 and 7 to publish the content specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license.  
We recommend that you contact the original copyright holder with the Content Permission Form (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=7c09/content-permission-form.pdf) and the following text:
“I request permission for the open-access journal PLOS ONE to publish XXX under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CCAL) CC BY 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Please be aware that this license allows unrestricted use and distribution, even commercially, by third parties. Please reply and provide explicit written permission to publish XXX under a CC BY license and complete the attached form.”
Please upload the completed Content Permission Form or other proof of granted permissions as an "Other" file with your submission.
In the figure caption of the copyrighted figure, please include the following text: “Reprinted from [ref] under a CC BY license, with permission from [name of publisher], original copyright [original copyright year].”
b) If you are unable to obtain permission from the original copyright holder to publish these figures under the CC BY 4.0 license or if the copyright holder’s requirements are incompatible with the CC BY 4.0 license, please either i) remove the figure or ii) supply a replacement figure that complies with the CC BY 4.0 license. Please check copyright information on all replacement figures and update the figure caption with source information. If applicable, please specify in the figure caption text when a figure is similar but not identical to the original image and is therefore for illustrative purposes only.
The following resources for replacing copyrighted map figures may be helpful:
USGS National Map Viewer (public domain): http://viewer.nationalmap.gov/viewer/
The Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth (public domain): http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov/sseop/clickmap/
Maps at the CIA (public domain): https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html and https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/cia-maps-publications/index.html
NASA Earth Observatory (public domain): http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/
Landsat: http://landsat.visibleearth.nasa.gov/
USGS EROS (Earth Resources Observatory and Science (EROS) Center) (public domain): http://eros.usgs.gov/#
Natural Earth (public domain): http://www.naturalearthdata.com/.
6. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
7. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This study investigates the influence of sports venues on the Population Layout in two mega cities in china in the year 2020. The paper is neat and well-written and the study is interesting and scientifically sound. However, some minor issues need some attention, including:
1. Lines 9, 300, 301, 354, 395, 396, 419, 422,423, 425, and 427: Please delete the duplicated word of "sports". Otherwise, the authors need to point out clearly what this duplication stands for?!
2. Lines 20-21: "Finally, ... cities". This statement is confusing and NOT clear and better if being rephrased in a straightforwardly meaning.
3. Line 65: "Based on this research". Please clarify (and later rephrase), "this research". refers to the current study, or the cited previous study (28 & 29)?!
4. Line 113: Please delete the duplicated "these".
5. Line 146: "3.3. Research Methodology": Using the terminology of "Research Methodology" is extremely confusing here, especially as a subtitle under the section of "Material and Methods". Alternatively, I strongly suggest using "Statistical Method", instead.
6. Line 345: "This shows". "This" What? Please specify.
7. Line 378: "5.4. Limitations of the Study". This section is to be placed after the Conclusion Section. And please delete "of the Study".
8. Line 379: "At the same time, ...study". Please delete "at the same time".
9. Lines 395, 406, and 411; Please delete the paragraph numbering i.e. (1, 2, and 3).
Reviewer #2: The manuscript is well written and provides a sound understanding of the set objective it outlines in the introduction. The study examined the influence of the distribution of sport venues on the intra-city population layout in Xi’an city and Zhengzhou city. Based on spatial analysis using MGWR, GWR and linear fitting, the study found that the spatial distribution of sport facilities venue is a good indicator of population distribution. While the manuscript is good, it can be further improved and its chances of being published greatly increased if the comments made in my review are carefully considered and the manuscript duly revised.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Regina Obilie Amoako-Sakyi
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: REVIEWERS COMMENT_PONE-D-22-35291.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0285600.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
28 Mar 2023

Response to Editor Comments
Thanks to the editor's reminder, we added a description of the map to the original manuscript.
Response to Reviewer 1 Comments
Dear PLOS ONE Editorial Board Editors and Reviewers.
Hello!
Thank you very much for your review of "Influence of sports venues on the intra-city population layout based on multi-source data. A case of Xi'an city and Zhengzhou city". We have addressed the reviewer's questions. We have carefully answered the reviewer's questions and made detailed revisions to the paper according to the reviewer's comments, and the revised parts are marked in red with revision status. The answers to the questions raised by the reviewers are as follows.
Point 1: Lines 9, 300, 301, 354, 395, 396, 419, 422,423, 425, and 427: Please delete the duplicated word of "sports". Otherwise, the authors need to point out clearly what this duplication stands for?!
Response 1: Thank you for your suggestion. In response to your suggestion, we checked and found that the duplicate word "sports" appeared in lines 9, 300, 301, 354, 395, 396, 419, 422, 423, 425, 427 and have now deleted the duplicate word.
Point 2: Lines 20-21: "Finally, ... cities". This statement is confusing and NOT clear and better if being rephrased in a straightforwardly meaning.
Response 2: The phrase "Finally, ... cities" has been replaced with "The study emphasizes the need to scientifically plan the layout of sports venues in a targeted way to reasonably promote the sustainable and high-quality development of different regions." in response to your suggestion.
Point 3: Line 65: "Based on this research". Please clarify (and later rephrase), "this research". refers to the current study, or the cited previous study (28 & 29)?!
Response 3: The phrase "Based on this research" has been changed to "Based on current research" to refer to the current study.
Point 4: Line 113: Please delete the duplicated "these".
Response 4: Thank you for your question. After checking, we found a duplicate "these" in line 113 and have removed the duplicate word.
Point 5: Line 146: "3.3. Research Methodology": Using the terminology of "Research Methodology" is extremely confusing here, especially as a subtitle under the section of "Material and Methods". Alternatively, I strongly suggest using "Statistical Method", instead.
Response 5: Thank you for your suggestion. After our discussion and combining your suggestions, we have changed the title of 3.3.
Point 6: Line 345: "This shows". "This" What? Please specify.
Response 6: Thank you for your question. "This shows" in line 345 is expressed through the industry chain.
Point 7: Line 378: "5.4. Limitations of the Study". This section is to be placed after the Conclusion Section. And please delete "of the Study".
Response 7: In response to your suggestion, we have placed line 378, "5.4. Limitations of the Study" after the conclusion section, and deleted "of the Study" and replaced it with "7. Limitations "
Point 8: Line 379: "At the same time, ...study". Please delete "at the same time".
Response 8: In response to your suggestion, "At the same time, . . study" by deleting "at the same time".
Point 9: Lines 395, 406, and 411; Please delete the paragraph numbering i.e. (1, 2, and 3).
Response 9: Paragraph numbers (1, 2, 3) on lines 395, 406 and 411 have been removed as per the suggestion you gave.
Yours sincerely,
Yang Liu
Response to Reviewer 2 Comments
Dear PLOS ONE Editorial Board Editors and Reviewers.
Hello!
Thank you very much for your review of "Influence of sports venues on the intra-city population layout based on multi-source data. A case of Xi'an city and Zhengzhou city". We have addressed the reviewer's questions. We have carefully answered the reviewer's questions and made detailed revisions to the paper according to the reviewer's comments, and the revised parts are marked in red with revision status. The answers to the questions raised by the reviewers are as follows.
i. Topic
Point 1: I suggest the topic is modified to read: “Influence of sports venues on the intra-city population layout based on multi-source data. A case of Xi’an city and Zhengzhou city”
Response 1: Thank you for your suggestions, we have revised the article in response to your suggestions.
ii. Abstract
Point 1: It will be helpful if the abstract includes a couple of recommendations based on the findings of the study as stated in the abstract section. Furthermore line 9 should be checked for a repetition of the word ‘sports’.
Response 1: Thank you for your careful reading of the study abstract, which begins with the last sentence of the abstract presenting: The study recommends that the layout of sports venues should be planned in a targeted and scientific manner, controlling the increase of sports venues in areas with special functions such as administration, business, tourism and education, while planning more sports venues in other areas appropriately due to needs, and reasonably promoting the sustainable and high-quality development of different areas; After checking the ninth line there is a duplicate of "sports", and the duplicate word was deleted.
iii. Introduction
Point 1: The introduction is well written.
Response 1: Thank you for your recognition and compliments!
iv. Materials and methods
It will be good if authors could respond to the following issues and make them clearer in the materials and methods section of the manuscript: 
Point 1: Kindly clarify the paragraph (line 104 to 108) in terms of the two sets of data used for the study. Why was there a need for the second dataset (data from the Public Information website)
Response 1: Thank you for your question, first of all, POI data is a kind of emerging open data, in order to improve the scientific nature of the study, we used the more reliable Sports Authority website to verify the data; at the same time, we re-examined the original manuscript and deleted the inappropriate words, and now the paragraph is as follows: The POI data for sports venues in Xi'an and Zhengzhou in the study were obtained from Baidu Map. These data include basic information such as the name, address, and geographic coordinates. After data cleaning, the number of sports venues in the two cities was obtained by combining the public information from the websites of the Xi'an and Zhengzhou Sports Bureaus: 12,316 and 14,972, respectively.
Point 2: There should be consistency in the use of ‘inner city’ or ‘intra-city’ which seems to be used interchangeably in the manuscript.
Response 2: We have carefully read the original manuscript and standardized its language, using the term "intra-city".
Point 3: Line 128, how do you convert .tiff data to vector and extract the built-up area? Was there no image classification done? An explanation of the process will do.
Response 3: The process of converting .tiff data into vector data is tedious and not the focus of this paper, so the process is explained as follows: using Landsat TM/ETM/OLI remote sensing images as the main data source, after image fusion, geometric correction, image enhancement and stitching, the national land use types are classified into 6 primary classes, 25 secondary classes and some tertiary classes by human-computer interaction visual interpretation. The land use data are classified into 6 primary categories, 25 secondary categories and some tertiary categories.
Point 4: At line 146, I would suggest you use the caption: data analysis.
Response 4: We have changed "Research Methodology" to "Data Analysis" in response to your suggestion.
Point 5: Which analytical software was used in this study?
Response 5: In this study, ENVI5.3 and ArcGIS10.6 were used in the data pre-processing stage, ArcGIS10.6 was used for the kernel density estimation method, and MGWR2.2 was used for the multi-scale geo-weighted regression.
Point 6: In the introduction and abstract, you mention the use of OLS and Linear fitting as part of the analytical tool used in your study, however, it has not been explained in your data analysis section.
Response 6: In this study, OLS, GWR and MGWR were used in doing regression analysis to obtain their regression parameters R2, AICc and residual sum of squares respectively and to compare the obtained parameters, it was concluded that MGWR was more suitable for this study, so OLS, GWR and MGWR were used, while only the results of MGWR were needed in the analysis part.
v. Results
Point 1: Unfortunately, authors failed to mention that they run correlation analysis in their write up at the data analysis section even though this is mentioned and discussed at the results section. 
Response 1: Thank you for raising this issue and we have added a correlation analysis to the data analysis section as follows:
3.3.2. Pearson Correlation Analysis
Pearson correlation refers to the simple linear correlation between random variables X and Y whose joint distribution obeys a two-dimensional normal distribution. The correlation between X and Y is represented by the simple correlation coefficient r. The Pearson correlation coefficient is used to measure whether the two data sets are on a straight line and is calculated as follows [33]:
(5)
The value of Pearson correlation coefficient ranges from [-1, 1], when r=0, it means there is no linear relationship between the two; when r>0, there is a certain linear positive relationship between the two, which means X has a certain positive relationship to Y, and the opposite is negative.
Point 2: Again, the scatter plots show a normal relationship than a correlation analysis. If it was a correlation analysis, kindly present the significance level.
Response 2: To represent the results of correlation analysis more clearly, we added the results of Pearson correlation analysis in 4.3.1 and changed Figure 6 to add the correlation coefficient heat map.
4.3.1. Overall Correlation Analysis
Sports and leisure activities that enrich the spare time of the general public can represent people's aspiration for a better life and are closely related to the development of cities. Therefore, as a carrier of residents' leisure and sports activities, sports venues not only have the function of leisure and entertainment but also have certain social symbolic functions. Additionally, studies have proven that the distribution of sports venues is closely related to the size of the population [24,28,29]. To explore the influence of the density of the stadium distribution on the intra-city population distribution in Xi'an and Zhengzhou cities, scatter plots and Pearson correlation analysis were created based on normalized data from Xi'an and Zhengzhou cities using Stata 16 and Origin 2018 software (Figure 6).
Figure 6.Heat map of linear fit and correlation coefficient between the intensity of sports stadium distribution and population density.
As shown in Figure 6, the models of Xi'an and Zhengzhou cities fit better based on the overall perspective, and the slopes of the fitted lines are positive. The coefficients obtained from the Pearson correlation analysis were all positive and significant at the 0.001 level. This means that the distribution of sports venues in both Xi'an and Zhengzhou cities can promote the growth of the intra-city population at the global scale. The slope of the fitted line and the correlation coefficient are higher in Zhengzhou, which means that the intra-city population in Zhengzhou is more sensitive to the distribution of sports venues.
Point 3: It will be useful to explain the OLS results in the data analysis section as presented in Table. 
Response 3: After the comparison of the three regression methods, it was found that the r2 of OLS was extremely small and the value of AICc was too large, and the regression effect was not satisfactory. The authors, after all the discussions, concluded that the results obtained from the OLS regression model could not better explain the influence of stadium distribution on population layout.
Yours sincerely,
Yang Liu
AttachmentSubmitted filename: re-two.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0285600.r003Decision Letter 1
ChengJingAcademic Editor© 2023 Jing Cheng2023Jing Chenghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
27 Apr 2023

Influence of sports venues on the intra-city population layout based on multi-source data: A case of Xi'an city and Zhengzhou city
PONE-D-22-35291R1
Dear Dr. Liu,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Jing Cheng
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed in the revised version of the manuscript. There is no more comment(s) to be addressed.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Regina Obilie Amoako-Sakyi
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0285600.r004Acceptance letter
ChengJingAcademic Editor© 2023 Jing Cheng2023Jing Chenghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
2 May 2023

PONE-D-22-35291R1 
A Study of the Influence of Sports venues on the Intra-City Population Layout based on Multi-Source Data—Taking Xi'an City and Zhengzhou City as Examples 
Dear Dr. Liu:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Jing Cheng 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE