pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10977790PMC10977790.110977790109777903854725710.1371/journal.pone.0299461PONE-D-23-231221Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineDiagnostic RadiologyUltrasound ImagingResearch and Analysis MethodsImaging TechniquesDiagnostic RadiologyUltrasound ImagingMedicine and Health SciencesRadiology and ImagingDiagnostic RadiologyUltrasound ImagingSocial SciencesSociologyEducationMedical EducationMedicine and Health SciencesMedical HumanitiesMedical EducationComputer and Information SciencesArtificial IntelligenceBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningHuman LearningBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceLearning and MemoryLearningHuman LearningMedicine and Health SciencesCardiologyBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyCardiovascular AnatomyHeartAortic ValveMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyCardiovascular AnatomyHeartAortic ValveMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Care ProvidersPhysiciansPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsMedical PersonnelPhysiciansPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsEthnicitiesThe effect of real-time EF automatic tool on cardiac ultrasound performance among medical students
The effect of real-time EF automatic tool on cardiac ultrasound performance among medical studentshttps://orcid.org/0009-0008-6578-9192AronovitzNoamConceptualizationData curationInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6064-6909HazanItaiConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0002-1421-2103JedwabRoniConceptualizationData curationInvestigation https://orcid.org/0009-0002-7093-8953Ben ShitritItamarProject administrationWriting – review & editing QuinnAnnaWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9440-787XWachtOrenProject administrationResources https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4537-8659FuchsLiorConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyResourcesSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Joyce and Irving Goldman Medical School, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel2
Clinical Research Center, Soroka University Medical Center and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel3
Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Community Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel4
Medical School for International Health in Beer-Sheva, Beer-Sheva, Israel5
Department of Emergency Medicine, Ben Gurion University of the Negev in Beer- Sheva, Israel6
Medical Intensive Care Unit, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, IsraelAbdelMassihAntoine FakhryEditor ].
Recent studies established the importance of integrating POCUS in bedside physical exams [ – ]. POCUS utilization includes cardiac function evaluation, shock diagnosis and management, image-guided procedures, and many other applications. It enhances internal medicine residents’ skills, as reflected in research covering diagnostic assessment of left ventricle (LV) function, valve diseases, and LV hypertrophy [ ]. A randomized controlled trial showed that early POCUS exams in patients with chest pain and dyspnea reduced time for initiation of appropriate treatments [ ].
The improved diagnostic performance and the positive clinical outcomes attributed to POCUS use, highlight the importance of its integration into medical education [ ]. Most American medical school curricula now integrate ultrasound training [ , ]. However, its highly operator-dependent modality requiring experience creates potential difficulty when implementing ultrasound training, especially for POCUS.
A study reviewing the POCUS-guided diagnosis of aortic aneurysms by emergency department physicians showed markedly varied results correlating with user experience [ ]. An Australian study presented a distinct correlation between user experience and interobserver agreement with expert echocardiographers in transthoracic hemodynamic POCUS evaluation [ ]. Both examples show how essential POCUS integration in medical training is for novice users to gain experience.
Despite the advantages mentioned, POCUS is not yet sufficiently utilized in many clinical settings. One American study conducted in 2020 surveyed POCUS use in all Veterans Affairs medical centers. It showed that the number of physicians using POCUS has not changed significantly between 2015 and 2020 despite the availability of equipment [ ]. The low utilization rates among experienced physicians and the limited experience of novice clinicians underscore the importance of integrating high-quality POCUS training early in medical education as well as implementing a feedback system independent of the user’s personal experience. To address this gap, it is crucial to focus on enhancing technological solutions, supporting inexperienced users in their clinical practices, and developing efficient training methods. In our study, we aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of one such technological solution, the artificial intelligence (AI) quality indicator tool, by assessing the cardiac ultrasound performance of inexperienced POCUS users in both intervention and control groups.
Some POCUS device manufacturers have already added automatic AI-based tools to enhance the performance and imaging abilities of novice and experienced users alike. These companies include but are not limited to Phillips, GE Healthcare, DiA, Pulsnmore, Kosmos, Ultrasight, and Caption Health. The Real-Time quality indicator is part of the Real-Time Ejection Fraction (EF) tool (by GE Healthcare, Venue POCUS family system) designed to execute automated calculations of EF values in the apical 4-chamber position. The tool provides live quality feedback of the apical 4-chamber image through a superimposed colored left ventricular contour line (red—poor, yellow—moderate, or green–good). The quality is based on AI analysis of image quality ( ).
 In our study, we aimed to address the shortage of experienced POCUS operators among medical school graduates. Considering previous research indicating that students often struggle with apical cardiac views [ ], we hypothesized that an AI-based quality indicator tool, specifically designed for apical 4- and 5-chamber views, could serve as an effective teaching aid, to improve the cardiac ultrasound skills of novice operators. Our study was designed to compare the success rates and quality of apical views, as well as other cardiac views, between students using the AI-based tool and those using the standard POCUS device, in order to test the added value of integrating such tools in medical education and clinical work.

## Methods
This is a prospective randomized controlled study in medical education, where the reader of the ultrasound test results was blinded to the study groups.

## Study population
The study was conducted at Ben-Gurion University during the pre-clinical cardiac ultrasound course, specifically involving 4th-year medical students in a 6-year program. Recruitment for this study took place on January 22nd, 2022. The possibility to participate was offered to all students who were enrolled in the POCUS course (a mandatory course in the curriculum). Exclusion criteria included previous POCUS experience or training, failure to sign informed consent and failure to observe group allocation during the training. Further exclusion criteria were applied during data processing after the 6-minute exam was conducted, as specified in the results section. Participating students filled out a personal questionnaire (see full questionnaire, ) and signed an informed consent form permitting the use of the data collected in the study for research purposes only. The questionnaire included personal and demographic details, extracurricular POCUS training hours, and thoracic anatomy knowledge reflected by the grade received in an academic course. The study was approved by the ethics committee of Ben-Gurion University Faculty of Health Sciences study. ID– 36–2021, November 28, 2021.
Students were divided into 4- to 6-member training groups. In the first training session, we randomly assigned these groups to one of two POCUS training methods. The first group utilized the AI-based quality indicator tool described below (the Auto-EF tool by Venue GE Healthcare). This student group was defined as the intervention group that underwent training and testing using the quality indicator. The second group, defined as the control group, was trained with standard POCUS systems without using the quality indicator tool. Group profiles were analyzed based on demographics and other relevant variables to ensure random assignment and equal representation [ ].
 

## Point of care cardiac ultrasound training course
All participants completed the same 8-hour frontal POCUS course, comprised of two 4-hour sessions focused on obtaining basic transthoracic cardiac views. The first covered basic principles of cardiac ultrasound imaging, sonographic heart anatomy, and common pathologies. The second included hands-on training focused on acquiring various cardiac views. Students were allocated randomly to one of the study groups: the AI-based quality indicating tool and the non-AI group. Apart from using the quality indicator when practicing the apical 4- and 5-chamber views, both groups underwent identical hands-on training courses, including 4 hours of bedside teaching by experienced POCUS instructors. After the formal training hours, the students had access to the POCUS training lab which held ultrasound devices with and without the AI-based tool according to their study group. A healthy model was used during the course’s hands-on, bedside teaching sessions, as well as during the exam.

## The AI quality indicator tool
The AI-based quality indicator tool provides real-time, three scale feedback on the quality of the apical 4-chamber image. This tool is part of the automatic EF tool. It presents the user with an LV endocardial border contour line that appears when the AI tool recognizes the apical 4- or 5-chamber views ( ). The contour line can appear in green (best quality), yellow (medium quality), or red (unrecognized structures), according to the image quality determined by the AI algorithm. The algorithm analyzes real-time image quality, anatomical landmark identification, and EF result consistency ( ). As mentioned, the intervention group used the tool during the course, additional training time, and exam. The control group did not use the tool at any point. All students were encouraged to practice outside the eight-hours course but were not mandated to do so. Students were required to document any extra practice hours for later analyses and comparisons between the groups.

## The six-minute exam
At the end of the course, we evaluated the students’ POCUS handling skills with the previously established six-minute exam (see exam scoring criteria, ) [ ]. This exam evaluates skills in obtaining key transthoracic cardiac views. The exam required students from both groups to acquire and store images of identical cardiac views.
Experienced POCUS instructors supervised the exam. Each student had 6 minutes to obtain clips with the POCUS device in a predetermined order of the following views: parasternal long axis; parasternal short axis including aortic valve (AV), mitral valve (MV), and mid-papillary level; apical 4-chamber; apical 5-chamber; apical 2-chamber; subcostal long axis and the inferior vena cava (IVC). All recorded clips were digitally stored for analysis.
After data collection was completed, the blinded review of the clips began. Clips were scrambled, and when reviewed, the quality indicator marker was removed to prevent the identification of the study group by the reviewer. A senior intensive care physician with over ten years of cardiac ultrasound experience performed a blinded rating of clip quality (grading anatomical landmarks acquisition and image quality). The exam score was based on a checklist of anatomical landmarks depicted in each echocardiographic view for a total of 31 points with one point per landmark (see scoring criteria in the exam, ). Models passed a pretest screening for approval of the cardiac sonographic windows to reduce a bias of models’ anatomical differences.
Additionally, we added another assessment criterion: the image quality score. This was a subjective criterion graded by the senior physician who blindly reviewed and graded all clips based on clinical experience and without restriction to specific landmarks. Overall scan quality scores were given as follows: 0—impossible to ascertain; 1- medium quality, readable image; and 2- good or excellent image.

## Statistical analysis
We compared the intervention and control groups’ scores, using non-parametric Mann-Whitney U tests to determine significant differences. We analyzed specific views and quality assessments using t-tests and chi-square tests as appropriate. A Poisson regression analysis assessed the relative risk of achieving a higher than the median score, adjusting for relevant covariates. Furthermore, we calculated Cohen’s D to measure the effect size, providing us with a standardized measure of the magnitude of the observed effects and aiding in interpreting the practical significance of our findings. All analyses were performed using R software version 4.0.2 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, https://www.R-project.org/). We considered P values < 0.05 as statistically significant. Subgroup analyses were performed for gender, ethnicity, age, practice hours, and anatomy exams using the same tests and models.

## Results
A total of 100 students participated in the ultrasound training with 40 excluded from our study. Students were excluded if they did not sign the informed consent (n = 4), did not follow group allocation (n = 5), exceeded the 6-minute time limit (n = 15), scored below 15/31 points (n = 7), or a combination of these (n = 7). Details of exclusion according to group allocation are seen in . We added the total score exclusion criterion since it was difficult to ascertain which views they attempted to achieve, rendering the data collected impossible to use. This was the case with 3/33 (9%) of the intervention group students and 11/63 (17.5%) of the control group students. There were no significant differences between the study groups in basic demographic parameters such as sex, age, ethnic background, anatomy exam score, and additional practice hours [ ].
 

## Total score
We found a significant difference between the groups in the total exam score. The intervention group had a median score of 26/31 (83.9%) as compared to 22/31 (71%) in the control group (P = 0.002). Cohen’s D for the difference in total exam score between the groups was 0.890 [ ].
 

## Specific view scores
There were two specific views with significantly different student scores. The first was the parasternal long-axis view with a mean score of 3.48/4 in the intervention group and 2.77/4 in the control group (P = 0.01). Cohen’s D for the difference in the long axis mean score between the groups was 0.536. In this view, the AI-based quality indicator does not function. Median scores were 4 and 3, respectively [ ]. The second was the apical 5-chamber view, where the AI-based quality indicator does function, with a mean score of 5.33/6 in the intervention group and 4.21/6 in the control group (P = 0.03) [ ]. Cohen’s D for the difference in the apical 5-chamber mean score between the groups was 0.634. In both parasternal long and apical 5-chamber views, all landmarks received higher success rates in the intervention group. The intervention group exhibited a trend of higher performance scores in most other cardiac windows but without statistical significance. In parasternal short views, the mean scores for the intervention and control group were as follows: aortic valve level view 3.05/4 and 2.54/4, respectively (P = 0.13); mitral valve level view 1.48/2 and 1.68/2, respectively (P = 0.4); and mid-papillary level view 1.33/2 for both groups (P>0.9) [ ]. Subcostal view mean scores were 2.71/3 and 2.41/3, respectively (P = 0.3); and IVC view mean scores were 1.76/2 and 1.44/2 (P = 0.09). Interestingly, we found no statistically significant differences between the groups in the apical 4-chamber view in which together with apical 5 chamber, the AI tool was designed to function. The mean scores were almost identical, 4.43/5 and 4.44/5 in the intervention and control groups, respectively (P = 0.8).

## Quality assessment scores
Blinded overall scan quality assessment scores generated significant differences in favor of the AI-based tool in various cardiac views. Quality indicator users achieved a higher score in the parasternal long axis (P = 0.002), apical 4-chamber (P = 0.003), apical 5-chamber (P = 0.003), subcostal (P = 0.04), and IVC (P = 0.02) views [ ]. Cohen’s D for the difference in the quality assessment score between the groups was 0.815 for parasternal long axis, 0.840 for apical 4-chamber, 0.850 for apical 5-chamber, 0.594 in subcostal, and 0.631 for IVC view. We found insignificant differences in the parasternal short aortic valve level (P = 0.1), mid-papillary level (P>0.9), mitral valve level (P>0.9), and apical 2-chamber (P = 0.2) [ ].
 

## Time
The utilization of the automatic tool during the cardiac study did not prolong the scanning time for the clip it was applied to. There was no significant difference in the time required for apical 4-chamber acquisition (measured as the time elapsed between the last clip prior to the apical 4-chamber clip and the time of the optimal apical 4-chamber clip) (P = 0.6). The total test time of the study groups was equal.

## Subgroup analysis
We conducted subgroup analyses comparing exam scores and image quality in subgroups based on gender, ethnicity, age, and anatomy exam. We also tested the extracurricular training by students as a covariate for better performance and found it to be equally distributed between the two study groups ( ). Our analysis did not reveal any statistically significant differences between the two groups, leaving the automatic tool as the only significant factor that can explain score differences.

## Multivariate analysis
The Poisson regression analysis showed that quality indicator users had a relative risk of 2.3 (95% CI: 1.10, 4.93, P = 0.03) for receiving an overall score higher than the median score of 23 compared to the control group.

## Discussion

## 6-minute exam
The overall 6-minute exam score showed a significant advantage for the intervention group. This general improvement can be broken down into the direct effect of the quality indicator demarcation seen in apical 4- and 5-chamber views and the indirect effect when the quality indicator demarcation was absent in other views. Furthermore, the quality of cardiac views, the anatomical landmarks acquired, and the acquired image quality received significantly higher scores among the intervention compared to control students in most cardiac views, even in cardiac views where the quality indicator demarcation is not active [ ].
Nevertheless, although the quality indicator was designed for the apical 4-chamber view, the mean score in this view was not significantly higher in the intervention group. However, the apical 5-chamber, also a compatible view for the tool, received significantly higher scores among the intervention group. A more thorough investigation revealed that the control group lost points during the transition from apical 4-chamber view to apical 5-chamber (worsening LV imaging from 38 (97%) successful depictions to 30 (77%), RV from 33 (85%) to 27 (69%), MV from 39 (100%) to 32 (82%), tricuspid valve (TV) from 30 (77%) to 19 (49%), and atria from 33 (85%) to 27 (69%), respectively). In contrast to the control, the intervention group revealed identical or improved success rates of demonstrating cardiac structures when shifting from apical 4-chamber to apical 5-chamber (RV from 17 (81%) to 18 (86%), MV at 20 (95%) for both, TV at 16 (76%) for both, and atria from 18 (86%) to 19 (90%), respectively) [ ].
These results suggest that the quality indicator may assist in maintaining the cardiac landmarks shared by both views when the operator shifts from the apical 4- to 5-chamber view. This may be due to an advantageous probe positioning in the apical 4-chamber view while preparing to shift to apical 5-chamber. It is also possible that the quality indicator helped maintain the proper apical 5-chamber view landmarks despite the more complex positioning when presenting the aortic valve.
In most views other than the apical 4- and 5-chamber, the intervention group had higher mean scores than the control group, despite the tool not being active. These included the parasternal-long axis, parasternal short axis base, apical 2-chamber, subcostal, and IVC presenting views [ ]. The parasternal long axis is the only view with a statistically significant improvement. However, the overall mean test score was significantly higher for the intervention group, further supporting the generalized improvement in sonography skills.
Subgroup analysis results had no significant difference in exam scores between groups based on gender, ethnicity, age, self-practice hours outside of the course, and anatomy exam scores.
Our multivariate analysis, however, showed a relative risk of 2.3 (95% CI: 1.10, 4.93, P = 0.03) for higher than the median scores compared to the control group, adjusting for age and sex. This indicates that quality indicator use was associated with a significantly greater likelihood of obtaining a higher general score, attributing the difference between the group scores to the quality indicator.

## Quality assessment
We compared the quality of the cardiac images with the help of an independent, experienced clinician blinded to the study group. The blinding was done by removing the automatic EF LV demarcation line to prevent identification of quality indicator use. Unlike in the standardized 6-minute exam scoring, the clinician based it on his general impression, making it potentially the most difficult factor to predict in relation to the quality indicator. The intervention group achieved significant improvement in image quality compared to the control group. In 5 of 9 views, quality indicator users had statistically significant higher image quality grades. The advantageous views included apical 4- and 5-chamber, parasternal long, subcostal, and IVC views. Our explanation for the improved image quality, even in the views without the quality indicator use, is that it assists the users on several levels. First is gaining a better sense of the correct pressure applied on the probe for optimizing image quality. Second is the familiarity with the proper representation of the cardiac images, exposing them to better image standards that later helped them acquire more explicit images in the tool-free cardiac views. Additional factors may be that rather than identifying the correct general positioning and moving on, students using the quality indicator learn to take their time until optimizing the image. This could be done by optimizing patient positioning, adding ultrasound gel etc. This habit will more likely be acquired when receiving repeated feedback requiring quality improvement and landmark depiction. This can also be seen in the time students required for image acquisition, which although not statistically significant, was longer in the intervention group than the control group (1.04 and 0.79 minutes respectively, P = 0.6) [ ]. An additional factor which may have had an effect is the fact that the intervention group had a higher number of extracurricular training hours [ ]. However, this difference was statistically insignificant, and likely a less probable explanation.
Subgroup analysis did not show a significant difference in image quality scores between groups based on gender, ethnicity, age, practice hours, and anatomy exam scores, supporting the attribution of the improved score to the quality indicator.
These findings suggest a general effect of improved image acquisition that is not limited to the direct effect of the quality indicator demarcation. Previous studies on AI-assisted echocardiography often focused on software used for retrospective image analysis rather than real-time image acquisition and quality improvement [ – ]. In studies where image acquisition was tested, the focus was on comparing novice users to experienced clinicians [ , , ]. Unlike previous studies, this study takes the assisting technology to the realm of medical education, comparing traditional learning methods with a new, real-time, AI-assisted tool. Our research suggests that real-time based feedback for cardiac ultrasound image quality improves image accuracy and quality among inexperienced users. As cardiac POCUS becomes an integral part of the standard physical examination, the demand for higher proficiency will enhance the need and development of such learning tools that enable novice operators to perform high-quality POCUS examinations.
Our research reinforces the established notion that interactive AI-based feedback tools can enhance POCUS performance, particularly in pulmonary and cardiovascular assessments [ , ]. Our study demonstrates that incorporating AI live feedback tools during cardiac POCUS training can significantly enhance training efficiency and outcomes among medical students.
We believe the implications of our findings are twofold: first, in training for quality control, establishing professional standards for student training; and second, in the clinical field, as previous research shows that POCUS integrated automated AI tool integration can support and validate clinical decision-making, particularly among less experienced users [ ]. Regarding the cardiac ultrasound applications explored in this study, we advocate for the integration of these tools into new POCUS systems and in student POCUS training programs. They prove invaluable in helping novice users optimize their imaging capabilities and further enhance the skills of experienced operators. Importantly, our findings indicate that the use of AI-based quality indicator tools did not significantly prolong the time required for image acquisition.

## Limitations
Our research has several limitations. The first and perhaps the most significant is that the 6-minute cardiac ultrasound competency exam took place immediately after a brief academic course. This is important as long-term differences (weeks or months after the course rather than days) between the groups are crucial in estimating effective medical education. Another significant limitation is the exclusion of over one-third of the participants from the study that could have caused a selection bias. It is important to stress that this exclusion was due to several reasons, as detailed in the results section. Criteria such as exceeding the time limit made the results incomparable to other users because time is an important factor in the exam, and the exclusion of students who scored ≤15 points was required because these students also had unclear images in their files, to such an extent that it was impossible to ascertain which views they were attempting to capture. Importantly, the excluded students were relatively equally divided between the two groups ( ). Additionally, we tested the intervention group while using the quality indicator. This fact precludes our reporting on whether the tool improved performance in the intervention group even when not using the tool. However, for views other than the apical 4- and 5- chamber (where the tool is not active), results were better in the intervention group.
The study took place in a single university medical school, causing a possible selection bias. The sample may not represent the larger population since the medical school curriculum may differ between institutions. Thus, it may not accurately reflect the tool’s advantage in other medical schools or healthcare settings. Further studies should be conducted on the intervention group without the tool in the future and should include larger sample sizes and additional medical schools.

## Conclusions
An AI-based quality indicator integrated into POCUS cardiac views improved the performance of cardiac ultrasound, as measured by the 6-minute exam, among recently trained students compared to students who did not use the tool. Improved scores were observed among the intervention group, even in cardiac views where the automatic tool was inactive. Such tools can assist in the learning process of cardiac ultrasound and should be integrated in new POCUS systems, in addition to expanding their repertoire to include more cardiac views. Further studies should be conducted to estimate their long-term effects on learning.

## Supporting information
S1 Appendix

## Research questionnaire.
(PDF)
S2 Appendix

## 6-Minute exam scoring.
(PDF)
S1 Data set(XLSX)

This research is part of the qualification requirements for M.D. approval at the Joyce & Irving Goldman Medical School at the Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0299461.r001Decision Letter 0
Samala VenkataVikramaditya Academic Editor© 2024 Vikramaditya Samala Venkata2024Vikramaditya Samala Venkatahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
29 Aug 2023

PONE-D-23-23122The effect of real-time EF automatic tool on cardiac ultrasound performance among medical studentsPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. ARONOVITZ,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 13 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Vikramaditya Samala Venkata
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. 
Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse.
3. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section: 
"I have read the journal's policy and the authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: 
GE healthcare© provided the POCUS devices used for this study. 
Lior Fuchs declares that he
works as a consultant for GE healthcare. The company had no access to the idea, to the study's primary objective, nor to its design, data analysis or writing. 
The rest of the authors declare that
no competing interests exist."
We note that one or more of the authors are employed by a commercial company: GE healthcare
(1) Please provide an amended Funding Statement declaring this commercial affiliation, as well as a statement regarding the Role of Funders in your study. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. You can update author roles in the Author Contributions section of the online submission form.
Please also include the following statement within your amended Funding Statement. 
“The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.”
If your commercial affiliation did play a role in your study, please state and explain this role within your updated Funding Statement. 
(2) Please also provide an updated Competing Interests Statement declaring this commercial affiliation along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, or marketed products, etc.  
Within your Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this commercial affiliation does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests). 
If this adherence statement is not accurate and  there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.
Please include both an updated Funding Statement and Competing Interests Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
5. We note that Figure 1 in your submission contain copyrighted images. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright.
We require you to either (1) present written permission from the copyright holder to publish these figures specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license, or (2) remove the figures from your submission:
(1) You may seek permission from the original copyright holder of Figure 1 to publish the content specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license. 
We recommend that you contact the original copyright holder with the Content Permission Form (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=7c09/content-permission-form.pdf) and the following text:
“I request permission for the open-access journal PLOS ONE to publish XXX under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CCAL) CC BY 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Please be aware that this license allows unrestricted use and distribution, even commercially, by third parties. Please reply and provide explicit written permission to publish XXX under a CC BY license and complete the attached form.”
Please upload the completed Content Permission Form or other proof of granted permissions as an ""Other"" file with your submission. 
In the figure caption of the copyrighted figure, please include the following text: “Reprinted from [ref] under a CC BY license, with permission from [name of publisher], original copyright [original copyright year].”
(2) If you are unable to obtain permission from the original copyright holder to publish these figures under the CC BY 4.0 license or if the copyright holder’s requirements are incompatible with the CC BY 4.0 license, please either i) remove the figure or ii) supply a replacement figure that complies with the CC BY 4.0 license. Please check copyright information on all replacement figures and update the figure caption with source information. 
If applicable, please specify in the figure caption text when a figure is similar but not identical to the original image and is therefore for illustrative purposes only.
6. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
was small in both groups)

Additional Editor Comments:

1)
Can authors explain if this AI indicator is available/or will be available with other brand of ultrasound machines. Basically can these results be reproduced at other institutions with other brand machines. What is the cost component with this AI indicator.2)
As reviewers note. Even for non apical views without AI tool. Intervention group had better scores. Authors proposed a reason stating, indicator can help with probe pressure etc  Can authors propose an alternative reason for this? The mean and median number of extracurricular hours were more in the intervention group in table 1( I understand it was not statistically significant but at the same time, N was small in both groups)3)
Whats the main take home point from this study/ or aim. Should we incorporate this specific AI tool in medical school education or should we start using ultrasound companies which have this new AI tool etc ( as reviewer mentions below, we need to go beyond presenting the results, explain what these results mean for the field of medicine in more detail)4)
Please see reviewer comments below and address them
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: While the introduction highlights the importance of POCUS and the challenges in integrating it into medical education, it lacks a clear statement of the research problem or hypothesis. What specific aspect are you trying to address or investigate with your study?
The recruitment process for participants could be described in more detail. How were students selected, and what criteria were used for exclusion?
It would be helpful to provide effect sizes or confidence intervals for the statistically significant differences you've identified.
The discussion section lacks depth in analyzing the results and their implications. It's important to go beyond just presenting the results and explain what they mean for the field of medical education, POCUS training, and the use of AI tools.
Reviewer #2: Any reason why only male students were enrolled in the study?
Only one experienced provider has reviewed the result. Study results reviewed by multiple provider might have provided more reliability.
Did the subjects in this study have any cardiac pathologies?
Did case and control groups have same subjects? If subjects differ, which group had more patients with cardiac pathologies?
Reviewer #3: Overall Assessment
The study is well-conceived and addresses an important issue in medical education, specifically focusing on the impact of an AI-based quality indicator tool in teaching cardiac point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) to 4th-year medical students. The research methodology is sound, and the results are statistically significant, suggesting that the AI-based tool does improve both the performance and image quality in cardiac ultrasound.
Strengths
The topic is relevant to medical education and has implications for better diagnostic performances, especially in point-of-care settings.
The study design is robust, including a control group for comparison.
Detailed statistical analysis strengthens the reliability of the findings, and the authors controlled for multiple covariates.
Areas for Improvement
Long-term Retention: The study's most significant limitation, as pointed out by the authors, is the immediate testing after the academic course. An evaluation of long-term retention of skills would provide a more comprehensive understanding of the tool's effectiveness.
Selection Bias: Another limitation is that over a third of the participants were excluded from the study, potentially causing a selection bias. This needs to be addressed more in the discussion.
Single Institution Study: The study being conducted at a single medical school may not generalize to other settings. Multi-center studies are encouraged.
Tool Availability: The intervention group was tested using the quality indicator, so it is not clear if the skills were internalized enough to maintain performance without the tool. Future studies could look into this.
The study appears to adhere to ethical guidelines, including informed consent and approval by an ethics committee. However, the authors should clarify whether all students were offered the chance to benefit from the AI tool post-study, given its proven efficacy.
Publication Ethics
No concerns about dual publication or publication ethics are apparent from the manuscript.
Reviewer #4: 1. The research involves assessing skills learned within hours which makes it difficult to avoid operator bias, as few students might be better than others or some do better by chance. However the use of the 6 mins test is a better idea to overcome the issue.
2. It is also difficult to see how this will help in long term practice as the operator of POCUS become more experienced the quality of obtaining images is improves. So, hard to justify the absolute necessity of the AI tools but definitely it will help learning at beginners level.
3. Over all good study but practical use ll be limited.
Reviewer #5: I congratulate the investigators. Overall, it is a good study and well-written.
There are some minor revision recommendations.
1. Please provide the supplementary document of the quality assessment.
2. Line number 55-56, please rewrite it; it needs to be clarified.
3. It's better to report the OR rather than the RR.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes: Naveen Prasath Baskaran
Reviewer #4: Yes: Nihar Jena
Reviewer #5: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0299461.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
11 Dec 2023

Dear editor and reviewing team, 
Thank you for your feedback. In the following response to the reviewers, we will address the points raised by the academic editor and reviewers. We would like to thank you for an in-depth assessment and for your important remarks. Careful consideration was given to address these comments. In this letter you will find a point-by-point response to your comments and suggestions. Where it was relevant, we have added line numbered references to changes made in the manuscript (the numbering applies to the untracked version). 
Once again, we would like to thank you all for your attention and the energy invested in this review. We have taken extensive measures to address the concerns you have shared with us and are confident our work now offers a coherent and valuable contribution to the scientific community. 
With thanks, 
Noam Aronovitz, Itai Hazan, Roni Jedwab, Itamar Ben Shitrit, Anna Quinn, Oren Wacht, and Lior Fuchs 
Responses to the editor: 
Additional requirements 
Comment: Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming 
Response: We have ensured that our manuscript meets PLOS ONE’s style requirements, including file naming. 
Comment: Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. 
Response: There has been no author generated code in the process of our study, except for the code used for statistical analysis when using the “R” program. We have added the “syntax.R” file as “other” assuming this is the code you were referring to in your comment. 
Comment: (1) Please provide an amended Funding Statement declaring this commercial affiliation, as well as a statement regarding the Role of Funders in your study. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. You can update author roles in the Author Contributions section of the online submission form. 
Please also include the following statement within your amended Funding Statement: “The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.” 
If your commercial affiliation did play a role in your study, please state and explain this role within your updated Funding Statement.  
(2) Please also provide an updated Competing Interests Statement declaring this commercial affiliation along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, or marketed products, etc.  Within your Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this commercial affiliation does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/

competing-interests). If this adherence statement is not accurate and  there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared. 
Please include both an updated Funding Statement and Competing Interests Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf. 
Response: An updated funding statement and competing interests statement were added to our cover letter. 
Comment: In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability. 
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories . Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized. 
Response: We have uploaded our study’s minimal data set as a Supporting Information file. 
Comment: We note that Figure 1 in your submission contains copyrighted images. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright. 
We require you to either (1) present written permission from the copyright holder to publish these figures specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license, or (2) remove the figures from your submission: 
Response: We have received written permission from the copyright holder (GE healthcare©) and are awaiting their legal team to send in the signed form. This may take a few more days (they committed to send us the signed form by Sunday 10.15.2023) and we would appreciate your understanding on this matter. Temporary written approval by email was uploaded as “other” with the description “Email approval from GE for image use”. 
Comment: Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice. 
Response: We have reviewed our reference list and ensured it is complete and in the correct format. Some changes were made to correct format and an additional reference was added (reference 19) while writing the revision. We have checked for retractions and none of the papers cited in our manuscript have been retracted. 
Additional editor comments: 
Comment: Can authors explain if this AI indicator is available/or will be available with other brand of ultrasound machines. Basically can these results be reproduced at other institutions with other brand machines. What is the cost component with this AI indicator 
Response: The question regarding availability of the AI indicator is an important one. The integration of AI technology can be seen in most of the major ultrasound manufacturers, and the automated ejection fraction measurement is part of that trend. The function can be inserted as an upgrade rather than a new system altogether. For the Venue Go system (the system we used in our study) the cost of the basic system is 28,000 USD. Adding the AI tool and auto EF function would cost an additional 3,500 USD. Another example can be found in Kosmos Trio by EchoNous© which has a very similar interface to the one we used in our study. The cost of their system is 10,000 USD without the AI tool, and an additional 2,000 USD would provide users with the automatic EF function which also comes with an AI quality indicator similar to the one we used in our study. These are expensive systems at base, but the addition of the AI component is relatively less expensive because it is usually a matter of software upgrading. Hopefully, as the use of quality indicators becomes more standard, we will see more companies integrating quality indicators in addition to automated measurements. We believe this will add a great deal of value in those places where manufacturers choose to do so. 
Comment: As reviewers note. Even for non apical views without AI tool. Intervention group had better scores. Authors proposed a reason stating, indicator can help with probe pressure etc Can authors propose an alternative reason for this? The mean and median number of extracurricular hours were more in the intervention group in table 1( I understand it was not statistically significant but at the same time, N was small in both groups) 
Response: We have expanded the discussion about alternative reasons for the improved scores among AI tool users. This is addressed in the manuscript in lines 310-323. Indeed, there is a difference in extracurricular training time; however, the statistical insignificance of these differences is not only due to a small N, but also due to the small absolute difference in training time which we found likely to be inconsequential. Despite this, we agree that it is noteworthy, and we have mentioned these differences in the aforementioned correction. 
Comment: What’s the main take home point from this study/ or aim. Should we incorporate this specific AI tool in medical school education or should we start using ultrasound companies which have this new AI tool etc (as reviewer mentions below, we need to go beyond presenting the results, explain what these results mean for the field of medicine in more detail) 
Response: We have expanded the discussion regarding the implications of our study results, and we have recommended the integration of POCUS AI tools in medical education. Corrections can be seen in lines 346-358. 
Reviewer comments 
Reviewer #1 
Comment: While the introduction highlights the importance of POCUS and the challenges in integrating it into medical education, it lacks a clear statement of the research problem or hypothesis. What specific aspect are you trying to address or investigate with your study? 
Response: We have clarified the research hypothesis and the goals of our study. Corrections can be found in lines 92-99. 
Comment: The recruitment process for participants could be described in more detail. How were students selected, and what criteria were used for exclusion? 
Response: We expanded the section describing the student recruitment process, describing student selection and exclusion criteria. Changes can be found in lines 105 -114. 
Comment: It would be helpful to provide effect sizes or confidence intervals for the statistically significant differences you've identified. 
Response: As recommended, we have calculated Cohen's D to measure the effect size, providing us with a standardized measure of the magnitude of the observed effects and aiding in interpreting the practical significance of our findings. Alterations were made accordingly throughout the manuscript, including a revised “Statistical analysis” paragraph, additions to tables 1, 2, and 3 and additional changes in the “Results” section. 
Comment: The discussion section lacks depth in analyzing the results and their implications. It's important to go beyond just presenting the results and explain what they mean for the field of medical education, POCUS training, and the use of AI tools. 
Response: Thank you for this important remark. We have expanded the discussion as recommended by both you and the editor (additional editor comment #3). Corrections can be seen in lines 346-358. 
Reviewer #2 
Comment:  Any reason why only male students were enrolled in the study? 
Response: As presented in Table1, there was an equal male:female ratio between the two groups, both male and female students participated in the study. 
Comment: Only one experienced provider has reviewed the result. Study results reviewed by multiple providers might have provided more reliability. 
Response: We agree that it would have been preferable to have more than one provider review the results, however our resources sufficed for only one. We believe that the fact that the results were presented blindly provided the necessary reliability. 
3,4. Comment: Did the subjects in this study have any cardiac pathologies? Did case and control groups have same subjects? If subjects differ, which group had more patients with cardiac pathologies? 
Response: None of the subjects in the study suffered from cardiac pathologies. The goal in this study was acquiring correct cardiac views and not testing diagnostic skills, although there is value in also introducing that function in further studies. The subjects in the study were randomly assigned to the groups: some were only in certain groups and some moved between groups as required by logistical constraints. As stated in the manuscript, all subjects passed a pretest screening for approving the cardiac sonographic windows to reduce potential bias due to anatomical differences. 
Reviewer #3 
We thank you for your positive overall assessment. Regarding specific remarks relating to areas for improvement: 
Comment: Long-term Retention: The study's most significant limitation, as pointed out by the authors, is the immediate testing after the academic course. An evaluation of long-term retention of skills would provide a more comprehensive understanding of the tool's effectiveness. 
Response: As pointed out in our study, we are aware of the study’s limitations in testing for long term retention. This question is beyond the scope of our current study, and its exploration was limited by course length and the availability of the relevant POCUS systems. 
 Comment: Selection Bias: Another limitation is that over a third of the participants were excluded from the study, potentially causing a selection bias. This needs to be addressed more in the discussion. 
Response: We are aware of the potential selection bias due to the exclusion criteria and excluded participants. We have elaborated our explanation addressing this issue in the manuscript. Changes can be found in lines 363-371. 
Comment: Single Institution Study: The study being conducted at a single medical school may not generalize to other settings. Multi-center studies are encouraged. 
Response: Regarding the possible bias due to our study being limited to a single institution, as pointed out in our study, we are aware of this limitation. However, a multi-center study exceeds the scope of our current work. 
Comment: Tool Availability: The intervention group was tested using the quality indicator, so it is not clear if the skills were internalized enough to maintain performance without the tool. Future studies could look into this. 
Response: We appreciate you stressing this point and strongly agree. Indeed, the question regarding long term internalization of acquired skills should be tested. We intend to address this question in further studies, as suggested. 
Comment: The study appears to adhere to ethical guidelines, including informed consent and approval by an ethics committee. However, the authors should clarify whether all students were offered the chance to benefit from the AI tool post-study, given its proven efficacy. 
Response: The POCUS systems that we used during the study were borrowed from the manufacturer for the purpose of the study and were thereafter returned to the manufacturer. The purpose of the study was to establish the advantage of using the AI tool and we intend to implement our findings by using this tool in the courses to come. However, the students will have an opportunity to use this tool in clinical rounds in the future, as these systems are being integrated into hospital wards in their training hospitals. 
Reviewer #4 
Comment: The research involves assessing skills learned within hours which makes it difficult to avoid operator bias, as few students might be better than others or some do better by chance. However the use of the 6 mins test is a better idea to overcome the issue. 
Response: We appreciate your relating to the difficulty with operator bias. Indeed, in the 6-minute exam we try to make as clear an assessment as possible, and together with the control group we believe the statistically significant results in our analysis provide compelling support for our hypothesis. 
Comment: It is also difficult to see how this will help in long term practice as the operator of POCUS become more experienced the quality of obtaining images is improves. So, hard to justify the absolute necessity of the AI tools but definitely it will help learning at beginners level. 
Response: We agree with the claim that our findings are more significant during training and among inexperienced users. As we have written in the introduction, the challenge we address is the time required for medical professionals to gain the important experience needed to properly operate the POCUS systems. Our study suggests that the AI tool can help reduce the time required to reach the proficiency level needed for clinical work, by allowing more efficient training, and can support users during the training time by providing them with a live feedback tool. 
Reviewer #5 
Comment: Please provide the supplementary document of the quality assessment. 
Response: A supplementary document with information regarding quality assessment scores has been submitted along with our “minimal data set”. Unlike the 6-minute exam there are no conventional landmarks provided, rather it represents a general impression as assessed by an intensive care specialist with extensive POCUS training and experience. 
Comment: Line number 55-56, please rewrite it; it needs to be clarified. 
Response: We have rephrased the lines you have related to. A corrected and clearer version can be found in lines 60-61. 
Comment: It's better to report the OR rather than the RR. 
Response: Thank you for this remark. After discussing this issue with our statistical consultants, we strongly believe the analysis in a study of this kind should report the RR. We have calculated the OR and believe it to be an overestimation (OR= 7.01, P= 0.003), as supported in previous studies related to the topic1,2. These studies recommend presenting the RR for RCTs and cohort studies, as the RR is less likely to overestimate the effect size. 
Additional changes made: 
Correction of author affiliations. 
Minimal changes in writing style and grammar throughout the manuscript, making the text more coherent. 
Added source of Fig 1 in reference list. 
Knol MJ, Duijnhoven RG, Grobbee DE, Moons KGM, Groenwold RHH. Potential Misinterpretation of Treatment Effects Due to Use of Odds Ratios and Logistic Regression in Randomized Controlled Trials. PLOS ONE. 2011;6(6):e21248. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0021248. 
Knol MJ, Le Cessie S, Algra A, Vandenbroucke JP, Groenwold RH. Overestimation of risk ratios by odds ratios in trials and cohort studies: alternatives to logistic regression. CMAJ. 2012;184(8):895-9. doi:10.1503/cmaj.101715. Epub 2011 Dec 12. PMID: 22158397; PMCID: PMC3348192.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers .docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0299461.r003Decision Letter 1
AbdelMassihAntoine FakhryAcademic Editor© 2024 Antoine Fakhry AbdelMassih2024Antoine Fakhry AbdelMassihhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
12 Feb 2024

The effect of real-time EF automatic tool on cardiac ultrasound performance among medical students
PONE-D-23-23122R1
Dear Dr. ARONOVITZ,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Antoine Fakhry AbdelMassih
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Excellent work on your article! It's clear you've thoroughly researched the topic and presented your findings effectively.
Reviewer #3: study's design and implementation are good, providing valuable insights into the effectiveness of real-time feedback mechanisms on learning outcomes. Additionally, addressing potential biases more thoroughly, ensuring data accessibility, and discussing ethical considerations related to AI use in education would further strengthen the manuscript. Overall, the study is a meaningful step towards integrating advanced technologies into medical training, with suggestions provided aiming to refine and enhance its contribution to the field.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0299461.r004Acceptance letter
AbdelMassihAntoine FakhryAcademic Editor© 2024 Antoine Fakhry AbdelMassih2024Antoine Fakhry AbdelMassihhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
20 Mar 2024

PONE-D-23-23122R1 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Aronovitz, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Prof Antoine Fakhry AbdelMassih 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE