4278jtcvsopenJTCVS OpenJTCVS OpenElsevierPMC1032883410328834103288343742544210.1016/j.xjon.2023.03.010Machine learning using institution-specific multi-modal electronic health records improves mortality risk prediction for cardiac surgery patients
WeissAaron JMD, PhD YadawArjun SPhD MeretzkyDavid LMA LevinMatthew AMD AdamsDavid HMD McCardleKenMS PandeyGauravPhD IyengarRaviPhD aDepartment of Cardiovascular Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NYbDepartment of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart, Vascular & Thoracic Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OhiocDepartment of Pharmacological Sciences and Institute for Systems Biomedicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NYdDivision of Cardiothoracic Anesthesia, Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NYeDepartment of Clinical Operations, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NYfDepartment of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY∗Address for reprints: Ravi Iyengar, PhD, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1215, New York, NY 10029. ravi.iyengar@mssm.edu
∗∗Aaron J. Weiss, MD, PhD, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Desk J4-1, Cleveland, OH 44915. weissa2@ccf.org
54202314214214–251972023© 2023 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract

## Background
The Society of Thoracic Surgeons risk scores are widely used to assess risk of morbidity and mortality in specific cardiac surgeries but may not perform optimally in all patients. In a cohort of patients undergoing cardiac surgery, we developed a data-driven, institution-specific machine learning–based model inferred from multi-modal electronic health records and compared the performance with the Society of Thoracic Surgeons models.

## Methods
All adult patients undergoing cardiac surgery between 2011 and 2016 were included. Routine electronic health record administrative, demographic, clinical, hemodynamic, laboratory, pharmacological, and procedural data features were extracted. The outcome was postoperative mortality. The database was randomly split into training (development) and test (evaluation) cohorts. Models developed using 4 classification algorithms were compared using 6 evaluation metrics. The performance of the final model was compared with the Society of Thoracic Surgeons models for 7 index surgical procedures.

## Results
A total of 6392 patients were included and described by 4016 features. Overall mortality was 3.0% (n = 193). The XGBoost algorithm using only features with no missing data (336 features) yielded the best-performing predictor. When applied to the test set, the predictor performed well (F-measure = 0.775; precision = 0.756; recall = 0.795; accuracy = 0.986; area under the receiver operating characteristic curve = 0.978; area under the precision-recall curve = 0.804). eXtreme Gradient Boosting consistently demonstrated improved performance over the Society of Thoracic Surgeons models when evaluated on index procedures within the test set.

## Conclusions
Machine learning models using institution-specific multi-modal electronic health records may improve performance in predicting mortality for individual patients undergoing cardiac surgery compared with the standard-of-care, population-derived Society of Thoracic Surgeons models. Institution-specific models may provide insights complementary to population-derived risk predictions to aid patient-level decision making.

Key Words: cardiac surgery, clinical outcomes, electronic health records, machine learning, prediction modeling, risk prediction

## Graphical abstract
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Oct 27; Revised 2023 Feb 4; Accepted 2023 Mar 16; Collection date 2023 Jun.

 

## Central Message
Institution-specific risk prediction models built on multi-modal EHR data may provide insights complementary to population-derived risk scores to aid patient-level decision making in patients undergoing cardiac surgery.

## Perspective
Machine learning models using institution-specific multi-modal EHR data may provide improved performance in predicting mortality for patients undergoing cardiac surgery compared with the standard-of-care STS risk scores derived from population-level data. Institution-specific models may provide insights complementary to population-derived risk predictions to aid patient-level decision making.

Established risk models, such as the Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) risk score , , and the European System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation (EuroSCORE) I and II, are routinely used to assess a cardiac surgery patient's procedural risk. These models aid treatment decisions, profile individual surgeons and institutions, and provide benchmarks for quality improvement initiatives.
The STS models continue to contribute to the field of cardiac surgery; however, they are subject to limitations. Most notably, the models are only applicable to specific case types (“index procedures”), leaving out significant numbers of patients undergoing nonindex procedures or procedural combinations for which no model exists. Furthermore, a single patient's or institution's risk is not readily identified using population-derived, regression-based models. , Additional challenges include limitations on the number of multi-modal features evaluated, suboptimal handling of missing data, and insufficient incorporation of nonlinear and indirect relationships. As a consequence, the STS models, may fail to accurately predict specific patients with complicated pathologies who require unique tailored preoperative evaluations and complex surgeries. , , , , , Despite these limitations, the STS models continue to provide important benchmarks for hospitals to evaluate and improve their performance.
As cardiac surgery evolves, accurate patient-level risk prediction models applicable across the spectrum of patients and procedures will prove even more important. Machine learning–based models using big electronic health record (EHR) data offer one possible solution for improving risk prediction. We hypothesized that a rigorous machine learning framework applied to routinely collected, multi-modal EHR data from a large, all-comers cardiac surgery patient cohort could be used to develop a personalized, institution-specific risk prediction model for mortality. We evaluated our model performance in a held-out patient cohort, and compared performance with the population-based STS risk models.

## Materials and Methods
 shows the workflow of our study. This retrospective study was approved by the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Institutional Review Board and included a waiver of informed consent (HS-15-00673, 10/29/2015).
 

## Study Cohort
Consecutive cardiac surgeries performed at the Mount Sinai Hospital from June 1, 2011, to June 1, 2016, were identified using Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) clinical classification software codes including heart valve procedures (HCUP = 43), coronary artery bypass graft (HCUP = 44), other operating room heart procedures (HCUP = 49), and aortic resection, replacement, or anastomosis (HCUP = 52). Duplicates, pediatric surgeries, vascular surgeries, thoracic surgeries, pericardial windows, reexplorations, and noncardiac surgeries were excluded. Patients with more than 1 operation during the study period were treated as separate observations if the procedures occurred during separate hospitalizations. For patients with multiple surgeries during a single hospitalization, only the first surgery was included.
The outcome, postoperative mortality, used the STS definition, namely, death during the same hospitalization as surgery, regardless of timing, or within 30 days of surgery regardless of venue. , , 

## Electronic Health Record Data Identification, Abstraction, and Cleaning
A collection of multi-modal clinical features was identified and abstracted through feeds from multiple EHR source systems. After vetting by expert physicians, a final list of multi-modal features comprised of administrative, demographic, clinical, hemodynamic, imaging, laboratory, pharmacological, and procedural features was created ( ). All observations for all features were uploaded into open-source R software (R Foundation) for systematic cleaning and assessment.

## Data Preparation and Preprocessing
The generated multi-modal set of features (x = 4016) consisted of 3883 preoperative and 133 intraoperative features, along with 1 postoperative outcome (mortality). We used the following multi-step data processing and machine learning strategy to develop a mortality risk prediction model using only the preoperative features and the cardiac surgery patient cohort described ( ). In essence, the model was built without intraoperative surgical procedure or event data providing a true preoperative risk prediction model.
 First, label encoding converted into numerical values each of the nonbinary categorical features. Then, the overall cohort (n = 6392) was randomly split into an 80% training set (n = 5113 patients) for model development and a 20% holdout test set (n = 1279 patients) for final model validation. The upfront separation of data into the 2 sets ensured the predictive model was rigorously developed and independently validated. The same 3883 preoperative features were available for both sets. The mortality outcome was also available for both sets but used for model development within the training set and for validation within the test set.
In the training set, features missing more than 99% of their values were eliminated. Nonmissing categorical features whose values were the same for more than 99% of the patients were also eliminated, because these were likely to be uninformative for outcome prediction. Continuous features were normalized by converting their respective values into z-scores [(value-mean)/(standard deviation)]. To eliminate redundant features, Pearson's correlation coefficients were calculated between each feature pair using only their nonmissing values. Among any pair with correlation greater than 0.9, the feature with the lower correlation with mortality was eliminated. Following these steps, the preprocessed training set included 5113 patient observations with 804 features.

## Missing Value Imputation
The training set was further split into a 75% development set (n = 3834) and a 25% validation set (n = 1279) that were used to simulate the training and test sets. Next, a stepwise process was implemented to account for missing data patterns and to determine the best missing data cutoff to be included in the model. Using the development set, features with different maximum missing value percentages were identified, and the mean-mode imputation method was applied. Next, 4 machine learning classification algorithms—random Forest (RF), logistic regression (LR), Support Vector Machine, and eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost)—were trained on the imputed data. The resultant models were evaluated on the validation set using 6 evaluation metrics, namely, F-measure, precision, recall, accuracy, area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC), and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC). Detailed explanations of the machine learning algorithms and the evaluation metrics are provided in .
The imputation and evaluation process was repeated for 0% to 60% missing value levels in 5% increments. To eliminate the dependence on 1 random split, the entire process was repeated 100 times, and the average of each of the metrics for each level was determined. The complete results were then analyzed as to whether imputation would improve performance, and if so, at which cutoff. The final training set with these features included was used for the subsequent model development steps.

## Determination of Model Thresholds
Machine learning–based classification models predict a probability that each observation in the test set is labeled a “class.” For the conversion of probabilities to binary outcome predictions, this threshold is typically 0.5, with probabilities 0.5 or greater labeled 1 class (alive) and probabilities less than 0.5 labeled the other class (deceased). However, for a highly skewed mortality outcome, such a default threshold may result in poor prediction performance, because most patients would be assigned to the “deceased” classes. For all of our candidate predictive models, this threshold was determined in a data-driven manner. Specifically, across all thresholds applicable to the probabilities produced by a candidate model on the corresponding validation set, we determined the final threshold as that which maximized the F-measure value for the minority (deceased) class to facilitate the model most likely to capture this more clinically relevant class.

## Feature Selection
To determine if a model trained on a smaller feature set would perform better, we tested the recursive feature elimination (RFE) algorithm in a setup analogous to the missing value imputation. The imputed training set was split in a 75:25 ratio into development and validation sets. By using RFE with the same 4 classification algorithms on the development set, candidate models were built with top x% of all features, with x decreasing from 100% to 5% in decrements of 5%. These candidates were evaluated on the validation set using the 6 evaluation metrics. This development-validation process was repeated 100 times, and the evaluated metrics were averaged to obtain the full range of results at different feature percentages. These results were used to define the most effective number of features to include in the final predictive model.

## Development and Evaluation of the Final Mortality Predictive Model
These steps yielded an optimally performing set of features with an acceptable level of missing values, and among them, the best-performing fraction of features that would be included in the final model. These analyses also identified which of the classification algorithms yielded the best performing final model. The final mortality prediction model was then built on the entire original training set (development set + validation set) using the chosen classification algorithm applied to the selected features and then evaluated on the holdout test set using the 6 evaluation metrics.

## Index Case-specific Model Performance and Comparison With Society of Thoracic Surgeons
The STS risk scores were generated at the time of surgery and stored in a prospective institutional database for the 7 index procedures: coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), aortic valve replacement (AVR), mitral valve repair (MVRepa), mitral valve replacement (MVR), AVR + CABG, MVRepa + CABG, and MVR + CABG. For each index procedure, the risk scores (probabilities) for the patients in our training set with known alive/death status were used to determine the best-performing classification threshold using the same method as the candidate predictive models. The performance of the index-specific STS scores were calculated on the respective subsets of the test set using the same evaluation metrics. After the development and evaluation of the final model, we also determined its performance for the 7 index procedures and compared with the performance of the corresponding STS risk models. The patients in the test set were identified as belonging to one of the index cases or as a non-STS index procedure. The final machine learning–based mortality prediction model was then evaluated individually on 5 STS index case cohorts (CABG, AVR, MVRepa, AVR + CABG, and MVRepa + CABG) in the test set. The MVR and MVR + CABG cohorts were not considered because of few events. Furthermore, STS scores were only available for 4487 patients, of whom 3562 and 925 were included in the training and test sets, respectively. Thus, the described evaluation and comparison were restricted to these patients.

## Statistical Analysis
For the overall cohort, qualitative features are denoted as frequencies and percentages, and quantitative features as medians and interquartile ranges. Baseline characteristics were compared between groups using the Student t test and chi-square test for continuous and categorical variables, respectively. All analyses were performed with publicly available software packages as noted in . provides the details for hyperparameter tuning for the XGBoost model.

## Results

## Study Cohort Characteristics
The overall patient cohort consisted of 6392 patients ( ). For each patient, observations included 3883 preoperative features and 1 outcome (postoperative mortality). provides summary statistics of clinically relevant multi-modal features for the overall patient cohort, training set, and test set. The median age was 64.7 years, and 4072 (63.7%) of the patients were male. The majority of patients identified as White (n = 3198, ∼50.0%). The number of patients with a history of cardiac surgery was 885 (13.8%). There were 193 patients (3.0%) who died. There were 928 unique combinations of surgical procedures with the most frequent being CABG (n = 1585), AVR (n = 528), and MVRepa plus tricuspid valve repair (n = 437) ( ). There were also substantial non-STS index cases, including aortic root replacements, ascending aorta replacements, left ventricular assist devices, and cardiac transplants.
 

## Development and Performance of the Mortality Prediction Model
 provides the multi-step machine learning–based methodology used to develop and validate the mortality risk model. First, the overall cohort was randomly split in an 80:20 ratio into training (n = 5113) and test (n = 1279) sets to develop and validate the model, respectively. The distributions of the predictor features and the mortality outcome were similar between both sets ( ).
Within the training set, we assessed the level of missing values that could be reliably imputed. The results ( and ) demonstrated that including any imputed missing values would not lead to a performance improvement. Thus, we proceeded with only the 336 features with no missing values in the training set ( ). Next, RFE assessed if selecting a subset of the features yielded a better performing model. The results ( and ) demonstrated model performance plateauing with including approximately 10% of the 336 features, whereas a smaller subset of features did not improve performance. Therefore, no additional features were eliminated during the final model development as to be more inclusive and avoid overfitting.
 In both of these steps, the XGBoost algorithm produced the best performing candidate model. Accordingly, we trained the final mortality prediction model by applying the XGBoost algorithm to the 336 features with no missing values in the original training set. The median of the optimized thresholds (0.261) of the XGBoost models was used as the threshold to convert the probabilities produced by the final model into deceased and alive labels. The final model was then evaluated on the held out test set. The results demonstrated that the model performed well across all metrics ( ).
 Next, the information gain method was used to identify the important features for the XGBoost model. Information gain represents the relative contribution of the corresponding feature to the model with higher values implying more importance to the model for generating predictions. shows the 15 most important features in the final model. These multi-modal features included preoperative medications (beta-blockers), comorbidities (hemodialysis and atrial fibrillation), administrative codes (acute kidney failure), and clinical acuity (intra-aortic balloon pump).
 

## Index Case Evaluation and Comparison With Society of Thoracic Surgeons Risk Scores
Finally, we sought to determine how the performance of the XGBoost model compared with the STS risk scores for index surgery types in the test set. describes the cohort stratified by index cardiac surgery procedure, as well as the number of patients who were alive and deceased.
 provides a performance comparison of the XGBoost model with each of the STS models for their respective index case types within the test set. The XGBoost model outperformed the STS model for each of the 5 specific index procedure types with sufficient data. provides confusion matrices detailing the correct/incorrect predictions made by the XGBoost and the respective STS risk models evaluated. In patients undergoing CABG, the XGBoost model correctly predicted all events except 1 false-positive, whereas the STS risk score had 5 false-positives and 2 false-negatives. For the AVR cohort, the XGBoost model correctly predicted all cases except for 1 false-negative, whereas the STS model had 21 false-positives. In particular, for all index surgery types, the STS models correctly predicted fewer deaths (true-positives), and their evaluation metrics for this important class were relatively low ( ).
 

## Discussion
In this study, we rigorously developed an institution-specific, machine learning–based mortality risk prediction model for patients undergoing cardiac surgery using routinely collected EHR. The final XGBoost model outperformed the commonly used STS risk scores for mortality for all index case types with sufficient data. Although the STS models are the gold standard for mortality risk assessment in cardiac surgery, they may be inadequately designed for several surgical procedures, as well as combinations of surgical procedures that are performed routinely. For potential wider applicability, our model was developed from and evaluated on a range of cardiac surgery patients undergoing various combinations of procedures ( ). Furthermore, the cases included were from all adult cardiac surgeons over the study period to reflect the variability and complexity of a real-world, high-volume academic practice.
Our model was developed from the noisy data routinely collected in the EHR during clinical encounters using a fully data-driven methodology. The process by which the multi-modal feature set was developed was rigorous and labor intensive, and necessitated expert clinical oversight for data quality, organization, transparency, and reproducibility. As EHRs evolve, automatic text mining of a priori defined discrete structured data points or natural language processing of unstructured clinical data can be leveraged to automatically select multi-modal risk features important in determining outcomes. These efforts when combined with data-driven analytics could theoretically populate institution-specific risk prediction models that continuously update in real time to aid decision making.
XGBoost is an effective prediction algorithm that builds an ensemble of decision trees by iteratively focusing on harder to predict subsets of the training data. Because of its systematic optimization-based design, this algorithm has shown superior performance for predictive modeling involving structured data, findings consistent with our observations. Another noteworthy aspect of XGBoost is its ability to discern nonlearning relationships among features and individual feature importance through the information gain method. Of the 15 most important features from the XGBoost model ( ), many have previously been associated with mortality risk including atrial fibrillation and renal failure requiring hemodialysis, as well as the presence of an intra-aortic balloon pump. Previous cardiac surgery has also been shown to increase the risk of mortality when patients undergo reoperative surgery. Several of the important features in the XGBoost model also appear in the STS risk model, including atrial fibrillation, acute kidney failure, hemodialysis, reoperation, and intra-aortic balloon pump, providing further validity. Of note, these 15 features were from a variety of EHR data types and sources, demonstrating the importance of multi-modal data to inform patient-level risk prediction.
Prediction models based on machine learning algorithms have been generated across clinical medicine with some demonstrating improved results over their standard of care counterparts. , , , , , , In cardiac surgery, a number of studies have used machine learning–based classifiers to model operative risk, , , , , , , , , , with some demonstrating improved performance. , , , However, most limit the assessed patient cohort to highly selected surgical procedures, leaving unaddressed more complex combinations of procedures. Additionally, several studies only incorporated features that were structured for national registries, potentially missing features not collected or more granular center-specific features that may contribute to residual unexplained risk. 
Allyn and colleagues retrospectively studied 6520 cardiac surgery patients from a single institution to predict postoperative mortality. The study included patients undergoing elective cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass, excluding high-risk emergency and noncardiopulmonary bypass cases. They evaluated EuroSCORE I and II, an LR model using EuroSCORE II covariates, 4 different machine learning models, and an ensemble machine learning model. The ensemble model outperformed the EuroSCORE II as assessed by the AUROC score, an evaluation metric with limited accuracy when applied to datasets with significant outcome class imbalance. This study only included EuroSCORE features, thereby potentially missing important multi-modal and institution-specific features. In contrast, our model was developed using a multi-modal feature set, and its performance was assessed in terms of 6 evaluation metrics more standardly reported in machine learning–based classifications.
Two studies from the same authors assessed machine learning algorithms for predicting outcomes for STS index cases. , The first study included 11,190 patients from a single institution undergoing only STS index cases. XGBoost was used to develop a risk model for operative mortality, demonstrating improved performance over the STS models. However, this study was limited by including only features captured for the STS models rather than multi-modal, center-specific features. The second study assessed the performance of an XGBoost mortality risk model for a national cohort of STS index patients undergoing isolated surgical AVR. Although the number of patients included was large (n = 243,142), the study was also limited by the same fixed STS feature set and lacked a fully separate test set, which is essential for assessing a predictive model's validity.
Our study methodology has the potential to be replicated in different institutions using patient- and center-specific data. Individual cardiac surgery practices benefit from tracking and comparing their outcomes with the national benchmarks derived from population-based risk scores such as the STS. However, as our study demonstrates, there is also benefit from incorporating hospital- and patient-specific data to provide an accurate prediction for an individual patient. This personalized risk prediction may help streamline patient selection and treatment options. Enhanced risk prediction may also enable the identification of unique center-specific features that can be incorporated into quality improvement initiatives.

## Study Limitations
Because this is a retrospective, single-institution study, the methodology should be validated in a prospective manner before being used to inform decision making. Additionally, the relatively small number of outcome events may affect the stability of some evaluation metrics. Relatedly and despite a large sample size for a single institution, we lacked sufficient outcome events to assess model performance for 2 STS index types. Moreover, with a large number of features with missing data, this may have resulted in important features being excluded from the final feature set that potentially contribute to residual uncharacterized risk. Last, the optimization parameters inherent to the different machine learning algorithms used may have further improved performance, but this was not attempted to avoid overfitting.

## Conclusions
Using a rigorous, data-driven, machine learning methodology applied to routinely collected, multi-modal EHR data on a diverse cardiac surgery patient cohort from a single institution, we developed an XGBoost-based mortality risk prediction model. This model demonstrated improved performance over the STS models for index cases. Our results show that data-driven, institution-specific models developed with machine learning algorithms may improve risk prediction in cardiac surgery and provide complementary insights to traditional population-based models.

## Conflict of Interest Statement
The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai receives royalty payments from Edwards Lifesciences and Medtronic for intellectual property related to Dr Adams' involvement in the development of 2 MVrepa rings and 1 tricuspid valve repair ring. Dr Adams is the National Co-Principal Investigator of the CoreValve United States Pivotal Trial, which is supported by Medtronic. Ravi Iyengar had a consulting agreement with Tectonic Therapeutics in 2021. All other authors reported no conflicts of interest.
The Journal policy requires editors and reviewers to disclose conflicts of interest and to decline handling or reviewing manuscripts for which they may have a conflict of interest. The editors and reviewers of this article have no conflicts of interest.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank Yan Chak Li for help with the Graphical Abstract and www.flaticon.com, and creators RaftelDesign, xnimrodx, Freepik, and juicy_fish for several icons included in the abstract.

## Footnotes
Supported by National Institutes of Health Grant P50GM071558NIGMS Systems Biology Center grant to R.I. that supported this research as part of A.J.W.’s clinical PhD thesis project and R01HG011407 to G.P.
Drs Weiss and Yadaw contributed equally to this article as co-first authors.
Drs Pandey and Iyengar contributed equally as co-senior authors.
Institutional Review Board Number and date of approval: HS-15-00673, 10/29/2015.

## Contributor Information
Aaron J. Weiss, Email: weissa2@ccf.org.
Ravi Iyengar, Email: ravi.iyengar@mssm.edu.

Appendix 2.

## Explanation of Machine Learning Algorithms and Evaluation Metrics

## Machine Learning Algorithms
There were 4 different classification algorithms used in this study (LR, random forest, support vector machine, and extreme gradient boosting). LR and support vector machine are linear classification algorithms that infer a hyperplane separating the 2 classes under consideration. LR identifies this hyperplane by optimizing the probability of a data point's class label based on its features, and support vector machines identifies the hyperplane that maximizes the separation between the classes. In contrast, random forest and extreme gradient boosting are ensemble algorithms that build a collection of decision tree classifiers, and aggregate the predictions from the trees as the final outcome. In particular, random forest learns the decision trees independently of each other, while extreme gradient boosting learns them sequentially to maximize the ensemble's collective classification performance.

## Evaluation Metrics
Multiple measures exist to evaluate classifier performance ( ). The most common of these is accuracy, which is the fraction of the total number of patients the model correctly classifies and is calculated as Accuracy = (TP + TN)/(TP + TN + FP + FN). However, this measure can be misleading in cases of severe class imbalance, because uninformed classification of all the patients to the majority class can yield an artificially high value of Accuracy.
 The AUROC is another commonly used measure, because it evaluates classifier performance over all prediction score thresholds. Although more effective than Accuracy, AUROC still faces challenges in cases of severe class imbalance like ours.
Precision, Recall and F-measure are class-specific evaluation measures that are designed for unbalanced classes ( ). Precision measures how many predictions for a given class are actually correct and is also referred to as the positive predictive value for the positive class, and vice versa. Recall measures how many of the true patients of a given class are correctly classified and is also referred to as the sensitivity and specificity for the positive and negative classes, respectively. A precision-recall curve shows how the 2 measures vary with respect to each other for a given classifier. AUPRC provides a global evaluation of the model and is more informative than AUROC when evaluating classifiers with unbalanced datasets.
The F-measure is the harmonic mean of precision and recall that represents a more reliable aggregate evaluation metric for unbalanced class distributions. F-measure has a range of 0 to 1, with higher values supporting improved classification performance. This measure is calculated as 2 × ((precision × recall)/(precision + recall)). Because of the relative strengths and weaknesses of the described measures, we report in this study Accuracy and AUROC, but focus on F-measure, precision, recall, and AUPRC as the main evaluation metrics.

Appendix 3.

## Software Used
All analyses were performed with the following publicly available software packages. Data preprocessing, model development and evaluation, and data visualization were performed with Jupyter Notebook, Anaconda software, and the Python programming language using the NumPy, Pandas, SciPy, Seaborn, Matplotlib, and Sklearn packages.
Specifically, initial data preprocessing was performed in R (R Foundation, Vienna, Austria) and preprocessed data were imported using Pandas version 1.1.4 and NumPy version 1.18.1 for normalization and imputation. All model code was in Python version 3.7.6 and models were run in Anaconda version 4.9.0 using Jupyter Notebook with XGB version 0.90 for the XGBoost classification model and Sklearn version 0.22.1 for the other machine learning models. Scipy version 1.4.1 was used to calculate measures of central tendency and confidence intervals. Figure plotting was performed using Matplotlib version 3.1.3 and Seaborn version 0.10.0.

Appendix 4.

## XGBoost Hyperparameters
Of note, hyperparameter tuning was not used in the model building process. For the XGBoost model, the standard parameters were applied as follows: XGBClassifier base_score = 0.5, booster = ‘gbtree,’ colsample_bylevel = 1, colsample_bynode = 1, colsample_bytree = 1, gamma = 0, learning_rate = 0.1, max_delta_step = 0, max_depth = 3, min_child_weight = 1, missing = None, n_estimators = 100, n_jobs = 1, nthread = None, objective = ‘binary:logistic,’ random_state = 0, reg_alpha = 0, reg_lambda = 1, scale_pos_weight = 1, seed = None, silent = None, subsample = 1, verbosity = 1.

 
Appendix 1.

## EHR Data Identification, Abstraction, and Cleaning
A collection of multi-modal clinical features was identified and abstracted through feeds from enterprise data warehouse, the MSDW, additional source systems including the EHR (Epic, Epic Systems Corporation), and from custom internal cardiology imaging databases (cardiac catheterization and echocardiography). The following process provides a detailed look at the data identification, abstraction, and cleaning process that were performed to enable an analyzable dataset that included routine granular clinical data for all patients who underwent cardiac surgery.
Where applicable, each feature was obtained with a time stamp, and features with repeated measurements over time were chronologically organized. All observations for all features were uploaded into open-source R software (R Foundation), where they were systematically cleaned and assessed for clinical relevance. If appropriate, features were transformed to more clinically relevant interpretations and subsequently recorded to enable transparency and reproducibility. Metadata for individual features were assessed to identify potential erroneous or outlier values, as well as to determine the frequency of unknown or missing values. Each feature and its associated range of values were systematically verified by a trained cardiothoracic surgeon (A.J.W.).
The description of each surgical procedural was manually abstracted and recorded from individual operative reports after harmonizing with the appropriate patient observation in the database. A new file was created that characterized the specific granular components of each operative procedure for each patient. This allowed identification of the surgical detail in a binary manner for each observation in a single location that also enabled quality checks and reproducibility. After correctly labeling and confirming all included surgical procedures, this yielded a total of 6392 open surgeries as unique patient observations for the study cohort.

## Generation of Patient Masterlist
Patients who had undergone cardiac surgery at the Mount Sinai Hospital during the period of June 1, 2011, to June 1, 2016, were identified using HCUP clinical classification software codes. By using enterprise-wide data warehouse sources, demographic information was queried for all the matching entries in the cohort. After reviewing, the data were cleaned from a semi-structured format to a structured format with more uniformity. Additionally, it was determined that multiple observations that were captured using the HCUP codes were not actual cardiac surgeries or performed by a cardiac surgeon and therefore would need to be removed. All entries with a noncardiac surgery primary surgeon were then removed, and the remaining surgeons were standardized in their identified values. All noncardiac surgery cases were also identified and removed.
We then checked for redundant observations in EPIC. For patients who had multiple surgeries (observations) during the same visit (same MRN and VISIT ID but different case name), we included only the first surgery during that visit and excluded any subsequent same hospitalization surgeries. After identifying feeds with demographic information from the MSDW, an inclusive list of demographic variables for each of the patients included in the cohort was harmonized to the master list. These variables were then cleaned, formalized, and standardized within the master list.
To determine the specific procedures that patients underwent and because CPT codes do not always accurately capture the granular level of detail needed for specific procedural identification, we undertook a manual (expert cardiothoracic surgeon) chart review of the operative notes to ascertain specific procedural details as detailed below: A file was created with the 6400 observations (only later became 6392 after this manual process eliminated 8 more patients from the cohort) along with the case name, MRN, VISIT ID, service date, and the 5 CPT columns from the master list obtained along with the demographic data with the corresponding values harmonized to each specific observation. Additional surgical procedure features were then created using clinical expertise corresponding to the different procedural components that could occur in surgery. Using the service date (date of cardiac surgery) and MRN as matching criteria, a manual data abstraction was taken for each of the 6392 patients. Each of the values for Preoperative Diagnosis, Postoperative Diagnosis and Surgeon Operative Description was copied verbatim from their respective operative note for each corresponding observation. Any discrepancies were noted in separate columns (labeled Notes 1 and Notes 2) for later reference if needed. The different procedural components were then filled out for the newly created procedure spreadsheet based on the Surgeon Operative Description. Following this, a manual entry of the corrected CPT codes (CPT1New–CPT8New) was done by A.J.W. (cardiothoracic surgeon) that corresponded with his interpretation of what CPT codes should be coded for that respective observation's procedure. A new column was created called Incorrect. This column took the codes from cpt1-5 and compared with CPT1New-CPT8New, and if the codes differed for each entry a 1 was recorded in the Incorrect column. If the codes matched between the 2 columns, then a 0 was inserted in that column for that respective observation. This allowed us to understand if the codes that were used for billing purposes were appropriately representative of the surgery that was performed.
The format of this spreadsheet facilitated transparency to the interpretation of the surgeries performed but also provided an easier and more consolidated way of looking at the data from each patient without having to go back into each patient's chart. This allowed identification of the surgical detail of each observation in this spreadsheet and permit repeated interpretation if needed. After all 6392 observations were appropriately labeled, 2 to 3 manual reviews that were separated in time were undertaken to fix incorrect entries. This process allowed for capture of errors due to the manual abstraction. After the final review, these new surgical procedure details were harmonized with the master list. Next, the format for dates and times was standardized and additional important clinical variables that involved lengths of time were created such as preoperative length of stay and hospital length of stay. Any additional redundant features were removed. Following merging with the master list, we were left with a final master list document that could be used for further harmonization.

## Processing of Administrative Features
We obtained data from the MSDW of all the International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision (ICD-9) and International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision (ICD-10) codes labeled as secondary diagnoses that were recorded for each observation matched to their VISIT-ID. These codes were captured at the time of the patient encounter for billing purposes (system data were extracted from Eagle). Each observation in this list (110,005 individual observations in the data feed) comes with an MRN, VISIT ID, and service date that match those found in the final master list. The aim was to identify all of the diagnosis codes present on admission that indicated what medical problems the patients had before being admitted. Additionally, the medical problems that developed at the hospital acquired were also cleaned and placed into a separate file. Issues that arose when reviewing these raw data:
Needed to first obtain all codes for all possible ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes and be able to make sure that the codes and descriptions matched. If they did not match or if a description did not have a code associated, it was removed.
Removed Duplicate Entries and Entries Not Applicable to a Present on Admission Code
Needed to determine if all 6392 patients had observations in this file and if any observations in this file were not for the 6392 patients in our cohort.
Needed to convert all of the ICD-10 codes to ICD-9 codes. This involved direct conversion when applicable but also some codes were identified as needing manually converted by expert opinion due to either coding for multiple different conversions or not coding for any particular ICD-9 or ICD-10 code.
Separated out the ICD-9 codes associated with the present on admission and those who were not or unable to be determined.
Created a new file where each diagnosis code was a feature. For each feature, the presence of that feature received a 1 in the corresponding observation and a 0 if the feature was not present.
Created a frequency table for all of the new features to determine the percentage of patients who had each individual feature.
The 2 Secondary Diagnosis final master list (Present on Admission and Hospital Acquired) documents were generated in the same format as the finalmasterlist document to facilitate database merging by VISIT ID. This resulted in creation of the following 4 files:
finalmasterlist_DiagnosisSecondaryPresentOnAdmission
finalmasterlist_DiagnosisSecondaryHospitalAcquired
frequencytable_DiagnosisSecondaryPresentOnAdmission
frequencytable_DiagnosisSecondaryHospitalAcquired.

## Processing of Admitting and Principal Diagnosis
We received a data feed from the MSDW of all the ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes labeled as admitting or principal diagnosis that were recorded for each observation matched to their VISIT-ID. These codes were captured at the time of the patient encounter for billing purposes (system data extracted from was Eagle). Each observation in this list (123,006 individual observations in the data feed organized as 10 features) comes with an MRN, VISIT ID, and service date that match those found in the finalmasterlist. The aim was to identify the admitting and principal diagnosis codes that indicated what medical problems the patient was being admitted to the hospital for (surrogate for chief symptom because this was unable to be reliably obtained). Additionally, the codes that were listed as Reason for Visit or labeled as H (not present at admission) were removed. Issues that arose when reviewing the raw data:
Needed to first obtain all codes for all possible ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes and be able to make sure that the codes and descriptions matched. If they did not match or if a description did not have a code associated, it was removed.
Removed duplicate entries and entries not applicable to a present on admission code for either Admitting or Principal Diagnosis as well as remove all entries that were listed as Reason for Visit.
Needed to determine if all 6392 patients had observations in this file and if any observations in this file were not for the 6392 patients in our cohort.
Needed to convert all of the ICD-10 codes to ICD-9 codes. This involved direct conversion when applicable, but also some codes were identified as needing manually converted by expert opinion due to either coding for multiple different conversions or not coding for any particular ICD-9 or ICD-10 code.
Separated out the ICD-9 codes associated with the present on admission and those who were not or unable to be determined.
For an individual observation (1-6392), it was possible to have more than 1 principal diagnosis code with the corresponding description and hospital acquired value (only P in this case). Therefore, we created a new file with the 6392 individual observations as matched by VISIT ID and the columns of features were as follows.
VISIT ID
Case name
MRN
Service date
Admitting Diagnosis ICD-9 Code
Admitting Diagnosis Description
Admitting Hospital Acquired (value = P)
Principal Diagnosis ICD-9 Code 1
Principal Diagnosis Description 1
Principal Hospital Acquired 1 (value = P)
Principal Diagnosis ICD-9 Code 2
Principal Diagnosis Description 2
Principal Hospital Acquired 2 (value = P)
Principal Diagnosis ICD-9 Code 3
Principal Diagnosis Description 3
Principal Hospital Acquired 3 (value = P)
For those observations that did not have more than 1 principal diagnosis ICD-9 code, then the values of the feature for that corresponding observation were labeled as not available (ie, missing).
Created a frequency table for all of the new features to determine the percentage of patients who had each individual feature for both admitting and principal diagnosis.
The final file generated was in the same format as the finalmasterlist document to facilitate later merging of the databases by VISIT ID. Along with the frequency distribution file, this resulted in creation of the following files:
finalmasterlist_DiagnosisAdmittingPrincipal
frequencytable_DiagnosisAdmittingPrincipal

## Processing of Intraoperative Time Features
This data feed was obtained from the intraoperative anesthesia record (CompuRecord) used at Mount Sinai and had 4 features with 279,219 observations. Each of the observations was an event that occurred in the operating room during a specific patient's procedure (Case Name). There were 94 different event types as values for the feature named Label and these were time stamped, indicating a chronological series of events that transpired in the operating room. The database had the following 4 features:
Case Name
Time stamp (exact date, hour, and minute) that corresponded with the Label feature
ItemID that corresponds with feature 4
Label (an event that occurred in the operating room)
The values for the feature Label (feature 4) were recorded by an anesthesiologist in real-time so this required vetting of input errors and lack of standardization of inputs. This was done by looking at the presence (or absence) of each value for Label as it occurred for each patient. These intraoperative events were then used to create clinically relevant features that characterized important time intervals in the surgery. A new file was created that would record the various features created from Events and the file was named “Intraoperative Times.” This database input the 6392 individual observations from masterlist. After cross-referencing to the 6392 observations from finalmasterlist, all entries that did not correspond by Case Name were eliminated from Events.
The following features were created for the database:
Intraoperative Times
MRN
VISIT ID
Case Name (matched by this identifier)
Service Date
Procedure Start Time (date/time)
Procedure Finish Time (date/time)
Time of Surgery (min)
Time of Surgery Missing (0 or 1)
Total Cardiopulmonary Bypass Time (min)
First Cardiopulmonary Bypass Time (min)
Subsequent Cardiopulmonary Bypass Time (min)
Number of Cardiopulmonary Bypass Runs (integers)
Cardiopulmonary Bypass Time Missing (0 or 1)
Total Aortic Crossclamp Time (min)
Number of Crossclamps Performed (integer)
Crossclamp Time Missing (0 or 1)
Circulatory Arrest Time (min)
Circulatory Arrest Time Missing (0 or 1)
Where applicable for an above feature, the distribution of results for a created column was checked to make sure there were no missense values present.

## Processing of Preoperative In-Hospital Medications Administered
This raw file contains information pertaining to observations for medications administered to a patient who had been admitted to the hospital before surgery. The file included 10 features with 615,504 observations with 10 features as outlined below:
MRN
VISIT ID
Service Date
Material Name—specific name of medication with concentration of medication where applicable (1890 different values for this feature)
Pharmacy Class—the overall class of drugs that the medication belonged to (267 different values for this feature)
Pharmacy Subclass—the subclass within the Pharmacy Class that the medication belonged into (422 different values for this feature)
Date Given—a time and date stamp for when the medication was administered
Units—numerical dose administered
Route—how the medication was administered (67 different values)
Action—a specific action taken for each observation of a drug (Values included ê Others, Restarted, Given)
Careful review of the range of values as well as the format of values for each of the columns was performed. Date entries without a complete time/date stamp were removed so as to only include administered medications that were confirmed to be given before the operation. Any observation that occurred after the feature from the Intraoperative Times sheet labeled “Patient In OR” was eliminated. This reduced the number of observations from 615,504 to 610,152 for 12 features (with addition of Case Name and Patient In OR Time (labeled Time)). A new file was created ê finalmasterlist_PreoperativeInHospitalMedAdministration that had the 6392 specific observations from finalmasterlist as denoted by MRN, VISIT ID, Case Name, and Service Date. Because patients who were admitted preoperatively were admitted for varying lengths of time before surgery, we looked at the frequency distribution of these times to determine a clinically relevant period where medications had been administered before surgery to include in the file (only included observations of medications administered within 1 week preoperatively).
Next, the following features were created due to their unique clinical significance:
Parenteral Nutrition Within 1 wk
Inotropic Support Within 48 h
Heparin Infusion Within 24 h
Nesiritide Infusion Within 48 h
Beta-Blocker Within 24 h
The Pharmacy Subclass was used as the feature set that the patients Preoperative In-hospital Medication Administration would be derived from. This was determined after reviewing the mostly unstructured and numerous unique features of Material Name as well as only 267 unique values for the Pharmacy Class. The Pharmacy Subclass had 422 unique features initially; however, after cleaning and imputing values from material name where Class and Subclass had none these results changed. A file consisting of a frequency table was created for each of the Pharmacy Subclass Values with the overall frequency at the top and the rows with the individual Material Names and their frequencies within each Pharmacy Subclass. The individual Pharmacy Subclass features and their corresponding values for each patient (0 = medication not administered and 1 = medication administered) and filled in the respective observations in the final file for Preoperative Administration of In-hospital Medications.
This file included for the 6392 observations:
4 features—MRN, VISIT ID, Case Name, Service Date
5 clinically relevant features—Parenteral Nutrition within 1 wk, inotropes within 48 h, heparin infusion within 24 hours, nesiritide within 48 h and beta-blockers within 24 h
414 features of individual pharmacy subclasses of medications that may or may not have been administered to a patient

## Processing of Medications Present on Preoperative Admission
This file contained information pertaining to observations of specific outpatient medications used by patients before being admitted to the hospital. The raw file had 8 features and 69,145 observations. The original raw data file had the following features:
MRN
VISIT ID
Service Date
Description—specific name of medication with dosage where it was entered (2682 different values)
Generic Name—the generic name associated to the drug in the feature Description (1004 different values)
Pharmacy Subclass—the subclass within the Pharmacy Class that the medication belonged into (562 different values)
Pharmacy Class—overall class of drugs that the medication belonged (357 different values) for this feature
Therapeutic Class—a less-specific drug classification system (51 different values)
Specific issues to this file included:
How to deal with combination drugs (eg, amlodipine/benazepril)
Drugs used for different purposes but had the same Class or Subclass (eg, Sildenafil listed as Viagra and classified as an Erectile Dysfunction Drug and Pulmonary Hypertension Drug)
A manual review of these medications was undertaken with an expert informed classification system developed (available by request). The designations were informed whenever possible by the previously described pharmacy Class or Subclass. Additionally, many patients were on multiple medications from the same subclass or class. If a generic value did not exist, the description then was checked, and it was appropriately assigned a generic value that was in line with what other observations with similar descriptions that did have a generic value assigned.
A file was created with the name ê Finalmasterlist_PTAMeds. The first 4 features were as with all the above-mentioned databases:
MRN
VISIT ID
Case Name
Service Date
Then. 3 features were created for each specific category
ptaXXX—whether or not the patient was taking this medication (values 0 or 1)
ptaXXXValue—the specific generic value for that observation from the original file after cleaning
if more than 1, then both were listed separated by a comma
ptaXXXDescription—the specific description value for that observation from the original file after cleaning
if more than 1, then both were listed separated by a comma.
Only the first of the 3 features for each category of medications was included in the analysis, but this formatting enabled to both review and check for accuracy and provide transparency with retainment of detailed. The file created was ê finalmasterlist_PTAMeds and included
4 features—MRN, VISIT ID, Case Name, Service Date
348 features that characterize 116 classes of medications with only 116 features (the column with 0 or 1) included in the final analysis

## Processing of Family History Features
This file contained the family history information for the observations included in the overall patient cohort and consisted of 7 features and 17,164 observations including the following:
MRN
VISIT ID
Service Date
Relative With Problem—specific value for which relative had the family history (32 different values including Missing Values, Family History Negative For, and NonContributory)
Problem Description—specific value for the medical problem that the family history was positive for (165 different values)
Some of these “unique” features were really the same as others but labeled slightly different.
Comments—a feature that provided free form text describing either the problem description or provided the problem description (1166 different values)
There was considerable messy data in this file, and the following steps were taken to generate a standardized feature set for family history for the data provided.
Deleted any entry with Family History Negative For or Noncontributory.
The value “no known problems” was kept as being negative for family history.
For those with Other as the Problem Description, if there was a value in comments, then this value was put in the Problem Description for that specific entry.
The exact family member with the medical problem was unable to be reliably captured; therefore, this was eliminated and instead just noted if there was presence or absence for a specific observation.
The remaining values were categorized and detailed steps of this classification of the various Family History features can be provided upon request.
A file was created ê Finalmasterlist_FamilyHistory with the following features:
MRN
VISIT ID
Case Name
Service Date
Family History Reported—whether or not a patient had any value recorded for their family history and if they did not then the value was 0 and if they did it was 1.
If the family history was not reported, then the rest of the features listed below were determined to be missing.
Only if family history was known to be negative was a value of 0 given.
Two additional features were created for each specific family history category:
famhxXXX—whether or not the patient had a positive family history for this category (values 0 or 1)
famhxXXX_descript—what the specific value for that category was from the original file
if patients had more than 1 in the same category then both were listed separated by a semicolon.
The file created ê finalmasterlist_FamilyHistory that included
4 features—MRN, VISIT ID, Case Name, Service Date
1 feature—famhxreported (0 or 1)
30 features of which 15 were binary for a specific class of Descriptions in Family History and 15 were the detailed descriptions for what those were (only the 15 binary features (the column with 0 or 1) were included in the final analysis)

## Processing of Preoperative Vital Signs
This file contained information pertaining to vital sign values that were for patients before the operating room. The file had 7 features and 1,366,940 observations including:
MRN
VISIT ID
Service Date
Vital Sign—specific value for the type of vital sign recorded (38 different values)
Measured Date Time—an exact date and time for when the Vital sign was recorded
Format provides a date, an hour and minutes
Measured Value—the measured vital sign value
Unit of Measure—units of measure for the value of the vital sign (9 different values)
Dates and times were standardized to the format used in other files. The date/time allowed identification of the most recent vital sign proximal to surgery and entries without a full time/date stamp were removed. Additionally, any entry that occurred after the feature from the Intraoperative Times sheet labeled “Patient In OR” was eliminated. We also used this Intraoperative feature to localize the most recent set of vitals for a patient before entering the operating room. The file ê Finalmasterlist_PreoperativeVitalSigns was created and included
MRN
VISIT ID
Case Name
Service Date
Surgery Time
Respirations (Breaths Per Minute)
Respirations (Measured Date Time)
Pulse (Beats Per Minute)
Pulse (Measured Date Time)
Temperature (degrees Fahrenheit)
Temperature (Measured Date Time)
Diastolic Blood Pressure (mm Hg)
Diastolic Blood Pressure (Measured Date Time)
Systolic Blood Pressure (mm Hg)
Systolic Blood Pressure (Measured Date Time)
Pain Scale (Pain Score)
Pain Scale (Measured Date Time)
O2 Saturation (Percent)
O2 Saturation (Measured Date Time)
Mean Arterial Pressure (mm Hg)—calculated from systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure
Pulse Pressure (mm Hg)—calculated from systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure
The final file included
4 features—MRN, VISIT ID, Case Name, Service Date
Surgery Time (later eliminated due to redundancy)
7 Vital Signs Features (respirations, pulse, temperature, diastolic blood pressure, systolic blood pressure, pain scale, O2 saturation)
7 features that had the measured date and time for their respective vital sign
2 features that were created (mean arterial pressure and pulse pressure)

## Processing of Preoperative Surgical History
This file contains information pertaining to a patient's specific surgical history. The file had 8 features and 23,297 observations including:
MRN
VISIT ID
Service Date
Surgical Procedure—where the individual observation came from (Surgical History of Surgical Procedure)
Surgery Date—if a date or date/time provided for when the surgical procedure took place
Context Procedure Code—proved to be an unusable column that was an internal procedure code that MSDW used without an association dictionary
Procedure Description—specific value of a surgery that had been performed before this hospitalization (1852 different values)
Context Name—which EHR the observation had been obtained from (10 different values)
Values: EPIC, HSM, Rad Mod Site 3, Carefusion Lab, Tamtron EAP, IP Outpatient Charges, Cardiology Charges, Surgery Charges, Dialysis Charges, Labor, and Delivery Charges
Upon review, the file needed structured features created and this entailed manually classifying the 1852 unique Procedure descriptions into defined categories. The list of unique Procedure Descriptions was listed into a file and categories of surgical procedures were created so that the 1852 unique entries would be classified under 1 of these categories (available upon request). Any entry associated with procedures that did not make sense or did not correspond to 1 of the 6392 patients in finalmasterlist then it was removed. This reduced the number of observations in Preoperative Surgical History from 23,297 to 14,634.The file Finalmasterlist_SurgicalHistory was created. The first 4 features were in line with all the previous files and the rest of the features were a binary feature (did this patient have this type of surgery, 0 or 1) and if they did have that type of surgery the second feature was its value (eg, Dental Surgery: 1, Dental Surgery value: history of dental surgery). Only 4839 patients of 6392 patients had information regarding their surgical history and therefore the patients who did not have anything listed for needed to be accounted for. An additional feature was created called Surgical History Present and if there was no surgical history then there was a 0 and the rest of the values within the file corresponding to that observation were labeled as missing data. If there was information regarding surgical history then it was labeled as a 1.
The final file ê finalmasterlist_SurgicalHistory and included
4 features—MRN, VISIT ID, Case Name, Service Date
Surgery History Present (0 or 1)
49 features of Categories of surgical procedures (binary 0 or 1)
49 features that have the detailed value that went into the designated categories

## Processing of Echocardiogram
These files contained the data from the echocardiograms performed at Mount Sinai and their corresponding reports generated from the Mount Sinai Cardiology Echocardiography Database. These files were related by their Unit Number (MRN), Report Number (unique identifying report number for each echocardiogram), and Test Date (date of echocardiogram exam) to match the various entries from each file to provide a full report for an individual exam. These files provided all of the entries for all patients who had echocardiograms at Mount Sinai both preoperatively and postoperatively. Each file was systematically evaluated, and all the features were listed out and manually reviewed and cleaned (full list of files with subsequent echo values provided available on request).
The report numbers were first matched between the various echo files. A master echo file was then created for all the features for all the observations. Because some features were the same name but had a different meaning, we renamed the individual features with the sheet name they came from in front followed by an underscore followed by the feature name (eg, TricuspidValve_Etiology). Duplicated features and features with 100% missing values were removed. Features with dates were standardized in the format %d-%m-%Y. Entries whose MRN did not match an MRN from the finalmasterlist (6392 patients) were removed. This resulted in 620 features with 14,428 observations.

## For stress echocardiogram
We then created a file (finalmasterlist_EchoStress) that had the most recent STRESS ECHOCARDIOGRAM (Stress Echo) before undergoing surgery. This provided us with 1 observation that was categorized as a Stress Echo and was the most proximal to the date of surgery (to give as much of a recent characterization of the information provided by a Stress Echo before surgery). This provided the most proximal observation of a stress echocardiogram performed preoperatively to the date of surgery for any patient with a stress echocardiogram. If a patient did not have a stress echocardiogram before surgery then missing value was input in its place. This resulted in 623 features with 6392 observations (corresponding to the same format as the 6392 observations in finalmasterlist). A total of 315 of the 6392 patients (4.9%) had a preoperative stress echocardiogram.

## For transthoracic echocardiogram
We then created a file (finalmasterlist_EchoColor) that had the most recent TRANSTHORACIC ECHOCARDIOGRAM before undergoing surgery. This provided us with 1 observation that was categorized as a Transthoracic Echo and was the most proximal to the date of surgery (to give as much of a recent characterization of the information provided by a Transthoracic Echo before surgery). This provided the most proximal observation of a transthoracic echocardiogram performed preoperatively to the date of surgery for any patient with echocardiogram. If a patient did not have a transthoracic echocardiogram before surgery then missing value was input in its place. The file has 623 features with 6392 observations (corresponding to the same format as the 6392 observations in finalmasterlist). A total of 2698 of the 6392 patients (42.2%) had a preoperative transthoracic echocardiogram.

## For transesophageal echocardiogram
We then created a file (finalmasterlist_EchoTrans) that had the most recent TRANSESOPHAGEAL ECHOCARDIOGRAM before undergoing surgery. This provided us with 1 observation that was categorized as a Transesophageal Echo and was the most proximal to the date of surgery (to give as much of a recent characterization of the information provided by a Transesophageal Echo before surgery). This provided the most proximal observation of a transesophageal echocardiogram performed preoperatively to the date of surgery for any patient with echocardiogram. If a patient did not have a transesophageal echocardiogram before surgery, then missing value was input in its place. The file had 623 features with 6392 observations (corresponding to the same format as the 6392 observations in finalmasterlist). A total of 666 of the 6392 patients (10.4%) had a preoperative transesophageal echocardiogram.

## For last echocardiogram before discharge
We then created a file (finalmasterlist_EchoPriorDischarge) that had the last echocardiogram before the date of discharge of the hospitalization the patient underwent surgery (had to fall in time interval between OR time and date of discharge). This provided us with 1 observation that was categorized as the last echocardiogram (regardless of type—Stress, transthoracic, transesophageal) that the patient had performed before being discharged. If a patient had multiple echocardiograms in the postoperative period, only the 1 performed closed to the date of discharge was included (this provided as much of a recent characterization of the echocardiogram information before discharge). This provided the most proximal observation of an echocardiogram performed before discharge in a patient who underwent cardiac surgery. If a patient did not have an echocardiogram in the time interval between the service date and the date of discharge, then missing value was input in its place. The file had 623 features with 6392 observations (corresponding to the same format as the 6392 observations in finalmasterlist). A total of 4795 of the 6392 (75.0%) patients had an echocardiogram between the service date and before discharge.

## For most recent echocardiogram available in system
We then created a file (finalmasterlist_EchoRecentPostOp) that had the results for the most recent echocardiogram available at the time of the data acquire from the Cardiology department. This took the most recent echocardiogram that was performed after surgery until the date of data acquire (the date of the exam could occur after the date of discharge). This provided us with 1 observation that was categorized as the most recent echocardiogram (regardless of type—Stress, transthoracic, transesophageal) that the patient had performed after having surgery even if it was after discharge. This provided the most recent observation of an echocardiogram performed after a patient had surgery until the data acquire (ie, the postoperative echo farthest out from surgery). If a patient did not have an echocardiogram performed at all after surgery, then a missing value was inserted for features in that observation. The file had 623 features with 6392 observations (corresponding to the same format as the 6392 observations in finalmasterlist). 4936 of the 6392 (77.2%) patients had an echocardiogram between the service date and the data acquire (January 31, 2017).

## For overall preoperative echo
We then created a file (finalmasterlist_EchoDataTotalPreop) that had the most recent preoperative echocardiogram before undergoing surgery regardless of what type of echo it was (Stress, Transesophageal, Transthoracic). This provided us with 1 observation for the most proximal echocardiogram regardless of type before having surgery (a combination of Stress, Transesophageal, Transthoracic but only taking the 1 observation out of all 3 that was closest to the day of service). This provided the most proximal observation (regardless of type of echocardiogram) performed preoperatively to the date of surgery for any patient with an echocardiogram. If a patient did not have an echocardiogram before surgery, then missing value was input in its place. The file had 623 features with 6392 observations (corresponding to the same format as the 6392 observations in finalmasterlist). A total of 2982 of the 6392 (46.7%) patients had a preoperative echocardiogram of any type.
The final list of features available in each of these files is available upon request.

## Processing of Preoperative Cardiac Catheterization
This file contains information pertaining to a patient's preoperative cardiac catheterization if 1 was available. The file had 355 features and 7460 observations. The unstructured features are available upon request. Careful review of the range of values as well as the format of values for each of the columns was undertaken to first understand the data. All dates and times were standardized to the format used in other files. The date stamp allowed us to determine when the catheterization took place in relation to the surgery date. Further review resulted in deletion of redundant features or personal identifying information or features with no data.
Cross-referencing to finalmasterlist determined that 3650 patients had a catheterization out of the 6392 total patients. There were 3854 caths that were matching to observations from finalmasterlist. However, some patients had multiple catheterizations that were farther back in time. Therefore, we wanted to take the catheterization observation most proximal to the date of service. Only the most recent catheterization observation was then isolated and put in a file called mostrecentcath and included the following:
MRN
VISIT ID
Case Name
Service Date
TESTDATE
REPORT NUMBER
And 344 features related to cardiac catheterization

## Processing of Intraoperative Fluid Outputs
This file was obtained from intraoperative anesthesia records (CompuRecord) and had 6 features with 20,368 observations. Each of the observations is a value for an output that was recorded in the operating room during a specific patient's procedure (Case Name). There are 6 different categories that are possible values for the feature of Label, and these are time stamped. The file had 6 features:
Case Name
Time stamp (exact date hour and minute) that corresponds with feature 4
ItemID that corresponds with feature 4
Label
Urine; E.B.L.; CSF; Ascites; Pump-Remains; N/G
Value—an amount associated with the specific label feature
Units—units of measurement of the output
The values for the feature Label (feature 4) were recorded by an anesthesiologist in real-time so this required vetting of input errors and lack of standardization of inputs. This was done by looking at the presence (or absence) of each label as it occurred for each patient. These intraoperative outputs were used to create specific features that characterized important overall outputs in the surgery.
A new file was created that would contain the features created from Outputs and was called Intraoperative Outputs. The following features were created for the file finalmasterlist_IntraoperativeOutputs.
VISIT ID
MRN
Case Name
Service Date
CSF Total Output—cerebral spinal fluid total output recorded for a case
Numeric range
Urine Total Output—urine total output recorded for a case
Numeric range

## Processing of Intraoperative Blood Product Use
This file was obtained from the intraoperative anesthesia records (CompuRecord) and had 6 features with 18,718 observations. Each of the observations was a value for a blood/blood product transfusion that was recorded in the operating room during a specific patient's procedure (Case Name). There are 13 different categories that are possible values for the feature of Label, and these are time stamped. The file had 6 features:
Case Name
Time stamp (exact date hour and minute) that corresponds with feature 4
ItemID that corresponds with feature 4
Label
RBCs; Cell Saver; Cryoprecipitate; Platelets; FFP; RBCs-Autol; Platelets-SD; RBCs-Washed; Whole Blood; Whole Blood-DD; RBCs-DD; PRBC; Whole Blood-bld bank.
Value—an amount associated with the specific label feature
Units—units of measurement of the output
The values for the feature Label (feature 4) were recorded by an anesthesiologist in real-time so this required vetting of input errors and lack of standardization of inputs. This was done by looking at the presence (or absence) of each label as it occurred for each patient. These intraoperative blood and blood products were used to create specific features that characterize important usage in the surgery. A new file was created that would contain the various features created from Intraoperative Blood Products and was called finalmasterlist_IntraoperativeBloodProducts. Blood and blood product transfusions that occurred after Procedure Finish Time were eliminated. Any entries with values less than 25 mL was removed because these were likely to be a recording error. The final file created included the following:
VISIT ID
MRN
Case Name
Service Date
Cell Saver—did a patient have cell saver transfusion given to them (value 0, 1)
Cell Saver Total mL (numeric range)
Cryoprecipitate—did a patient have cryoprecipitate transfusion given to them (value 0, 1)
Cryoprecipitate Units (numeric range)
Cryoprecipitate Total mL (numeric range)
FFP—did a patient have FFP transfusion given to them (value 0, 1)
FFP Units (numeric range)
FFP Total mL (numeric range)
Platelets—did a patient have platelets transfusion given to them (value 0, 1)
Platelets Units (numeric range)
Platelets Total mL (numeric range)
Autologous RBCs—did a patient have autologous RBCs transfusion given to them (value 0, 1)
Autologous RBCs Units (numeric range)
Autologous RBCs Total mL (numeric range)
RBCs—did a patient have RBCs transfusion given to them (value 0, 1)
RBCs Units (numeric range)
RBCs Total mL (numeric range)
Whole Blood—did a patient have whole blood transfusion given to them (value 0, 1)
Whole Blood Units (numeric range)
Whole Blood total mL (numeric range)
Intraoperative transfusion—did a patient receive platelets, FFP, cryoprecipitate, or RBCs (value 0, 1)

## Processing of Preoperative Laboratory Values
This file contained information pertaining to observations of laboratory features that were routinely check preoperatively in patients who would be having open surgery. The file had 11 features and 2,789,525 observations and included the following:
MRN
VISIT ID
Service Date
Order Code—the internal code used by Mount Sinai to identify different orders (678 different values)
Result Date Time—an exact date and time for when the laboratory result was drawn
Format provides a date, an hour, and minutes
Result Status—the current status of the value of the result (6 different values)
Final Result; Preliminary Result; Result Canceled; Correct Result; Result Not Available; Other Result
Result Code—the internal code used by Mount Sinai to identify different specific results (1222 different values)
If an order code was for a panel then the result code only corresponded to the specific feature in that panel.
This also provided the singular laboratory tests that were important to abstract and create features from.
Abnormal Flag—if the laboratory value assessed was abnormal compared with the normal reference range used (7 unique values)
NA; Below low normal; Above high normal; Abnormal (applies to non-numeric results); Above upper panic limits; Below lower panic limits; Critical or Absurd (alphanumeric only)
Reference range—reference range internally used to determine if a specific laboratory value was normal versus abnormal.
Qualitative and Quantitative values for this feature as it depended on the specific laboratory value feature it related to.
Value—the value for the specific laboratory test that was performed specific to an individual patient.
Qualitative and Quantitative values for this feature as it depended on the specific laboratory value feature it related to.
Unit of Measure—the reference unit of measure used for a specific laboratory test.
Qualitative and Quantitative values for this feature as it depended on the specific laboratory value feature it related to.
Each of these features was explored to determine if any data were corrupt or did not make sense. Any erroneous entries or entries that were not completed or deemed to not have an appropriate value for that corresponding feature were removed. To keep proximity to the date of surgery, we eliminated all observations that were more than 1 week before the Procedural Start Time and only included the laboratory values in that interval (<1 week before the surgery start). This resulted in 1175 unique Result Codes (#7 above). Because there were many unique features, we had to determine what all of the unique laboratory test features were that could be created and if some laboratory tests were the same but labeled in a different way. Laboratory tests that were the same but labeled slightly different were identified and their labels were unified under 1 harmonized feature label.
We then created a file that provided the Order Code, Result Code, No Observations with that Lab test result (of 6392), Units, and Reference Range. All of the unique Result codes with their corresponding information for the columns of Order Code, Number of Observations, Units, and Reference Ranges were included. If more than 1 unit or Reference Range corresponded to that specific Result Code then they were listed in their feature column along with a semi colon between them. A full list of the unique Result Codes was created with their frequency of appearance (of 6392). This query returned 1081 individual laboratory test features of which many had only rare values. Therefore, we decided to eliminate all laboratory tests that had a nonmissing value filled in for an observation less than 1% of all observations (frequency of values needed to be ≥64). The rest of the entries corresponding to the infrequent observations were removed from the dataset. This brought the number of features down from 1081 to 174. We then identified the most proximal observation for a specific laboratory result code to the date of surgery. This was performed for all of the unique Result Codes so that each patient would not have more than 1 entry of the same laboratory test.
The features were then grouped by clinically relevant groups (eg, all ABG lab values in the same group of features, all CBC lab values in the same group of features). The groups were as follows:
General labs
Coagulation profile labs
ABG labs
CBC labs
VBG labs
Urinlytes labs
Urinalysis labs
Urine microscopy labs
Urine dipstick labs
A file was created named finalmasterlist_PreoperativeLabs and included
MRN
VISIT ID
Case Name
Service Date
And then the following 3 feature format was made to represent each of the laboratory features that were cleaned (feature X, Y, Z…):
Laboratory Feature X
Resulted in 174 unique features that each needed to be individually vetted and cleaned to make sure the results were standardized
Laboratory Feature X Date and Time
The time and date that the laboratory feature X resulted
Laboratory Feature X AB
This reflected whether or not the measured value for Feature X was considered to be abnormal when compared to the reference range used at the time the laboratory value resulted.
One additional feature was created from 2 previous features stratified by race. Because GFR was reported for both Non-African Americans and African Americans as 2 separate features, we created a new column Final GFR that took the appropriate value from the Non-African American GFR feature or the African American GFR feature depending on race denoted from finalmasterlist. This would then have a column with only the GFR applicable to that patient as noted by their race.
Full list of generated laboratory value features is available upon request.

## Processing of Preoperative Cardiac Catheterization Anatomy
This file contained information pertaining to a patient's preoperative cardiac catheterization specifically in relation to the coronary vessel anatomy. The file had 10 features and 45,899 observations including the following:
Report Number
Vessel—specifically what vessel each observation was referring to
Obstruction—defined the stenosis present
Morphology—descriptive term
Morphology 1—descriptive term
Morphology 2—descriptive term
Distal Vessel 1—described the vessel after the stenosis
Distal Vessel 2—described the vessel after the stenosis
Distal Vessel 3—described the vessel after the stenosis
Careful review of the range of values as well as the format of values for each of the features was undertaken to first understand the data. The Report Number allowed us to correlate it to the administrative data such as date of catheterization as previously described in Most Recent Cath. Further cleaning resulted in deletion of redundant features or personal identifying information or features with no data at all. Cross-referencing to finalmasterlist it was determined that 3650 patients had a catheterization of the 6392 patients. There were 3854 catheterizations that were matching to observations from finalmasterlist. However, some patients had multiple catheterization that were farther back in time. Therefore we wanted to take the catheterization observation most proximal to the date of service. Only the observations with Report Numbers corresponding to those present in finalmasterlist_MostRecentCath were used.
The file finalmasterlist_CatheterizationAnatomy was created.
The number of unique Vessels were 6 (RCA; Left Main; LAD; LCx; NA; Ramus Intermedius). The number of unique Segments were 28 (Proximal; NA; OM1; Distal; Mid; High Lateral; D1; OM2; RPDA; RPL1; D2; AV Continuation; Ostial; D1 Ostial; OM1 Ostial; LPL2; LPDA; LPL1; Acute Marginal; D3; D2 Ostial; RPDA Ostial; RPL2; OM3; 1st Septal; LPDA Ostial; Separate Ostia; LAV).
We created a vector of column names that corresponded to the unique combinations present between the feature of Vessels and the feature of Segments. Also collapsed the 3 Morphology features down into 1 feature with the values separated by semi-colons. The same was done for the 3 separate Distal Vessel features. Then a new feature (feature 1) was created that was the combination of the unique values of Vessels and Segments, and a second feature (feature 2) was created that provided the Morphology related to the first feature, and a third feature (feature 3) was created that provided the Distal Vessel values related to the first feature. The value in the feature Obstruction was inserted into the value for feature 1 that corresponded to its specific observation.
Therefore, to provide an example: a patient with report number XXXXX with an observation with the following information.
Vessel—LAD
Segment—D1
Obstruction—No Obstruction
Morphology—Bifurcation
Morphology 1—Aneurysmal
Morphology 2—(blank)
Distal Vessel 1—Moderate size, moderate disease
Distal Vessel 2-branching vessel
Distal Vessel 3-(blank)
This would read as:
Feature 1—LAD-D1 with a value of (No obstruction)
Feature 2—LAD-D1-Morphology with a value of (Bifurcation; Aneurysmal)
Feature 3—LAD-D1-Distal Vessel with a value of (Moderate size, moderate disease; branching vessel)
This was then done for all of the unique combinations of Vessels and Segments and resulted in 411 features for 6392 observations that matched finalmasterlist. The file included
VISIT ID
MRN
Case Name
Service Date
Test Date
Report Number
Then 135 unique combinations of Vessel and Feature laid out in the format above.
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 3

## Generation of Preoperative Medical History
A unique file was created that had a hand curated number of features that corresponded to clinically impactful as well as previously used features from the STS Risk models. This resulted in the file finalmasterlist_PreoperativeMedicalHistory being created, and it included 34 features for 6392 observations. The 34 features were as follows:
MRN
VISIT ID
Case Name
Service Date
Diabetes
Diabetes Control
Hypertension
Peripheral Arterial Disease
Preoperative Mechanical Ventilation
Immunocompromise
Dialysis
Cerebrovascular Disease
Cerebrovascular Accident
Inotropes Within 48 h.
IABP
Liver Disease
Liver Disease Type
Pulmonary hypertension
Atrial fibrillation
Number Diseased coronary arteries
NYHA Class
Left Main Stenosis
Ejection fraction
Aortic insufficiency
Aortic stenosis
Mitral insufficiency
Mitral stenosis
Tricuspid insufficiency
Status at admission
Cardiogenic shock
Radiation
Tobacco history
Endocarditis
Meld Score
A thorough explanation can be provided upon request as to how these features and their corresponding values was generated. Additional source code can be found in the PreopMedicalHistory.R file used to create this database for any further clarification.

## References