pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11098484PMC11098484.111098484110984843875383510.1371/journal.pone.0303854PONE-D-23-308671Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesInfectious Disease ControlVaccinesMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19Biology and Life SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesSocial SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAsiaKazakhstanPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsEuropeKazakhstanBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyPandemicsResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchQuestionnairesAttitude toward vaccination against COVID-19 and acceptance of the national “QazVac” vaccine in the Aktobe city population, West Kazakhstan: A cross-sectional survey
QazVac vaccine attitude in Aktobe, West Kazakhstanhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4773-0807UrazayevaSaltanat T.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing KurmangaliyevaSaulesh S.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisition KaliyevAsset A.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisition TussupkaliyevaKymbat Sh.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisition https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0486-0054IssimovArmanSoftwareWriting – review & editing UrazayevaAisha B.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisition TashimovaZhuldyz K.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisition MussinNadiar M.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisition BegalinToleukhanConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisition AmanshiyevaAimeken A.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisition NurmaganbetovaGulaiym Zh.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisition NurmukhamedovaShara M.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisition https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4080-5383BalmagambetovaSauleConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisition 1
Department of Epidemiology, West Kazakhstan Marat Ospanov Medical University, Aktobe, Kazakhstan2
Department of Microbiology, Virology and Immunology, West Kazakhstan Marat Ospanov Medical University, Aktobe, Kazakhstan3
Department of General Surgery, West Kazakhstan Marat Ospanov Medical University, Aktobe, Kazakhstan4
Department of Biology, K.Zhubanov Aktobe Regional University, Aktobe, Kazakhstan5
Department of Oncology, West Kazakhstan Marat Ospanov Medical University, Aktobe, KazakhstanAlfanoVincenzoEditor files.OutbreaksCOVID-19

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript and its files.

## Introduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) first declared that SARS-CoV-2 infection had become a pandemic on March 11, 2020, when 118,319 infections and 4,292 deaths were reported in 113 countries [ ]. The pandemic constituted a severe test for societal life worldwide and significantly affected public health. During this period, non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) have been one of the key weapons against the SARS-CoV-2 virus, affecting virtually any societal process. It has been proven that school closing, followed by workplace closing, business and venue closing, and public event bans were the most effective NPIs in controlling the spread of COVID-19 [ , ]. Government effectiveness and the rule of law increased the efficiency of NPIs, while regulatory quality was the most crucial dimension of their efficacy [ ].
Vaccination policy was another critical tool for national governments to reduce the spread of the virus, and the World Health Organization (WHO) strongly supported the use of the approved COVID-19 vaccines even though no vaccine had been 100% protective [ ]. In 2019, the WHO announced vaccine hesitancy as one of the ten threats to global health. Experts have identified several common reasons for vaccine hesitancy, including the belief that a person is not at risk for the disease, limited access to vaccines, and lack of trust in their safety and efficacy [ ]. A study by Global Market Research and Public Opinion Specialist (IPSOS), which surveyed 18,526 respondents from 15 countries worldwide, found that 73% of respondents were willing to be vaccinated against COVID-19 [ ]. According to data from the London-based YouGov Data Center, by 2021, the UK had the highest proportion of respondents willing to receive the COVID-19 vaccine, at 71.3%, while France had the lowest, at 29.8% [ ].
Around the same period, the Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation (CAREC) studied attitudes towards COVID-19 vaccination in seven countries, including Kazakhstan. While most respondents expressed positive opinions about the effectiveness of vaccinations, the lowest proportion (29.2%) was found among respondents from Kazakhstan [ ]. Generally, cross-country differences concerning vaccination willingness can be explained by the fact that decisions about vaccination are based on more than mere knowledge of risks, costs, and benefits. Individual decision-making about vaccinating involves many other factors, including emotion, culture, religion, and socio-political context [ ]. In the meantime, Kazakhstan was one of the countries where the inactivated vaccine QazCovid-in (QazVac) had been developed. During a 6-month follow-up period, the QazVac vaccine showed 82% protective efficacy (95% CI 71.1;88.5) in volunteers [ , ].
Cases of the disease in Kazakhstan have been registered since March 2020; in the Aktobe region, the first imported case from abroad was noted on 22.03.2020. Since the beginning of the pandemic, 1,408,124 confirmed cases of COVID-19 infection have been registered in Kazakhstan, 13,846 fatal cases, and 11,258 patients have been receiving treatment (as of March 14, 2023). There is no proof of fabrication for Central Asian republics reported COVID-19 cases [ ]. Kazakhstan, like other countries, also introduced non-pharmaceutical interventions. Researchers who explored the strategies applied in the Central Asian region to contain COVID-19 concluded that, except for Turkmenistan, the rest of the region states adopted a very similar approach and that deaths, more than cases, pushed governments to impose restrictions [ ].
Vaccination started in February 2021, and mandatory vaccination was required for health providers, teachers of secondary schools, and police officers; then, as access to vaccines expanded, it became compulsory for students and employees of higher and secondary educational institutions. Several types of vaccines were available to the public: Kazakhstan’s QazVac, Russian Sputnik V and Sputnik Lite, Chinese Hayat-Vax (Sinopharm) and CoronaVac, and later Pfizer’s Comirnaty vaccine (USA) for vaccination of adolescents, pregnant women and patients of maternity wards [ ]. It is commonly accepted that several types of vaccines allow for more rapid collective immunity. Vaccination against COVID-19 was free for all population categories; a second vaccination was recommended 9–12 months after the first round.
Overall, the emergency scale, ease of survey, and crowdsourcing deployment guaranteed by the latest technology have allowed unprecedented access to data describing behavioral changes induced by the pandemic [ ]. During the pandemic and after its official termination announced in 2022, much research has been published on various aspects of COVID-19. At the same time, few studies in Kazakhstan and none across the country’s western region have examined behavioral patterns during the pandemic, attitudes toward vaccination, and the reasons for the population’s approval or refusal of vaccination. Our research aims to fill this gap.
Thus, the study aimed to present the survey results to identify attitudes toward vaccination against COVID-19 among the population living in Aktobe, a sizeable western city. We also explored the confidence level in the national QazVac vaccine and the role of different sources of information on COVID-19 in individual decision-making about vaccination.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
This study posed no risk to the participating individuals. Survey participation did not imply restrictions on receiving any clinical care determined by specialists. The study was conducted according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki (2013), and patient rights were observed. The purpose and methods of the current study were explained to all participants in the preamble to the questionnaire and in the informed consent form, which was obtained separately from each respondent through WhatsApp messenger. All respondents who filled out the questionnaire checked the consent box. Participation in the survey was voluntary and confidential, and these provisions were stated in the informed consent form and the preamble to the questionnaire. The respondents were informed that their data would be placed anonymously in the research database without mentioning personal details, i.e., using coded numbers, and their confidential information would not be disclosed when publishing the results of this survey. All participants gave their consent to publishing the results of the study. The research protocol was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the West Kazakhstan Marat Ospanov Medical University (No. 7–07, ref. 7, dated 28.09.2022.)

## Study design and participants
A cross-sectional survey was conducted from October 28 to November 30, 2022, among residents of Aktobe, the largest city in West Kazakhstan (549,381 population as of 2022). The survey was computer-assisted through the Google platform. Adult persons who decided to participate in the study were enrolled using the convenience sampling technique. The assigned researchers distributed the questionnaire among Aktobe residents through the following personal WhatsApp groups (chats): "Friends," "Relatives," "Colleagues," "Students," and "Acquainted persons." The informed consent form was sent separately in each chat and obtained from subjects together with the filled questionnaires. The inclusion criteria involved Aktobe residents aged 18–75 without mental disorders from different social groups. As designated researchers from the project staff distributed the questionnaire among their surroundings, individuals with mental disorders had no opportunity to participate. Other exclusion criteria were persons under 18 or older than 75 and those living out of Aktobe. No limitations were implied by gender, ethnicity, social and employment status, education level, presence of chronic somatic diseases, or vaccination status. The authors did not use incentives or advertising to recruit participants. WhatsApp Messenger has been chosen because it is the most frequently used network by the population in Kazakhstan.

## Data collection
We designed and used a data collection questionnaire with various closed-ended questions, implying dichotomous or multiple-choice responses and including those in a Likert scale. After 15 participants were fully informed about the study and signed the informed consent form, the pilot launching was conducted; these participants were then excluded from the study. Five questionnaire iterations were developed and tested, involving 15 participants each time, until the acceptable validation level, Cronbach alpha 0.7, was reached. The questionnaire was prepared so the participants could easily and independently complete it. The design of the questionnaire provided the respondents with anonymity and confidentiality protection. No identifying (personal) information was requested or recorded, even the exact birth date, only age groups. The experts on the questionnaire content were epidemiologists involved in arranging and promoting vaccination of the population against COVID-19 and university scientists with experience in questionnaire development methodology. The questionnaire was developed in two languages, Russian and Kazakh, for the convenience of the respondents’ choice of language.
The questionnaire consisted of three domains (see ):
The demographic domain included six questions about age, gender, education, type of activity, monthly income per capita, and somatic chronic diseases (presence/absence.) The “Education” item implied four levels: incomplete secondary, secondary (school), secondary professional (presence of a specialty that does not require a university diploma—electrician, plumber, highly qualified worker, etc.), and higher education (university diploma.) The “Type of activity” item included four categories: nonworking (unemployed, housewives), student, employed, and retired. The “Income” item included three extents of monthly income per capita: high (500 thousand tenges (national currency) and above, which is approximately equal to 1,000 US dollars); middle (from 100 to 500 thousand tenges, i.e., in the range of 200–1,000 US dollars), and low income (100 thousand tenges and below, i.e., 200 US dollars per month or less.) The item “Presence/absence of somatic chronic diseases” included five response options—the absence of disease, arterial hypertension (AG), coronary heart disease (CHD), diabetes mellitus (DM), and other diseases that should be inscribed.
“Attitude/Trust in Vaccination Against COVID-19 and Information Sources” domain contained eight questions:
What type of vaccine against COVID-19 did you receive last time?
What was the reason for getting vaccinated?
Why have you refused vaccination if so?
Which sources of information do you trust?
In your opinion, has enough information about COVID-19 vaccination been provided in official sources?
Which COVID-19 vaccine do you trust?
What is your attitude to vaccination against COVID-19? (Likert scale responses)
What is your level of confidence in Kazakhstan’s QazVac vaccine? (Likert scale responses)

“Questions Concerning the Experience with COVID-19” domain included six questions:
Have you been ill with COVID-19?
By what method of testing have you been diagnosed with COVID-19 disease?
In what kind of condition did you suffer from the COVID-19 disease?
Have you been ill with COVID-19 disease after vaccination?
How long has a doctor observed you after suffering COVID-19?
Which of the following symptoms did you have after the disease?

## Statistical analysis
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was applied to determine the data distribution, skewness, and kurtosis coefficients in the present study, where data were not normally distributed. Sociodemographic characteristics were defined using descriptive statistics (frequency, percentage). Demographic data and responses to the questionnaire were treated as categorical variables (the reasons for getting vaccinated, refusing vaccination, etc.) The Pearson chi-squared criterion was applied to evaluate the relationships between the independent variables (demographic data, level of trust in different information sources, etc.) and attitudes toward vaccination, thus identifying intergroup differences. In evaluating the level of confidence in the national QazVac vaccine across various groups and investigating whether there was a statistically significant difference between this variable of interest and the sub-categories of the other variables (sociodemographic, etc.), the Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test was applied. To assess the influence of independent factors (obtaining information about COVID-19 vaccination; the amount of information regarding vaccines) on the binary variable of response (being vaccinated; trust in the Qazvac vaccine), logistic regression analyses (LRA) were performed. Getting a vaccine and trusting in the Qazvac vaccine were treated as a "positive" effect, and the opposite was treated as a "negative" effect. Variables were included if p<0.1 in the univariate analysis (chi-squared test.)
The sample size calculation was performed, considering the expected logistic regression analysis. As stated in the Guidelines on sample size calculation for logistic regression [ ], a minimum sample of 500 is required to conduct a logistic regression properly. Besides, considering the number of independent variables in the final logistic regression model (i), the minimum sample size (N) can be estimated as N = 100 + 50i.
Two-sided levels at 0.05 were assumed to be statistically significant. For statistical processing, software packages SPSS (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA, v.25) and Statistica (Stat-Soft, Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA, v. 10) were used.

## Results
Overall, questionnaires were sent out to 2,184 individuals, and 2,009 participants responded, with a response rate of 92%. Out of 2,009 interviewees, the majority were women, and the most common age range was 18–29. By occupational status, most were students or employed. Among the participants, almost two-thirds had a college education and a middle-income level ( ).
 

## Differences between vaccinated and unvaccinated respondents
We analyzed the sample by vaccination status. Of 2,009 participants, 1,669 (83.1%) received the vaccine, and 340 (16.9%) refused vaccination. displays the descriptive and comparative statistics regarding the differences between vaccinated and unvaccinated interviewees.
Gender, age and the presence of chronic diseases did not influence the decision to be vaccinated (p<0.05, ). Most interviewees suffering from chronic diseases (268, or 13.3% out of 2,009) provided combined answers on item 6. Among these 268 individuals, 73 indicated the presence of AG+CHD (27.2%), 50 respondents marked AG+DM (18.7%), 34 noted CHD+DM (12.7%), 31 (11.5%) pointed all the listed diseases, and 80 (29.9%) indicated only one somatic disease, respectively. Almost four out of five suffering from chronic diseases (212 out of 268, 79.1%) decided to get a vaccine. The proportion of participants with no somatic diseases was approximately similar among those vaccinated and those who refused. Notably, a previous (before vaccination and before the survey) history of COVID-19 disease also did not affect the decision to get vaccinated. Individuals who had not been ill with COVID-19 and those who had been ill or thought themselves sick were approximately equally divided among immunized and unimmunized respondents (p 0.285, ).
The factors that significantly impacted vaccination decisions appeared to be the level of education, occupational status, and interest in getting information on COVID-19 issues through available sources. Of those who were vaccinated, 66% had a higher education. The majority of vaccinated were students (48%) and employed people (42.1%). Nonworking individuals and respondents of retirement age were more likely to refuse immunization (14.7% vs. 7.5% and 9.7% vs. 2.4% of those vaccinated, respectively). Regarding the income level, the highest proportion of those who preferred to take preventive measures against COVID-19 should have been expected among individuals with high incomes. However, respondents with a middle-income level (200–1,000 USD per capita) provided the majority of immunizations (66.4%, p 0.047). In the meantime, 20.1% of respondents indicated they had been subject to a definite degree of pressure from their employers in deciding to be vaccinated. About two-thirds (65.3%) of participants decided independently.

## The role of information sources in the decision-making regarding vaccination by respondents
Significant differences between vaccinated and unvaccinated participants were observed concerning how to get information on the disease (p 0.001). Of all vaccinated respondents (1,669), two-thirds (66.5%) trusted official sources of information about the disease, while 72.7% of those who refused (N 340) trusted alternative sources (item 10, ). The majority of vaccinated interviewees (75.2%) found the available information “sufficient,” while 57.7% of those who refused (340) considered the information “scarce” (p<0.001).
We utilized a simple binary logistic regression model to determine the predictors of favorable vaccination decisions. A total of 8 variables with p<0.1 were present in the univariate analysis ( ). The multivariate LRA of these variables showed that, after adjusting, only one variable (the amount of relevant information) contributed significantly to the participants’ willingness to be vaccinated (p-log<0.05). Our analysis presented a chi-square statistic (χ2(1) = 18.6, p<0.001), refuting the null hypothesis and signifying that the “sufficient” amount of available information predicts the decision to get a vaccine ( ). The model’s R2 value, standing at 0.15, suggests that variations in the amount of information account for approximately 15% of the variance in the final decision, highlighting the influence of “sufficient” available information about the disease in official sources on the eventual decision of getting a vaccine in the respondents. The odds ratio (OR) calculated at 1.71, with a 95% CI of [1.3;2.26], p < 0.05, elucidates that a “sufficient” amount of relevant information increases the odds of being vaccinated by 63.9%. When the respondents assess the amount of information as “many” or “too many (excessive),” the odds of deciding on vaccination turn insignificant: OR 1.36, 95% CI of [0.81;2.28], p 0.24, and OR 0.9, 95% CI of [0.56;1.45], p 0.68, respectively.

## Attitudes toward vaccination among the West Kazakhstan population
In item 13 ( ), we presented 1,298 interviewees who positively treated vaccination, while 711 individuals treated indifferently (92) or negatively (619). The most significant contribution to the positive attitudes toward vaccination was made by persons vaccinated (74.9%), whereas 86.2% of those who refused (340) treated vaccination indifferently or negatively (chi-sqr. 248.6, p<0.001).
We also analyzed the relationship between the acceptance of a vaccine against COVID-19 and other parameters irrespective of the vaccination status of interviewees ( ). Gender, income level, and history of COVID-19 (whether respondents were ill or not) did not influence the vaccination approval (p<0.05, ). Of those who welcomed vaccination, the most significant contributions were made by persons aged 18–29 (61.2%, p 0.001), individuals with a college education (64.8%, p 0.001), and students (48.4%, p 0.02). In comparison, nonworking individuals were primarily negative or indifferent (10.7% vs. 7.6% of those who treated positively). Those who suffered from chronic diseases were undoubtedly positive toward vaccination (192 vs. 76, p 0.01), though this sample showed other statistics in (N 212 vaccinated vs. 56 unvaccinated). Individuals who welcomed vaccination trusted official sources of information about COVID-19 (66.4%), while 31.9% of those with a negative attitude toward vaccination demonstrated trust in various YouTube podcasts (p 0.022). Of 1,669 immunized individuals, 66.5% trusted official information about the disease, while among those who refused vaccination (N 340), more than 52.1% relied on alternative sources ( ). About three-quarters of those who positively treated vaccination found the available official information “sufficient” (74.3%, p 0.001). They also welcomed the national QazVac vaccine (54.7% vs. 6.8% of those who did not trust it, p 0.001).
Thus, studying the general attitude towards SARS-CoV-2 immunization among the population, regardless of vaccination presence/absence in interviewees, confirmed the general trends and indices identified in the analysis across vaccination status (Тable 1) despite insignificant discrepancies.
In a separate analysis of the sample of those who refused vaccination (N 340), we found no differences in gender, age, and income (p>0.05). Still, nonworking people and those with low incomes prevailed compared to the vaccinated. About one-third (27.5%) feared vaccination consequences, and 38.2% expressed anti-vaccine sentiment (19.1% lack confidence in vaccines’ effectiveness, and 19.1% lack trust in vaccines in general). In item 12 ( ), the proportion of respondents who stated their lack of confidence in vaccines was 30.8%. Accordingly, 80% of those who refused vaccination did not trust the national QazVac vaccine (item 14).

## The course of the disease in those who fell ill with COVID-19
In , item 15, we reported the total number of those who did not face COVID-19 before vaccination (N 1,233 out of 2,009, or 61.4%) and those who doubted whether they fell ill with COVID-19 (likely fell ill, 374, or 18.6%). These individuals did not consult a doctor to establish a diagnosis. Still, they experienced illness during the pandemic, which allows them to be conditionally classified as having recovered from COVID-19. The number of those who suffered from the disease with an established diagnosis was 402, or 20%. The descriptive statistics regarding the details of COVID-19 in respondents are displayed in .
 Figuring out precise statistics on the incidence of COVID-19 among the respondents appeared to be difficult, as many of them could not see a doctor during the pandemic. Approximately one-fifth of them considered themselves to be those who fell ill (N 374) without an established diagnosis and subsequent follow-up by a doctor. The same applies to those who thought themselves ill after vaccination (N 287). PCR tests, chest X-rays, and CT scans were the most prevalent methods of COVID-19 diagnosis ( ). Overall, 776 individuals (38.6% out of 2,009) reported a history of COVID-19 infection with severities of different degrees (402 had an established diagnosis and were followed up). Among these 776 convalescents, more than half (52.2%) experienced moderate and severe forms of the disease with various manifestations of likely post-COVID syndrome.
Violation of the sense of smell and taste, frequently combined with fatigue, as well as decreased memory and mental performance, and sleep disorders were the most prevalent symptoms in this group of interviewees. The presence of multiple combined answers to a specific question does not allow for performing comparative statistics within this questionnaire section.

## Attitudes toward the national QazVac vaccine
Overall, 69.2% of respondents trusted all vaccines (item 12, ), while vaccination against COVID-19 was treated positively by 64.6% (item 13). The negative attitude to all vaccines and vaccination in general was expressed by 30.8% of interviewees. Attitudes toward all vaccines, positive or negative, were not affected by the experience of COVID-19 illness of varying severity (p 0.65, ).
Many respondents chose multiple answers regarding trust in the definite vaccine type (item 12, ). Of 1,390 respondents who trusted all vaccines, 806 provided single clear answers regarding the choice of specific vaccines, while 584 interviewees preferred combined answers. Of them, 334 (57.2%) highlighted a combination of all three groups of vaccines, 130 (22.3%) marked a combination of QazVac and vaccines from neighboring countries, 77 (13.2%) preferred a combination of vaccines from neighboring and far-abroad countries, and 43 (7.3%) pointed out QazVac + far-abroad vaccines. In total, 758 (37.7%) respondents marked QazVac separately and in different combinations. They expressed various extents of their favorable attitudes towards QazVac (item 14), from partial trust (12.8%) to complete acceptance (3.7%), albeit only 305 were immunized with this vaccine (item 7, ). There were no significant differences between supporters and those who were distrustful of the QazVac vaccine across their education level (p 0.23), income (p 0.7), occupational status (p 0.42), presence/absence of chronic diseases (p 0.071), and personal history of COVID-19 disease (p 0.83, ). It is noteworthy that significant differences emerged by gender. Most men welcomed the domestic vaccine (52.7% of supporters vs. 19.5% of men treated negatively and 47.3% vs. 80.5% of women, respectively, p 0.001, chi-sqr. 26.9). In terms of age, 36.1% of those aged 30–39 trusted in QazVac vs. 10.3% of their opponents. At the same time, a substantial proportion of the youngest population (18–29 yrs.) treated Kazakhstan’s vaccine mostly negatively (35.1% of supporters vs. 56.4% of opponents, p 0.004). The age differences were also revealed between the youngest and oldest respondents within the groups of supporters and opponents of the national vaccine, H (3, N 2,009, R = 1,094.3, p 0.01).
Supporters and those skeptical toward the domestic vaccine differed significantly in how they obtained information and the amount of information necessary to express judgments. Almost seven out of ten who approved introducing the national vaccine (69.9%) trusted the official sources of information vs. 47.6% of those who were pessimistic about the domestic product (p 0.018). Three-quarters of supporters (75.1%) considered the information regarding COVID-19 and QazVac “sufficient” for trust (chi-sqr. 46.1, p 0.001). We designed a binary logistic regression model to reveal the possible predictors of trust in the national vaccine. A total of 5 variables with p<0.1 were present in the univariate analysis ( ). After adjusting for the other variables, the multivariate analyses resulted in the presence of one variable (the amount of relevant information) that contributed significantly to the participants’ trust in the national vaccine (p-log<0.05). A chi-square statistic χ2(1) of 48.4 p<0.001 signifies that “sufficient” information in official sources predicts trust in the domestic vaccine. The model’s R2 value of 0.32 suggests that variations in the amount of information account for approximately 32% of the variance in the final result, highlighting the influence of available information about the disease and a vaccine of interest in official sources on the judgment about the vaccine in the respondents. The OR 2.35, with a 95% CI of [1.82;3.02], p < 0.05, evidence that a “sufficient” amount of relevant information increases the odds of trust in the QazVac vaccine by 70.1%. Yet, the likelihood of confidence in the vaccine decreases with further increments up to the level of “many information” (OR 2.24, 95% CI [1.47;3.42], p 0.001) and turns insignificant at the level of “superfluous information” (OR 1.77, 95% CI [1.14;2.75], p 0.11).

## COVID-19 cases after vaccination and the overall effectiveness of vaccines in respondents
Previously, we analyzed attitudes toward vaccination among the general sample (N 2,009). As for 1,669 vaccinated respondents, a total of 1,188 (71.2%) had a positive perception of vaccination, and 481 (28.8%) expressed indifferent or negative attitudes ( ). Significant differences were identified when analyzing from the perspective of those who experienced COVID-19 after vaccination (p 0.021, ). Most of those 1,210 vaccinated who did not get sick after vaccination approved immunization (74.4% versus 67.9% of those who were negative or indifferent). However, individuals who suffered from the disease after vaccination expressed predominantly negative sentiments. Among those 172 who experienced moderate or severe forms of COVID-19 after vaccination, 12.5% were unfriendly toward vaccines, vs. 9.4% who remained their supporters. Among those 287 who did not have a diagnosis but considered themselves to have recovered from the disease, the same proportion was observed: 19.8% skeptics vs. 16.2% supporters of vaccination ( ).
We performed an analysis of the relationship between the type of vaccine received and the incidence of COVID-19 after vaccination, using data from item 7 (“What type of vaccine against COVID-19 did you receive?”) and item 18 (“Have you been ill with COVID-19 disease after vaccination?”). presents the results: 72.5% (1,210) of all vaccinated individuals did not get COVID-19 after vaccination, while 459 (27.5%) reported a history of illness after vaccination. Of them, only 172 (10.3% out of 1,669 vaccinated) clearly indicated the COVID-19 disease after vaccination (the descriptive statistics on item 18 are also presented in ).
 Among people vaccinated with specific vaccines, we obtained the following rates of those who avoided COVID-19: Sputnik V, with 572 individuals out of 763 (75%) not falling ill with COVID-19 after being vaccinated; Pfizer, with 141/195 individuals (72.3%); unknown vaccine—176/246 (71.5%); QazVac—211/305 (69.2%); CoronaVac—41/64 (64.1%); and Hayat-Vax—69/96 (60.9%).
No significant differences have been observed regarding the overall performance across five vaccines available for Kazakhstan’s population (p 0.27).

## Discussion

## Attitudes toward vaccination
In our study performed at the end of 2022 in a sample of 2,009 participants, the proportion of those vaccinated increased almost three times (83.1%) compared to 2021, when the share of vaccinated people in Kazakhstan was 29.2% [ ]. The mandatory vaccination of selected population groups introduced nationwide and the employers’ requirements that provided 20.1% of those vaccinated contributed significantly to restraining the pandemic. In general, the experience of fighting the pandemic has substantially shifted the commonly accepted conception of vaccination. Historically, only the therapeutic paradigm—safety and benefit-risk assessment—was considered. A public health paradigm that strengthened its position after the pandemic considers the population impact and encompasses measures of community benefits against various outcomes, not only etiologically defined clinical consequences [ ].
Our analysis showed that individuals with a college education were more willing to receive a COVID-19 vaccine. They provided two-thirds of the vaccinated ( , 66%, p 0.001) and those who positively treated vaccination ( , 64.8%, p 0.001). In a study by Macharia et al. [ ], 62.4% of respondents expressed willingness to receive COVID-19 vaccines, and they had similar characteristics, i.e., higher education and satisfactory income. Contrary to expectations, in our study, the most significant contribution to the proportion of those vaccinated was made not by high-income people but by middle-income earners (66.4% vs. 14.6% of high-income respondents, p.0.047). Our data on this issue are, to a definite extent, in contrast with other researchers’ findings suggesting that individuals with lower socio-economic status tend to be more opposed to vaccination [ ]. The perceptions of vaccination in those with higher education levels are also generally contradictory. Many researchers have reported that highly educated people’s attitudes towards vaccination vary significantly. On the one hand, education positively affected individuals’ vaccination acceptance in Ecuador, France, Germany, India, and the US. In contrast, a higher level of education was correlated with lower acceptance in Canada, Spain, and the UK [ , ]. Hak et al. reported that among the determinants of an entirely negative attitude toward vaccination was also a high education ([OR] 3.3, [95% CI]: 1.3–8.6) [ ].
Gender played no role in our study, neither in the attitude to vaccination nor in the acceptance of vaccines. There were no significant differences between genders in terms of the vaccination status of participants. However, men appreciated the national QazVac vaccine more favorably than women (52.7% trusted in QazVac, while 19.5% did not, p 0.001, ). In the study by Lazarus et al., which assessed the associations of age, gender, and level of education with vaccine acceptance, with a random sample of 13,426 participants, several noteworthy trends emerged: women in France, Germany, Russia, and Sweden were significantly more likely to accept a vaccine than men in these countries. Older (≥50) people in Canada, Poland, France, Germany, Sweden, and the UK were significantly more favorably disposed to vaccination than younger respondents, but the reverse trend held in China [ ]. In our sample, there was no difference between age groups across vaccination status, but the youngest people aged 18–29 comprised 61.2% of those who welcomed vaccination (p 0.001, ). In the meantime, the same age group was mainly negatively disposed to the QazVac vaccine (56.4%, p 0.004, ). In another study by Lazarus et al., individuals aged 25–54 and 55–64 were more likely to get vaccinated upon the request of their employers. At the same time, most older people intend to take the vaccine in the future. As to the gender issues, men were found to be less likely to receive the vaccine than women [ ]. Also, according to a survey of over 3,000 Australians regarding their attitude towards COVID-19 vaccination, women from socioeconomically disadvantaged areas expressed more uncertainty regarding immunization acceptance than men (p 0.006) [ ]. Our study displayed that individuals with chronic diseases showed a high propensity to be vaccinated and positively disposed of vaccines (p 0.01, ), albeit they did not trust the domestic vaccine (p 0.071).
According to Edwards et al., respondents with higher income levels who trust the government and medical institutions were likelier to favor vaccination [ ]. In our study, we did not set out to find a relationship between income level and the degree of trust in official sources of information about COVID-19. However, we have identified the key factors that push a person to get vaccinated. Trusting official sources of information and a certain amount of relevant information subjectively assessed by respondents as "sufficient" increases the odds of vaccination by 69.3%. The same is valid for trust in the domestic vaccine when these predictors increase trust odds by 70.1%. In case the amount of information escalates to "many" or "too many," interviewees subjectively assess it as excessive, and the chance of trust in the QazVac vaccine or favorable decision regarding vaccination decreases or turns insignificant ( and Tables).
Researchers have established that the lack of confidence in the safety of vaccines is one of the most significant factors influencing the acceptance rate [ ]. Of the psychological determinants, confidence in vaccine safety was reportedly associated with one’s own vaccination and recommendation behavior [ , ]. According to a study from Malaysia, vaccine hesitancy among parents was 11.6%. In a univariate analysis, vaccination hesitancy was associated with unemployed status, younger age of parents, and other factors [ ]. Among our respondents, we revealed 16.9% of those who refused vaccination (N 340) and 86.2% of them treated vaccination indifferently or negatively (chi-sqr. 246.8, p<0.001, ). These respondents of different ages were primarily nonworking and had low incomes. They feared possible complications after vaccination (27.4%) and expressed anti-vaccine sentiments, being against all vaccines and not believing in the vaccine’s effectiveness (38.2%). The overall % of those who did not trust vaccines in our study was 30.8% ( , item 12).
According to Huang et al., the main reasons for vaccination hesitancy were concerns about the safety of the COVID-19 vaccine and limited trust in the government [ ]. Other researchers have also mentioned that ideology, which can result in the rejection of science due to conspiracist ideation and limited trust in government medical experts, is a factor that indirectly affects immunization propensity [ , ]. Huang et al. listed the presence of local vaccine distribution points among the factors contributing to vaccination [ ]. In our study, respondents did not experience difficulties in reaching the vaccination points but faced challenges of other nature when receiving vaccines. Likely, many respondents chose multiple answers when asked about preferences and trust in the definite vaccine type (item 12, ), as most did not receive the vaccine they were willing to get. The matter of trust in a particular type of vaccine was not related to the type of vaccine received due to the uneven supply of vaccines to healthcare facilities. Interviewees could not always choose the vaccine independently and received only the available ones. In particular, Sputnik V arrived first, and supplies with this vaccine were regular, while the BioNTech/Pfizer vaccine arrived last. This circumstance explains why almost half of those vaccinated (45.7%) received Sputnik V. Eventually, our survey did not shed light on the population preferences for five vaccines that have run in the country during the pandemic. However, it appeared reasonably informative regarding trust in our national vaccine, QazVac (37.7% of respondents), and the general confidence in vaccines (69.2%).

## Barriers and acceptance of vaccination against COVID-19
El-Ghitany et al. have reported that the most common reasons for refusing the vaccine are concerns about its efficacy (39.5%) and possible side effects (38.8%) [ ]. The top three concerns among the unvaccinated Black Americans were: (1) the vaccine is too new (92%), (2) safety issues (85%), and (3) preference for natural immunity over vaccine-induced immunity (85%) [ ]. In a cross-sectional study from Saudi Arabia, the majority of participants received the Pfizer vaccine (72.8%) and most expressed high confidence in its effectiveness (55%) [ ]. In our study, 195 out of 1,669 (11.7%) interviewees received the Pfizer vaccine, 54 fell ill after vaccination, and 141 (72.3%) avoided infection.
Fear of side effects, distrust of vaccination stakeholders, and a lack of confidence in the vaccine were barriers to COVID-19 vaccination among healthcare workers [ ]. Researchers identified three major obstacles to vaccination: (1) lack of accessible and understandable information about a COVID-19 vaccine; (2) problems with access to vaccines and supplies; and (3) widespread misinformation based on mistrust of the medical community and government [ , ]. Previously, we mentioned uneven supplies of vaccines that created certain obstacles to free choice in our respondents. The design of the questionnaire, which focused primarily on ease of survey and obtaining the essential information regarding attitudes toward vaccination, has not allowed for a more detailed study of the issues listed in the cited sources, particularly a level of mistrust of medical providers. Our analysis revealed that 14.5% of respondents relied on medical workers’ vaccination recommendations.
A representative cross-sectional survey conducted in Germany with 27,509 participants found that older people and men were more likely to approve the compulsory vaccination than younger participants and women within the given context [ ]. Other researchers stated the same situation [ ]. There were no differences regarding gender in our research. At the same time, the proportion of retired people who disposed positively to vaccination was three times greater than those who treated immunization indifferently or negatively (18% vs. 6.1%, p 0.001, ).
Among 267 patients with inflammatory bowel disease in Poland, faith in vaccination was among the most common reasons for immunization (43.2%). The most common reasons for vaccine refusal were concern about side effects (50.0%) and possible exacerbation of gastroenterological disease (34.2%) [ ]. More than two-thirds of our participants believed in vaccines (69.2%), and 212 of 268 (79.1%) respondents with chronic diseases got vaccinated. Our research suggests that not so much doubt about vaccine side effects plays a decisive role in the acceptance of vaccination and overall trust in vaccines, but rather, trust in different sources of information about COVID-19. In our study, two-thirds (66.5%) of all vaccinated respondents (1,669) trusted official sources of information about the disease. In comparison, 72.7% of those who refused (N 340) trusted alternative sources, i.e., YouTube podcasts, speeches of famous personalities, or opinions of their surroundings. The majority of vaccinated interviewees (75.2%) found the available official information “sufficient,” while 57.7% of those who refused (340) considered the information “scarce” (p<0.001, ). About three-quarters of those who positively treated vaccination, regardless of their vaccination status, found the official information “sufficient” (74.3%, p 0.001, ).
In this relation, the theory of planned behavior (TPB) developed by I. Ajzen applies to behavioral research on health issues [ ]. According to the theory, “A more favorable attitude makes a person more attentive toward a recommendation made by significant others,” i.e., family members, friends, relatives, and the most trustable media personalities. Our data are consistent with the findings of other researchers. They found that vaccine uptake and attitudes vary considerably between those who rely on different information sources to make their vaccination decisions [ ]. Fridman et al. studied differential exposure to media channels and social networks in representatives of two American political parties. Researchers revealed that adherence to opposite information sources may explain these groups’ divergence in perceived threat and vaccine attitudes [ ]. The source of vaccine information is a crucial factor, and medical professionals play a unique role in improving knowledge and acceptance of vaccines among the public [ ]. Hence, complete and reliable information from official sources and the medical community is necessary to overcome vaccine hesitancy.

## Advances and limitations of the study
We reported the explored population’s attitudes toward vaccines in relevant detail, designated the reasons for refusal of immunization, and revealed the predictors of favorable vaccination decisions. We figured out the level of trust in the first national QazVac vaccine.
Regrettably, our study was characterized not so much by limitations as errors concerning the questionnaire’s design and sampling. First was the substantial heterogeneity of our sample regarding age and gender. The youngest group of respondents exceeded the number of those of retirement age by more than four times, and the overwhelming majority of the sample were women. Such inequity significantly limited the chance of proper analysis across the groups, potentially leading to bias. An insufficient number of questions designed on a Likert scale can also be referred to a shortcoming. In addition, we failed to predict the pitfalls of composing some questions. In particular, we have not provided our tool with barriers for multiple responses to a single question. For instance, in the items regarding vaccine preferences and the section “The course of the disease in those who fell ill with COVID-19.” These drawbacks substantially affected the questionnaire’s statistical processing quality, reducing the range of possible findings to a definite extent.

## Conclusions
Within the explored sample of 2,009 individuals, most (83.1%) were immunized against COVID-19; among them, 20.1% obeyed the request of their employers that had been practiced in frames of non-pharmaceutical interventions to contain the disease. The youngest respondents, aged 18–29, individuals with a college education, students, employed people, and those with chronic diseases, showed a positive attitude toward vaccination (all p<0.05). More than two-thirds of respondents (69.2%) expressed trust in all types of vaccines against COVID-19. Of those who refused vaccination (16.9%), about one-third feared vaccination consequences, and more than a third (38.2%) reported anti-vaccine sentiments.
The decisive factors in accepting vaccination were trust in official sources of information (reports of medical experts, etc.) and, mainly, subjectively interpreted sufficiency of information about the disease, which had increased the odds of being vaccinated by 63.9% (OR 1.71, 95% CI [1.3;2.26], p<0.05).
Only 37.7% of respondents expressed confidence in the domestic QazVac vaccine, which may indicate insufficient educational efforts by public health structures in the country. History and severity of COVID-19 disease did not play a role in positive perceptions of vaccination, while illness after vaccination significantly affected vaccination approval (p 0.021). No significant differences have been observed regarding the overall performance across five vaccines (QazVac, Sputnik V, CoronaVac, Hayat-Vax, and BioNTech/Pfizer) available for Kazakhstan’s population (p 0.27).
The vaccination experience during the COVID-19 pandemic should be thoroughly analyzed by the country’s scientific research centers, health officials, and other involved structures.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## The English version of the Questionnaire to evaluate the attitude toward vaccination and acceptance of the “QazVac” vaccine against COVID-19 in the West Kazakhstan population.
(DOCX)
S2 Table

## Logistic regression analysis on relationships between the amount of information about COVID-19 vaccination in official sources and the vaccination status of respondents.
(DOCX)
S3 Table

## Analysis of the relationship between attitudes toward vaccination and the other parameters, N 2,009.
(DOCX)
S4 Table

## Analysis of the relationship between the history and severity of COVID-19 disease and trust in vaccines, N 2,009.
(DOCX)
S5 Table

## Analysis of the relationship between trust in the “QazVac” vaccine and the other parameters, N 2,009.
(DOCX)
S6 Table

## Logistic regression analysis on relationship between the amount of information about COVID-19 vaccination in official sources and the trust in the domestic “QazVac” vaccine.
(DOCX)
S7 Table

## Analysis of the relationship between the disease after vaccination and attitudes toward vaccination, N 1,669.
(DOCX)

The authors’ team thanks the University’s Department of Biostatistics staff member Saltanat Zhumagaliyeva for assistance in the statistical processing of the results.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0303854.r001Decision Letter 0
AlfanoVincenzoAcademic Editor© 2024 Vincenzo Alfano2024Vincenzo Alfanohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
10 Jan 2024

PONE-D-23-30867Attitude and acceptance of “QazVac” vaccine against COVID-19 among Aktobe city population, West Kazakhstan: a cross-sectional studyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Issimov,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please address referee #2 comment, and specify better the source of data and where are those checkable. Also, Ethics Committee clearance should be indicated, as per Plos One policies. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Feb 18 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Vincenzo Alfano
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. We suggest you thoroughly copyedit your manuscript for language usage, spelling, and grammar. If you do not know anyone who can help you do this, you may wish to consider employing a professional scientific editing service. 
Whilst you may use any professional scientific editing service of your choice, PLOS has partnered with both American Journal Experts (AJE) and Editage to provide discounted services to PLOS authors. Both organizations have experience helping authors meet PLOS guidelines and can provide language editing, translation, manuscript formatting, and figure formatting to ensure your manuscript meets our submission guidelines. To take advantage of our partnership with AJE, visit the AJE website (http://learn.aje.com/plos/) for a 15% discount off AJE services. To take advantage of our partnership with Editage, visit the Editage website (www.editage.com) and enter referral code PLOSEDIT for a 15% discount off Editage services.  If the PLOS editorial team finds any language issues in text that either AJE or Editage has edited, the service provider will re-edit the text for free.
Upon resubmission, please provide the following:
The name of the colleague or the details of the professional service that edited your manuscript
A copy of your manuscript showing your changes by either highlighting them or using track changes (uploaded as a *supporting information* file)
A clean copy of the edited manuscript (uploaded as the new *manuscript* file)
3. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: 
"This research was funded by the Science Committee of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan (Grant No. AP14870878)."
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: ""The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."" 
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. Please note that in order to use the direct billing option the corresponding author must be affiliated with the chosen institute. Please either amend your manuscript to change the affiliation or corresponding author, or email us at plosone@plos.org with a request to remove this option.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Dear Authors,
I must appreciate the efforts of the authors in conducting this research. However, I have lots of concerns regarding the manuscript. Overall, the manuscript Sections appear disconnected, and there is a need for a more systematic organization of ideas.
Here are a few major concerns that need consideration.
1. The manuscript contains numerous grammatical errors that significantly hinder the readability and overall quality of the writing.
2. The title of the manuscript does not seem to precisely reflect the content of the paper.
3. Moreover, the introduction lacks alignment with the subsequent sections of the manuscript specifically the introduction, result and conclusion of the manuscript. The structure of the introduction should be addressed differently, with the aim to make it logical and easy to read.
4. Regarding the methodology section, I suggest the authors add the Google questionnaire link, elaborate on the inclusion and exclusion criteria, and describe the income level and education level in the methodology section.
5. In my opinion I suggest authors consider adding WhatsApp group names as the majority of respondents were students.
6. In methodology ambiguous terminology should be avoided like focus group and etc.
7. In the questionnaire, the type of activity, education level, and family income level should be elaborated and explained. I suggest authors replace the presence of chronic disease with any medical history.
8. In attitude and trust in vaccination against COVID-19 few questions are not clear and vague like: What is your attitude to vaccination against COVID-19? What is your level of confidence in Kazakhstan's QazVac vaccine? Are these open-ended or closed-ended questions? Another question from the same section " Which COVID-19 vaccine do you trust" does not match with the title of the manuscript.
9. Question about the experience of COVID-19 is ambiguous and not clear like: Have you been ill with COVID-19 disease after vaccination? I suggest the authors modify this part of the question as it raises lots of concerns: After which dose of the COVID-19 vaccine do the respondents become ill? As few presents with symptoms after the first dose whereas other reports after 2nd dose. Another question which of the following symptoms did you have after the disease? I suggest the authors mention the symptoms, and the authors want to ask about symptoms after the disease or symptoms after COVID-19 vaccination???
10. I suggest authors use clear statements in the questionnaire and also mention the scale like the Likert scale or another scale that they used in their research.
11. The authors mentioned that “The oral informed consent of each respondent was obtained before filling in the questionnaire” How did authors collect this informed consent as this is an online questionnaire?
12. It is also mentioned in the methodology section that “All respondents were informed of the study purpose and procedure”. Do authors mention this in their online questionnaire???
13. Regarding, the result section I observed ambiguity in this section. The authors must provide clear and concise explanations of their findings, avoiding vague language or undefined terms. In Table 1 the age groups are not equally distributed; I recommend authors to distribute age groups equally. Table no: 4 and 5 is not well-explained, and their relevance to the study is unclear. I suggest the authors align the results with the title and rationale/objective stated in the introduction.
14. The total number of responses shown in Table 5 is much more than the study's sample size. Please recalculate the findings carefully.
15. The discussion section needs to be improved and should be rewritten with logical reasoning and a comparison of present study findings with other published studies. The reasoning presented in the discussion is unaligned with the findings and needs a cohesive link to the existing literature. I recommend the authors to focus the discussion on directly addressing the study's objectives. Remove any content that does not come up with the main argument.
16.The conclusion should be drawn on actual findings after the improvement of results and discussion and should be in line with the title and objective of the study. Authors are advised not to overestimate the generalization of present study results on an international scale.
I think that managing these issues will significantly improve the manuscript's quality and its possibility for publication.
Reviewer #2: Referee report
MS Number: PONE-D-23-30867
Title: Attitude and acceptance of “QazVac” vaccine against COVID-19 among Aktobe city population, West Kazakhstan: a cross-sectional study
Decision: accepted with moderate-major revisions
Short summary
The paper investigates the attitudes towards vaccination against COVID-19 and the level of confidence in the domestic QazVac vaccine in Aktobe city, West Kazakhstan, by means of a cross-sectional study. The results highlight some individual characteristics more correlated with the choice to get vaccinated. This is an important and emerging topic and it is focused in a area less covered by scholars. In my opinion these are good points to consider the paper to be published. Nevertheless, the manuscript needs some revisions in order to be suitable for POEN journal. In the following lines I will express my main concerns on the paper. I hope that my comments can be helpful for the author(s).
Recommended suggestions
1. In the abstracts (in the method subsection) I would suggest to add more information on the quantitative methodology used in the paper
2. The organization of the paper (in terms of sections sequence) is a little bit strange and unusual for me. The authors highlight the main findings of previous studies in section 4. I think that a background section after the brief introduction is needed (before data, methodology and results). In the results section the authors can make comments on the consistence between their results and previous results.
3. In the introduction section the authors should also briefly highlight that vaccination is one of the main policies aimed at reduce the risk of contagions. In fact, this is a pharmaceutical measure that has been supported also by non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPI). Please note that there are also some studies specifically focused on central Asia. I suggest some paper that could be probably useful in order to better frame this policy intervention among the public health policies chosen by national governments.
• Alfano, V. (2022). COVID-19 in Central Asia: exploring the relationship between governance and non-pharmaceutical intervention. Health Policy and Planning, 37(8), 952-962.
• Alfano, V., Ercolano, S., & Pinto, M. (2023). Modeling Central Asia’s Choices in Containing COVID-19: A Multivariate Study. Administration & Society, 55(9), 1819-1836.
• Perra, N. (2021). Non-pharmaceutical interventions during the COVID-19 pandemic: A review. Physics Reports, 913, 1-52.
• Mendez-Brito, A., El Bcheraoui, C., & Pozo-Martin, F. (2021). Systematic review of empirical studies comparing the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions against COVID-19. Journal of Infection, 83(3), 281-293.
4. The factors able to influence the choice to get vaccinated need to be better discussed. There are several papers with good literature review. I suggest the following papers just as starting point to be discussed in the background section
• Alfano, V., & Ercolano, S. (2022). Your vaccine attitude determines your altitude. What are the determinants of attitudes toward vaccination?. Vaccine, 40(48), 6987-6997.
• Baumgaertner B, Carlisle JE, Justwan F, Rabinowitz M. The influence of political ideology and trust on willingness to vaccinate. PLoS ONE 2018;13(1): e0191728.
• Czarnek G, Kossowska M, Szwed P. Political ideology and attitudes toward vaccination: A study report. Working paper; 2020
• Fridman A, Gershon R, Gneezy A, Capraro V. COVID-19 and vaccine hesitancy: A longitudinal study. PLoS ONE 2021;16(4):e0250123.
• Gessner BD, Kaslow D, Louis J, Neuzil K, O’Brien KL, Picot V, et al. Estimating the full public health value of vaccination. Vaccine 2017;35(46):6255–63.
• Hak E, Schönbeck Y, De Melker H, Van Essen GA, Sanders EA. Negative attitude of highly educated parents and health care workers towards future vaccinations in the Dutch childhood vaccination program. Vaccine 2005;23 (24):3103–7.
• Lazarus JV, Wyka K, Rauh L, Rabin K, Ratzan S, Gostin LO, et al. Hesitant or not? The association of age, gender, and education with potential acceptance of a COVID-19 vaccine: a country-level analysis. J Health Commun 2020;25 (10):799–807.
• Lewandowsky S, Gignac GE, Oberauer K, Denson T. The role of conspiracist ideation and worldviews in predicting rejection of science. PLoS ONE 2013;8 (10):e75637.
• Maurer J, Uscher-Pines L, Harris KM. Perceived seriousness of seasonal and A (H1N1) influenzas, attitudes toward vaccination, and vaccine uptake among US adults: does the source of information matter? Prev Med 2010;51 (2):185–7.
5. On the basis of the suggested literature, I think that the authors can improve the discussion and the interpretation of their results.
6. The paper is focused on the vaccine hesitancy that represent an important issue correlated with the aim of the manuscript. Nevertheless, in my opinion the authors should also consider other approach more based on the attitudes toward vaccination (that is probably more focused on their data). In fact, as pointed out by Alfano and Ercolano, the attitudes toward vaccination could represent a more complex and complete rationale rather than the simple hesitancy. In fact, if we measure individual attitude we can range from hesitancy to positive attitude toward vaccination.
7. The sample used in the paper is a convenience sample. I think that the authors should discuss this point in the paper. Moreover it could be interesting to have some statistics in order to compare some caracteristics of the sample population with the whole population of Aktobe (age, gender, education).
8. Honestly, I am not fully convinced of the quantitative methodology used by authors. In my opinion, in order to have a good ceteris paribus correlations the authors should use a regression model as the related literature. This kind of methodology could help the authors to go ahead the definition of the social profile of the residents of Aktobe who has been vaccinated. This is a very important point in order to improve the robustness of the paper. In the current version we know just some bivariate correlations but if I understood the methodology, the ceteris paribus condition is not respected. The authors should try to address this concern.
9. I think that the authors should try to deepener the policy implication of their study.
Other minor suggestions (not compulsory)
10. I appreciated some technical tables in the supplemental material (like the questionaiires) but I think that the tables with the main results should be in the main text.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Sadia Minhas
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0303854.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
15 Apr 2024

Our original research article has undergone the major revisions required and is detailed in the cover letter.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Comments to Reviewer 2.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0303854.r003Decision Letter 1
AlfanoVincenzoAcademic Editor© 2024 Vincenzo Alfano2024Vincenzo Alfanohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
2 May 2024

Attitude toward vaccination against COVID-19 and acceptance of the national “QazVac” vaccine in the Aktobe city population, West Kazakhstan: a cross-sectional survey
PONE-D-23-30867R1
Dear Dr. Issimov,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Vincenzo Alfano
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
**********