pmcHeliyonHeliyon2992heliyon101672560Heliyon2405-8440ElsevierPMC11583716PMC11583716.111583716115837163958412510.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e39802S2405-8440(24)15833-1e398021Research ArticleAre enterprises embedding in digital platform ecosystems greener? A resource curse view
ZhaoQian ZhaoChenfangchenfangzhao93@163.com SongChengcheng aSchool of Economics, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, 430073, Wuhan, ChinabSchool of Business Administration, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, 611130, Chengdu, ChinacSchool of International Relations and Public Affairs, Fudan University, 200433, Shanghai, China⁎Corresponding author. chenfangzhao93@163.com30112024301020241022475609e398023220242210202423102024301020242311202425112024© 2024 The Authors2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).Achieving the global climate mitigation goals requires corporate green innovation, especially substantive green innovation, to address the resource constraints. In this paper, we analyze the impact of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in digital platform ecosystems (DPEs) on substantive green innovation of enterprises. Previous research findings suggest that enterprises' involvement in DPEs can overcome the resource constraints and increase resource accumulation required for the substantive green innovation of enterprises. However, we suggest that this positive effect may also trigger the resource curse and inhibit substantive green innovation of enterprises. By crawling the word frequencies related to enterprise embedding in the DPE in enterprise annual reports, matching the CSMAR and CNRDS databases, this paper constructs a sample of 15,828 Chinese industrial A-share listed firms from 2010 to 2020, and empirically tests the above theoretical hypotheses by using a quadratic polynomial regression model. We find that there is a significant inverted U-shaped effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on firms’ substantive green innovation, and the optimal depth of embeddedness is 0.66 %. The results of the moderating mechanism test suggest that the family-owned equity of firms weakens, whereas state-owned equity enhances, the inverted U-shaped effect. Our study introduces the resource blessing and resource curse perspectives into the study of DPEs, revealing that moderate depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs promotes substantive green innovation of enterprises, whereas excessive depth of embeddedness hinders it.

## Highlights
•Inverted U-shape: enterprise embedding in DPEs & substantive green innovation.
•Family-owned equity weakens the inverted U-shaped relationship.
•State-owned equity strengthens this relationship.
•Grounded in the theories of resource blessing and resource curse.

## Keywords
Depth of enterprise embeddedness in the digital platform ecosystemSubstantive green innovationResource curseFamily-owned equityState-owned equitypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC1

## Introduction
Achieving the climate mitigation goals requires substantial advancements in green innovation at the firm level, particularly in energy-saving and emission reduction technologies [ , ]. Unlike strategic green innovation, which aims to make incremental improvements to an enterprise's existing products and technologies [ ], substantive green innovation aims to develop new clean products and technologies to meet the needs of carbon reduction [ ]. Therefore, substantive green innovation in enterprises is characterized by a long research and development cycle and high investment risk [ ], requiring the support of a large number of heterogeneous resources, such as human, technological and financial resources [ ].
Enterprises can mitigate resource constraints on their substantive green innovation by integrating into the digital platform ecosystems (DPEs) [ ]. Greater integration expands the channels through which enterprises can access resources and improves their efficiency in allocating diverse resources [ ]. For example, industrial enterprises embedding in Haier's COSMO platform can collaborate with other manufacturers and distributors within the platform, overcoming financing constraints [ ]. This process of overcoming resource constraints by acquiring large amounts of heterogeneous resources, ultimately promoting substantive green innovation, has been termed “resource blessing” [ ].
However, excessive resource accumulation may trigger a “resource curse” that inhibits substantive green innovation by enterprises [ ]. Research indicates that an abundance of idle resources can lead enterprises to engage in rent-seeking and resource waste, thereby hindering substantive green innovation [ ]. Thus, as more enterprises embed themselves within DPEs, a balance must be truck [ ]. On the one hand, increased depth of embeddedness can overcome resource constraints and promote substantive green innovation [ ]. On the other hand, excessively high depth of embeddedness can result in the resource curse, ultimately inhibiting substantive green innovation [ ].
A question of attention, therefore, is whether there is an optimal embedding interval that allows enterprises embed in DPEs to break through the resource constraints of substantive green innovation while avoiding the resource curse?
Previous studies have explored the impact of DPEs on enterprise green innovation from both the perspectives of platform owners and users [ , , , ]. From the perspective of platform owners, Wu et al. [ ]suggested that the development of DPEs by the firms themselves significantly promoted substantive green innovation by increasing research and development investment using survey data from 1100 Chinese private firms. In addition, Yu and Chen [ ] found that self-built DPEs significantly promoted enterprises’ green innovation by improving innovation capability. From the perspective of platform users, specifically enterprises embedding in DPEs, Buttol et al. [ ] utilized the case of the Ecosmes Platform and found that enterprises embedding in the platform were able to break through resource constraints and enhanced green innovation. Li et al. [ ] also found that by embedding themselves in DPEs, enterprises could enhance their capabilities in terms of interactivity, which positively impacted their green innovations.
Nevertheless, few studies have empirically examined the non-linear impact of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation from the perspectives of resource blessing and resource curse [ , , , , , , ]. First, while existing studies have found that the depth of enterprise embeddedness promotes green innovation from the perspective of resource blessing [ , ], few have explored that the depth of embeddedness may lead to resource curse, hindering substantive green innovation [ , ]. Second, most studies have examined the impact of enterprises' embeddedness on green innovation qualitatively (i.e., whether they are embed or not), with few analyzing the impact of the depth of embeddedness in the DPE on green innovation from a quantitative perspective (i.e., the depth of embeddedness) [ ]. Finally, it remains to be observed whether equity differences -such as state-owned versus family-owned equity-affect the substantive green innovation of embeddedness [ , ]. This includes examining how equity differences influence enterprises’ willingness to accumulate resources and their acceptance of substantive green innovation [ ].
To address the above research gaps, this paper makes contributions in the following three areas. First, it empirically analyzes the inverted U-shaped influence of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in the DPEs on the substantive green innovation of enterprises, thereby expanding research on the environmental effects of DPEs. Second, it measures the optimal depth interval for enterprise embeddedness in DPEs at the micro level, emphasizing the importance of moderate depth of embeddedness. This finding is crucial for stimulating substantive green innovation, overcoming resource constraints, and avoiding the resource curse. Third, it examines the moderating mechanisms of family-owned equity and state-owned equity, thereby enriching research related to enterprise equity structure.
This paper explores the inverted U-shaped impact of the depth of embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation from the perspectives of resource blessing and resource curse. Additionally, it examines the moderating roles of state-owned and family-owned equity.
The findings reveal a significant inverted U-shaped effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on firms’ substantive green innovation, with the optimal depth of embeddedness identified at 0.66 %. The moderating mechanism analysis indicates that family-owned equity weakens, while state-owned equity enhances the inverted U-shaped effect.
The subsequent sections of this research are organized as follows: Section provides a comprehensive examination of the theoretical concepts and the formulation of hypotheses. Section outlines the specific research design used for the empirical investigation. Section presents the findings of the econometric regression analysis. Section conducts the results of robustness tests. Section presents the endogeneity tests. Section comprises the discussions, implications and limitations. Section presents the conclusions.

2

## Theoretical analysis and hypotheses
2.1

## The depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs and substantive green innovation
The depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs refers to the degree to which an enterprise, as a user of the DPE, is integrated into, reliant on, or influenced by the DPE [ , ]. Embedding methods include firms using the DPE for business operations, interacting with other entities within the DPE, following the rules of the DPE, and using the DPE for innovation [ ].
The research posits a positive influence of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation. Specifically, this impact is discernible through two principal dimensions: the resource blessing and the resource curse [ , , ]. On the one hand, aligning with resource blessing theory, enterprise embedding in DPEs facilitates the accumulation of a diverse array of heterogeneous resources [ ]; this not only augments enterprises' reserves of various resources but also enhances their innovation capabilities [ ], thereby fulfilling the resource requirements of substantive green innovation [ ]. On the other hand, the resource curse, arising after enterprises embed in DPEs, suggests that an increase in the depth of embeddedness may increase enterprises’ dependence on existing resources, leading to speculative behavior and potential waste of resources [ , , ]. In these cases, enterprises may be more inclined to carry out strategic green innovation and, thus, less substantive green innovation [ ]. The complex logic underlying these opposed effects is as follows.
Increasing the degree to which enterprises embed within DPEs enables them to accumulate resources (economic, human, and natural) that can help promote substantive green innovation by enterprises [ , , ]. First, strengthening the depth of embeddedness in DPEs can facilitate substantive green innovation by enabling firms to access economic resources provided by stakeholders [ ]. Limited economic resources are one of the barriers to substantive green innovation by firms [ ]. There are many stakeholders (customers, suppliers, and research organizations) in DPEs that can provide economic resources to embedding enterprises [ ]. Moreover, these stakeholders have environmental preferences, and firms must produce cleaner products if they want to access their economic resources [ ].
Second, by increasing the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs, firms can access human resources to promote substantive green innovation [ ]. Substantive green innovation is characterized by high risk, technical difficulty and requires knowledge-intensive human resource support [ ]. By increasing the depth of embeddedness, firms can improve their knowledge-intensive human resources by obtaining opportunities for industry-university-research cooperation, enhancing their entrepreneurial capabilities, and reaping the dividends of inter-firm knowledge spillovers [ ]. First, DPEs provide embedding enterprises with more opportunities for industry-university-research cooperation [ ]. Second, DPEs are able to empower entrepreneurs of embedding firms with platform-based thinking, improving their entrepreneurial capabilities. Third, by increasing the depth of embeddedness in DPEs, enterprises can obtain the dividends of knowledge spillovers from other embedding enterprises, and ultimately promote their substantial green innovation [ ].
Third, by increasing the depth of embeddedness in DPEs, firms are able to improve the efficiency of natural resource allocation and thus promote substantive green innovation [ ]. The problem of inefficient allocation of natural resources exists in firms’ substantive green innovation, and DPEs can build platforms for natural resource management, development, and operation. As the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs increases, embedding enterprises can use DPEs to integrate scattered and fragmented forests and other natural resources, and entrust DPEs with operating and managing natural resources, thus improving the efficiency of natural resources [ ].
However, the resource curse increases rent-seeking and arbitrage behaviors, inhibiting firms' substantive green innovation [ ]. The resource curse effect of the depth of embeddedness in DPEs inhibits firms' substantive green innovation in three ways: increasing the risk of firms' intellectual property rights being infringed upon [ ], triggering unfair competition in terms of firms’ human resources [ ], and generating moral hazards associated with natural resources [ ].
First, as the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs deepens, the blessing of economic resources enhances the risk of the enterprise's intellectual property being infringed upon by others [ ]. Enterprises with deeper enterprise embeddedness in DPEs have more economic resources to expand their products and service offerings [ , ]. As a result, intellectual property being infringed upon by others is more likely to occur and inhibit substantive green innovation [ ]. As economic resources become more plentiful, enterprises seek new growth areas [ , ]. It may involve developing new products, expanding into new markets, or offering new services [ ]. However, expanding product and service lines increases challenges for enterprises simultaneously [ ]. As firms expand their range of products and services, enterprises become involved in more technology areas and market segments, which increases the risk of intellectual property being infringed upon by others [ ]. Enterprises may favor strategic innovations over risky substantive green innovations [ ]. Particularly in terms of substantive green innovation, many innovations are still in their infancy [ ]. Concerns about infringement may cause enterprises to slow substantive green innovation [ ].
Second, when firms embed DPEs to some extent, the increase in human resources triggers undesirable competition for labor and pressure for employee performance assessment, which may weaken substantive green innovation [ ]. Under high-performance evaluation pressure, researchers may find that their undertaking of substantive green innovation characterized by long-term, high risk and high technological barriers is not in line with their personal cost minimization principle [ ]. Instead, they may gravitate toward strategic green innovation with lower technological thresholds because such innovation can shorten the research and development cycle, reduce complexity, and increase the likelihood of success [ ]. As a result, they may favor strategic green innovations with lower technological barriers but higher success rates. For example, researchers can generate a sufficient number of strategic green innovations in a shorter period by simply tweaking the non-critical parameters of a product [ ]. This approach not only puts researchers in a favorable position in the competitive environment, but also produces expected benefits in a short period that outweigh more demanding substantive green innovations [ ].
In addition, the amount of natural resources acquired by firms increases as the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs increases. The resource curse theory suggests that overdependence on natural resources may lead to the crowding out of other factors of production from firms, thus hindering substantive green innovation [ ]. The cause of this problem can be explained by the fact that natural resource income induces rent-seeking by firms, which in turn induces moral hazard [ ]. In addition, there is an inter-firm imitation effect in terms of firms’ rent-seeking behavior, which can also inhibit substantive green innovation [ ].
 depicts the inverted U-shaped effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation. The resource blessing effect of the depth of embeddedness in DPEs positively affects firms' substantive green innovation [ ], which is shown as a straight line sloping to the upper right. However, the resource curse effect caused by an increase in the depth of embeddedness has a negative impact on firms’ substantive green innovation [ ], which manifests as a straight line inclined to the lower right. 
Owing to the superposition of these two opposite effects, the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs has an inverted U-shaped impact on firms' substantive green innovation. Specifically, as the depth of embeddedness increases, firms' substantive green innovation gradually increases, when the positive effect of resource blessing plays a dominant role [ ]. However, as the depth of embeddedness in DPEs increases to a certain degree, the negative effect of the resource curse gradually offsets the positive effect of resource blessing [ ]. At this point, the firm's substantive green innovation level begins to decline from the apex.
Thus, the study proposes the following hypotheses.H1The depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs has an inverted U-shaped effect on firms' substantive green innovation.

2.2

## Moderating effect of family-owned equity
This study explores how the depth of embeddedness in DPEs influences firms' substantive green innovation. However, this hypothesis somehow implicitly assumes that different firms respond in the same way to changes in the degree [ ]. There are differences in the identity of controlling shareholders across firms [ ]. Such differences will inevitably affect the performance of firms in terms of their ability to acquire and allocate resources [ ]. At the same time, controlling shareholders can directly dominate the direction of firms' strategic decisions [ ]. Different controlling shareholders have different interest orientations, which will affect the preference of different enterprises on resource utilization [ ]. Therefore, the level of substantive green innovation, as a high-risk, high-resource-investment strategic decision, is inevitably affected by the differences in firm equity structure [ ]. Based on this, this paper expects that the impact of the depth of embeddedness in DPEs on firms' substantive green innovation will vary according to the differences in firms’ equity structure [ ]. Specifically, controlling shareholders of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) usually have the attribute of political ties, and their strategic decisions are more biased towards the public interest [ ]. In contrast, controlling shareholders of family-owned enterprises (FOEs) have kinship bond attributes and their strategic decisions are more biased toward private interests [ ]. Therefore, this paper examines the moderating effect of equity structure from two perspectives: family-owned equity and state-owned equity.
In order to weaken external monitoring of firms' financial flows and control over R&D departments, family-owned equity can contribute to firms' tendency to be risk averse, thus inhibiting the resource blessing effect of the depth of firms' embeddedness in DPEs [ , , ]. For FOEs, the family's exclusive control over the firm is an important socioemotional wealth [ ]. According to socioemotional wealth theory, if a business decision may threaten the family's existing socioemotional wealth, family decision makers will tend to avoid such strategic choices out of concern for loss of wealth [ ]. First, increasing the depth of firm embeddedness in DPEs introduces oversight of the firm's use of capital by outside investors from DPEs [ ]. Such oversight may weaken the family's strategic control over the firm [ ]. Concerns about weakened family control can exacerbate the risk-averse tendencies of FOEs [ ], making them more inclined to avoid relying on DPEs to accumulate heterogeneous resources [ ]. As a result, it is difficult for firms to access resources that contribute to substantive green innovation by embedding themselves in DPEs [ ].
Second, increasing the depth of firm embeddedness in DPEs to advance substantive green innovation means that FOEs need to search for non-family-held green technology resources and recruit green technology talent in DPEs [ ]. Skilled talent from DPEs will further weaken the family's control over the business [ ]. Since substantive green innovation requires a high level of technological difficulty and expertise [ ], which family members may not have, FOEs have to rely on non-family green technology talents in DPEs [ ]. The dominance of non-family technical talents in substantive green innovation will reduce the family's control over the green R&D department [ ]. At the same time, substantive green innovation is characterized by high risk and long payback cycles [ ]. FOEs, thus, tend to overestimate the probability of innovation failure and fear the losses associated with failure [ ]. Conversely, non-FOEs tend to be more risk-averse [ ]. The shareholding structure of such firms is not dominated by a single controlling family [ ]. As a result, non-FOEs are less concerned than FOEs about the loss of socioemotional wealth [ ]. FOEs are more focused on the potential benefits of embedding in DPEs and are more inclined to underestimate the costs of substantive green innovation [ ]. They will more actively seek out heterogeneous resources in DPEs [ ]. Therefore, family-owned equity can be expected to undermine firms' substantive green innovation when the depth of their embeddedness in DPEs increases.
However, by weakening the firm's intellectual property risk and enhancing the firm's long-term reputation, family-owned equity dampens the resource curse effect of the depth of firms' embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation [ , , ]. First, the intergenerational inheritance system reduces the risk of intellectual property infringement that firms face in embedding in DPEs [ ]. Such a system ensures long-term family control and continuity of interests in the enterprise, enhances the incentives for family members to work together to safeguard the interests of the enterprise, and increases trust among members [ ]. Substantive green innovation, as core intellectual property, can bring long-term benefits to the enterprise [ ]. Family members tend to protect these core intellectual property rights and do not disclose relevant information to competitors due to short-term benefits or external temptations [ ]. Compared to managers in non-FOEs, even as the depth of the firms' embeddedness in DPEs increases and the number of competitors within DPEs increases, family members remain less susceptible to bribery [ ]. It is difficult for competitors to easily access the firm's substantive green innovation information [ ]. Therefore, the intergenerational transmission system of family-owned equity can effectively weaken the resource curse effect brought by firm embeddedness in DPEs [ ].
Second, the intergenerational transmission system motivates FOEs to maintain long-term reputations and discourages rent-seeking behavior in substantive green innovation [ , , ]. FOEs aim to pass on the business to future generations, so long-term reputation is critical to the family's sustainability and future economic returns [ ]. A good corporate reputation helps the family to gain an advantage in succession and ensures a smooth transfer of the business to the next generation [ ]. In this long-term perspective, as the depth of their embeddedness in DPEs increases, FOEs focus more on winning the trust of partners with environmental preferences to build long-term customer relationships [ ]. To maintain this trust, FOEs typically forego rent-seeking opportunities in DPEs to avoid the resource curse negatively affecting their substantive green innovation [ ]. In contrast, non-FOEs, which often do not have a propensity for intergenerational inheritance, may have a higher propensity for intellectual property infringement and moral hazard, encountering the resource curse triggered by embedding in DPEs, thus inhibiting substantive green innovation [ , ]. It can be expected that family-owned equity mitigates, to some extent, the negative impact of a higher depth of firm embeddedness in DPEs on its substantive green innovation.
Given this context and the preceding discussion on resources, we propose the following research hypothesis.H2Family-owned equity weakens the inverted U-shaped effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on enterprises' substantive green innovation.

2.3

## Moderating effect of state-owned equity
By enhancing the firm's substantive green innovation preferences and risk resistance, state-owned equity improves the resource blessing effect of the depth of firm embeddedness in DPEs [ , ]. First, state-owned equity can enhance firms' substantive green innovation preferences [ ]. Unlike non-SOEs, SOEs have access to more economic resources due to their ownership advantage [ ]. This resource advantage requires SOEs to consider the government's will in their strategic decisions, such as promoting carbon emission reduction [ , ]. As a result, State-owned equity encourages firms to engage in substantive green innovation more actively [ ]. In this context, SOEs are more inclined to seek partners with green innovation preferences when embedding in DPEs [ ]. At the same time, when allocating heterogeneous resources obtained from the DPEs, SOEs are more inclined to comply with local environmental policies and reduce environmental pollution, further promoting substantive green innovation [ ].
Second, state-owned equity improves firms' risk resistance [ ]. An enterprise's market position and operational security are critical to maintaining cooperative relationships and coping with economic uncertainty [ , ]. Compared with non-SOEs, SOEs can reduce cash flow fluctuations in response to external shocks by their higher market position and operational security, and enhance their risk-resistant capacity, thus providing long-term and sufficient resource security for substantive green innovation [ , ]. This advantage of SOEs stems from the low level of information asymmetry with the government [ ]. This low degree of information asymmetry enables SOEs to obtain timely information about changes in environmental policies, reducing the high risk of green innovation investments [ ]. In this context, when uncertainty exists in DPEs, SOEs can better maintain cooperative relationships with other enterprises, enhance the confidence of cooperative enterprises to engage in substantive green innovation with them [ ].
However, by enhancing opportunistic tendencies and increasing systemic transaction costs, state-owned equity exacerbates the resource curse effect of the depth of firms’ embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation [ ]. First, as firms embed in DPEs to a certain depth, the opportunistic tendencies of SOE managers may increase [ ]. Unlike non-SOEs, SOE managers are usually government officials rather than professional managers [ ]. These managers are more concerned with personal advancement at the executive level than with the strategic development of the firm [ ]. Since the compensation of SOE managers is tied to their administrative rank and is subject to a tightly monitored compensation cap, they are more inclined to pursue hidden income [ , ]. At the same time, SOEs are characterized by the problems of the lack of separation of government and enterprises, which makes the supervision of management insufficient [ ]. When enterprises embed in DPEs to a certain depth, SOEs have access to many heterogeneous resources [ ]. Overloaded resources provide opportunities for managers to obtain hidden income, leading to the misuse of resources or their diversion to unproductive uses, thus magnifying the resource curse effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation [ ].
Second, as the depth of firm embeddedness in DPEs increases, the institutional transaction costs of SOEs are likely to rise [ , ]. Compared to non-SOEs, SOEs' business decisions often require multiple layers of approvals, including within the firm, the state-owned assets supervisory agency, and other government departments [ ]. These complex decision-making processes make the decision-making process cumbersome, consume much time and increase institutional transaction costs, reducing the efficiency of resource allocation [ , ]. In addition, the multi-layered approval mechanism can lead to the dispersal of decision-making responsibilities among different departments and officials, resulting in shirking responsibilities in case of corporate decision-making errors, further undermining resource allocation efficiency [ , ]. When enterprises embed in DPEs to a certain depth, SOEs' access to heterogeneous resources increases significantly [ ]. Expansion of resources increases the number and complexity of firms' operations, significantly increases firms’ institutional transaction costs, weakens the resource allocation efficiency in substantive green innovation, and further amplifies the resource curse effect [ , ].
Accordingly, we propose the following research hypothesis.H3State-owned equity enhances the inverted U-shaped effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation.

 portrays the research framework of this paper. 

3

## Research design
3.1

## Data sources and processing
Considering that environmental pollution originates mainly from industrial sectors [ ] and that the implementation of DPEs in China has emerged since 2010, there has been a significant absence of substantive green innovation data for Chinese enterprises since 2020. To ensure the thoroughness of this research, this study utilizes an initial sample of A-share enterprises listed in the industrial sector from 2010 to 2020. The sample is carefully selected on the basis of the following criteria: (1) samples from the financial sector are not included; (2) samples labeled as ST, ST∗, and PT are not included; and (3) samples with missing important variables are not included. Finally, 15828 annual observations about listed enterprises are collected. The data on listed enterprises are sourced from the Shenzhen Stock Exchange Official Information Disclosure Platform. Financial information on these enterprises is obtained from the China Stock Market & Accounting Research Database (CSMAR). Substantive green innovation data are retrieved from the China Research Data Services Platform (CNRDS). Regional-level data are derived from the China Urban Statistical Yearbook. Every continuous variable is compressed at the extreme 1 % level, both above and below, and the standard errors of the regression are modified to account for clustering at the enterprise level.

3.2

## Variables
3.2.1

## Independent variable
Currently, the assessment of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in platform ecosystems poses a challenge in related research. Research is predominantly based on rational qualitative analysis, using inductive single-case study methodologies and embedding enterprises as case objects [ ]. Although there are few quantitative studies on the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs, a small number of scholars have endeavored to carry out quantitative analyses in this area [ ]. For example, Hao and Ji [ ] measured the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs at the provincial level via “platformed-based transactions”. Nevertheless, this approach is not yet capable of effectively revealing the differences in enterprise embeddedness in DPEs at the enterprise level, which results in a misestimation of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs. The study argues that the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs, as a key strategy for high-quality enterprise development in the platform economy, is likely to be reflected in enterprise annual reports, which are usually summaries or guidance [ ]. Thus, the study counts the frequency of words related to “enterprise embeddedness in DPEs” in the business analysis section of listed enterprise annual reports. By using this method, characterizing the depth of embeddedness in DPEs is possible and scientific. According to Fan et al. [ ], the digitization level of an enterprise can be quantified by analyzing the frequency of keywords linked to digitalization in its annual report. This approach offers a valuable analogical rationale for performing this study. The use of enterprise embeddedness in DPE-related keywords in annual reports released by public enterprises can be used as a proxy indicator for enterprise embeddedness in DPEs. The study constructs enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on the basis of Fan et al. [ ]:
First, the study constructs a dictionary of enterprise embeddedness in DPE terms. Owing to the absence of a specialized dictionary for enterprise embeddedness in DPE terms, this study identifies characteristic words of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on the basis of a series of authoritative studies and policy documents. On the one hand, this research refers to a series of classic studies focused on enterprise embeddedness in DPEs. On the other hand, in terms of important policy documents and research report references, the study searches through the websites of the government and Ministry of Industry and Information Technology according to the research of Fan et al. [ ]. Through manual screening, 28 key national-level DPE-related policy documents issued between 2010 and 2020 are obtained and used to extract keywords related to enterprise embeddedness in DPEs. The documents consist of Guidelines for the Construction and Promotion of the Industrial Internet Platform, Guiding Opinions of the General Office of the State Council on Promoting the Standardized and Healthy Development of the Platform Economy, and the Implementation Plan for the Industrial Internet APP Cultivation Project (2018–2020), among other documents.
A review of prior research indicates that DPEs primarily offer embedding enterprise support functions (providing necessary technical support and infrastructure) [ ],value-added functions (delivering various services to enhance the user experience) [ ], and application functions (the ability to meet the diverse needs of embedding enterprises) [ ]. Therefore, through Python word segmentation processing and manual identification, we ultimately screen and obtain 82 enterprise embeddedness in DPEs-related terms. These terms constitute the terminology dictionary of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs for this paper.
 depicts a dictionary of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs terms using the form of a word cloud diagram. shows that the two most frequent terms are “platform” and “ecosystem”. 
As shown in , we categorize the collected keywords related to enterprise embeddedness in PDEs into three categories on the basis of the three functional dimensions of DPEs mentioned above (support functions, value-added functions, and application functions). 
In the following steps, we conduct a textual analysis of the paragraphs within the annual report. This study extends the Chinese word segmentation library Jieba in the Python package with 82 terms related enterprise embeddedness in DPEs terminology dictionary. We subsequently use machine learning to examine the “Management Discussion and Analysis” (MD&A) component of annual reports from listed enterprises to quantify the occurrence of 82 phrases associated with enterprise embeddedness in DPEs.
Third, the depth index of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs is constructed. In accordance with Fan et al. [ ]. In this research, the enterprise embeddedness in DPEs terms is aggregated to yield an overall word frequency, which is then divided by the total word frequency in the MD&A section of the annual report, resulting in a depth index of the enterprise embeddedness in DPEs.

3.2.2

## Dependent variable
The ratio of the total number of green invention patent applications to the overall number of invention patent applications in a particular year serves as a proxy for substantive green innovation in listed enterprises.

3.2.3

## Moderator variables
This study selects family-owned equity and state-owned equity as moderating variables.

3.2.4

## Control variables
The analysis draws on Li and Pang [ ], Zhang et al. [ ], and Zhang and Wang [ ] to identify control variables that may affect enterprise substantive green innovation. The control variables at the enterprise level include enterprise size (Lnlabor), return on assets (Roa), asset level (Lnassets), Tobin's Q value (Lntobinq), shareholding by the largest shareholder (Top1), capital intensity (Capinten), and, at the city level, GDP per capita (Lnpgdp) and the intensity of environmental regulation (Er). Furthermore, the regression model in this study accounts for year and enterprise fixed effects.
 describes how the main variables are measured in this paper. 

3.3

## Empirical design
According to Long et al. [ ], Zhang et al. [ ] and based on the above hypotheses, the following model is constructed:(1)Gtoit=β0+β1Platformit+β2Platformit2+θ1Xit+{FE}+εit(2)Gtoit=β0+β1Platformit+β2Platformit2+α1Familyit+α2Familyit×platformit+α3Familyit×Platformit2+θ1Xit+{FE}+εit(3)Gtoit=β0+β1Platformit+β2Platformit2+α1Stateit+α2Stateit×platformit+α3Stateit×Platformit2+θ1Xit+{FE}+εit
Substantive green innovation is the dependent variable in Eq. , whereas enterprise embeddedness in DPEs and its quadratic term are the explanatory variables. The control variables are a series of variables listed in . Eq. builds upon Eq. by including the moderating variable of family-owned equity, the interaction term between family-owned equity and the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs, and the interaction term between family-owned equity and the quadratic term of the depth of embeddedness. Eq. extends Eq. by incorporating the moderating variable of state-owned equity, the interaction term between state-owned equity and the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs, and the interaction term between state-owned equity and the quadratic term of the depth of enterprise embeddedness. denotes the control variables, denotes year fixed effects and enterprise fixed effects, and denotes the random error term.

4

## Empirical results and analysis
4.1

## Summary statistics
4.1.1

## Baseline regression
The estimated results are shown in . On the basis of Eq. constructed above, in this section we examine the quantitative impact of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on the substantive green innovation of listed enterprises. 
Column (1) presents the first regression outcome without any control variables. The enterprise-level and city-level control variables are included in column (2) in addition to the existing variables. Column (3) includes year fixed effects in addition to the variables included in Column (2). Column (4) incorporates regional fixed effects into the analysis conducted in Column (3). Column (5) includes both year and enterprise fixed effects. Clustered standard errors at the enterprise level are employed in all baseline regressions. When control variables are incrementally included, the coefficient for platform has a very significant positive effect, whereas its squared term has a highly significant negative effect, both at the 1 % level. The findings suggest that there is a U-shaped correlation between enterprise embeddedness in DPEs and substantive green innovation, supporting . In column (5), the coefficient of platform2 is −0.0518, while the coefficient of platform is 0.0682. this indicates that the turning point of the inverted U-shaped curve is platform = 0.6583, which falls exactly within the interval of the values of platform [0,1.20].
This is because enterprise embeddedness in DPEs provides enterprises with accumulated economic, human, and natural resources, enabling them to develop their resource endowments and continually innovate in substantive green technology [ ]. In the meantime, the resource curse will occur, leading to an increase in rent-seeking and arbitrage behavior, and hindering substantive green innovation [ ]. The resource curse effect of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs inhibits enterprise substantive green innovation in three dimensions: increasing the risk of intellectual property infringement [ ], triggering unfair competition in terms of human resources [ ], and generating moral risks associated with natural resource utilization [ ].

4.2

## Moderating mechanism
Furthermore, we investigate how family-owned equity and state-owned equity influence the relationship between the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs and substantive green innovation, which follows an inverted U-shaped pattern.
 illustrates the results of the empirical tests of the moderating mechanism. In , the coefficient of the interaction term between family and platform is significantly negative at the 5 % level of significance. Furthermore, the coefficient of the interaction term between family and platform2 has a statistically significant positive effect at the 10 % significance level. Conversely, the coefficient for the interaction between state and platform is positively significant at the 5 % level, whereas the coefficient for the interaction between state and platform2 is negatively significant at the 10 % level. Differences in equity can moderate the extent to which the depth of enterprise embeddedness influences substantive green innovation in enterprises. For family-owned enterprises, family-owned equity weakens the inverted U-shaped impact of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation, which is consistent with . However, for state-owned enterprises, state-owned equity strengthens the inverted U-shaped effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation, which is consistent with . 
 shows the moderating mechanism of family-owned equity. In particular, the green markers represent the effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness on substantive green innovation moderated by family-owned equity. 
 also shows the moderating mechanism of state-owned equity. The red markers represent the effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness on substantive green innovation moderated by state-owned equity. Thus, equity differences can moderate the inverted U-shaped effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation. 

5

## Robustness test
 illustrates the robustness test results. First, the measurement of the dependent variable is changed. Considering that green patents can be used to measure green invention patents [ ], in this study we employ the ratio of green patent applications to total patent applications as the measurement indicator for the dependent variable [ ]. The coefficient of platform in column (1) of has a statistically significant beneficial effect at the 1 % level, whereas the coefficient of platform2 at the 1 % level is significantly negative. Consistent with the significance of the relationship between the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs and substantive green innovation in the previous section, is supported. 
Second, the method of measuring the independent variable is changed. To clarify that this research examines the impact of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs, rather than digitalization, on substantive green innovation, we posit that the core characteristic of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs is the role of the enterprise as a participant embedding in DPEs [ ]. Accordingly, we extract two keywords (digital platform and ecosystem) that directly represent enterprise embeddedness in DPEs and remeasures platform2 for substitution. While the square term of the coefficient of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs is negative, Column (2) of demonstrates that the coefficient of platform is notably positive at the 1 % level. This is in line with the importance of the connection between the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs and substantive green innovation. remains valid.
Third, enterprises in heavily polluting industries are retained. Because China emphasizes regulating heavily polluting industries, substantive green innovation is essential for the long-term development of heavily polluting businesses [ ]. Combined with the 2012 National Economic Industry Classification Standards, 13 types of heavily polluting industries were selected from A-share listed enterprises for empirical testing. These industries are identified as C16, C25, C26, C27, C30, C31, C32, C33, C37, C42, D44, D45, and D46 [ ]. column (3) indicates that platform has a significant positive coefficient at the 1 % level, whereas platform2 has a negative coefficient at the 1 % level, which is consistent with the significant relationship between the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs and substantive green innovation. is still supported.
Fourth, the regression method is changed. Given that substantive green innovation features a left-truncation feature, this study regresses Model (1) via the Tobit model [ ]. 's column (4) shows that the coefficient of platform2 is notably positive at the 1 % level, whereas the coefficient of platform is significantly negative at the same level. Hence, is still supported.
Fifth, we exclude enterprises without patent applications. Considering that some listed enterprises did not apply for patents during the sample period, enterprises with total patent applications of 0 were excluded [ ]. At the 1 % significance level, as shown in column (5), platform2 has significantly negative coefficient. Hence, is still supported.

6

## Endogeneity test
 illustrates the endogeneity test results. On the one hand, considering omitted variables such as exogenous shocks at the city and industry levels, and on the other hand, acknowledging the potential bidirectional causality between the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs and substantive green innovation, there may be endogeneity issues in the regression results [ ]. Specifically, as the level of substantive green innovation in enterprises increases, enterprises are more inclined to embed in DPEs to showcase their competitive advantages to stakeholders and gain resource support [ ]. Therefore, this study employs high-dimensional fixed effects models and instrumental variable methods to mitigate endogeneity. 
First, following the approach of Lewbel et al. [ ], the instrumental variable (Gap_Cubic) for the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs is constructed by calculating the difference between the depth of firm-level enterprise embeddedness in DPEs and the average depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs at the industry-province level. The instrumental variable for platform2 is the square of Gap_Cubic. displays the first-stage regression findings in columns (1) and (2). Gap_Cubic has a significant and positive correlation with platform, as these columns show. At the 1 % significance level, this correlation rejects the null hypothesis. The results of the second step of the regression are shown in the research article in , column (3). For the enterprise samples affected by the effective instrumental variables, at the 1 % significance level, the coefficient of Gap_Cubic2 estimated by instrumental variables is significantly negative, whereas the coefficient of Gap_Cubic assessed by instrumental variables is considerably positive. At a significance level of 1 %, the Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic shows that the hypothesis of underidentification of instrumental variables is rejected. Additionally, the critical value of Stock-Yogo (7.03) is surpassed by the Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic (426.582), suggesting that at a significance level of 10 %, this study rejects the hypothesis of weak instrumental variables.
Second, after enterprise and year-fixed effects are considered, industry-year and city-year fixed effects are further introduced to control for potential impacts of exogenous shocks at the industry and regional levels, respectively. 's column (4) illustrates that the coefficient of platform is positively significant at the 1 % level. Furthermore, at the 1 % level, the coefficient of platform2 has negative significance. In summary, these findings suggest that the instrumental variables used in this study are resilient, successfully mitigating the problems of endogeneity that may arise from bidirectional causation and omitted variables.

7

## Discussion and implication
7.1

## Discussion
This study finds that there is an inverted U-shaped effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on firms’ substantive green innovation, with the optimal depth being 0.66 %. When the depth lies within the interval [0,0.66 %], the depth of enterprise embeddedness has a significant positive impact on substantive green innovation. This finding aligns with Buttol et al. [ ], who, using the case of the Cosmes platform, demonstrated that firms can overcome resource constraints after joining the platform, significantly contributing to substantive green innovation. This study further quantifies that enhancing the depth of enterprise embeddedness within the interval of [0,0.66 %] significantly boosts substantive green innovation. Moreover, at the depth of 0.66 %, the level of substantive green innovation reaches its maximum value. The rationale behind this phenomenon is that, as the depth of enterprise embeddedness increases, other enterprises and stakeholders in DPEs can provide financial, natural, talent and other heterogeneous resources to the embedding enterprise at low cost and high quality [ ]. This resource blessing effect helps the embedding enterprise overcome resource constraints inherent in substantive green innovation [ ].
On the other hand, this study presents new findings from the resource curse perspective, demonstrating that enterprise embeddedness in DPEs has a significant negative impact on substantive green innovation when the depth of embeddedness exceeds 0.66 %. Existing studies [ , ] emphasize the positive impact of digital platform ecosystems on firms' green innovation from interaction and system perspectives. However, this paper argues from the resource curse perspective that excessive embedding in DPEs leads to an over-accumulation of resources, which triggers a resource curse and consequently inhibits substantive green innovation. Xu et al. [ ] highlights that excessive reliance on natural resources inhibits green innovation, indirectly supporting this paper's findings. Moreover, this study reveals that, beyond natural resources, other heterogeneous resources such as financial, technological, and human resources provided by DPEs to embedding firms can also trigger a resource curse, thereby inhibiting substantive green innovation. This occurs because the resource abundance facilitated by DPEs may lead to corporate moral hazard and intellectual property infringement problems [ ].
Additionally, this study introduces new moderating mechanisms-family-owned equity and state-owned equity and finds that family-owned equity weakens the inverted U-shaped effect of the depth of enterprise embeddedness, whereas state-owned equity enhances it. The underlying reason is likely that family-owned equity reduces firms' risk tolerance and incentivizes them to enhance business credit [ ]. Conversely, state-owned equity increases firms' environmental concerns and weakens their incentives to innovate [ ]. Wu et al. [ ] highlights that firms’ equity differences as platform builders affect substantive green innovation. In contrast to Wu et al. [ ], this study considers firms as platform users and examines whether their equity differences affect the inverted U-shaped effect of enterprise embeddedness, thereby enriching research on the moderating mechanism of equity differences in enterprise embeddedness.
This study extends existing theoretical and empirical research on the impact of DPEs on firms' substantive green innovation [ ], particularly by expanding the application of the resource curse theory to the study of the green innovation effect of enterprise embeddedness [ ]. Our findings suggest that the depth of firms' embeddedness in DPEs needs to be moderate to avoid the negative effects of the resource curse. This study reveals that when the depth of enterprise embeddedness is 0.66 %, the level of firms’ substantive green innovation reaches its highest value. Therefore, to promote substantive green innovation in firms, the optimal depth of embeddedness should be maintained around 0.66 %.
This study provides guidance for firms on the optimal depth of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs. Firms should carefully plan their depth of embeddedness in DPEs to avoid over-reliance on platform resources. Moderate embedding can help enterprises maximize substantive green innovation benefits, while over-embedding may be counterproductive [ ]. For enterprise managers, this study suggests that enterprises should actively embed in DPEs, particularly when the depth of enterprise embeddedness is below 0.66 %. A moderate depth of enterprise embeddedness is conducive to enhancing the level of substantive green innovation of the enterprise, reducing economic costs [ ], promoting synergy and division of labor among enterprises, and empowering high-quality development [ ]. However, when the depth of embeddedness exceeds 0.66 %, enterprises should dynamically adjust their embeddedness strategy to ensure continuous access to resource blessings while avoiding the resource curse [ ].
For policymakers, this study suggests developing incentive mechanisms to encourage enterprises with an embeddedness depth below 0.66 % to participate in DPEs, thereby enhancing overall substantive green innovation capacity. For enterprises with an embeddedness depth greater than 0.66 %, policymakers should establish a dynamic monitoring mechanism to track the green innovation status of these enterprises and make timely policy adjustments to curb false green innovation behaviors [ ].
As more companies embed themselves in DPEs, only a moderate embedding strategy will contribute to the green transformation and sustainability of the industry as a whole [ ]. This study reveals a potential resource conflict for substantive green innovation in the era of increasing enterprises embeddedness in DPEs. Without a reasonable interval of enterprise embeddedness in DPEs, it is likely to trigger the resource curse, impeding the high-quality development of enterprises and the achievement of global dual-carbon goal [ ].
The limitation of this study is the limited scope of the data and coverage of resource conflicts [ ]. The research data are primarily from Chinese industrial enterprises, which may not be applicable to other industries or countries [ ]. Additionally, this paper does not consider the impact of uneven resource allocation conflicts on firms' substantive green innovation within platform ecosystems. Uneven resource allocation may result in large monopolistic firms obtaining excessive resources, while other firms remain constrained by insufficient resources [ ]. Such uneven allocation can lead to resource wastage and innovation inefficiency, ultimately affecting the level of firms’ substantive green innovation [ ].
Future studies could expand the data to include more industries and countries to validate the generalizability of the findings. Additionally, future research could explore the differences between monopolistic and non-monopolistic firms in their strategies for embedding platforms within the context of platform ecosystems. Through case studies, researchers could clarify whether there is a conflict between these two types of firms concerning unequal resource allocation.

7.2

## Policy implication
This study reveals that excessive embedding in DPEs can lead to issues such as intellectual property rights infringement, vicious competition for human resources, and moral hazard, thereby generating a resource curse effect that weakens substantive green innovation [ , , ]. Enterprises should optimize their DPE strategies to enhance intellectual property utilization and green innovation, adapting management for maximum protection and performance [ ]. They should implement a comprehensive personnel classification and assessment system, with specific guidelines and a difficulty-weighted scoring system to encourage substantive green innovation [ ]. Additionally, enterprises should improve resource utilization efficiency, avoid over-reliance on internal resources, and enhance innovation capabilities to promote green innovation [ ].
For family-owned enterprises, family-owned equity weakens the inverted U-shaped relationship of the main regression. Therefore, family-owned enterprises should enhance their professional manager system, update governance regulations, and adapt family values to the platform economy era [ ]. They should also prioritize corporate social responsibility, focus on social emotional wealth, and avoid short-sighted, performance-oriented incentives [ ].
For state-owned enterprises, state-owned equity enhances the inverted U-shaped relationship of the main regression. Based on this, state-owned enterprises should integrate substantive green innovation into their development strategy, leveraging platform ecosystem resources under environmental regulation pressures [ ]. They should adopt a gradual, step-by-step approach to embedding in DPEs to avoid the resource curse effect and ensure sustainable innovation [ ].

8

## Conclusions
This study examines the impact of the depth of Chinese enterprise embeddedness in DPEs on substantive green innovation from 2010 to 2020. We address endogeneity using various methods and explore the moderating effects of family-owned equity and state-owned equity.
The primary findings of the study are as follows: (1) The relationship between the depth of enterprise embeddedness in the DPE and substantive green innovation exhibits an inverted U-shaped pattern:initial embedding fosters innovation through the resource blessing effect, but beyond a certain threshold of 0.66 %, the resource curse effect dominates, inhibiting innovation. (2) Family ownership lessens this inverted U-shaped relationship, whereas state ownership enhances.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Qian Zhao: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation. Chenfang Zhao: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Investigation, Conceptualization. Chengcheng Song: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization.

## Data and Code Availability statement
Data will be made available on request.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.