pmcPLoS GenetPLoS Genet331plosgen101239074plosPLOS Genetics1553-73901553-7404PLOSPMC10355397PMC10355397.110355397103553973741848910.1371/journal.pgen.1010807PGENETICS-D-22-014241MethodsBiology and Life SciencesEvolutionary BiologyEvolutionary SystematicsPhylogeneticsPhylogenetic AnalysisBiology and Life SciencesTaxonomyEvolutionary SystematicsPhylogeneticsPhylogenetic AnalysisComputer and Information SciencesData ManagementTaxonomyEvolutionary SystematicsPhylogeneticsPhylogenetic AnalysisBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsMutationBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGenomicsBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsPrimatesApesGorillasBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsPrimatesApesGorillasPhysical SciencesMathematicsProbability TheoryProbability DistributionPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsEuropeBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGenetic LociAllelesBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesSequencing TechniquesNucleotide SequencingResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesSequencing TechniquesNucleotide SequencingRegularized sequence-context mutational trees capture variation in mutation rates across the human genome
Baymer: A Bayesian approach to capture mutation rate variation using population variation datahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8615-9164AdamsChristopher J.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7640-0797ConeryMitchellData curationVisualizationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0496-1119AuerbachBenjamin J.Formal analysisWriting – review & editing JensenShane T.ConceptualizationWriting – review & editing MathiesonIainConceptualizationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6205-9994VoightBenjamin F.ConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Genomics and Computational Biology Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America2
Department of Statistics and Data Science, The Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America3
Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America4
Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America5
Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of AmericaBaldingDavidEditor ). We have implemented our Baymer method into software that is freely available as a python package. This can be accessed on the Voight Lab GitHub repository: https://github.com/bvoightlab/Baymer. Model outputs from Baymer described in the manuscript are available at: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7843023.

## Data Availability
All data used for this project was obtained from the public domain, with specific links to download provided in the Supplement ( ). We have implemented our Baymer method into software that is freely available as a python package. This can be accessed on the Voight Lab GitHub repository: https://github.com/bvoightlab/Baymer. Model outputs from Baymer described in the manuscript are available at: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7843023.

## Introduction
Germline mutations are the primary source of genetic variation between and within species. Quantifying where, what type, and how frequently mutations arise is therefore of fundamental importance to population genetic inference and complex trait studies. Better estimates of mutation rates improve tools designed to quantify population divergence times [ ], demographic history [ ], and the effects of background selection [ ]. Moreover, models for the underlying de novo mutation rate from which burden of mutations can be statistically assessed have enabled discovery of genes [ , ] and non-coding sequences [ , ] contributing to complex disease [ , , , ].
Our working hypothesis is that there exists an underlying structure to the context-dependent effects that shape the mutation rate. Here, we focus on polymorphism probabilities as a proxy for the mutation rate that we hypothesize share the same context-dependent architecture subject to genetic drift, demography, selection, biased gene conversion, or additional phenomenon that operate across population history. The frequency of polymorphisms varies widely across the genome [ ] and correlates with several genomic features [ – ], with new mutations caused by both exogenous and endogenous sources [ ]. There is considerable evidence to suggest that local nucleotide context directly relates to the probability that a nucleotide mutates. A classic example of this is the ~14-fold higher rate of C>T transitions at methylated CpG sites, owing to spontaneous deamination of 5-methylcytosine [ – ]. Long tracts of low-complexity DNA show elevated variability in mutation rates, which is hypothesized to be the result of slippage of DNA polymerase during replication [ ]. This prior work suggests that local sequence context is integral to understanding variation in polymorphism rates across the genome, and that the most predictive models will be best positioned to guide elucidation of the underlying mutational mechanisms.
Our previous work demonstrated that a sequence context window of seven nucleotides (i.e., ‘7-mer’) provided a superior model to explain patterns of genetic variation relative to smaller windows that are commonly used (e.g., 3-mers) [ ]. While an advance, this model was fundamentally limited for three reasons: scalability, regularization, and uncertainty. First, the size of the model–which increases by a factor of four for each nucleotide included–presents intrinsic limits both computationally and in terms of statistical power. Second, while it is straightforward to assume that every sequence context is meaningful, a more parsimonious model–informed by biological intuition–might be that only a subset of contexts contributes meaningfully to the observed variation in data. This is particularly important for inference of somatic and de novo mutation rates or in other data-sparse situations (e.g., across species). Finally, while our previous model provided a point estimate of the mean polymorphism probability, it did not immediately emit uncertainty resulting from multinomial variance and heterogeneity in larger sequence contexts. As sequence context sizes are expanded, there is functionally less data and thus more uncertainty in estimates, making point estimates even more unreliable. Quantifying uncertainty is also required for detecting differences in probabilities across models, for example when comparing differences in rates across populations [ – ] or at functional genomic features [ ]. Ideally, a method should scale the inferred context length proportional to the amount of data and the biological signal that may be present within that data while providing uncertainty in estimated parameters and underlying probabilities.
Previous work has sought to address these challenges, though methods introduced to date do not address all limitations simultaneously. Sparsity and scalability have been tackled through a deep-learning framework [ ] as well as an IUPAC-motif-based clustering approach [ ] which modeled polymorphism probabilities up through 9-mers. Another method explored polymorphism probabilities up through 7-mers using DNA shape covariates to reduce the parameter space [ ]. All three methods are robust and effective at measuring point estimates of polymorphism probabilities in expanded sequence contexts, however none explicitly estimates the uncertainty of these parameters. Finally, the CIPI model [ ] is a Bayesian method that addresses these issues, but focuses on applications with smaller context-window motifs (5-mer) in variant settings with fewer mutation events (e.g., somatic mutations in cancer or mutations in viral genomes) and is not obviously scalable computationally to larger size context windows and sizes of contemporary population genomics data sets in humans (e.g., hundreds of millions of polymorphic sites).
Here, we develop a method that addresses all three limitations embedded in a novel model. We construct a Bayesian tree-based method that integrates sequence context window size, handles sparse data, and captures uncertainty in estimates of mutation probability via the posterior distribution. We subsequently apply our approach in multiple ways. First, we quantify differences in polymorphism probabilities between continental populations and place bounds on the effect sizes of potential undescribed context-dependent differences in the 1000 Genomes dataset [ ]. Second, we explore the use of polymorphism datasets to predict de novo mutations. We measure the effect of population history, variant age, and sequence context size on model performance with the aim of generating a meaningful proxy to estimate the germline mutation rate. Finally, we build models of different great ape species and assess the similarity to human polymorphism models.

## Description of the method

## A tree-based sequence-context model captures variation in polymorphism probabilities
We began by developing a model to describe the hierarchical relationship of sequence context dependencies over increasing window sizes. We structured this as a rooted, tree-based graph, where each type of substitution class is represented distinctly ( ). Each level of the tree represents an increasing window size of sequence considered, alternating between incorporating nucleotides to the window on the 3′ end for even-sized contexts and on the 5′ end for odd-sized contexts. We fold over reverse complementary contexts to reduce the parameter count ( ). To ease readability, we denote each mutation with the sequence context, the nucleotide in scope underlined, and the polymorphism indicated with an arrow (e.g. TCC>T represents the polymorphism where the underlined cytosine has become a thymine). Each non-root edge represents the log-transformed, multiplicative shift in polymorphism probability captured by expanding sequence context. The root edge corresponds to an estimated base polymorphism probability for a given mutation type. For a given sequence context, each node in the tree represents the probability of observing a polymorphic site in the central nucleotide (referred to hereafter as polymorphism probability), and is the product of all edges, starting from the root that leads to the node ( ). As our previous work has shown for a specific level of sequence context, the distribution of observed counts for each sequence context can be modelled via independent multinomial distributions [ ] facilitating likelihood calculation. The resulting multinomial probability vector corresponds to the combination of individual polymorphism probability estimates across each mutation type tree for each sequence context ( ).
 Within the model, we incorporate two features essential for downstream applications when comparing the outputs of competing models. First, we employ a Bayesian formulation which generates posterior distributions for polymorphism probabilities ( ). This approach naturally provides uncertainty around parameter estimates which is essential for comparison of rates across different tabulated models. Second, we incorporate regularization in the parameter estimation procedure for tree edges. Previous sequence context models estimated parameters (ϕ) for all edges of the tree, meaning that all values of were effectively non-zero. However, our previous work suggested that perhaps only a fraction of edges meaningfully contribute information [ ]. Hypothesizing that only a subset of edges is informative for estimating mutation probabilities, we regularize our tree model by incorporating a spike-and-slab prior on the ϕ parameters [ ]. Our approach estimates the fraction of posterior samples in the slab, implying a non-zero effect on polymorphism probabilities, and in the spike, which implies no effect. Thus, the probability of an edge being included in the slab is the equivalent of the posterior inclusion probability (PIP) for our model. We tune the model such that the slab is favored when the evidence suggests a multinomial probability shift greater than 10% for a given context level ( ). This value was chosen weighing the stability of model convergence with the goal of inferring the largest possible effects.
Because the posterior distribution is not analytically tractable, we implemented an adaptive Metropolis-within-Gibbs Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling scheme [ ] to sample from and thereby estimate the posterior distribution of this model. To further aid in convergence and enforce intermediate nodes to have identifiable mutation probabilities, we estimated parameters of the model level-by-level rather than all simultaneously, leveraging the conditional dependency structure of the hierarchical tree. Under this set-up, the unseen higher-order layers are assigned ϕa,b = 0 edges until their level has been sampled. We embedded this model and sampling scheme into software (named Baymer) for further testing and applications.

## Verification and comparison

## Asymmetric context expansion improves parsimony and model inference
The hierarchical tree-based Baymer graphs are constructed such that the difference in length of flanking nucleotides on either side of the focal nucleotide is zero for odd-length contexts, and one for even-length contexts. It follows that these trees can be constructed in three ways: expanding sequence contexts by including even-length contexts (termed “asymmetric models”)–alternating expansions starting at either the (1) left, or 5’, end, or (2) starting with the right, or 3’, end–or (3) expanding by exclusively using odd-length contexts (termed “symmetric models”; ). When expanding an odd-length context by two nucleotides (e.g., 1-mer to 3-mer), symmetric models require 16 edges per context as compared to 20 edges per context (16 edges + 4 intermediate edges) in the asymmetric model. Despite more total edges in the asymmetric model tree architecture, we hypothesized the intermediate edges would more efficiently capture signal and provide greater resolution to detect inflection points in the tree where the local sequence context results in mutability changes. We implemented and tested all three models on the same dataset. First, we observed that for our most challenging model (9-mers), rate estimates are very strongly correlated amongst all models ( ). Furthermore, we observed that despite more total edges in the tree-graph, asymmetric models include approximately 38% fewer overall edges with high confidence ( ), suggesting greater parsimony. Finally, asymmetric models produced models that better fit holdout data than the symmetric models ( and ). This improvement arises specifically in situations where there is sufficient data to estimate 8-mer edges, but insufficient data to confidently estimate 9-mer rates. Given our folding scheme, we opted for the biologically pragmatic choice of an even-length context tree architectural model that initiates alternating context expansions with the right end (3’), as this captures CpG effect(s) as early as possible in the tree without distributing the effect across more than one edge.
 

## Evaluation of the model demonstrates robust inference of the underlying rates with uncertainty
A key feature of Baymer is that it estimates posterior distributions for each parameter, allowing for uncertainty in the probabilities of polymorphism at each sequence context. To evaluate the coverage of the estimated posterior probabilities, we used simulations to assess how often our posterior distribution captures simulated values. Using a pre-specified polymorphism probability table, we tested how frequently polymorphism probabilities estimated by Baymer captured the true value for each sequence context ( ). We found that across all sequence context sizes, 89%, 93%, and 97% of context simulations contained the true polymorphism probability in the 90%, 95%, and 99% credible intervals, respectively ( and ).
A second important feature is that regularization is embedded into the method, allowing for the creation of parsimonious models that capture most of the information with the fewest non-zero parameters. This part is critical to address cases where the amount of data is not large and limits power, or when considering larger windows of sequence context that are rare and/or uninformative. If robustly calibrated, we would expect probabilities inferred in a holdout set to strongly correlate with those estimated during a test phase (i.e., minimal overfitting). To evaluate the robustness of the inferred rates, we partitioned the human genome reference into two sets–even and odd base pairs–and used SNPs of allele count 2 or greater observed in the gnomAD [ ] non-Finnish European (NFE) collection to independently train models ( ). We compared the concordance of probabilities for models with sequence context windows up to 4 flanking nucleotides on either side (i.e., a 9-mer model) using the maximum likelihood estimate approach [ ] and Baymer ( ). For each comparison, in addition to the Spearman correlation, we also calculated the root mean squared perpendicular error (RMSPE) from each point to the x-y axis, as a measure of the tightness of the distribution from the true, shared value ( ). The maximum likelihood estimates of polymorphism probabilities ( , Spearman correlation ρ = 0.915; RMSPE = 0.117) were less correlated and considerably less tightly distributed than those for Baymer-derived models ( , ρ = 0.990; RMSPE = 0.035). This result occurred even after omitting ~16,000 sequence contexts with zero mutations in either dataset (odd and even base pairs) from the maximum likelihood model comparison, rendering practical use of large swaths of the model useless due to substantial overfitting at the 9-mer level. If zero-mutation contexts omitted from the maximum likelihood model were included, the correlations would perform considerably worse ( and , ρ = 0.876; RMSPE = 0.744), as these polymorphism probabilities are exclusively determined by pseudo counts. Within the NFE dataset, Baymer inferences were also robust across allele frequency bins ( ).
 We next sought to evaluate the transferability of inferred models between experimental collections; while internally consistent, the above procedure could simply reflect data set specific biases [ ]. For this, we compared non-admixed, non-Finnish European (EUR) samples obtained from the 1000 Genomes (1KG) Project (re-sequenced by the New York Genome Center) [ ] with the gnomAD NFE sample described above. As before, we split the data into even and odd base pairs but also applied a variant down-sampling procedure to match total variant count and site-frequency spectrum between both sets ( ). By comparing variants found in the even base pair genome of gnomAD with the odd base pair genome of 1KG, this strategy ensures no variation overlapped between data sets. We observed that the probabilities estimated from both sample sets were strongly correlated (ρ = 0.984; RMSPE = 0.045; ) though were slightly weaker than the correlations from each internal comparison and fit less tightly (gnomAD ρ = 0.990; RMSPE = 0.035; ; 1KG ρ = 0.986; RMSPE = 0.042; ). This result demonstrates that while some additional between-sample variation may exist, Baymer infers probabilities of polymorphism that are broadly consistent with one another, supporting the notion of model transferability across different data sets.
We next aimed to quantify how well the model selects meaningful context features. We expected more proximal bases to the focal site to have a greater impact on polymorphism probabilities for two reasons, (i) due to data richness, and (ii) that proximity to the polymorphic site would suggest more direct impacts on mutability, e.g., the CpG context. Consistent with expectation, the fraction of edges with a PIP > 0.95 monotonically decreases as the sequence context size is increased ( ). For any given 9-mer context, we find a median of 3 edges included with high confidence in the model ( ). The median window of context-dependence for each 9-mer was 5 base pairs wide, although this inference is limited by the sparsity of the model ( ).

## Larger contexts best explain patterns of variation genome-wide
We note that over 61% of all edges with a PIP > 0.95 are found in the 8-mer and 9-mer levels of our model of polymorphism observed in the gnomAD NFE data. While fewer than 2% of 9-mer edges meaningfully impact the final estimates, they still account for the most total absolute edges (7189 total edges > 0.95 PIP) and are enriched for larger effect sizes ( ). This observation holds even after filters for data sparsity ( and ). This implies a considerable impact on polymorphism probabilities in extended sequence contexts, consistent with previous work [ , – ]. This general trend is similarly consistent across mutation types ( ), although with a variable degree of impact, most notably with less additional variability estimated in wider CpG>T edges ( ). We thus evaluated the overall improvement in likelihood by expanding window sizes up to 9-mers. Compared to lower context models (e.g., 3-mer, 5-mer, or 7-mer) on holdout data, 9-mer Baymer models substantially improved the likelihood and best fit to the data ( and ).

## Applications

## Sequence context motifs are correlated with changes in polymorphism probability
We next aimed to identify inflection points in the Baymer trees by examining the edges corresponding to the largest ϕs across each layer. Unsurprisingly, the CpG>T edge had the largest mean posterior ϕ magnitude ( ). Consistent with our previous results [ ], edges with the largest absolute mean posterior ϕ are largely localized at the intersection of poly-A repeat-rich sequences (lower rates of A>T substitutions) but particularly presented in 8-mer context by poly-A tract of length 4, where the mutation type extends one of the repeated patterns (e.g., CGCGAGAGA>C or CCCAAAA>C), and the CAATN motif which increases A>G mutability (2.35–2.99x increase, ).
Next, we attempted to discover specific motifs that are enriched in the highest or lowest 1% of 9-mer polymorphism probabilities within each mutation type ( and ). We recapitulate almost all previously reported motifs [ , , ]. Consistent with previous reports, we identify a preponderance of repeat-rich motifs, which is perhaps due to the impact of slippage in introducing mutations [ ]. We discover numerous motifs with flanks extending 4 base pairs from the focal nucleotide that showed enrichment (21 motifs with p < 0.0001; ), emphasizing the utility of expanded sequence context windows for modeling mutability.

## Frequency of polymorphism across populations do not differ substantially across levels of sequence context
Prior work has centered around evaluating whether mutation rates have changed over evolutionary time by evaluating differences in the proportions of sequence-context-dependent polymorphism between human populations [ , , – ]. To determine whether polymorphism probabilities differ across human populations, we analyzed individuals from the NYGC resequencing of 1000 Genomes Project (1KG) Phase III representing continental European, African, East Asian, and South Asian groups. We extracted variants private to these continental groups, down-sampling to match site-frequency spectra bins and overall sample sizes ( ). We then applied Baymer to each individual dataset to model probabilities up to a 9-mer window of sequence context. We compared estimates of polymorphism probabilities in each population by assessing the degree to which the posterior distribution of each population’s model parameters overlapped. The fraction overlap of each distribution is a proxy for the probability that the underlying parameters are the same. Due to the implicit tree structure of sequence context models, polymorphism probability shifts in edges will affect all edges downstream of the context in question. Therefore, we identified contexts where both the estimated polymorphism probability and the immediate edge leading to that context were both considered very likely to be different between populations.
Specifically, we identified contexts whose posterior estimates of polymorphism probabilities and edges both overlapped less than 1% in pairwise comparisons between the four populations ( ). This included all the most notable previously reported 3-mer shifts across continental groups, including the increase in TCC>T mutations found in European relative to non-European ancestry populations [ – , , ].
We next focused on the remainder of 3-mer and wider extended sequence contexts ( ). While a handful of such sequence contexts have been implicated [ ], these results are confounded by batch effects in the original 1KG sequencing data [ ]. Since the data we use for our analysis is derived from the New York Genome Center resequencing project [ ], we do not expect the same confounder. In our results, we observed the presence of nucleotide repeats, e.g., TA / CG dinucleotides; poly-C / poly-A in several of the divergent contexts, which could be explained by polymerase slippage [ ].
 While the population-specific polymorphism probabilities estimated and polymorphism counts are identical between each pairwise comparison and thus correlated, we still note that 15/28 pairwise differences are specific to a single continental group. Of these, only the two canonical European context mutation differences (TCC>T and TCT>T) are in 3-mer contexts, otherwise all are found in 5-mer and greater window sizes. In South Asian samples, we find that the mean CTATA>T polymorphism probabilities are approximately 1.6 times higher than the remaining populations and in Africans TATATATC>G is approximately 1.9 times higher. The largest population-specific effect was discovered in East Asians where ATACCTC>A polymorphism probabilities are roughly 2.7 times higher than in European, African, or South Asian models. None of these effects have been explicitly documented before.
Taken collectively, we observed relatively few instances of edges that were quantifiably different across continental groups, and those that were observed were largely confined to relatively small windows of context where we might have anticipated well-powered tests (e.g., 3- and 5-mers). To quantify the power of our specific analytic procedure for discovery and the sample size necessary to identify true differences in polymorphism probabilities, we performed simulations where true effect differences were ‘spiked-in’ between two populations over a range of weak to stronger effects and across a sampling of different sequence contexts ( ). Differences in mutability between populations for this experiment are defined as the natural log of the polymorphism probabilities ratio (NLPPR) between each simulated population. This allowed us to construct credible sets of effects that we were reasonably well powered (>80%) to discover ( ). Unsurprisingly, the power scaled proportional to the number of context instances, simulated mutations in the dataset, and the size of the spiked-in differences ( ). Notably, extremely subtle shifts (NLPPR < = 0.01; 0.99–1.01-fold change) were not detectable at any sequence context size. On the opposite side of the spectrum, we found that we were reasonably powered to identify shift differences where NLPPR > 1.0 (fold decrease ≤ 0.37 or fold increase ≥ 2.72) up through 5-mers and in 6-mers with large sample sizes. For reference, the TCC>T polymorphism has an NLPPR = 0.291 (~1.34 fold increase)–the largest difference of any 3-mer by our calculation.
 In contrast, our experiment had essentially no power to discover 9-mer polymorphism probability changes and extremely limited power for 8-mers, even for large differences. Thus, there may exist large differences at these sizes that we could not reliably capture. These results are consistent with our comparisons in the real data ( ), as only differences within the detectable range at each mer-level were implicated. These power calculations suggest that, given the experiment we performed grouping all mutations together (agnostic to allele frequency or age, see ), if any 3-mer differences greater than the TCC>T shift exist, we would have discovered these effects for a broad range of modest to very strong effects across a range of sequence contexts window sizes. This effectively sets bounds on the differences possible for this analysis scheme in this data.

## A sequence context model that captures variability in de novo mutational rates
Given its formulation in handling data sparsity, we next sought to apply Baymer to develop a model that best captures rates of de novo mutations across the genome. We took advantage of a recent collection of 2,976 WGS Icelandic trios that identified 200,435 de novo events[ ] and, analogous to the above, we partitioned de novo variants into even (for training) and odd (for testing) base pairs. We observed substantial improvement in the overall likelihood in the testing set for 5-mer size windows compared to 3-mers (3-mer vs 5-mer, ΔLL = 2,144), but only minimal improvement for increasing windows sizes further (5-mer vs 9-mer, ΔLL = 265, ). Indeed, Baymer did not select any sequence context feature beyond the 5-mer level with PIP > 0.95. This is not unexpected given our approach to regularization, as the number of events in larger sequence contexts is increasingly sparse, it is desirable to only include informative contexts to avoid overfitting.
We next used Baymer to improve upon this baseline model. Previous work has demonstrated that inference of de novo mutational probabilities can be captured via rare variant polymorphism data obtained from population sets as a proxy [ ]. We hypothesized that a partitioned set of polymorphism data based on: (i) larger sample sizes that (ii) closely matched the ancestry of the de novo set and (iii) focused on rare variants as a proxy to capture the most recent mutation events would generate the most transferrable model and robust rate estimates. To build variant partitions, we used variant call set data from gnomAD, focused on either a population-matched proxy (i.e., NFE, the non-Finnish European subset) or variant calls from all samples in gnomAD regardless of ancestry (i.e., ALL). For each of these, we created three partitions focused (i) exclusively on variants with one allele count (i.e., singletons; for NFE labeled NFE-1), (ii) exclusively on variants with two allele counts (i.e., doubletons; for NFE labeled NFE-2), and (iii) variants with allele count of two or greater (for NFE labeled NFE-2+). Beyond this, we also identified a set of putatively derived substitutions in the human lineage by comparing the GRCh38 human reference genome with ancestral sequences obtained from primates[ ].
We applied Baymer to each variant set independently, comparing the likelihoods of each model to explain rates of de novo mutation in the test set after downscaling probabilities proportional to the sample size. First, we observed that for 3-mer sequence context models, the set of variants obtained from the de novo training set outperformed all other models despite 102 to 1,377 times fewer variants contributing to them than the polymorphism datasets ( and ). In contrast, for larger windows of context (i.e., 7-mer and 9-mer), several of the polymorphism partitions explained the data better than one trained directly from de novo events. This result indicates that increased sample size is required to detect meaningful shifts in polymorphism probabilities in larger sequence context windows.
 Despite evidence to suggest singleton datasets should best recapitulate de novo variation [ , , ], we observed that models that trained exclusively on singletons and ALL-2 performed considerably worse than the rest across all windows of sequence context ( and ). While our prior intuition that larger numbers of variants would have provided better rate estimates from increased power deeper in the context tree, rate models exclusively estimated with singletons suffer the most from the impact of recurrent mutations [ , ], especially at CpG sites, which include the highest polymorphism probability mutation type (CpG>T) ( ).
Alternatively, population concordance between training and test and/or the quality of variant calls used in training the model could also impact performance. As such, we next sought to explore the effect of noise in low allele count variants. Although we only used variants that passed gnomAD quality control checks, this filter still included a large proportion of variants with a negative log-odds ratio of being a true variant (AS_VQSLOD < 0; ). This pattern was also evident for other variant allele counts but were most striking in singletons and the ALL-2 variant groups. Stricter quality filters (AS_VQSLOD > 5–10) considerably improved model performance, but still did not surpass the de novo training model at the 3-mer level ( ). Our NFE singleton Baymer model trained on the strictest quality filter tested (AS_VQSLOD > 10) nearly equaled our best performing model, NFE-2+, with ~ 1/30th the number of variants, but came up just short. In summary, we observed that training from a population matched sample which excluded singletons, NFE-2+, best predicted rates of de novo mutations in 5-mer or larger contexts, better than models trained on de novo events directly.
Next, we sought to determine which sample set best modelled the de novo test set adjusting for the total number of variants within the partition. To control sample size differences, we downsampled each partition to match the number of variants observed in the de novo training set (n = 70,364) five times. After down-sampling and when considering 9-mer context models, we observed that the partitions which included NFE exclusively (noted in green, ) performed on average better than using the entirety of gnomAD, “ALL” (noted in orange in ), which included a more diverse panel of individuals within Europe (e.g., Finnish) but also beyond Europe (e.g., East and South Asian, African and African American). This is consistent with prior belief that, after controlling for the total sample size, variants that derive from samples where ancestries more closely match are the most informative.

## A grafted tree approach provides superior estimates of de novo mutational probabilities
Given the observations that de novo models only outperform polymorphism-based models when either small sequence contexts are used ( ) or the sample size is controlled ( ), we next sought to explore a transfer learning-inspired [ ] strategy to improve upon our model performance. Transfer learning has previously been employed in a sequence context modelling setting [ ]. We hypothesized that regularization means that de novo models have reduced performance with expanded sequence contexts due to low sample sizes. Indeed, our de novo model did not have the power necessary to confidently (PIP > 0.95) include any non-zero shifts in sequence contexts larger than 5-mers in the model ( ). The larger polymorphism datasets, however, were well-powered to detect shifts in every level of the tree ( ).
 The nested tree structure of our polymorphism probability models provides a natural strategy where specific branches of the estimated trees can be interchanged, i.e., a “grafted” tree. We asked how similar estimates for edges in expanded sequence contexts are between our de novo model and the best-performing polymorphism model, NFE-2+. In edges in 2-mer and greater levels where the de novo training model is powered enough to detect shifts (PIP > 0.95), the mean posterior estimates of shifts are highly correlated ( ). This suggests a grafted tree approach is feasible, leveraging the polymorphism datasets for those edges the de novo model is incapable of estimating properly due to sparsity ( ). Therefore, we built a grafted tree model using 1- to 3-mer edges estimated in the de novo training data model, and 4- to 9-mer edges estimated using the NFE-2+ data model. The resulting combined model had a greater fit to the holdout de novo data than either the NFE-2+ model or de novo model alone ( and ).

## Sequence context-dependent mutability is shared between closely related great ape species
Finally, we examined how well human polymorphism models could capture variability in polymorphism levels observed in populations of great ape. Using polymorphism data from the Great Ape Genome Project [ ], we built Baymer models of Pan troglodytes and Gorilla gorilla ( ). We note broad agreement in estimated polymorphism probabilities between humans and chimpanzees ( , Spearman correlation ρ = 0.950; RMSPE = 0.089) or gorillas ( , Spearman correlation ρ = 0.942; RMSPE = 0.103). These results indicate that the rates of polymorphism at higher orders of sequences contexts are similar across closely related great ape species. As we were especially interested in how human polymorphism models compared with chimpanzee and gorilla models in predicting holdout data in each respective species, we then tested models on odd base pair data in each species, training models using even base pair data for the species in focus ( ). For both chimpanzee ( ) and gorilla ( ) tests, species-matched 9-mer models outperformed all other models. While human-derived models are outperformed at the 9-mer level, it is notable that human 9-mer models are more likely than chimpanzee 7-mer models against chimpanzee data and gorilla 5-mer models against gorilla data ( ). Taken collectively, these results suggest the rates of polymorphism at higher orders of sequences contexts are similar across closely related great ape species, with within-species models best capturing variability in observed polymorphism levels.

## Discussion
Here, we present Baymer, a Bayesian method to model mutation rate variation that computationally scales to large windows of nucleotide sequence context ( and ), robustly manages sparse data through an efficient regularization strategy, and emits posterior probabilities that capture uncertainty in estimated probabilities. Consistent with previous studies [ – ], we show that expanded sequence context models in most current human datasets are overfit with classic empirical methods but considerably improve model performance when properly regularized. As a result, this method allows for renewed evaluation of experiments that originally were statistically limited to polymorphism probability models with small sequence context windows.
We examined differences in polymorphism probabilities between the continental populations in the 1KG project. While differences in 3-mer polymorphism probabilities have been well-documented [ – ] and expansions up to 7-mers have been tested [ ], both methods rely on empirical models with frequentist measures of uncertainty. Here, we expanded the search space out to 9-mer windows and leverage the uncertainty estimated in the model to directly quantify differences in these populations. We note that many of the differences discovered contain poly-nucleotide repeats. There is some prior literature on the mechanism of slippage in polymerases during replication of such sequences [ ], so differential efficiencies of these enzymes across populations could conceivably result in these patterns. However, it is also very possible that artifacts from sequencing errors with differential effects across populations could explain the differences.
Despite being well-powered to identify a large range of differences in 3-mer and smaller contexts, we identified very few contexts that differ with high probability between the populations tested. This implies that if large-scale population differences in the mutation spectrum do exist at these window context sizes, they may be comprised of numerous subtle shifts rather than a few large changes, in agreement with conclusions from prior work [ ].
We also explicitly placed bounds on the magnitude of differences that could possibly exist in these data without being detected, quantifying what differences we can expect to be discovered given the way variants are grouped in this experiment. Even though the 1KG project is relatively small compared to current datasets, the number of sequence contexts available for modeling is dataset-independent and inherently limited by the sequence diversity of the human genome. Thus, while more polymorphism data could lead to the discovery of additional smaller shifts in the future, bigger datasets will not improve the power to detect larger shifts in this allele frequency agnostic setting. In fact, for very large samples, polymorphisms in some contexts can become saturated [ ], reducing the information content in a similar manner as overly sparse data. Thus, both to increase power and to improve modeling resolution, it will become necessary to partition the data (e.g., by allele frequency or variant age [ ], or other genomic features).
It remains a challenge to disentangle the contribution of demography [ , , ] versus changes in the underlying mutation rate on the mutation spectrum. Here, we control for the site frequency spectrum of variants included, but the next stage of this model will need to incorporate more sophisticated demographic features. Integrating Baymer-derived trees with a joint mutation spectrum and demographic history method, such as mushi [ ], is a promising future direction. While this work focuses on modeling mutability in regions minimally affected by background selection, constraint could also bias estimates. Given prior work [ ] we do not expect the underlying sequence-context-mediated mutability to behave any differently in constrained regions, suggesting future Baymer-estimated codon-aware models to explicitly model expected variation in coding regions.
We also aimed to address the degree to which polymorphism datasets could be used to approximate the de novo mutation rate. Currently, true de novo mutation datasets are limited in size, which place bounds on the scope of inference for adequate sequence context modeling. We demonstrate that polymorphism datasets are accurate proxies for de novo mutation models and largely share the same context-dependent mutability shifts, though in contrast to reports in the literature [ , , ], the focus exclusively on singleton variants (at least, using gnomAD calls) performed poorly relative to all other considered models. Indeed, our experiment indicates that it is preferable to use germline mutation models based on large polymorphism datasets that can estimate shifts through the 9-mer level than it is to use the largest 3-mer de novo dataset, as is commonly used in the literature [ , , ]. Including exclusively variants from either polymorphism data or de novo data was also suboptimal, however, as the best possible model we built for estimating de novo mutation rates used de novo mutations in concert with polymorphism datasets. The success of this experiment implies a general context-dependent mutability architecture that underlies the human mutation spectrum. The similarity of the derived dataset, which in theory represents the oldest subset of variants tested, to the de novo variation further strengthens this argument. We note this dataset could in theory be biased towards European samples given the history of the Human Genome Project [ ], and as such, refinements will need to be made as more diverse representations of the human genome are created. Overall, this work suggests that although there have been some well-documented small changes in context-dependent mutation rates, the general architecture remains largely conserved during modern human history.
Our experiments modeling great ape variation suggests this general architecture might be more pervasive across the tree of life. While some specific mutation spectra differences have been documented [ , ], we note broad agreement amongst closely related species as well as similar signals in extended sequence contexts. For those non-human species with WGS datasets, cohort-sizes are usually very small (< 100), however, Baymer is well-suited to handle these sparse data situations. Furthermore, for those species with very little data, this work opens the exciting possibility to leverage closely related species’ models as priors for estimating variation in less well-characterized relatives. Further work is necessary to model species across the tree of life to determine the extent that sequence context-dependent mutability is shared and how transferable 9-mer models can be.
One limitation of the model is the treatment of multi-allelic sites. Currently, multi-allelic sites are treated as separate polymorphisms which violates assumptions of the multinomial model, where only one outcome is possible for each locus. When we excluded multi-allelic sites, we observed biases in the rates of CpG>A and CpG>G mutations, which are disproportionately filtered as a side-effect of sharing the same sequence contexts with CpG>T mutations. A more nuanced approach that models multiallelic and biallelic sites separately and then integrates jointly would deal with this issue, though multiple mutations at the same nucleotide position with the same allele change would require additional effort [ ].
Finally, although we can identify regions of the tree where polymorphism probabilities diverge and thus infer critical points in the tree, this model is tailored towards polymorphism probability estimation rather than explicitly for motif discovery [ ]. Our objective is to estimate polymorphism probabilities rather than finding those contexts with the largest effect sizes. Although including even-length contexts yields better-performing models, the current tree architecture only explicitly captures the effects of half of such contexts. While adding one nucleotide at a time pseudo-symmetrically for tree generation reduces the computational sampling load, it makes for more difficult interpretation of the resulting mono-nucleotide impacts. Baymer’s formulation also does not model the mutability of target contexts independent of mutation type, which currently requires post-hoc analysis to identify motifs that have non-specific mutability signatures. Future work will therefore need to integrate all possible paths through the sequence context tree and share information across contexts between mutation type trees.
In all our experiments, we focused on the entirety of the non-coding genome that is accessible to sequencing. That said, Baymer can easily be applied to any genomic features of interest for both polymorphism probability estimates and comparisons of feature-dependent sequence context mutability changes. Our approach does not currently incorporate genomic features in the model, but given genomic area bounds, polymorphism probabilities can be tailored to a biological question of interest. Addressing questions regarding the impact of genomic features on observed polymorphisms will be enhanced with well-regularized models, as smaller genomic areas or specific variant conditions can induce considerable data sparsity by reducing the number of contexts and/or polymorphisms available. Therefore, Baymer paves the way for exciting possibilities to study the effects of genomic features, variant age, and smaller subpopulations on sequence context-dependent mutation rate variation.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Empirical even odd polymorphism probability scatter plots for the NFE dataset including contexts with zero mutation variants.
Baymer mean posterior estimates for (A) 3-mer models (Spearman correlation = 0.999; p < 10−100; RMSPE = 0.0009), (B) 5-mer models (Spearman correlation = 0.999; p < 10−100; RMSPE = 0.0063), (C) 7-mer models (Spearman correlation = 0.992; p < 10−100; RMSPE = 0.0459), and (D) 9-mer models (Spearman correlation = 0.876; p < 10−100; RMSPE = 0.7441) in even and odd base pair datasets. Polymorphism probabilities in the bottom two and top left quadrants correspond to those contexts where no mutations are present for the given mutation type in the respective datasets. These polymorphism probabilities are exclusively calculated using pseudocounts.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Comparison of Baymer mean posterior estimates for differing allele frequency (AF) bins in the NFE dataset.
(A-D) AF 0.02–0.05 compared against 0.05–0.15 AF, 0.15–0.30 AF, 0.30–0.50 AF, and 0.50–0.85 AF, respectively. (E-G) AF 0.05–0.15 AF compared against 0.15–0.30 AF, 0.30–0.50 AF, and 0.50–0.85 AF, respectively. (H-I) 0.15–0.30 AF compared against 0.30–0.50 AF and 0.50–0.85 AF, respectively. (J) 0.30–0.50 AF compared against 0.50–0.85 AF.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Comparison of empirical and Baymer-derived 9-mer polymorphism probabilities in NYGC-resequenced 1000 Genomes Phase 3 non-admixed non-Finnish European (EUR) polymorphisms with derived AC ≥ two in non-coding accessible regions.
(A) Empirical 9-mer polymorphism probabilities for context mutations with at least one occurrence in both datasets (102,875 omitted context mutations) are plotted against one another (Spearman correlation = 0.862; RMSPE = 0.175). (B) Baymer mean posterior estimates for 9-mer polymorphism estimates in even and odd base pair datasets (Spearman correlation = 0.986; RMSPE = 0.042).
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## Overview of the characteristics of edge mutability change dynamics in Baymer models of the NFE dataset.
(A) Histogram of the number of edges per 9-mer that were inferred to confidently change polymorphism probabilities (PIP > 0.95). (B) Histogram of the maximum edge size per each 9-mer that was inferred to confidently change polymorphism probabilities (PIP > 0.95). (C) Estimated distributions of phi for each mer size level. (D) The distribution of the fractional differences of each 9-mer mean posterior polymorphism probability with their respective nested 3-mer mean posterior polymorphism probability estimates, partitioned by mutation type.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## Fraction overlap of simulated datasets trained by Baymer at varying sequence contexts and log changes to the null polymorphism probability.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## Variant Quality Scores reported in gnomAD by allele count.
Distribution of gnomAD AS_VQSLOD quality scores in non-Finnish European samples (“NFE”; A-C) and in all populations (“ALL”; D-F), separated into singletons (A,D), doubletons (B,E), and variants with allele count greater than or equal to 3 (C,F).
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## Comparison of Homo sapiens Baymer model (NFE-2+ model) estimates with Pan troglodytes and Gorilla gorilla great ape species.
(A) Mean polymorphism estimates of Homo sapiens model plotted against mean polymorphism estimates of Pan troglodytes model (Spearman correlation = 0.957; RMSPE = 0.088). (B) Mean polymorphism estimates of Homo sapiens model plotted against mean polymorphism estimates of Gorilla gorilla model (Spearman correlation = 0.950; RMSPE = 0.097). (C) Multinomial likelihoods for each model are calculated on odd base pair Pan troglodytes test data at various sequence context sizes. Pan troglodytes model is trained on even base pair data only. (D) Multinomial likelihoods for each model are calculated on odd base pair gorilla gorilla test data at various sequence context sizes. Gorilla gorilla model is trained on even base pair data only. Polymorphism probability estimates were linearly scaled to match the mean polymorphism probability of the holdout dataset.
(EPS)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Calibration of credible sets across mer levels by measuring number of simulations capturing the truth value.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Likelihood of even base pair NFE Baymer models on 9-mer odd base pair holdout NFE data.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Top 5 largest mean posterior phi estimates for each context size.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Table

## Motifs tested for enrichment in the top or bottom 1% of polymorphism probabilities for each mutation type.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Table

## Baymer modeled 1KG private continental context mutations with extreme polymorphism probability differences.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Table

## Sample sizes and test likelihoods for each de novo comparison dataset.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Table

## Sample sizes and test likelihoods for each great ape comparison test.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S8 Table

## Run-times for models with increasing sequence context windows.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Text

## Supplementary Methods.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Text

## Computational Considerations.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Text

## Data Availability.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

We would like to thank Dr. Ziyue Gao for her very helpful feedback on the manuscript and in the development process.
 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010807.r001Decision Letter 0
BaldingDavidSection EditorSiepelAdamGuest Editor© 2023 Balding, Siepel2023Balding, Siepelhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
7 Feb 2023

Dear Dr Voight,
Thank you very much for submitting your Research Article entitled 'Regularized sequence-context mutational trees capture variation in mutation rates across the human genome' to PLOS Genetics.
The manuscript was fully evaluated at the editorial level and by independent peer reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important problem, but raised some substantial concerns about the current manuscript and the associated software. Based on the reviews, we will not be able to accept this version of the manuscript, but we would be willing to review much-revised version of the manuscript with working software. We cannot, of course, promise publication at that time.
Should you decide to revise the manuscript for further consideration here, your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. We will also require a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript.
If you decide to revise the manuscript for further consideration at PLOS Genetics, please aim to resubmit within the next 60 days, unless it will take extra time to address the concerns of the reviewers, in which case we would appreciate an expected resubmission date by email to plosgenetics@plos.org.
If present, accompanying reviewer attachments are included with this email; please notify the journal office if any appear to be missing. They will also be available for download from the link below. You can use this link to log into the system when you are ready to submit a revised version, having first consulted our Submission Checklist.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please be aware that our data availability policy requires that all numerical data underlying graphs or summary statistics are included with the submission, and you will need to provide this upon resubmission if not already present. In addition, we do not permit the inclusion of phrases such as "data not shown" or "unpublished results" in manuscripts. All points should be backed up by data provided with the submission.
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool.  PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
PLOS has incorporated Similarity Check, powered by iThenticate, into its journal-wide submission system in order to screen submitted content for originality before publication. Each PLOS journal undertakes screening on a proportion of submitted articles. You will be contacted if needed following the screening process.
To resubmit, use the link below and 'Revise Submission' in the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder.
We are sorry that we cannot be more positive about your manuscript at this stage. Please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any concerns or questions.
Yours sincerely,
Adam Siepel
Guest Editor
PLOS Genetics
David Balding
Section Editor
PLOS Genetics
Reviewer's Comments to the Authors:
Reviewer #1: In this manuscript, Adams et al describe a method to model the likelihood of mutations occuring in the human germline given the (up to) 9-mer nucleotide context of the mutated locus. The method incorporates a form of regularization (via the spike-and-slab prior) helping it deal with sparse/noisy data due to low mutation counts and thus lessens overfitting, and further provides estimates of uncertainty. The hierarchical nature of the model allows for a certain form of transfer-learning-like strategy. The modelling method is well described, and reasonably rigorously tested on out-of-sample data and it is convincing that it can model the extended, up to nonanucleotide, context effects on mutation rates in the human germline well.
With respect to novel biological insight gained, this study is in my opinion somewhat limited. All the analysis is on human germline mutation/polymorphism. We see that there is signal in the 9-mer context in human population variation, extended from the 7-mer reported in a previous paper from the same lab (DOI: 10.1038/ng.3511); this is arguably a bit of an incremental advance. There are reports about differences („shifts“) in mutable oligonucleotides between human populations, with again largely unclear novelty compared to another previous paper from the same lab (doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz023). In all fairness, here, because of the new method, we do have the ability to check the variation in the 9mer contexts (wider than before) however significant differences appear very rare (or, with very slight effect, so they 'slip under the radar').
There are some technical tests on what sort of polymorphisms (singletons, doubletons, rare variants, species divergence) represent the best proxy for de novo mutations, which is interesting as an approach to boost the accuracy of the methodology, but it is not clear what new biology is/can be revealed using the improvements. In this study, the method is applied in a specialized way, only to the population variants and de novo variants, without demonstrating more general application beyond population genomics. This would be shown by illustrative analyses of feasibility to apply to other data types, e.g. somatic mutations, species divergence (except as a baseline, which was implemented), or population variation in other species). Or, as touched upon in the discussion, application to different genomic regions („areas“) would be of much interest, since it can add very interesting context to germline variation analysis (e.g. DNA replication time associates with mutagenesis quite strongly, and is often considered in genome-wide mutagenesis analyses). Thus the paper also misses, in my opinion, showcasing of the method on more diverse set of applications, to demonstrate broad interest.
Some specific suggestions follow:
1. Lines 182-184, describing the concordance test: "If zero-mutation contexts omitted from the maximum likelihood model were included, the correlations would perform considerably worse (Methods, Supplementary Fig. 1D, ρ = 0.876; RMSPE = 0.744)". Could the authors explain why two clouds of points appear at the top left and bottom right of the plot? Are these variants with exactly zero counts?
2. Additionally, it may be interesting to consider correlation in the 9-mer model by considering bins of common variants with larger counts (for instance, allele frequency >5%, >10%, 20% etc) – is Baymer expected to perform similarly well on variants under selection? (I expect that it should; they may want to comment and/or show with data)
3. Based on the power analysis presented in Table 2 (which is well appreciated!), which provides the rate of false-negatives at various effect sizes, could the authors infer the full number of true shifts in the various the 3-mer, 5-mer, 7-mer, 9-mer contexts? Can this be inferred from the number of discovered shifts (in true populations), and the false negative rate (estimated from analysis of simulated populations)?
4. Regarding the spike-and-slab prior used for regularization – its utility in preventing overfitting was nicely demonstrated. However if I understand correctly it does have at least one metaparameter (the width of the spike) and so models may benefit from optimizing this metaparameter. This is standard practice for regularized regression, usually aiming to maximize crossvalidation accuracy.
Minor:
5. cells of the last column (Population Specificity) in Table 1/supplementary Table 3 could add an asterisk in the cell indicating that this shift was or was not reported in prior work.
6. line 469: ” In all of our experiments, we focused on the entirety of the accessible, non-coding genome.: I think here "accessible" is intended to mean "accessible to sequencing", which might be confused with the meaning of "chromatin accessibility" (e.g. DHS or ATAC or such)
7. line 491: “We also compiled all sites where the high-confidence ancestral state and GRCh38 reference genome disagree, treating this collection as a call-set of derived variants.” Can they comment on whether this definition may be biased by the fact that the GRCh38 reference allele is sometimes the minor allele and not necessarily representative of the population at large?
Reviewer #2: The authors propose a new Bayesian framework for estimating the probability of observing a mutation at a site as a function of the sequence context. Their method is based on using a spike and slab prior to induce sparsity combined with a hierarchical scheme to sequentially add context to the model. They apply the method to compare polymorphism data between populations and also use it in the analysis of de novo mutations. They also conduct simulations to check that the proportional
The method is interesting and marks a significant advance in an area that has recently seen a burst of renewed interest. The paper is well-written although there are some technical details that I feel should be clarified. PLOS Genetics is an appropriate venue for this manuscript, although I think the readers of PLOS Genetics would appreciate some additional biological interpretation (the manuscript is very focused on the methodological advance).
I have two top-level concerns about the manuscript:
(1) Although the hierarchical scheme for adding context-dependence to the model makes a lot of sense from a statistical perspective, it seems quite odd from a more biological or mechanistic perspective. The model works by alternating between expanding the context at the 3' end and at the 5' end, and only allows extension to include more context if the last extension was informative. But this is quite odd physically because it means that whether context at the +3 position relative to the mutation can be included depends on whether the context at the -3 position was relevant. It would make much more sense for the inclusion of the +3 position to depend on whether the adjacent +2 position was relevant. E.g. this would make sense under the hypothesis that the effects on mutation rate are mediated by stretches of adjacent bases but that these stretches need not necessarily be exactly centered on the mutated position.
I understand that the authors have already done a great deal of work under their current scheme. But at least a spot test of e.g. expanding via a more spatially sensible hierarchy or via a symmetric widening scheme would help alleviate worries that the current scheme is leaving out important context.
(2) I think the broad readership of PLOS Genetics would be interested to hear more about the biological characteristics of the fit models and what they tell us qualitatively about the nature and extent of context dependence in human mutational dynamics. For example, if you look at a random polymorphic site, what is the distribution of the size of the context that was relevant? And what is the answer for a random (not necessarily polymorphic) position in the genome? Similarly, there is little interpretation of the actual values of phi. But there are many interesting questions, such as whether the long contexts learned by the model are indicative of sequence contexts that have a mutagenic effect (hotspots) or a protective effect. The manuscript would be improved
Minor comments:
General, but for instance Figure 2D 2E 2F y axis labels. There is a proliferation of different terminology around the parameters of the model that I found confusing. The phi are sometimes referred to as "shifts", but then also can be referred to as "edges" (as in the Figure 2 caption) or sometimes it seems are called contexts (e.g. line 214 "We note that over 61% of all sequence contexts with PIP>.95 [...]"). And then inclusion means I=1? Or can it include I=0 but phi \\neq 0?. And then differences in polymorphism rates between populations are not shifts in polymorphism rates but rather "shift differences". I suggest simplifying the terminology here to the extent that is possible.
Line 255 I was confused about the exact criteria for inclusion in Table 1.
Line 527 Is y defined?
Line 553 Does "informative" mean I=1?
Line 577 The level-by-level sampling scheme was quite unclear to me. Since there are multiple samples of the parameters at each level, how do these multiple samples play into the sampling at subsequent levels?
Reviewer #3: The manuscript introduces a new method called Baymer that can estimate mutation rates based on sequence context. It builds a hierarchical model of the sequence context and solves the model selection problem of choosing the best context size taking the data sparsity into account by using a regularizing “spike and slab” prior. The authors first use the model to investigate differences in the sequence context of polymorphisms between populations. Secondly, they explore using polymorphisms to predict the rate of de novo mutations.
A few other recent articles have looked at methods for building 9mer models of mutations, but this is a new approach to doing so. I like the idea of the grafted tree "transfer learning" model where de novo mutations are used to train the upper levels in the hierarchical model, but polymorphism data is used to train the differences between the longer k-mers. Overall the manuscript is well-written and interesting.
Specific comments:
You write that a limitation of the model is the treatment of multi-allelic sites because you assume that you only see one mutation at each site. I think that not considering recurrent mutations is a bigger problem than multi-allelic variants when you train on the polymorphism data. In a large population sample like gnomAD the majority of all possible CpG mutations are polymorphic, and because of the high mutation rate, there will have been recurrent mutations a many CpG sites. In line 340, you write that you were surprised that models trained on singletons or doubletons did not do better. I do not think this is so surprising - if you do not take the low number of CpG sites that are not already polymorphic into account you would significantly underestimate their mutation rate using the singletons. Was the model fit with singletons especially bad for CpG transitions? Either increasing the mutation counts to account for recurrent mutations or reducing the background context count to reflect that you cannot observe a singleton at an already polymorphic site should improve the models.
I tried installing the software using the included install script, but it failed because conda could not find many of the specific package versions specified in the yaml file. Maybe you need to specify which conda channels should be used?
I was able to get it installed by using other versions of the packages than the ones specified in the conda yaml file, and I tried running the code in “baymer_tutorial.ipynb”. But It looks like the tutorial in the notebook is not up to date with the names of the parameters in the functions it calls. When I tried counting mutations by running the second cell in the notebook, it gave me this error:
“TypeError: driver() missing 1 required positional argument: ‘quality_bool’”
In the 4th cell I got this:
TypeError: driver() got an unexpected keyword argument ‘random_seed’
In the 5th cell:
TypeError: driver() got an unexpected keyword argument ‘param_config_file’
Can you say something about what the running time of the method is and whether it could be used on 11mers?
Reviewer #4: Summary:
The authors present a new model and computational implementation called Baymer for inferring polymorphism probability (a proxy for mutation rate) from nucleotide sequence context. Whereas most previous work has focused on fixed local sequence context (usually 3-mers), the key insight of Baymer is that related mutation contexts (e.g. two 5-mers with a common central 3-mer) may be expected to have similar polymorphism probabilities. They construct a hierarchical tree of increasing context size around a root singlet mutation type, and model the log probability of polymorphism as additive over parameters associated to tree edges. This parameter sharing of related contexts allows more reliable estimation, especially for larger contexts that are sampled very sparsely. They also introduce explicit sparsity assumptions on the edge weights via a spike-slab prior. This parameterization and regularization results in a compressed representation of polymorphism probability over a range of context sizes, and is more robust than empirical counts in terms of several out-of-sample prediction tasks.
Overall, I found the methods and results to be compelling, creative, rigorously validated, and mostly described well. Some aspects are somewhat heuristic and less interpretable, but overall I think the work shows that the model is behaving sensibly and improving on simpler baselines, although there are some directions for improvement.
Major comments:
As the authors note, the alternating addition of 5’/3’ nucleotides across tree levels is somewhat awkward and not directly interpretable. It should also be noted that this excludes half of all even-ordered contexts. For example, as shown in figure 1, level 2 captures dinucleotide mutation types like A*>C* by adding nodes for the 4 possible 3’ contexts of the focal site. However, IIUC there are no nodes in any tree level that correspond to dinucleotide mutation with 5’ context, e.g. *A>*C. This asymmetry seems to omit a large number of mutation types from consideration, and also seems inconsistent with the approach of collapsing variants by reverse complement (with all focal site ancestral states collapsed to A or C). Are results robust to swapping the alternation order?
As a side remark related to the above point, I wonder if it’s possible to augment the tree with nodes for both 5’ and 3’ additions, and sum over paths (the tree would become a DAG). For example, TCC>T would be the child of both TC>T and CC>T, and the probability contributions could be additive over such parallel paths.
One notable limitation in the Baymer approach is that it doesn’t allow parameter sharing among mutation types that have the same ancestral state and context, but different derived states. Indeed, a separate parameter tree is constructed for each singlet mutation type. This may limit the ability to detect signatures of mutability for highly specific ancestral contexts with less specified derived states (i.e. parameter sharing for mutation targeting to identical/similar contexts, but different derived states).
Polymorphism probability is being interpreted as a proxy for mutation rate. To test this, it would be very interesting to perform a simulation study using a population genetic simulator (like msprime or slim), where the mutation rate can be parameterized according to the tree-based parameters and a standard demographic model. Even just asking how well the polymorphism-based estimates reflect the underlying mutation trees would be interesting, let alone additional modeling work to put the trees into a history inference procedure. As the authors note in the discussion, this is left for future work, so not a necessary addition for this work. But it may be straightforward to assess at some point how good a proxy for mutation rate is the polymorphism probability.
Minor comments:
Instead of the even-odd basepair test-train split, I would have thought windowed region (or whole chromosome) holdouts would be a natural way to hold out SNPs for testing. Did the authors consider this?
I didn’t really follow the arguments about a possible 2nd signal in the TCC>T signature with a distinct CC>T subcomponent. Given the asymmetric leveling, isn’t it impossible in this model to have found the 5’ dinucleotide subcomponent TC>T?
It is not clear if SNPs and mutation context are polarized with respect to an inferred human ancestral state, or taken simply as REF/ALT states.
The mutation types *AC>*CC was previously shown to be enriched in the 1KG Japanese population (Harris and Pritchard), but this was later found to be a likely cell line artifact (Anderson-Trocmé et al.). I did not see this artifactual signature in Baymer results—can you comment on why?
It is not clear how equation 1 is constrained to the unit interval (i.e. how it represents a probability). Given the priors on the phi parameters, apparently there is a nonzero probability that p will exceed unity. Similarly, elements of the p vector in equation 2 could exceed unity. How is this being handled?
It’s great that the authors have made their code repository available on GitHub. Unfortunately, the install procedure failed on both linux and mac for me. I was able to install after editing the conda environment file heavily (removing many packages, removing all the version specifications, and removing the user-specific prefix). The tutorial notebook then failed due to a API usage error in `baymer.mutation_counter.driver()`. I suggest the authors revise the install procedure to be replicable across machines/users with minimal dependencies, and debug the tutorial notebook.
**********

Have all data underlying the figures and results presented in the manuscript been provided?

Large-scale datasets should be made available via a public repository as described in the PLOS Genetics
data availability policy, and numerical data that underlies graphs or summary statistics should be provided in spreadsheet form as supporting information.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: None
Reviewer #3: None
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes: Søren Besenbacher
Reviewer #4: Yes: William DeWitt
10.1371/journal.pgen.1010807.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
28 Apr 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: baymer_rebuttal_FINAL.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pgen.1010807.r003Decision Letter 1
BaldingDavidSection Editor© 2023 David Balding2023David Baldinghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
1 Jun 2023

Dear Dr Voight,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript entitled "Regularized sequence-context mutational trees capture variation in mutation rates across the human genome" has been editorially accepted for publication in PLOS Genetics. Congratulations!
However, two reviewers have raised concerns with the software. We do not wish to delay the process any further with a minor revision decision, it's in your interests to try to resolve these problems before the paper is published which we urge you to do and make any associated adjustment to the text when preparing the final version for publication.
Before your submission can be formally accepted and sent to production you will need to complete our formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. Please be aware that it may take several days for you to receive this email; during this time no action is required by you. Please note: the accept date on your published article will reflect the date of this provisional acceptance, but your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until the required changes have been made.
Once your paper is formally accepted, an uncorrected proof of your manuscript will be published online ahead of the final version, unless you’ve already opted out via the online submission form. If, for any reason, you do not want an earlier version of your manuscript published online or are unsure if you have already indicated as such, please let the journal staff know immediately at plosgenetics@plos.org.
In the meantime, please log into Editorial Manager at https://www.editorialmanager.com/pgenetics/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production and billing process. Note that PLOS requires an ORCID iD for all corresponding authors. Therefore, please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field.  This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager.
If you have a press-related query, or would like to know about making your underlying data available (as you will be aware, this is required for publication), please see the end of this email. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming article at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. Inform journal staff as soon as possible if you are preparing a press release for your article and need a publication date.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Genetics!
Yours sincerely,
David Balding
Section Editor
PLOS Genetics

www.plosgenetics.org

Twitter: @PLOSGenetics
----------------------------------------------------
Reviewer's Comments to the Authors:
Reviewer #1: The authors have answered my queries satisfactorily. The study was improved by the revisions.
Reviewer #2: The authors have provided a thoughtful response to reviewer comments and made many improvements to the manuscript. These include a new main text figure (Figure 2) exploring different schemes for expanding local sequence content and several new passages focused on biology interpretation, particularly the new passage on comparison of mutation rates among the great apes. Overall these changes have substantially improved the manuscript and sufficiently addressed my concerns from the previous round of review.
Reviewer #3: The authors have adressed my comments to the text but I still had problems installing the tool and running it from the command line.
When I try to install the conda environment from the yaml file I get an error saying that the environment requirements cannot be solved:
Could not solve for environment specs
Encountered problems while solving:
- package numba-0.53.1-py39ha9a9b91_0 requires numpy >=1.19.5,<1.21.0a0, but none of the providers can be installed
The environment can't be solved, aborting the operation
I then installed the required packages without specifying specific version numbers and was able to run the first two commands in the tutorial but the “generate_count_json.py” command fails with the following error:
File "/opt/miniconda3/envs/baymer/lib/python3.9/site-packages/numpy/core/_methods.py", line 49, in _sum
return umr_sum(a, axis, dtype, out, keepdims, initial, where)
TypeError: can only concatenate str (not "int") to str
Reviewer #4: In this revision, the authors have added new analyses that strengthen and validate the model and results, and they have made modifications to the text to improve clarity and correctness. My main concerns and comments from the previous version have been adequately addressed. The authors directly address the more heuristic aspects of the model, showing results hold up to varying these.
There are still some issues with usability of the software (installation and tutorial notebook), and it would be nice if those could be rectified. I'll summarize some difficulties:
- The install.sh bash script is error-prone, because if the Conda env creation fails for any reason, it will still attempt to install Baymer on the last line, and this would then install it in the base environment, instead of the Baymer environment as intended. This could be avoided by using the && operator in bash, so that subsequent commands are not run after one fails.
- The current "python setup.py install" line raises a deprecation warning: "SetuptoolsDeprecationWarning: setup.py install is deprecated. Use build and pip and other standards-based tools". It is probably preferable to install via pip with "pip install .", where "." refers to the root directory. This could even be bundled into the Conda env file, so that no wrapper shell script is needed.
- Install failed for me because Conda could not resolve the version numba=0.53.1. You might want to remove or weaken the version specifiers (I was able to install successfully after removing them all).
- I’ve attached a modified Conda environment yaml file that I used to install Baymer and its dependencies, with changes addressing the issues above. I also added a jupyter dependency, so I could try running the tutorial notebook.
- Cell 3 of the tutorial notebook issues two warnings, one about a deprecation, and the other about a possibly invalid DataFrame operation. Maybe these can be modified, or at least checked for possible bugs.
- The notebook then fails to run due to FileNotFoundError errors beginning on cell 5. I suspect the notebook is relying on the contents of a local working directory that has diverged from what’s currently on GitHub. I suggest checking all this on a fresh clone of your repo. Better yet, you could set up a GitHub action to automatically check that install and notebook execution works, and have it run any time you push to the main branch.
**********

Have all data underlying the figures and results presented in the manuscript been provided?

Large-scale datasets should be made available via a public repository as described in the PLOS Genetics
data availability policy, and numerical data that underlies graphs or summary statistics should be provided in spreadsheet form as supporting information.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: None
Reviewer #4: None
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes: William DeWitt
----------------------------------------------------

Data Deposition

If you have submitted a Research Article or Front Matter that has associated data that are not suitable for deposition in a subject-specific public repository (such as GenBank or ArrayExpress), one way to make that data available is to deposit it in the Dryad Digital Repository. As you may recall, we ask all authors to agree to make data available; this is one way to achieve that. A full list of recommended repositories can be found on our website.
The following link will take you to the Dryad record for your article, so you won't have to re‐enter its bibliographic information, and can upload your files directly: 

http://datadryad.org/submit?journalID=pgenetics&manu=PGENETICS-D-22-01424R1

More information about depositing data in Dryad is available at http://www.datadryad.org/depositing. If you experience any difficulties in submitting your data, please contact help@datadryad.org for support.
Additionally, please be aware that our data availability policy requires that all numerical data underlying display items are included with the submission, and you will need to provide this before we can formally accept your manuscript, if not already present.
----------------------------------------------------

Press Queries

If you or your institution will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, or if you need to know your paper's publication date for media purposes, please inform the journal staff as soon as possible so that your submission can be scheduled accordingly. Your manuscript will remain under a strict press embargo until the publication date and time. This means an early version of your manuscript will not be published ahead of your final version. PLOS Genetics may also choose to issue a press release for your article. If there's anything the journal should know or you'd like more information, please get in touch via plosgenetics@plos.org.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: baymer_conda_env.yaml
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pgen.1010807.r004Acceptance letter
BaldingDavidSection Editor© 2023 David Balding2023David Baldinghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
26 Jun 2023

PGENETICS-D-22-01424R1 
Regularized sequence-context mutational trees capture variation in mutation rates across the human genome 
Dear Dr Voight, 
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript entitled "Regularized sequence-context mutational trees capture variation in mutation rates across the human genome" has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Genetics! Your manuscript is now with our production department and you will be notified of the publication date in due course.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. 
Soon after your final files are uploaded, unless you have opted out or your manuscript is a front-matter piece, the early version of your manuscript will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting PLOS Genetics and open-access publishing. We are looking forward to publishing your work! 
With kind regards,
Jazmin Toth
PLOS Genetics
On behalf of:
The PLOS Genetics Team
Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge CB4 3DN | United Kingdom
plosgenetics@plos.org | +44 (0) 1223-442823
plosgenetics.org | Twitter: @PLOSGenetics