pmcPLOS Glob Public HealthPLOS Glob Public Health4390plosgph9918283779606676plosPLOS Global Public Health2767-3375PLOSPMC11135783PMC11135783.111135783111357833880991010.1371/journal.pgph.0002188PGPH-D-23-012131Research ArticleMedicine and health sciencesMedical conditionsInfectious diseasesInfectious disease controlVaccinesViral vaccinesHIV vaccinesBiology and life sciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral vaccinesHIV vaccinesMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesInfectious Disease ControlVaccinesMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19Biology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAfricaUgandaMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthBehavioral and Social Aspects of HealthMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesInfectious Disease ControlVaccinesViral VaccinesBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral VaccinesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentStructural and social factors affecting COVID-19 vaccine uptake among healthcare workers and older people in Uganda: A qualitative analysis
Structural, social, and contextual factors influencing COVID-19 vaccine uptakehttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9463-5004SlivesteriSandeConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4801-0411SsaliAgnesConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1092-4832BahemukaUbaldo M.ConceptualizationProject administrationSupervisionVisualizationWriting – review & editing NsubugaDenisConceptualizationFormal analysisValidationVisualizationWriting – original draft MuwangaMosesConceptualizationProject administrationSupervision NserekoChrisConceptualizationProject administrationSupervision SsemwangaEdwardConceptualizationProject administrationSupervision RobertAsabaConceptualizationProject administrationSupervision https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0583-5272SeeleyJanetConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2818-9549ElliottAlisonFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionVisualizationWriting – review & editing RuzagiraEugeneConceptualizationInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
MRC/UVRI & LSHTM Uganda Research Unit, Wakiso, Uganda2
Department of Global Health and Development, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom3
Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital, Wakiso, Uganda4
Villa Maria Hospital, Kalungu, Uganda5
Our Lady of Consolata, Kisubi Hospital, Wakiso, Uganda6
Department of Clinical Research, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom7
Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United KingdomRobinsonJuliaEditor ]. The pandemic placed a considerable strain on the public health system, notably in its initial phase in 2020. Besides lockdown prevention measures causing great mobility challenges in accessing health facilities, many public health facilities scaled down on antenatal, HIV, vaccination, and other health services to focus on COVID-19, especially in 2020–2021 [ – ].
Several vaccines have proved to be safe and effective against laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 virus infection and symptomatic or severe COVID-19 disease [ – ]. Since December 2020, several countries initiated COVID-19 vaccine rollout programmes, with 67% of the world population fully vaccinated and 31.5% vaccinated with at least one booster or additional dose by June 2023. Vaccination rollout has been reportedly slower in Africa, with only 49.7% of the African population fully vaccinated [ , ]
In Uganda, COVID-19 vaccine rollout was launched on 10th March 2021 targeting at-risk groups: healthcare workers, security personnel, people aged 50 years and above, and those aged 18–50 years with comorbidities [ – ]. COVID-19 vaccination was scaled up to target all persons aged 18 years and above and children of 12 years above in 2022 [ , ].
Findings from a study in South Africa indicated that acceptance of a new COVID-19 vaccine was influenced by different factors including age, employment status, urbanity, and geographical location [ ]. Another study among high-risk populations in Uganda showed that 70% of the participants were open to receiving the COVID-19 vaccine with the probabilities being four times higher in men versus women [ ].
However, other studies reported concerns about the vaccine’s expedited development and approval process, potential side effects, and efficacy [ – ]. Such concerns contribute to vaccine hesitancy, which has been reported as a significant challenge to disease prevention and control worldwide. The WHO describes vaccine hesitancy as the delay in the acceptance or complete refusal of vaccines [ ].
Structural, social, and contextual factors may contribute to vaccine confidence and affect the uptake of the COVID-19 vaccine among HCWs and older people in Uganda. We set out to describe the structural, social, and contextual factors that influence the uptake of COVID-19 vaccines among HCWs and older people aged ≥ 50 years using the Social Ecological Model (SEM) to structure our analysis.

## Theoretical framework
The Social Ecological Model (SEM) provides a framework for exploring the relationship between social and structural factors and the physical environment and how such factors influence and shape the decision-making process of individuals, including their health-seeking behaviours [ , ]. The model has been used to describe individuals’ behaviours using measurements comprising of intrapersonal (within the individual), interpersonal (between individuals), institutional, community and public policy factors to provide a framework for understanding the interplay between these levels and how they shape or influence an individual’s actions and choices [ , ].
Using this framework, we explored participants’ knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes about COVID-19, personal experience about COVID-19 vaccines, facilitators and barriers to vaccine uptake, and opinions on the future of vaccine rollout (See below).
 The intrapersonal level includes individual characteristics, such as age, education, income, and health history, the interpersonal level comprises the relationship and interaction with others in a person’s closest social circle, such as friends, partners, and family members, all of whom influence a person’s behaviours including health-seeking behaviours. The institutional layer includes the social organisation characteristics, rules, and regulations for operation. The community layer covers the settings in which people have social relationships, such as schools, workplaces, and neighbourhoods, and the characteristics of these settings that affect health. Finally, the public policy layer includes the broad societal factors that favour or impair health including state regulations.

## Methods

## Study design and setting
This was a qualitative methods study conducted among a subset of participants enrolled between May and October 2021 in a prospective study to investigate acceptability and immunogenicity of COVID-19 vaccines among 597 HCWs and 150 older people (≥50 years) in Uganda. The HCWs were enrolled from three hospitals: I) Entebbe regional referral public hospital, located in Entebbe municipality, 44km from Kampala, the capital city of Uganda; II) Our Lady of Consolata Kisubi Hospital, a Private Not-For-Profit (PNFP) hospital located approximately 28km from Kampala, and Villa Maria Hospital, a PNFP hospital in Kalungu district, approximately 138km from Kampala. The older people were participants in the Well-being of Older People Study (WOPs) that has been ongoing in the semi-urban Wakiso district and rural Kalungu district for 12 years. The objective of WOPs is to describe the roles, health problems (physical and mental) and social well-being of older people directly and indirectly affected by HIV/AIDS, with special attention to the effects of the introduction of Antiretroviral Therapy (ART). In the current study, we enrolled HCWs from the three hospitals and older people from Wakiso District.

## Study participants, and sampling
Using the participant identification logs of the COVID-19 vaccine acceptability and immunogenicity study, we conducted a purposive sampling process to identify and invite 33 individuals who had been enrolled in the preceding three weeks to participate in the in-depth interviews.
We aimed to capture a wide range of perspectives by purposively including participants with diverse demographic characteristics. Selection was based on sex, occupation, education, cadre of the HCWs (doctors, nurses, laboratory technicians, hospital support staff and administrators). We also ensured that our sample included participants with different vaccination status. This was important to explore the perceptions and experiences of those who had been vaccinated and those who had not.
To account for potential variations in vaccine acceptability among different healthcare settings, we selected participants from three distinct hospitals: Kisubi hospital (n = 8), Entebbe Regional Referral hospital (n = 8), and Villa Maria hospital (n = 9). Additionally, we included 8 older participants from WOPs. This approach allowed us to move beyond solely studying vaccine acceptability among HCWs and explore the perspectives of a more diverse sample within a COVID-19 at-risk population. The combination of these factors guided our selection process, ensuring that we had a diverse group of participants for the in-depth interviews.

## Data collection
Social science research assistants (RAs) contacted the selected individuals by telephone and requested their participation in the in-depth interviews. The RAs and the identified participants agreed on the date, time, and convenient venue to discuss study information, and if they consented, interviews were conducted on the same day.
Interviews were conducted using a semi-structured interview guide (see ) that included the following topics: knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes towards COVID-19 vaccines; enabling factors and barriers to uptake of COVID-19 vaccines, and personal views on the future of the COVID-19 vaccine rollout programme. The interviews were audio-recorded if the participant agreed, or notes were taken if the participant declined voice recording. Interviews were conducted in the local vernacular language (Luganda). A few interviews were conducted in English for the participants who preferred this. Each interview lasted about 45 minutes. A senior social scientist conducted regular debriefing meetings with the RAs to review the completeness of the data and identify areas to improve on in subsequent interviews.

## Data management and analysis
Anonymized audio files were transferred onto encrypted password-protected computers, transcriptions and translations were done by the RAs, and anonymized transcripts were transferred to a secure data server at the Medical Research Council /Uganda Virus Research Institute and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (MRC/UVRI and LSHTM) Uganda Research Unit.
The data analysis process involved an iterative approach with two research assistants, under the guidance of a senior social scientist. The research team collaboratively reviewed and discussed transcripts to identify and reach a consensus on common codes. A codebook was developed based on a priori data categorization and emergent categories that came from the coding process. The codebook included definitions and examples for each code to facilitate consistent coding (see and Text).
To ensure consistency and reliability of the coding process, two research assistants independently coded a subset of transcripts, compared results and any differences in coding were resolved through discussion led by the senior social scientist until a consensus was reached. Patterns from the data led to the themes identified in this paper which are informed by the layers from the SEM.

## Ethical considerations
The study was approved by the Uganda Virus Research Institute Research Ethics Committee (UVRI REC GC/127/21/03/813), the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (UNCST SS767ES, 27-04-2021), and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine Research Ethics Committee (25997). We obtained administrative clearance from all the collaborating hospitals to conduct the study. Written informed consent to participate in the interviews was obtained at enrolment in the main study of acceptability and immunogenicity of COVID-19 vaccines. Before each interview, RAs verbally checked to confirm that participants were still interested in taking part in the in-depth interview. All interviews were conducted in a safe and private place to ensure participants’ privacy and confidentiality.

## Results

## Demographic characteristics of study participants
Among the eight older people, the mean age was 68.8 (SD 6.7) years, 50% were female, 75% were Christian, 50% had attained at least secondary education level and 37.5% had received at least one dose of the vaccine ( ). Among the 25 HCWs, the mean age was 37.8 (SD 11.2) years, 32% were female, all were Christian, 68% had at least a diploma/bachelor’s degree or other higher-level education, and 92% had received at least one dose of SARS-CoV2 vaccine ( ).
 We present our results ordered by the structure of the SEM, summarised in below.
 

## Barriers to vaccination

## Intrapersonal barriers
We captured participants’ barriers to vaccine uptake based on their individual attributes, knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes towards COVID-19 vaccines.
Having chronic conditions/illnesses such as HIV, diabetes, hypertension, and allergies was described as a barrier to vaccine uptake by HCWs and older people. Participants shared the belief that when a person with such chronic conditions have the COVID-19 vaccine, it worsens their already existing chronic health condition, even when people with chronic health conditions are prioritised for the COVID-19 vaccination.
"I have a disease called allergy, that is the only reason, why I have not been vaccinated yet" Female, 47 years, HCW, not vaccinated.
The older people reported that HCWs advised people with chronic diseases and conditions to delay receiving the vaccine.
“Whenever I get there (to the vaccination centres), the health workers tell me that the blood pressure is high and urge that I should wait for it to reduce before I take the vaccine" Female, 63 years, older person, not vaccinated.

## Interpersonal barriers
Individuals’ interactions with people close to them or people in their families/communities shape their behaviours, attitudes, and preferences, and influence their decision-making including health-seeking behaviours. The barriers included myths and misconceptions and fear of the effect the vaccine might have on them.
The myths and misconceptions attributed to social media posts and what other people were saying within homes and communities were reported to have caused fears and worries among the HCWs and older people about the vaccine. The myths and misconceptions that vaccines were intended to kill Africans, cause infertility and the linking of the COVID-19 vaccines to acts of “devil/satanic worship” were barriers to vaccine uptake. There was a reported misconception that people who received the vaccine would die two years after vaccination. There were also concerns about infertility:
“I am not vaccinated because I have had that belief, that COVID-19 vaccines cause infertility” Female, 23 years, HCW, not vaccinated.
"They would say that in men it (vaccines) causes impotence and in female, you would be barren because it was a new drug, people did not know about it. So, those who had not yet had children said let me first wait and see" Female, 44 years, HCW, vaccinated.
" I don’t want to be vaccinated because I heard about the infertility thing and the side effects like general body weakness and things of that kind” Female, 23 years, HCW, not vaccinated.
The HCWs and older people described their fears of known and anticipated vaccine side effects as barriers to vaccine uptake. They attributed these vaccine fears to social media posts.
“I usually see these videos and children show them to me like my daughter, they have phones, and they show them to me [asking] `have you seen?’. They have said this and that and the vaccine they have brought this time round is fake” Female, 62 years, older person, vaccinated.
HCWs described the concerns about vaccine side effects shared by some people which had an impact on the vaccine uptake.
"To the patients, when they come, and they do not have a fever, they happen to start feeling fever and severe headache after vaccination. They conclude that they have been given poison” Female, 29 years, HCW, vaccinated.

## Institutional barriers
Vaccine stockouts and long wating times were reported to have negatively impacted on the vaccine uptake.
HCWs and older people reported that vaccine stock-outs at the vaccination centres were a barrier to vaccine uptake.
“I went to Kisubi hospital to be vaccinated and there were no vaccines. They gave me a telephone number to call them and check if they have the vaccines. I have called them twice, and the vaccines are not yet available" Male, 68 years, older person, not vaccinated.
Some HCWs reported sending away people who came to the health facilities for vaccination because of vaccine stock-outs. The failure to find vaccines at the vaccination centres after travelling long distances was a reported setback to vaccine uptake.
"Limited vaccine doses […] like now people intending to receive the vaccines come, and you tell them that the vaccines are not available, and people move several times to the hospital and do not find the vaccine" Female, 29 years, HCW, vaccinated.
The congestion at vaccination centres, coupled with the lack of special arrangements to facilitate easy access to vaccines for older people, created barriers to vaccine uptake. The older people reported that they could not stand in long queues at the vaccination centres to receive the vaccines.
"In the beginning, being a new thing (COVID-19 vaccine), I know that it attracts many people. In my life, I do not want to struggle and be in a long queue like many people standing in the same place. I would not go there (hospital) because people were many people at the vaccination sites" Male, 68 years, older person, not vaccinated.

## Community barriers
Long distances to vaccination centres coupled with high transport costs and mobility challenges are community barriers reported.
The older people reported transport challenges getting to the vaccination centres within the communities as a barrier to vaccine uptake. The long distances to the vaccination centres and the COVID-19-related public transportation restrictions (the requirement for public transport vehicles to operate at half capacity), led to increased transport costs.
“I do not have transport to UVRI Entebbe or Kisubi hospital, that is the main reason why I am not vaccinated, nothing else” Male, 76 years, older person, not vaccinated.
Participants emphasised that transport costs and age-related mobility challenges were a major hindrance to vaccine uptake.
"The older person has difficulties taking her/him from where she/he is to the vaccination centres, they cannot move, many do not have money for transport," Male, 68 years older person, not vaccinated.
The long distance to vaccination centres was reported as a challenge by some HCWs and older people. They highlighted that COVID-19 vaccines were not available in lower-level health facilities, such as Health Centres II, which operate at the community level. HCWs emphasized that vaccines were only accessible at Health Centre III and hospital-level health facilities which were often in towns and larger trading centres. This was reported to have influenced vaccine access because people had to move long distances to the vaccination centres.
"The distance to the vaccination centres is long." Female, 76 years, older person, not vaccinated.
"Some people’s homes are too far from the health centres that are giving the vaccines because there are villages that are far from the health facilities and vaccines are not available in those communities Male, 38 years, HCW, vaccinated.

## Public policy barrier
There were particular factors associated with the roll-out of the COVID-19 vaccination campaign which differed from other vaccination programmes and raised concerns. Some HCWs complained about the unusual process of signing a consent form before being given the vaccine. This requirement caused fears and doubts about the safety of the COVID-19 vaccine.
“Why do they first want us to consent? So, they mean that if I have any problem, there is nowhere I can report because I consented. So, most people fear that consent form. Female, 29 years, HCW, vaccinated.

## Facilitators to vaccination

## Intrapersonal facilitators
HCWs and older people reported having access to correct information on COVID-19 vaccines as a facilitator to vaccine uptake. The World Health Organization (WHO) COVID-19 updates, the Continuous Medical Education series (CMEs), the updates from the Ministry of Health, training by the District Health Teams (DHT), the internet, and social media were reported as specific sources of information for HCWs. The news media (television and radio) were the information sources for older people and some HCWs. Some HCWs reported being approached by the hospital management, convincing them to take the vaccine.
“Management had to sit down and singled us out (unvaccinated), and they actually brought one of the persons who works with WHO mainly on vaccination, to talk to us, to remove the doubts we had”. Female, 29 years, HCW, vaccinated.
For some participants, being older and having chronic health conditions were described as factors that prompted them to be vaccinated. Participants with diabetes, persons living with HIV, and those with hypertension reported having accepted to receive the vaccine because of fear of the detrimental effects of COVID-19 for unvaccinated persons with these conditions.
"My age prompted me and the underlying diseases I have. First, I have diabetes, I have high blood pressure, and I am on antiretroviral therapy" Female, 62 years, older person, vaccinated.
“I am not very young. Because I realized that if the disease was to strike me, maybe, I would not have a chance to fight it much” Male, 58 years, HCW, vaccinated.
The belief in the vaccine’s potential to provide protection against deadly disease played a significant role in motivating HCWs and older individuals to actively seek vaccination.
"Fear of death because the moment you see people struggling in the ICU [intensive care unit], you will run and take these vaccines" Female, 29 years, HCW, vaccinated.

## Interpersonal facilitators
The influence of leaders who took the vaccine was the leading social factor mentioned by some participants. Participants reported that they gained confidence that the COVID-19 vaccines were safe after witnessing religious, cultural, and political leaders, employers (hospital administrators) and peers receive the vaccine.
"As you see the leadership going for the same (vaccination), you get motivated, like when for example, the minister of health took the jab" Male, 58 years, HCW, vaccinated.
Some hospital administrators reported taking the vaccine to encourage their peers and the people they led to receive it.
"There was no way that I could convince my people (juniors) to go for vaccination, yet I had not done the same" Female, 63 years, HCW, vaccinated.
Other HCWs reported that they went in for vaccination after interacting with their peers who had taken the vaccine and had not suffered any consequences.

## Institutional factors
The risky working environment at the hospitals was a facilitator for vaccine uptake for the HCWs. Some HCWs revealed how reluctant they had been to be vaccinated until they were assigned to work directly in COVID-19 patients’ wards.
“I am always exposed. I am always among patients, so I could not think that I could never get the disease. So, I could not take it for granted, because we are always exposed among these patients” Female, 54 years, HCW, vaccinated.
"It is very funny. At first, I was a bit hesitant to take the vaccine. There came a time when hospital administration was looking for staff who are going to perform COVID-19 tests, and I was among the staff selected to perform COVID-19 testing. I started thinking of my safety” Male, 35 years, HCW, vaccinated.
The implementation of mandatory COVID-19 vaccination requirements for HCWs served as a deciding factor for some HCWs, leading them to opt for vaccination to maintain their employment. Some older people reported taking the vaccine in anticipation of future mandatory movement permits in the form of COVID-19 vaccination cards.
"So, when management sat, they decided to change the policy, that please, if you are not vaccinated, go home and get vaccinated or if you fall sick, you pay your own bills. It was hard at first until one of the persons; one staff got sick who was not vaccinated” Male, 31 years, HCW, vaccinated.
"At first, it was optional, we did not put much stress on everyone getting vaccinated, but as time went on, we made it mandatory" Female, 63 years, HCW, vaccinated.
“Even us, the health care workers, currently vaccination is a policy for the institution" Female, 41 years, HCW, vaccinated.

## Participants’ recommendations to reduce barriers to COVID-19 vaccine uptake
Participants’ had several recommendations for reducing barriers to COVID-19 vaccine uptake. HCW and older people suggested using various communication channels e.g., radio, social media, posters, and megaphones to share information on COVID-19 vaccines (e.g., benefits, safety, and development processes) widely in all the communities, ensuring vaccine availability, conducting targeted vaccination outreach, putting in place mandatory vaccine policies, initiating in-country (local) manufacturing of vaccines, and financial allowances to HCWs involved in COVID-19 vaccination campaigns.
“They should continue educating people and creating awareness. There is no other approach apart from that because if a person understands, he/she will know what exactly is taking place” Male, 76 years, older person, not vaccinated.
“The information should continue running on air, in communities, health workers should start going to the communities and do health education in the communities. It should be regular” Female, 54 years, HCW, vaccinated.
Some HCWs underscored the relevance of providing enough information for people to appreciate the benefits of receiving the vaccine and cautioned that mandatory vaccination would instead force people to get fake vaccination certificates without necessarily receiving the vaccine.
"The best thing is to counsel somebody to know why he is getting the vaccine. Yes, that is the best way because the policy will be there, and somebody will go to Nasser Road (a street in Kampala that is notorious for being a source of forged documents) and get a fake card" Female, 44 years, HCW, vaccinated.
The HCWs and older people recommended that a regular and consistent vaccine supply to the vaccination centres would be important.
"They have to increase the quantity of the vaccines. At least this time, people want the vaccines, but they are not available. So, they should make them available" Male, 46 years, HCW, vaccinated.
Targeted vaccination outreach campaigns that take the vaccines were recommended as a facilitator of vaccination uptake.
“The government should bring the vaccines and try to bring it close to people in the communities” Male, 71 years, older person, vaccinated.
"They should put vaccine outreaches such that people can reach every person far deep down on the ground as they have done for HIV" Male, 38 years, HCW, vaccinated.
The HCWs and older people recommended local vaccine manufacture.
"Uganda should work on manufacturing [its] own vaccine. [Make] Our own vaccine that is manufactured in Uganda, not from outside, as people fear vaccines from outside, which they say [are feared because] `the whites want to kill them" Male, 21 years, HCW, vaccinated.
The recommendation for local vaccine manufacture is believed to enhance vaccine availability, supply reliability, and foster confidence in vaccine safety.

## Discussion
Our study highlights several individual, interpersonal, institutional, community, and public policy level barriers and facilitators of COVID-19 vaccine uptake among HCWs and older persons in the early phase of vaccination roll-out in Uganda in 2021.
We found out that having chronic illnesses was a barrier and at the same time a facilitator to vaccine uptake, while fear of vaccine side effects, myths and misconceptions were reported as interpersonal barriers to vaccine uptake. At the institutional level, we found out that vaccine stockouts and congestion at the vaccination centres were major health facility operational barriers. High transports costs, long distances to the vaccination centres and mobility challenges were community barriers while the prerequisite of signing consent forms before vaccination was a public policy related barrier.
Access to the correct information and older age were reported as positive intrapersonal facilitators while fear of side effects, and the influence of leaders were reported to be community facilitators for vaccine uptake. The risky working environment (hospitals) and the hospital vaccination requirements were reported as institutional requirements that promoted vaccine update.
Myths, concerns, and conspiracy theories about COVID-19 vaccines e.g., causing infertility, impotence, and weakening the body’s immunity were major interpersonal barriers to vaccine uptake. Myths and conspiracy theories are well-recognized drivers of vaccine hesitancy globally [ – ]. As exposure to reliable information is a crucial intrapersonal tool for assisting people in making informed judgments [ – ], efforts to actively identify and address COVID-19 misinformation are needed to increase the acceptance of COVID-19 vaccines and other future mass vaccination campaigns, particularly those involving new vaccines.
Older age, presence of chronic health conditions, and working in a hospital setting were facilitators for the uptake of COVID-19 vaccines in the current study. These findings are consistent with those of other studies [ – ] and might be expected, since these populations were prioritised for COVID-19 vaccination due to their increased risk of infection and poor COVID-19 outcomes [ – ]. However, we also found that the presence of underlying chronic conditions was the reason for deferral or non-uptake of COVID-19 vaccination for some participants because of fears that vaccination could possibly make these conditions worse. This underscores the need for strategies to increase knowledge about the effectiveness and safety of COVID-19 vaccines in the most-at-risk populations.
At the community level, leading by example through the public vaccination of high-profile community leaders or by HCWs getting vaccinated before vaccinating other people, facilitated uptake of vaccination. Agha and colleagues [ ] in their study of COVID-19 vaccination in Nigeria showed that individuals can easily accept or refuse health campaigns depending on the attitude and perception of influential persons in their communities.
At the structural level, our study identified several barriers to COVID-19 vaccination uptake that particularly impacted older persons (non-HCWs). These included long distances to vaccination centres and associated transport costs, crowding at the health facilities, and limited vaccine supplies and/stockouts. Similar barriers were reported in other African settings during the early phase of the epidemic [ ]. These barriers may have been attributed, at least in part, to limited vaccine supplies, funding shortfalls, a lack of vaccinators, sub-optimal training, inadequate planning, and COVID-19 related disruptions to essential health services [ ].
Our results show both support for and caution against mandatory COVID-19 vaccination. Whereas some individuals may be encouraged to get vaccinated to stay in employment, be able to access certain public spaces and/or travel, this approach may have limitations. For example, persons who are strongly opposed to or who are not convinced of the vaccination benefits might opt to use fake COVID-19 certification. Mandatory COVID-19 vaccination could also have ethical implications if people feel forced to take something they do not wish to have which could result in the breakdown of trust between employees and their institutions [ ].
In the early phase of COVID-19 vaccine roll-out in Uganda, individuals intending to receive the COVID-19 vaccines were required to sign a consent form [ ]. Our results show that this requirement may have negatively impacted uptake of COVID-19 vaccination. Formal consent is not a requirement for other vaccinations in the country. COVID-19 vaccines were first made available under emergency use authorization i.e., a regulatory mechanism to facilitate the availability of unapproved product medical products, including drugs and vaccines, during a public health emergency, which required consent to be sought. The unusual requirement to consent for vaccination coupled with the misinformation about COVID-19 vaccines discussed above, may have heightened concerns about the safety of the vaccines. This finding is in agreement with the study of Bîrsanu and colleagues [ ] that indicated that the unusual informed consent requirement reduced confidence in the vaccine.

## Study strengths and limitations
We enrolled individuals prioritised for COVID-19 vaccination during the early phase of COVID-19 vaccination campaign and during the second wave of COVID-19 in Uganda (May to October 2021). Thus, study participants’ responses were informed by real-life experiences of the vaccination campaign including receipt of information about seeking and receiving the vaccines.
A notable limitation of this study pertains to the relatively low number older persons included in the study sample compared to the HCWs. Out of a total of 33 interviews conducted, only eight involved older people and 25 for HCWs. Furthermore, older persons interviews were exclusively sourced from a single district, Wakiso district, a mostly semi-urban/urban setting, the study results may not comprehensively reflect the lived experiences of rural older persons in relation to COVID-19 vaccine uptake. Future research should strive to include a more extensive and varied older persons participant group to enhance the comprehensiveness of the results.

## Conclusion
To maximize the success of mass vaccination campaigns it is crucial to implement a comprehensive information dissemination strategy that effectively communicates information about the vaccines. Ensuring improved access to vaccines through community outreach campaigns, maintaining adequate vaccine stocks, and providing robust health education to address vaccine misinformation and myths, may enhance COVID-19 vaccine uptake, particularly in countries where uptake remains low. Moreover, implementing these strategies can potentially increase the uptake of future vaccines during disease outbreaks.

## Supporting information
S1 Text

## In-depth interview guide for HCWs and older persons.
(DOCX)
S2 Text

## CO-ROLL codebook.
(DOCX)
S3 Text

## Data file.
(DOCX)

We would like to express our appreciation to the staff of Villa Maria Hospital, Our Lady of Consolata, Kisubi Hospital, and Entebbe Regional Referral Hospital who participated in this study as well as the entire study team at MRC/UVRI & LSHTM Uganda Research Unit.
 10.1371/journal.pgph.0002188.r001Decision Letter 0
AliRichardStaff Editor© 2024 Richard Ali2024Richard Alihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
25 Sep 2023

PGPH-D-23-01213
Structural, Social, and Contextual factors influencing COVID-19 vaccine uptake: A qualitative methods study among Healthcare Workers and Older People in Uganda.
PLOS Global Public Health
Dear Dr. Slivesteri,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Global Public Health. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please note that we have only been able to secure a single reviewer to assess your manuscript. We are issuing a decision on your manuscript at this point to prevent further delays in the evaluation of your manuscript. Please be aware that the editor who handles your revised manuscript might find it necessary to invite additional reviewers to assess this work once the revised manuscript is submitted. However, we will aim to proceed on the basis of this single review if possible. 
The manuscript has been evaluated by a single reviewer, and their comments are available below. Reviewer #1 has concerns regarding the number of interviewed participants, and recommend recruiting additional elderly people or alternatively, focusing your manuscript on health care workers. They also recommend additional clarity in the Methods section as it relates to how the sample number was devised and how analysis of results were performed. Could you please revise the manuscript to carefully address the concerns raised? 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Nov 06 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at globalpubhealth@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pgph/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:

A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Richard Ali, PhD
Staff Editor
PLOS Global Public Health
Journal Requirements:
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Does this manuscript meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria? Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions? The manuscript must describe methodologically and ethically rigorous research with conclusions that are appropriately drawn based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: N/A
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception. The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS Global Public Health does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the opportunity to review this interesting and important work. This is a qualitative, interview-based study of COVID-19 vaccination barriers and facilitators among Health care workers and the elderly in Uganda. The topics addressed are extremely important and the project was theoretically sound. I did have the following concerns with the manuscript, however.
1. The number of people interviewed was low. Only eight of your 33 interviews were with elderly people, and they were all from the same district. Elderly people and health care workers may not have much in common. I would suggest splitting them into two populations, which may involve recruiting more elderly people. I hate to suggest to make this paper focus only on health care workers, but I am not convinced that the number and diversity of you elderly population is enough to draw some of the conclusions you draw. Taking out the elderly people and making it a paper about health care workers may focus and strengthen the manuscript.
2. Please go into greater detail in the methods section on how you selected the number of people you chose to survey
3. Please discuss more in the methods section how you performed your results coding and how many people verified the conclusions from each interview.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
 
10.1371/journal.pgph.0002188.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
1 Dec 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Responses to the reviewer.docx
10.1371/journal.pgph.0002188.r003Decision Letter 1
ZimmermanSteveStaff Editor© 2024 Steve Zimmerman2024Steve Zimmermanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
21 Feb 2024

PGPH-D-23-01213R1
Structural, Social, and Contextual factors influencing COVID-19 vaccine uptake: A qualitative methods study among Healthcare Workers and Older People in Uganda.
PLOS Global Public Health
Dear Dr. Slivesteri,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Global Public Health. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
The manuscript has been evaluated by two reviewers, and their comments are available below.
Although reviewer 1 is satisfied with the revisions to the manuscript, reviewer 2 has raised a number of concerns, and makes several requests aimed at improving the clarity of the manuscript and the detail of the reporting.
Could you please carefully revise the manuscript to address all comments raised?
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 22 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at globalpubhealth@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pgph/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:

A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Steve Zimmerman, PhD
PLOS Staff Editor
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
2. Does this manuscript meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria? Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions? The manuscript must describe methodologically and ethically rigorous research with conclusions that are appropriately drawn based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception. The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS Global Public Health does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for addressing the concerns from the last review
Reviewer #2: In the context of establishing clear and coherent narrative of the study argument, the following observations are made and suggested revision recommended.
1. The title needs minor but very important syntax modifications. This study, in no way can measure or infer the level of “influence” going by the study design and methodological approaches used. Some of the constructs mentioned in the title for measurement, particularly contextual factors, appear vague and redundant. A more appropriate title suggested would be; “Structural and Social factors involved with COVID-19 vaccine uptake among Healthcare Workers and Older People in Uganda: A qualitative analysis”
2.Abstract: The objective of the study as stated in the abstract needs to be appropriately stated to adequately align with the problem phenomenon warranting the study which has not been well stated. Methodology needs editorial revising to establish clarity.
3. Introduction/Background of the study: Structural, Social, and Contextual factors influencing COVID-19 vaccine uptake: A
qualitative methods study among Healthcare Workers and Older People in Uganda.
The background has not operationalize the principles extant in the title and objective of the study. The coherence of the thesis of the study is weak and has not established any argument needing to demonstrate proof of concept warranting data collection and analysis. The statement in Lines 56 - 59 is redundant and has not contributed to the context of the narrative.
There are some grammatical issues to be treated. Line 128. Line 55: “had caused 12.2 million confirmed cases (256,542 deaths) in Africa and 170,544 confirmed cases (3,632 deaths) in Uganda…” should read; “...had caused 12.2 million confirmed cases with 256,542 deaths in Africa and 170,544 confirmed cases with 3,632 deaths in Uganda…”.
Fallout from an analysis of the background narrative:
a. What is the problem and argument the study seeks to establish? This is not succinctly apparent in the background narrative. At least, from lines 54-69 should have appropriately introduced the basis of delayed vaccine rollout, efficacy expected and likely problems to be encountered with such modality, considering global antecedents with vaccine acceptance challenges with other vaccines already in use for different communicable diseases before providing citations of study demonstrating acceptance challenges with the vaccines for Covid-19 as in lines 64, 70-79. Introducing the statement “Structural, social, and contextual factors may contribute to vaccine confidence and affect the uptake of the COVID-19 vaccine among HCWs and older people in Uganda” in line 80 has not contributed appropriately to coherence and clarity of the study argument. What is meant by structural factors, or social factors or contextual factors?
b. By stating “We set out to explore the structural, social, and contextual factors that influence the uptake of COVID-19 vaccines among HCWs and older people aged 50 years using the Social Ecological Model (SEM) to structure our analysis” introduces a confusion of whether a statement of objective is intended or introduction of the theoretical framework.
c. The theoretical framework: Theories and models are very important tools in public health and health promotion research because they offer the basis for understanding individual behaviour and those factors that are associated with such behaviour. McLeroy et al (1987) clarified the importance of models within the context of an ecological perspective stated that behaviour results from the interaction between the individual and the environmental determinants, such as biological, psychological, socio-cultural and structural spheres which facilitates the behavioural outcomes. The choice of the Social Ecological Model (SEM) in this study appears appropriate. However, it must be noted that it is a framework that provides only context of levels of relationships and interactions but does not provide constructs to be measured and therefore, requires further analysis of the dynamics involved at the various levels to appropriately apply SEM to operationalize the dynamics involved at each level of the context. Any application of SEM without recourse to this micro-level consideration would easily be deemed frivolous and flawed. In the statement of lines 93-95; “Using this framework, we explored participants' knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes about COVID-19, personal experience about COVID-19 vaccines, facilitators and barriers to vaccine uptake, and opinions on the future of vaccine rollout” raises the questions of on what scientific basis has the constructs of knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes about COVID-19 been derived? Kindly review the theoretical framework and re-define the applications of SEM to operational sources of the constructs at the intra-personal, inter-personal, community and policy levels. You may consider the health belief model at the intra-, social learning at the inter- and probably social marketing or adoption of innovation at the community-, and policy levels. There are variables/constructs fitting these specified models to adequately align the thesis of the study with regards to figure 2 representations and the methodology.
4. The results: The exclusively qualitative approach has constituted a weakness in the appropriate application of the framework to adequately answer the emerging research questions in the study. I would have thought that the qualitative aspect of the study design to address context-relevance and quantitatively establish the proof of associations between structural, social and the outcome variable of covid-19 vaccine uptake.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Nnodimele Onuigbo ATULOMAH
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pgph.0002188.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
15 Mar 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to the reviewer.docx
10.1371/journal.pgph.0002188.r005Decision Letter 2
RobinsonJuliaStaff Editor© 2024 Julia Robinson2024Julia Robinsonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
30 Apr 2024

Structural and Social factors affecting COVID-19 vaccine uptake among Healthcare Workers and Older People in Uganda: A qualitative analysis
PGPH-D-23-01213R2
Dear MR. Slivesteri,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Structural and Social factors affecting COVID-19 vaccine uptake among Healthcare Workers and Older People in Uganda: A qualitative analysis' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Global Public Health.
Please note that the reviews you see below are what we suspect were from an earlier version of the manuscript. We tried to engage the reviewer to update with the most recent draft but they were unresponsive. There is no need to submit a response to the reviews below - this paper will now move along to production.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact globalpubhealth@plos.org.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Global Public Health.
Best regards,
Julia Robinson
Executive Editor
PLOS Global Public Health
***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
2. Does this manuscript meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria? Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions? The manuscript must describe methodologically and ethically rigorous research with conclusions that are appropriately drawn based on the data presented.
Reviewer #2: No
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception. The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS Global Public Health does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: No
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: Response of authors to suggestions for title modification: In the second round of review, a suggestion to improve the rendering of the title was made for syntax and technical reasons to “Structural and Social factors involved with COVID-19 vaccine uptake among Healthcare Workers and Older People in Uganda: A qualitative analysis”, but no change has been made. The syntax error and technical inaccuracy of the validity of the implication of the word “influence” used in the title still remain.
Response of authors to suggestions for abstract modification: In the second round of review of the manuscript, it was pointed out that the abstract needed to be appropriately stated, particularly the background and objective of the study, to adequately align with the problem phenomenon warranting the study which has not been well stated; this observed inadequacy still remain unattended to. Stating the study objective as;“ To inform the vaccine rollout efforts, we set out to explore the social and structural factors that influenced the uptake of COVID-19 vaccines among HCWs and older people in Uganda.” is inappropriate, weak and unattainable. In the statement “To inform the vaccine rollout efforts,…” has not communicated anything. To inform the vaccine rollout effort about what? A suggested removal of the word “influence” for an observational study for which this study can not demonstrate except by an experimental study design was ignored. A fitting suggestion for the statement of objective would be; “Considering the likely challenge of vaccine acceptance among the at-risk population, the study sought to explore social and structural factors likely to be associated with the uptake of COVID-19 vaccines among HCWs and older people in Uganda.”
Response of authors to suggestions for revision in the background to the study: The authors are encouraged to keep in mind the context of the challenge of the vaccine rollout being whether the vaccines would be accepted considering fear of effectiveness and safety in the emerging misinformation arousing general doubts and concerns in the population.
Some of the grammatical issues pointed out still remain in the current revised version.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: Yes: Nnodimele Onuigbo ATULOMAH
**********