440plosonePLOS ONEPLoS OnePLOSPMC1176057011760570117605703985430810.1371/journal.pone.0317815Usual prevention in unusual settings: A scoping review of place-based health interventions in public-facing businesses
TsaiJackConceptualization, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing McCannNicholas AConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing ChekuriLakshminarayanaEditor 1School of Public Health, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America2Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America3University of Missouri School of Medicine, UNITED STATES OF AMERICACompeting Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
✉* E-mail: Jack.Tsai@uth.tmc.edu
2412025201e0317815e03178152512025This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

## Abstract
Place-based health interventions may help reach underserved populations. This scoping review summarizes the peer-reviewed literature on the type and effects of place-based health interventions in unconventional public-facing business settings (e.g., retail and services). A literature search was conducted in PubMed, Google Scholar, and APA PsycNet for studies from 1990–2023. Inclusion criteria for studies were: conducted in the United States, delivered a health intervention, based on an unconventional business setting, and targeted a specific health condition. An initial search yielded 2,727 unduplicated studies, which was filtered to 42 studies included in this review. These 42 studies were categorized based on health conditions of focus, including cardiovascular health (12 studies); HIV (6 studies); diabetes (5 studies); cancers (13 studies); and all other conditions (14 studies). The most common unconventional public-facing business settings for health interventions included barbershops or beauty salons; interventions included health education, preventative screenings, pharmacy services, and connections to local healthcare providers and resources. Notably, 34 (81%) of the studies targeted Black populations. Studies reported positive responses from participants for place-based interventions, increased awareness and screening of health conditions, more referrals to healthcare services, and improved health outcomes. While there have been 9 randomized trials conducted across various health conditions, these trials are limited to focus on a few select settings and lack of objective health outcome measures. These findings highlight the need for more rigorously designed studies in diverse settings that can effectively evaluate the impact of place-based health interventions. The existing literature suggests health interventions delivered in public-facing business settings may be a promising strategy to reach underserved populations.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Jul 29; Accepted 2025 Jan 6; Collection date 2025.

## Introduction
An important part of public health is reaching all segments of the population where they live, work, and play [ ]. However, there are various groups in the United States that can be considered underserved, including some low-income, racial/ethnic minority, and immigrant populations. Thus, there have been increasing efforts to develop unique ways to outreach, engage, and serve these groups. Place-based interventions is one approach to reach people “where they are.” Place-based interventions can range widely, from changing physical environments and areas where groups live (e.g., creating bike lanes to facilitate exercise) to increasing access to resources in neighborhoods (e.g., introducing new farmers markets or transport facilities).
A recent review examined 51 studies of locally-delivered place-based interventions across three elements of place and health: the physical, social, and economic environments [ ]. However, these interventions were mostly focused on altering the “place” of people as the intervention, which can disconnect individuals from their familiar community contexts. In contrast, delivering traditional health interventions in unconventional settings—such as salons and barbershops—maintains the familiarity and trust that these spaces offer, potentially leading to better engagement and participation from target populations. For example, a number of novel studies have developed health promotion interventions in salons and barbershops to reach African American communities, which have been summarized in a recent systematic review [ ]. However, the vast majority of health promotion activities in real-world settings and in the research literature continue to occur in traditional settings, such as primary care clinics, and clinics embedded in pharmacies, grocery stores, and community health centers.
The Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19) pandemic also helped popularize these types of place-based health interventions, which were often referred to as “pop-up clinics” by offering COVID-19 vaccines across many public settings, such as groceries, malls, schools, etc. [ ]. But what types of other interventions and in which types of settings have these place-based interventions been used? Specifically, what unconventional public-facing business settings have been involved, and which communities have been served?
No prior review found has examined the full scope of these types of place-based health interventions delivered at less conventional public-facing business settings across all health conditions and racial/ethnic groups. Such a review would help public health practitioners, researchers, and business owners understand what is possible in terms of implementing interventions in public-facing business settings. In particular, a review that examines not only the types of settings, but the health conditions targeted and the outcomes can further knowledge about how to reach underserved and minority populations in these settings.
To address this knowledge gap, we conducted a scoping review of studies on delivering preventive health interventions in unconventional public-facing business settings, such as retail and service settings, to understand the type of interventions, the diversity of settings, the broad range of health conditions targeted, and how these interventions have been implemented across various racial and ethnic populations.

## Methods

## Protocol
A review protocol was developed based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) guidelines [ ]. While this protocol was not registered, it followed a systematic approach aligned with PRISMA-ScR standards. The three major search databases used were PubMed, Google Scholar, and APA PsycNet. The search range in each database was set from 1960 to the present; however, the oldest study that met the inclusion criteria was published in 1995, and the most recent in 2023. Inclusion criteria were studies conducted in the United States, provided health interventions (e.g., education, disease screening, connection with healthcare providers, pharmacy services) to clients in one or more business settings for one or more diseases or conditions, were written in English, and were peer-reviewed. Exclusion criteria were studies that were not peer-reviewed, not published in English-written journals, or did not report study of a health intervention in a business setting. We only included peer-reviewed studies to ensure the review focused on studies which had been previously assessed and deemed acceptable for publication as a quality control measure for this review.

## Search method
The two authors participated in all stages of the review, with one author leading study screening, selection, and data extraction and the other author assisting and double-checking this work for validity, and rerunning processes when there were discrepancies. Searches were initially conducted in PubMed using keywords and Boolean operators like “public health AND barbershop OR laundromat OR hair salon OR movie theater OR nail salon OR mechanic.” The full syntax of keywords and strategies used in these initial searches are provided in . The initial search returned a total of 2,727 unduplicated studies (PubMed 749, Google Scholar 1,930, APA PsycNet 48). Filtering and brief analysis of the titles and abstracts led to exclusion of 2,603 studies and a total of 124 studies entering the initial review process.

## Review process
Between January and April 2024, the two authors reviewed all 124 studies. To reduce potential bias, the two authors conducted a calibration exercise, independently reviewing a subset of studies to establish consistency before proceeding with selecting studies and extracting data from the selected studies. In total, 77 studies were removed for not meeting the inclusion criteria following an initial preliminary review of the studies by title and abstract (PubMed 76, Google Scholar 1). Twelve of the excluded studies were systematic reviews, and the other 65 studies were excluded due to conduction of the studies outside of the United States, providing health interventions outside of unusual business settings, or only surveying business clients without providing additional health intervention services. After a secondary review (NM), five more studies were removed after the full text articles were assessed for eligibility due to not meeting the inclusion criteria. This resulted in a final selection of 42 studies. These 42 studies were then sorted into three categories based on targeted health conditions: 1) cardiovascular health conditions, HIV, and diabetes (20 studies), 2) cancers (13 studies), and 3) all other conditions (14 studies). Note that certain included studies may fall into more than one category due to targeting multiple diseases or conditions through its intervention. includes a CONSORT diagram summarizing the study identification and review process.
 

## Data extraction and synthesis
Data extraction was conducted using an Excel-based form, which included fields for study design, business setting, health intervention, population of interest, sample size, target disease or condition, data findings, and conclusions. This Excel form served as a tracking and synthesis tool, while Zotero was used for citation management. To ensure consistency, data extraction was piloted by both reviewers on a subset of studies, following which any discrepancies were discussed and resolved. Synthesized data were categorized descriptively across intervention type, health condition, and setting, allowing for a narrative overview.
To assess the quality of each study included in this review, each study was evaluated using the NIH Study Quality Assessment Tools, matched to the appropriate study type [ ]. Observational cohort and cross-sectional studies—including cross-sectional studies, longitudinal studies, descriptive studies, and cohort studies—were assessed using the Quality Assessment Tool for Observational Cohort and Cross-Sectional Studies. Pre-post studies, such as feasibility studies, program evaluations, and pilot studies, were evaluated with the Quality Assessment Tool for Before-After (Pre-Post) Studies With No Control Group. Finally, controlled intervention studies, specifically randomized controlled trials (RCTs), were assessed using the Quality Assessment of Controlled Intervention Studies. By applying these tools, we ensured that each study design underwent a rigorous and relevant quality assessment. This assessment provided insight into the methodological rigor and potential risk of bias across the included studies.

## Results
The 42 studies identified were categorized by the health condition(s) they were focused on in Tables – . contained studies providing interventions for cardiovascular health conditions, HIV, and diabetes [ – ]. contained studies providing interventions for different cancers [ , – ], and contained studies providing interventions for all other conditions not falling into the previously listed categories [ , , , – ]. Each table lists the study author(s), study design, intervention setting (e.g., barbershop, nail salon, etc.), study population, sample size, health condition targeted by intervention, geographic area of study, major data findings, and overall findings. Note that some studies provided interventions for multiple conditions with certain studies falling into multiple tables [ , , ]. Among the 42 studies, 36 studies involved health education as an intervention, 20 studies offered preventative screening as an intervention, 9 studies referred and facilitated connection to local healthcare providers and resources, and 3 studies offered pharmacy services as an intervention.
 

## Cardiovascular health conditions
A total of 12 studies were identified by their provided interventions for cardiovascular health conditions. Of these, 2 studies provided interventions for peripheral artery disease, 9 for hypertension or blood pressure monitoring, and 1 for heart disease.
Both studies investigating peripheral artery disease (PAD) at barbershops sampled Black men in a midwestern state, each with a sample size of 37 participants [ , ]. One of these studies used a longitudinal study design [ ], while the other was a qualitative analysis and was a sub-study of the longitudinal study [ ]. In the longitudinal study [ ], participants completed three visits to the barbershop: a first visit initially screened participants for PAD, a second visit rescreened participants for PAD and presented a PAD education video 4–6 weeks later, and a third visit in which exit interviews and assessments were conducted. The trial ultimately diagnosed PAD in 5/31 (16.1%) of participants and overall awareness of PAD began low at the beginning of the study but significantly increased between the initial and exit visit assessments.
The qualitative study [ ] was conducted at the final exit assessment of the longitudinal study [ ] and involved individual interviews to understand the perspectives of Black men in receiving barbershop-based screening and PAD education. Several common themes arose such as acknowledgement of barriers like fear, trust, and healthcare access, but participants indicated that the barbershop intervention enhanced knowledge of PAD and cardiovascular disease.
A total of 9 studies investigating hypertension or blood pressure management were identified, and all 9 studies targeted these conditions in either Black men or predominantly Black populations and offered interventions at barbershops or hair salons [ , , , – ]. These studies were conducted in all five regions of the United States (Northeast, Southwest, West, Southeast, and Midwest), and study designs included program evaluations, cluster-randomized trials, exploratory studies, longitudinal studies, pilot intervention studies, cohort studies, and descriptive studies. Additionally, the sample sizes of these hypertension intervention studies ranged widely from 10 to 14,000 participants.
Each of the 9 studies incorporated blood pressure screening into their interventions in different ways. For example, studies that investigated hypertension with larger sample sizes (i.e., 680–14,000) focused on taking blood pressure measurements, using self-report questions asking about recent blood pressure screenings, connecting participants to providers, or training barbers and hair stylists to serve as lay health educators [ , – ]. Overall, these larger studies found that barbershops and beauty salons served as suitable locations for blood pressure screenings and reported increased awareness of hypertension and connection to providers by participants.
The other five hypertension studies utilized longitudinal or cluster-randomized trial designs and included baseline and follow-up blood pressure measurements. These studies reported that participants who were connected with pharmacy or other medical providers and provided hypertension education had notable reductions in their blood pressure [ , , – ]. Two cluster-randomized trials were of particular note due to their study designs (control and intervention groups) and results, which found that the use of barbers as lay health educators and connection with pharmacy and healthcare services led to significant reduction in mean blood pressure in the intervention groups [ , ]. Two of these hypertension studies with longitudinal components utilized additional unique methods in their interventions. One study incorporated a telehealth component for follow-up care by connecting pharmacy providers with study participants recruited from barbershops online after their blood pressure had been controlled via medication [ ]. The other study was a cluster-randomized trial that directly connected some participants to hypertension specialists and observed greater reductions in systolic blood pressure than participants who were first connected to primary care providers [ ].

## HIV
A total of 6 studies provided interventions for HIV in this review [ – ]. Sample sizes of these studies ranged from 48–1,124 participants, and the designs of the included studies were a cluster-randomized trial, longitudinal studies, descriptive studies, and qualitative analyses. The majority of HIV intervention studies were conducted in the Northeast region of the United States, with one being conducted in the Southeastern United States [ ]. Additionally, while most of the studies primarily targeted predominantly Black populations recruited from laundromats, one study recruited participants from a variety of settings; and another study sampled diverse racial/ethnic participants [ , ]. All 6 studies provided participants education about HIV and safe sex practices.
One notable study was a descriptive study assessing previous HIV knowledge and providing prevention and education services to Black participants (n = 677) at corner stores, beauty supply stores, laundromats, mechanics, and barbershops [ ]. The intervention targeted Black communities heavily affected by HIV in Miami, Florida and included a survey collecting demographic information and HIV knowledge and prevention services like free condom distribution and HIV testing. Within these communities, 68.8% had never heard of PrEP (a medication highly effective at reducing the risk of getting HIV), 8% had never been tested for HIV, and 65.9% had no primary care provider [ ]. The study found that the intervention delivered at corner and food stores had the most engagement followed by laundromats, barbershops, and beauty salons.
A second notable intervention study based in Delaware utilized the Popular Opinion Model (POL), a community level peer-based outreach strategy designed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, to provide HIV education to over 6,000 racial/ethnic minority participants and HIV tests to 1,124 of those participants [ ].
A third notable HIV study was a cluster randomized controlled trial targeting Black men (n = 618) that compared the Shape Up! Barbers Building Better Brothers HIV risk-reduction intervention (based on the theory of planned behavior) or an attention-matched violence prevention control [ ]. The Shape Up! intervention led to a significantly increased consistent condom use in the postintervention period.
These three notable studies together suggest place-based interventions can lead to decreased risky behavior associated HIV transmission (e.g. condomless sex, sex with multiple partners, etc.) and increased self-efficacy for condom use among participants [ , , ].

## Diabetes
A total of 5 studies provided interventions for diabetes were included in the review [ , , , , ]. Each of these studies occurred at barbershops or beauty salons, and incorporated diabetes education and prevention strategies. The designs of the 5 diabetes studies included a program evaluation, a longitudinal study, a cohort study, a focus group and qualitative research study, and a cross-sectional study. Two of the studies targeted predominantly Black populations, and two additional studies targeted Black men specifically. The remaining study included a broad sample of participants deemed “at risk” for developing diabetes. The sample sizes of the included studies ranged from 13–14,000 participants.
Three studies provided a diabetes intervention in addition to interventions for other conditions [ , , ]. One study was a program evaluation targeting predominantly Black populations (n = 1,823) in barbershops and beauty salons for high blood pressure, diabetes, tobacco-use associated conditions, high cholesterol, and need for social services [ ]. Through partnership with an integrated healthcare system, local barbershops and salons in Baltimore, Maryland, and a mobile health clinic, the program screened 469 participants and connected them with free resources when necessary. Another study was a longitudinal study (n = 356) targeting people at risk for diabetes, heart disease, stroke, colon cancer, and breast cancer in laundromats and investigated perceived risk and susceptibility to these conditions; the study found 18% of participants believed their risk for diabetes was lower than it was [ ]. The third study was a cohort study that trained over 700 stylists as lay health educators and reported reaching over 14,000 clients with 60% of clients reporting they took steps to prevent or address their diabetes, hypertension, or kidney disease with a provider [ ].
The two remaining diabetes studies were a qualitative study and a cross-sectional study, each targeting Black men in barbershops [ , ]. In the qualitative study, focus groups with 13 participants found that diet and exercise were recognized as ways to prevent diabetes, and people were supportive of barbershops as sites for a diabetes intervention program [ ]. The cross-sectional study sampled 290 participants and provided diagnostic hemoglobin A1C testing on site at barbershops and diabetes education based on screening results [ ].

## Cancer
A total of 13 studies providing cancer-related prevention, screening, education, and referral services were included in this review [ , – ]. Of the 13 studies, 6 of them provided interventions for breast cancer, 4 for prostate cancer, 2 for colorectal cancer, and 1 including both colorectal cancer and breast cancer.
Seven studies provided breast cancer interventions with sample sizes ranging from 162–10,306 participants [ , – , – ]. Study designs included longitudinal studies, descriptive studies, randomized-controlled trials, cluster randomized trials, health education programs, and pilot studies. The two cluster randomized trials are noteworthy due to their inclusion of control and intervention groups in their study designs [ , ]. The majority of studies occurred in beauty salons; but barbershops, churches, neighborhood health centers, laundromats, social service agencies, health fairs, and public libraries were also breast cancer intervention sites. Interventions included health education provided verbally by medical professionals and stylists trained as lay health educators; and education and connection to local resources via kiosks, magazines, store displays, and other paper materials. Regarding target populations, five of the seven interventions targeted Black women specifically, while the other two targeted participants at risk for breast cancer and all women, respectively [ , ]. One notable study provided breast cancer education for Black women through touch-screen kiosks located in beauty salons, churches, health fairs, neighborhood health centers, laundromats, public libraries and social service agencies [ ]. These kiosks used an interactive computer program called Reflections of You that printed magazines for users containing tailored breast cancer education and local breast cancer resources based on participants’ answers to screening questions. These kiosks reached 4,527 participants in under 18 months and reported that 34.1% of participants over 40 had never had a mammogram before the intervention. Another descriptive study by the same lead author used the Reflections of You kiosks to identify appropriate community channels and settings for delivering evidence-based breast cancer health promotion materials [ ]. Through the 10,306 kiosks used over a four year period, the study identified laundromats were the only settings that had the highest kiosk use and highest specificity (e.g. proportion of users without health insurance, barriers to getting a mammogram, low breast cancer and mammography knowledge, etc.).
Four studies provided prostate cancer interventions as two pilot studies, a descriptive study, and a non-randomized comparison study [ , , , ]. While three of the four studies targeted Black men in barbershops, one study targeted all men in barbershops, churches, industries, meal sites, car dealerships, civic organizations, and housing projects. Sample sizes of each of these studies ranged from 40–1,552 participants. Each study provided prostate cancer education and prevention materials. One notable study due to its large sample size and unique findings was a descriptive study investigating predictors of participation in free prostate cancer screenings in barbershops, churches, industries, meal sites, car dealerships, civic organizations, and housing projects [ ]. The study ultimately found that being white, having at least a high school education, being married, perceiving health benefits, and receiving a client navigator or prior education intervention were significant predictors of participation in the study’s free prostate cancer screenings. Another pilot study investigated the feasibility of training barbers to deliver customized (culturally appropriate) prostate cancer education to Black men, mostly through brochures [ ]. Through the feasibility pilot study, prostate cancer knowledge scores raised from 60% to 79%.
Three studies provided colorectal cancer interventions in barbershops as a longitudinal study, a qualitative analysis, and a randomized controlled trial respectively [ , , ]. The intervention provided in each of these studies was colorectal cancer education and screening, with two studies focused on Black men and the third study focused on adults in general at risk for developing diabetes, heart disease, stroke, and breast cancer in addition to colorectal cancer. One particularly significant colorectal cancer intervention study due to its incorporation of a telehealth component and large sample size (n = 731) was the randomized controlled trial [ ]. This study aimed to test the effectiveness of a preclinical, telephone-based intervention designed to encourage and connect older Black men to colorectal cancer screening opportunities. Black male participants were recruited from barbershops initially and placed in one of three telephone intervention groups: patient navigation by a community health worker for colorectal cancer screening, motivational interviewing by a trained counselor, or both interventions. The study ultimately found that both groups of participants that received navigation by community health worker were most likely to pursue colorectal cancer screening within six months.

## Other conditions
Fourteen studies focused on other conditions not already described above, including high cholesterol, overall physical fitness, mental health, nutrition, stroke, unintended pregnancy, violence, influenza, kidney disease, HPV, and COVID-19 [ , , , – ]. These studies included cross-sectional studies, longitudinal studies, descriptive studies, feasibility studies, a randomized controlled trial, pilot studies, cohort studies, and program evaluations. Sample sizes ranged from 20–14,000 participants, and target populations included predominantly Black populations, at risk participants for certain conditions, women across all demographic classifications, adults with children 6 months to 2 years of age, adults over 50 years of age, and citizens in the Northeast Bronx region of New York. Each study provided education, prevention strategies, and screening promotion in some capacity for its respective target condition.
These studies took place in barbershops, beauty salons, nail salons, and movie theaters. One descriptive study is particularly noteworthy because of its relatively large sample size (n = 530 participants), specific target population (adults with children 6 months to 2 years of age and adults over 50 years of age), and with the intervention taking place in movie theaters [ ]. This intervention was designed to promote annual influenza vaccination by showing slides providing education about the flu and advocating for people to get their annual flu vaccine prior to presentation of upcoming movie premieres. Among moviegoers exposed to the education slides prior to the film, 24% recalled seeing the flu vaccination slides prior to the movie advertisements although some participants did not arrive to the theater before the start of the film to see the flu vaccination slides.
An additional noteworthy study was a randomized controlled trial aimed at assessing the impact of an intervention conducted in barbershops on mental health and violence threat screening among Black men in Philadelphia, PA [ ]. With a sample size of 618 participants, the study found significant effects of the intervention on increasing awareness of Black manhood vulnerability. This heightened awareness contributed to a significant reduction in physical fights among participants. The study’s findings were robust, demonstrating statistically significant pathways from the intervention through both Black manhood vulnerability awareness and hypermasculinity to the outcomes studied.
Another interesting study investigated the effectiveness of using beauticians to educate Black female clients about stroke warning signs and risk factors [ , ]. Beauticians were trained about stroke warning signs and risk factors, and clients were asked survey questions about their stroke knowledge before and after the intervention. The study reported significant increases in client knowledge of stroke warning signs (40.7% to 50.6%) and to call 911 for stroke symptoms (86% to 94%) with this improvement sustained for five months. However, no significant increase in knowledge of the three stroke risk factors was seen before and after the intervention.
One final study to note is one focused on providing COVID-19 vaccination education and resources in barbershops, hair salons, beauty salons, and faith-based organizations to Northeast Bronx citizens [ ]. Forty-five public-facing business sites across Northeast Bronx, New York participated in this COVID-19 intervention by encouraging clients to complete baseline and follow-up surveys about perceptions of COVID-19 vaccines and commitments to future vaccination, having conversations about COVID-19 and offering supporting materials, displaying posters and brochures on site encouraging vaccination, and hosting local health department staff on site. Over a span of four months, COVID-19 vaccination rates across five zip codes in Northeast Bronx were observed to increase from 5.6% to 8.7%, although causality of the intervention cannot be inferred.

## Discussion
This unique review of place-based health interventions in public business settings found that a number of studies have been conducted on the topic in the past two decades. We reviewed 42 studies of place-based health interventions offered for various chronic health conditions and certain select business settings. The majority of the interventions offered were health education and preventative health screenings. Thirty-four (81%) of the studies focused on reaching Black populations; all studies, except for one, delivered health interventions in barbershops and beauty salons either solely or among a few other settings. The largest number of studies focused on cancer (13 studies) or cardiovascular disease (12 studies). Additionally, the specific health condition with the greatest number of controlled trials was for hypertension (3 studies).
In general, studies reported that health interventions embedded in public settings were associated with positive outcomes, including increased disease awareness, improved health behaviors and disease management, and high rates of health screening and connection to healthcare services. Given that all studies targeted outreach to racial/ethnic minority populations, the findings suggest place-based interventions are an important way to reach underserved population and potentially address health disparities by providing accessible health education, screenings, and connection to services in places that they visit to purchase goods and services. However, it is essential to acknowledge that conducting health interventions in public spaces may inadvertently lead to unintended consequences, such as stigma and concerns about privacy. The presence of stigma or concerns about privacy can affect participant engagement and willingness to utilize these services, potentially undermining the effectiveness of the interventions. Thus, careful consideration of these social dynamics is crucial when designing and implementing interventions in community settings. Placements of these interventions in barbershops and beauty salons may represent familiar and trusted community settings that can enhance participant engagement. Further study is needed to expand beyond these settings to determine whether other public-facing business settings (e.g., banks, movie theatres, malls) are also effective and acceptable places for health interventions.
Among the 42 studies reviewed, there was a general lack of rigor in the designed studies. Only one study received the maximum quality rating score [ ], and no other study was within 2 point of the maximum quality rating score. Most studies were descriptive or observational one-group designs and did not include a comparison group. Although we identified 7 randomized trials, including several cluster randomized trials, these studies varied widely in terms of interventions and health conditions. As a result, we did not attempt to synthesize the results quantitatively. Instead, we summarized the findings of each study individually, highlighting their diverse approaches and outcomes. This decision was based on the heterogeneity of the studies, which made direct comparison challenging. In addition, many of these trials did not appear to be rigorously designed and may have had many threats to internal validity (e.g., confounding variables, inadequate sample size, limited follow-up or differential attrition between groups) that were not fully examined. Almost all studies relied on subjective outcome measures and did not measure objective health outcomes (e.g., service utilization, disease onset and outcome) so there is a need for further rigorous studies with objective outcomes. Together, our review concludes there is a small, growing body of studies of health interventions delivered in public-facing business settings that shows some preliminary success in reaching Black communities for a variety of health conditions, and these interventions may be a promising strategy to reach underserved populations but more rigorous and varied studies are needed to expand and deepen the evidence for these interventions to pinpoint how they are effective, who they are most effective for, and in using which interventions in what places.
This review had several strengths and limitations worth noting. Given the nature of scoping reviews, we took a broad, comprehensive approach to cover a wide range of health conditions, interventions, settings, and study designs. There was wide variability in studies making it challenging to compare studies, and a meta-analysis could not be conducted to quantify a summary of outcomes. Given the range of studies, we are also limited in specificity in drawing conclusions. However, we have tried to summarize findings by health condition to organize the studies and allow researchers to focus on particular health conditions. We only included studies in the United States, and there may be various innovative place-based interventions delivered internationally in other countries that would yield new insights so that is both a limitation of our review and an opportunity for future research. Moreover, we only include published studies, and there may be a “file-drawer problem” of unpublished studies we do not include. Finally, while stakeholder consultation is recognized as beneficial in scoping reviews, no formal stakeholder consultations were conducted for this review, which we acknowledge as a limitation. Additionally, while our approach aligns with best practices for scoping reviews, the absence of protocol registration may limit transparency. We also recognize this as a potential limitation to reproducibility.
These limitations notwithstanding, this review highlights unique and innovative ways to reach underserved populations in places like barbershops and beauty salons. The strongest evidence for these place-based interventions is for cardiovascular disease (especially hypertension) and cancer, but there are opportunities to study this further for various other health conditions. Together, these studies demonstrate possible collaborations between healthcare providers, researchers, and business owners with mutual goals to serve underserved communities. Finally, this review paves numerous paths for needed research in this area, including more experimental studies with objective outcomes, examination of the sustainability and scalability of these interventions, and the cost-effectiveness of interventions to support their adoption by businesses, healthcare providers, and policymakers.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Keywords/operators/truncation used in databases for systematic review.
(DOCX)
S1 Checklist

## PRISMA 2020 checklist.
(DOCX)

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript. This is a review paper so there is no specific datasets. We do provide the syntax for our literature search in the Supplementary Information.

## Funding Statement
The author(s) received no specific funding for this work.

## References
 

PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0317815.r001Decision Letter 0
ChekuriLakshminarayanaAcademic Editor© 2025 Lakshminarayana ChekuriThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
27 Sep 2024

PONE-D-24-30536Usual prevention in unusual settings: A scoping review of place-based health interventions in public-facing businessesPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tsai,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Nov 11 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Lakshminarayana Chekuri, MD, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements: When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements. 1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf 2. We note that your Data Availability Statement is currently as follows: All relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting Information files. Please confirm at this time whether or not your submission contains all raw data required to replicate the results of your study. Authors must share the “minimal data set” for their submission. PLOS defines the minimal data set to consist of the data required to replicate all study findings reported in the article, as well as related metadata and methods (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-minimal-data-set-definition). For example, authors should submit the following data: - The values behind the means, standard deviations and other measures reported;- The values used to build graphs;- The points extracted from images for analysis. Authors do not need to submit their entire data set if only a portion of the data was used in the reported study. If your submission does not contain these data, please either upload them as Supporting Information files or deposit them to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories. If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent. If data are owned by a third party, please indicate how others may request data access. 3. We note that you have included the phrase “data not shown” in your manuscript. Unfortunately, this does not meet our data sharing requirements. PLOS does not permit references to inaccessible data. We require that authors provide all relevant data within the paper, Supporting Information files, or in an acceptable, public repository. Please add a citation to support this phrase or upload the data that corresponds with these findings to a stable repository (such as Figshare or Dryad) and provide and URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers that may be used to access these data. Or, if the data are not a core part of the research being presented in your study, we ask that you remove the phrase that refers to these data.

Additional Editor Comments:

Thank you for your scholarly contribution. I'd also like to thank the authors for choosing PLOS ONE to publish your findings from this study. Comments from reviewers are provided below. Please review these comments and I suggest address them and resubmit your manuscript. Your timely response would help this study be published and accessible to interested readers across the world. I look forward to reviewing your revised manuscript. I wish you good luck with your future endeavors.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This article presents a scoping review of peer reviewed articles on the broad topic of place-based health interventions. They present the findings by health issue of 43 peer reviewed articles and provide information on geographic location, sample population and size, and main findings. They found that barber shops and beauty salons were common facilities for cardiovascular disease and cancer interventions (i.e., screenings, referrals, and education), particularly in populations that were African American or Black.
I see a couple of major concerns about the synthesis of the findings and a need for transparency of the methods to determine rigor. These concerns prevent me from endorsing its acceptance in its present state.
The study fails to clarify how this scoping review builds upon a recent umbrella review by McGowan et al (2021). In addition, this article’s main finding of use of barbershops and beauty salons for public health outreach, research, and health intervention in racial and ethnic minority populations is already well established. For example, W. Kong and E. Saunders published in this context about hypertension in 1989. Additional synthesis of data by health issue, geographic region, strength of evidence, etc. would be helpful to the reader. For example, an evidence map may be relevant.
I have concerns about the level of sufficient detail to determine whether the scoping review was performed with rigor. Increased transparency in the methods is essential. The authors are off to a good start by using the PRISMA checklist for reporting. However, several key areas are not included or are included with insufficient detail. There was only one reviewer and yet no information about attempts to reduce bias. They should thoroughly address failure to implement best practices from Mak and Thomas (2022). For example, the review protocol should be registered and the management software named. They should describe methods used to synthesize results. They should describe the process of extraction, calibration, stakeholder consultation, and beyond. The lack of assessment on risk of bias or analysis of strength of evidence should be explored as described in the PRISMA checklist.
As part of the discussion, in exploring these findings, the unintended consequences (ie. stigma) should be noted in conducting any health intervention in a public space. Experience with community advisory boards helps tailor interventions with cultural competence. In addition, greater discussion of the limitations and gaps is needed.
Specific minor feedback for consideration is included below:
• Figure 1 is very challenging to read despite zooming in. Make the text larger and increase the quality of the image. Additional details to clarify the process should be included.
• “Black” should be capitalized consistently throughout when referring to groups in racial, cultural, or ethnic terms.
• Justification is needed on why only peer reviewed articles were included and what impact that could have on the findings.
• The full syntax of keywords and strategies used in the initial searches should be available as supplemental materials, not available upon request from the authors.
References:
Mak S, Thomas A. Steps for Conducting a Scoping Review. J Grad Med Educ. 2022 Oct;14(5):565-567.
McGowan, V.J., Buckner, S., Mead, R. et al. Examining the effectiveness of place-based interventions to improve public health and reduce health inequalities: an umbrella review. BMC Public Health 21, 1888 (2021).
Kong W., Saunders E. (1989). Community programs to increase hypertension control. Journal of the National Medical Association, 81, 13–16.
Reviewer #2: Comments to Authors
Overall Feedback
The manuscript presents an important review on the use of non-traditional business settings for health interventions, which is both timely and relevant. I believe that addressing the structural and methodological concerns will significantly strengthen the manuscript.
Abstract
• Please provide a clearly defined and focused objective. The current version is too broad, making it difficult for the reader to gauge the expectations and scope of the review. I recommend using the objective stated in the Introduction for consistency and clarity.
• Additionally, a clarification is needed for the statement: “While there have been 9 randomized trials conducted across health conditions, they have been limited to a few select settings with little measurement of objective health outcomes indicating a need for more rigorously designed studies.” It is unclear whether the concern is the limited rigor of the randomized trials or their restriction to select settings with inadequate focus on objective health outcomes. I will suggest that authors address this ambiguity for a clearer interpretation.
Introduction
The introduction is well-structured but could be improved further.
• The statement, “However, these interventions were mostly focused on altering the ‘place’ of people as the intervention rather than focusing on delivering usual interventions in unusual places or settings,” requires expansion. It is not immediately apparent why altering the "place" of people is less favorable compared to delivering interventions in unconventional settings. Further explanation of these approaches and their respective merits or shortcomings would add depth to the argument.
• The example cited “For example, there have been a number of studies that have developed health promotion interventions in salons and barbershops to reach African American communities and a systematic review has summarized this research [3]” is a good one, but it feels disconnected from the preceding sentences. I will suggest re-writing the paragraph to provide a more coherent narrative, clearly linking examples to the argument.
• There is also a lack of an explicit explanation of how this review fills a gap in the literature. Currently, the significance of focusing on "unusual business settings" for health interventions is not adequately emphasized. Further explanation on why these settings are essential for addressing health disparities or improving outreach would strenghten the introduction. The objective should also address the "so what?" question to clarify the overall goal of the review.
Methods
There are some concerns in this section that need to be addressed.
• First, the manuscript states that "four major search databases were used: PubMed, Google Scholar, and APA PsycNet," but this lists only three databases.
• Also, the rationale behind limiting the search to studies from 1995-2023 is not provided. An explanation for this temporal restriction is needed to justify its relevance to the review.
• The search syntax appears overly simplistic. I recommend following established search strategies from previous reviews, such as those by McGowan et al. (2021) and Palmer et al. (2021), which may provide more robust search terms. In addition, the search seems to focus exclusively on barbershops, laundromats, hair salons, movie theaters, and nail salons, but there is no explanation for excluding other business settings that might serve as intervention sites. Expanding this scope, or at least justifying the exclusion of other settings, would improve the comprehensiveness of the review.
• It is best practice to include both inclusion and exclusion criteria explicitly, which are missing in this section. Additionally, since the review appears to be conducted by a single author, this raises concerns about potential bias. I recommend that co-authors participate in the data extraction process and that at least two reviewers are involved to verify extracted data and ensure consistency, which will strengthen the rigor of the review.
Results
• The current organization of the results does not align well with the review’s objectives. I recommend thematizing the findings based on the various types of preventive health interventions rather than organizing them by health conditions. This would allow for a more structured discussion of intervention methods, such as screenings for hypertension, HIV, or diabetes, while also categorizing them into primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention levels.
• For these sentences, “Table 1 contained studies providing interventions for cardiovascular health conditions, HIV, and diabetes. Table 2 contained studies providing interventions for different cancers, and Table 3 contained studies providing interventions for all other conditions not falling.”, Please cite the studies that belong to each of these categories. For instance, when discussing cardiovascular interventions, specific studies should be cited for clarity.
• The sentence, "These studies included screening programs, cross-sectional studies, longitudinal studies, descriptive studies, feasibility studies, a randomized controlled trial, pilot studies, cohort studies, and program evaluations," seems unclear in its inclusion of screening programs. Is there a specific reason screening programs are listed alongside study designs? Clarifying this distinction would improve clarity.
• Including more commentary on intervention outcomes, particularly which intervention methods were most effective, would add depth to the analysis.
• Adding more commentary on intervention outcomes, particularly on which methods were the most effective, would enrich the analysis and provide readers with a clearer sense of the practical impact of these interventions.
• More detail on the effectiveness of the interventions is needed, especially in terms of measurable health outcomes. For instance, while the review notes positive participant responses, including data on health improvements or behavior changes (e.g., increases in screenings or follow-up rates) would strengthen the results section.
• The tables are well-structured, but adding a column that summarizes the limitations of each study—such as small sample sizes or the observational nature of some interventions—would be helpful, especially since the authors are interested in the rigor of study designs.
Discussion
• The discussion section should demonstrate stronger alignment with the review's objective. For instance, the statement "we reviewed 43 studies of place-based health interventions" should clearly connect to the objective, which is to assess interventions delivered in non-traditional settings.
• “Additionally, the specific health condition with the greatest number of rigorous research designs (e.g. randomized controlled trials, cluster randomized trials) was for hypertension (3 studies).” I do not agree with this statement. The claim that randomized controlled trials are more rigorous than other study designs is problematic. The rigor of a study design depends on its alignment with the research question. Cross-sectional studies can be as rigorous as randomized controlled trials if they are appropriately suited to the research aims.
• “Further study is needed to expand beyond these settings to determine whether other public-facing business settings (e.g., grocery stores, banks, movie theatres, malls) are also effective and acceptable places for health interventions.” Did any of the reviewed studies focus on these settings or is there a reason why authors did not review articles from these settings?
• The sentence, "Although we counted 7 randomized trials, including several cluster randomized trials, they offered different types of interventions and targeted different health conditions, making synthesis challenging," is unclear. Could the authors clarify whether they attempted to synthesize information from these studies? If not, what approach did they take to handle these trials?
• "Many of these trials appeared to have design flaws, potentially compromising internal validity due to factors such as confounding variables, inadequate sample sizes, limited follow-up, or differential attrition between groups." Since the authors are concerned with study design rigor, it would be beneficial to evaluate the quality of each trial using established guidelines.
• The statement "Almost all studies relied on subjective outcome measures and did not measure..." is incomplete and not discussed in the results section. The authors should include this in the results if it is an important observation.
• Given the range of studies, we are also limited in specificity in drawing conclusions” Authors should please clarify what this statement means.
• "We only included studies from the United States, but there may be innovative place-based interventions in other countries" requires justification in the introduction. Why was the focus restricted to U.S.-based studies?
• While the review highlights innovative methods for reaching underserved populations in barbershops and beauty salons, the current structure of the results may not fully support this claim. Reorganizing the results by types of place-based health intervention first, followed by specific interventions, and then health conditions, would provide a clearer framework for discussion.
• A more detailed exploration of the barriers encountered in implementing health interventions in these settings should be included in the discussion. Challenges related to business owners’ willingness to participate, or logistical issues should be addressed.
• Expanding the discussion to include policy implications for promoting place-based health interventions, particularly in underserved communities, would add valuable context to the findings.
• Additionally, reflecting on how the review's findings could guide future research on health disparities would strengthen the overall contribution of the paper.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0317815.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
2412025201e0317815e0317815Collection date 2025.

20 Nov 2024

Dear Dr. Chekuri and Reviewers
Thank you for the opportunity to revise and resubmit our article entitled “Usual prevention in unusual settings: A scoping review of place-based health interventions in public-facing businesses” (PONE-D-24-30536). We appreciate the Reviewers’ constructive comments and have worked to address each of them, which we detail below. We believe the review has been strengthened in the process and hope you can reconsider this work for publication in PLOS ONE. Thank you greatly for your time.
For Reviewer #1:
1. “The study fails to clarify how this scoping review builds upon a recent umbrella review by McGowan et al (2021). In addition, this article’s main finding of use of barbershops and beauty salons for public health outreach, research, and health intervention in racial and ethnic minority populations is already well established. For example, W. Kong and E. Saunders published in this context about hypertension in 1989. Additional synthesis of data by health issue, geographic region, strength of evidence, etc. would be helpful to the reader. For example, an evidence map may be relevant.”
Response #1: We appreciate the reviewer’s suggestion to clarify how this review builds on existing literature, such as the recent umbrella review by McGowan et al. (2021). In response, we have expanded the introduction to clarify that, unlike prior reviews that largely focus on interventions in more conventional settings, our scoping review examines preventive health interventions in a broader array of unconventional business settings. We have revised the text on pages 2-3 to emphasize this distinction and highlight our review’s unique focus on public-facing venues outside of commonly studied sites such as grocery stores and pharmacies.
2. “I have concerns about the level of sufficient detail to determine whether the scoping review was performed with rigor. Increased transparency in the methods is essential. The authors are off to a good start by using the PRISMA checklist for reporting. However, several key areas are not included or are included with insufficient detail. There was only one reviewer and yet no information about attempts to reduce bias. They should thoroughly address failure to implement best practices from Mak and Thomas (2022). For example, the review protocol should be registered and the management software named. They should describe methods used to synthesize results. They should describe the process of extraction, calibration, stakeholder consultation, and beyond. The lack of assessment on risk of bias or analysis of strength of evidence should be explored as described in the PRISMA checklist.”
Response #2: Thank you for your feedback on ensuring sufficient rigor in our methods. We have revised the manuscript to clarify that two reviewers participated in all stages of the review, including with one reviewer leading study screening, selection, and data extraction and checked by the second reviewer with corrections made when discrepancies were found. We provided additional detail on our calibration process, where both reviewers independently extracted data from a sample of studies to ensure consistency. We also clarified our management approach, noting the use of Excel for data collection and Zotero for citation management. While the review protocol was not pre-registered, we aligned our methods with PRISMA guidelines for scoping reviews. We acknowledged the lack of formal stakeholder consultation as a limitation. Additionally, we described our results synthesis by categorizing studies according to intervention type, health condition, and setting. Finally, we assessed the methodological quality of each study using the NIH Study Quality Assessment Tools to provide insights into the strength of the evidence presented. These changes were implemented on pages 3-6 and 18 to enhance the transparency and rigor of our scoping review.
3. “As part of the discussion, in exploring these findings, the unintended consequences (ie. stigma) should be noted in conducting any health intervention in a public space. Experience with community advisory boards helps tailor interventions with cultural competence. In addition, greater discussion of the limitations and gaps is needed.”
Response #3: Thank you for your valuable feedback regarding the need to address stigma in health interventions. We have revised the manuscript to include this important aspect. On page 17, we now discuss how health interventions in public settings may lead to stigma, potentially affecting participant engagement. We highlight the importance of understanding these dynamics to ensure interventions are culturally competent and effectively tailored to the communities served. This addition strengthens our discussion and emphasizes the need to consider unintended consequences in place-based health interventions.
4. “Figure 1 is very challenging to read despite zooming in. Make the text larger and increase the quality of the image. Additional details to clarify the process should be included.”
Response #4: We have now uploaded an original image for Figure 1 which should be higher resolution. 
5. “’Black’ should be capitalized consistently throughout when referring to groups in racial, cultural, or ethnic terms.”
Response #5: Thank you for your valuable feedback regarding the capitalization of "Black" in our manuscript. We have revised the text to ensure that "Black" is now consistently capitalized throughout when referring to groups in racial, cultural, or ethnic terms. We appreciate your attention to this detail, as it enhances the accuracy and professionalism of our writing.
6. “Justification is needed on why only peer reviewed articles were included and what impact that could have on the findings.”
Response #6: Thank you for your insightful comment regarding the inclusion of only peer-reviewed articles in our review. We chose to limit our analysis to peer-reviewed studies to ensure the rigor and credibility of the research findings. Peer review serves as a quality control mechanism that helps validate the methodology and results of a study, thereby enhancing the reliability of the evidence presented. By focusing on peer-reviewed literature, we aimed to provide a more robust synthesis of place-based health interventions, ensuring that the interventions evaluated have undergone critical scrutiny by experts in the field. We acknowledge that this choice may limit the scope of included studies and could exclude valuable insights from non-peer-reviewed literature. However, we believe that prioritizing peer-reviewed research contributes to the overall strength and validity of our review's conclusions. We now provide a justification in the Methods section.
7. “The full syntax of keywords and strategies used in the initial searches should be available as supplemental materials, not available upon request from the authors.”
Response #7: We now provide a full list of syntax used as an Appendix item. 
For Reviewer #2:
Abstract
1. “Please provide a clearly defined and focused objective. The current version is too broad, making it difficult for the reader to gauge the expectations and scope of the review. I recommend using the objective stated in the Introduction for consistency and clarity.”
Response #1: Thank you for your insightful comment regarding the need for a clearer and more focused objective. In response, we have revised the objective in the abstract to better articulate the scope and expectations of the review. The objective now clearly states the aim of summarizing the peer-reviewed literature on place-based health interventions in unconventional public-facing business settings, specifically highlighting the target populations and health conditions addressed. These changes can be found on page 1 of the revised manuscript.
2. “Additionally, a clarification is needed for the statement: “While there have been 9 randomized trials conducted across health conditions, they have been limited to a few select settings with little measurement of objective health outcomes indicating a need for more rigorously designed studies.” It is unclear whether the concern is the limited rigor of the randomized trials or their restriction to select settings with inadequate focus on objective health outcomes. I will suggest that authors address this ambiguity for a clearer interpretation.”
Response #2: Thank you for your insightful feedback regarding the statement on the randomized trials. To address the ambiguity, we have revised the text for clarity. The updated sentence now explicitly distinguishes the two concerns regarding the randomized trials: their restriction to select settings and the limited rigor in their design, particularly concerning the measurement of objective health outcomes. The revised statement now more simply and clearly reads: “While there have been 9 randomized trials conducted across various health conditions, these trials are limited in two key ways: first, they focus on a few select settings and lack of objective health out. This highlights the need for more rigorously designed studies in diverse settings that can effectively evaluate the impact of place-based health interventions.” These changes were made on page 1. We appreciate your guidance in enhancing the clarity of our manuscript.
Introduction:
3. “The statement, “However, these interventions were mostly focused on altering the ‘place’ of people as the intervention rather than focusing on delivering usual interventions in unusual places or settings,” requires expansion. It is not immediately apparent why altering the "place" of people is less favorable compared to delivering interventions in unconventional settings. Further explanation of these approaches and their respective merits or shortcomings would add depth to the argument.”
Response #3: We appreciate your feedback regarding the need for expansion on the statement concerning the focus on altering the "place" of people versus delivering usual interventions in unconventional settings. In response, we have clarified this point in the paragraph by emphasizing that altering the “place” of people can disconnect individuals from their familiar community contexts. We argue that delivering traditional health interventions in unconventional settings—such as salons and barbershops—preserves the familiarity and trust these spaces offer, which can lead to better engagement and participation from target populations. This addition enriches the discussion by providing a clearer rationale for why the context of the intervention matters. These changes were made on page 2.
4. “The example cited “For example, there have been a number of studies that have developed health promotion interventions in salons and barbershops to reach African American communities and a systematic review has summarized this research [3]” is a good one, but it feels disconnected from the preceding sentences. I will suggest re-writing the paragraph to provide a more coherent narrative, clearly linking examples to the argument.”
Response #4: Thank you for your feedback regarding the coherence of the example within the paragraph. We have revised the paragraph to create a clearer and more cohesive narrative that better links the example to the overarching argument. Specifically, we clarified how altering the "place" of people can disconnect them from familiar community settings, in contrast to delivering interventions in unconventional but trusted spaces like salons and barbershops. This revision illustrates how using such settings can enhance engagement and accessibility for target populations. These changes were made to improve the flow and strengthen the argument within the paragraph on pages 2-3.
5. “There is also a lack of an explicit explanation of how this review fills a gap in the literature. Currently, the significance of focusing on "unusual business settings" for health interventions is not adequately emphasized. Further explanation on why these settings are essential for addressing health disparities or improving outreach would strengthen the introduction. The objective should also address the "so what?" question to clarify the overall goal of the review.”
Response #5: Thank you for highlighting the need for a clearer explanation of this review’s significance. In response, we have revised the introduction to explicitly state how focusing on unconventional business settings for health interventions addresses a gap in the literature. We emphasize that these settings—such as salons, barbershops, and other non-traditional venues—provide a unique opportunity to reach underserved populations in familiar, trusted spaces, potentially enhancing engagement and access to health resources. We have also clarified the objective to highlight how these unconventional settings can contribute to addressing health disparities and extending outreach. These revisions were made to ensure that the purpose and importance of the review are clear, providing a stronger rationale for its focus.
Methods:
6. “First, the manuscript states that "four major search databases were used: PubMed, Google Scholar, and APA PsycNet," but this lists only three databases.”
Response #6: Thank you for catching this inconsistency. We have corrected the text to reflect that three major search databases were used (PubMed, Google Scholar, and APA PsycNet) instead of four. This change has been made on page 4.
7. “Also, the rationale behind limiting the search to studies from 1995-2023 is not provided. An explanation for this temporal restriction is needed to justify its relevance to the review.”
Response #7: Thank you for your comment. We have clarified in the manuscript that while the search range in each database was set from 1960 to the present, the studies that met our inclusion criteria were published between 1995 and 2023. This revision has been made on page 4.
8. “The search syntax appears overly simplistic. I recommend following established search strategies from previous reviews, such as those by McGowan et al. (2021) and Palmer et al. (2021), which may provide more robust search terms. In addition, the search seems to focus exclusively on barbershops, laundromats, hair salons, movie theaters, and nail salons, but there is no explanation for excluding other business settings that might serve as intervention sites. Expanding this scope, or at least justifying the exclusion of other settings, would improve the comprehensiveness of the review.”
Response #8: Thank you for this feedback. We have now included the exact search terms and syntax used in our search, which included the strategies suggested. We focused on sites, such as barbershops, laundromats, hair salons, movie theaters, and nail salons—that met our definition of "unconventional" business settings where healthcare interventions had not usually be considered historically. These settings were selected based on their established role in the community and their alignment with our review’s objective of identifying less traditional sites for health interventions. Expanding to additional settings was beyond the scope of this review; however, we agree that exploring a broader range of business types could be valuable for future research.
9. “It is best practice to include both inclusion and exclusion criteria explicitly, which are missing in this section. Additionally, since the review appears to be conducted by a single author, this raises concerns about potential bias. I recommend that co-authors participate in the data extraction process and that at least two reviewers are involved to verify extracted data and ensure consistency, which will strengthen the rigor of the review.”
Response #9: Thanks for this important point. We have now clarified both inclusion and exclusion criteria explicitly. In short, inclusion criteria were “studies conducted in the United States, provided health interventions (e.g., education, disease screening, connection with healthcare providers, pharmacy services) to clients in one or more business settings for one or more diseases or conditions, were written in English, and were peer-reviewed.” And exclusion criteria were “studies that were not peer-reviewed, not p
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response Letter.docx
PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0317815.r003Decision Letter 1
ChekuriLakshminarayanaAcademic Editor© 2025 Lakshminarayana ChekuriThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
16 Dec 2024

PONE-D-24-30536R1Usual prevention in unusual settings: A scoping review of place-based health interventions in public-facing businessesPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tsai,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 30 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Lakshminarayana Chekuri, MD, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments :
Please review attached document for my suggestions.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: I appreciate the numerous changes made by the authors to address the reviewers’ concerns. These improved the transparency in the rigor of the methods.
My previous concern, as well as that noted by Reviewer #2, was partially addressed; how does this review build upon the existing literature (i.e. McGowan et al 2021)? As previously noted, this article’s main finding of use of barbershops and beauty salons for public health outreach, research, and health intervention in racial and ethnic minority populations is already well-established. The author's clarified that organizing their findings by health issue adds value to the field as it synthesizes the evidence and quality to plan for future research and intervention.
Please clarify the revisions the authors’ noted on page 2 as they present two unclear and conflicting sentences (below).
“For example, there have been a number of studies that have developed health promotion interventions in salons and barbershops to reach African American communities, with a systematic review summarizing this research [3]. However, these studies have primarily focused on settings traditionally associated with community health outreach, such as grocery stores, pharmacies, and similar venues.”
Reviewer #2: The authors have done a great job addressing the concerns I raised in the first round of review. I have no additional comments. Well done.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Editor comments 12-15-24.docx
PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0317815.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
2412025201e0317815e0317815Collection date 2025.

17 Dec 2024

Dear Dr. Chekuri and Reviewers
Thank you for the opportunity to revise and resubmit our article entitled “Usual prevention in unusual settings: A scoping review of place-based health interventions in public-facing businesses” (PONE-D-24-30536R1). We appreciate the Editor’s careful reading and suggested edits along with each of the Reviewers’ positive and encouraging comments.
In this revised submission, we have now made all of the Editor’s suggested edits throughout the manuscript. For Reviewer #2, we have clarified the two sentences (bottom of page 2 and top of page 3) that there have been a few novel studies of interventions in unconventional settings like barbershops, but the majority of studies and the work in real-world settings continue to be in traditional settings like pharmacies and community health centers. We hope these revisions have improved the manuscript.
We greatly appreciate the opportunity to resubmit our work and hope this revised manuscript can be considered for publication. Thank you for your time.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response Letter 12.17.24.docx
PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0317815.r005Decision Letter 2
ChekuriLakshminarayanaAcademic Editor© 2025 Lakshminarayana ChekuriThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
27 Dec 2024

PONE-D-24-30536R2Usual prevention in unusual settings: A scoping review of place-based health interventions in public-facing businessesPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tsai,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Feb 10 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Lakshminarayana Chekuri, MD, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Please review my comments in attached document.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Academic Editor comments 12-26-24.docx
PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0317815.r006Author response to Decision Letter 2
2412025201e0317815e0317815Collection date 2025.

30 Dec 2024

Dear Dr. Chekuri,
Thank you for the opportunity to make some final corrections to the manuscript. Your comments were very helpful, and we have made each of the following revisions.
In the Abstract on Page 1, we have revised the sentence to now read: “The most common unconventional public-facing business settings for health interventions included barbershops or beauty salons…” We took out the number of studies because we agree it’s confusing and potentially misleading. You are also very correct that it is 34 (81%) of studies targeted Black populations. We have corrected this in the Abstract and in the Discussion, thank you very much.
On Page 2, we have revised the sentence as suggested to read: “Place-based interventions is one approach to reach people ‘where they are.’”
On Page 3, we have corrected a number of typos and reworded several sentences as you suggested. Thank you for these great suggestions.
On Page 5, we have taken out the word “reviewer.” On Page 7, we have corrected the wording to now read “…each with a sample size of 37 participants…”
On Page 18, we have corrected the sentence to now read “…there was a general lack of rigor in the designed studies." Thank you.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response Letter 12.30.24.docx
PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0317815.r007Decision Letter 3
ChekuriLakshminarayanaAcademic Editor© 2025 Lakshminarayana ChekuriThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
7 Jan 2025

Usual prevention in unusual settings: A scoping review of place-based health interventions in public-facing businesses
PONE-D-24-30536R3
Dear Dr. Tsai,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Lakshminarayana Chekuri, MD, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0317815.r008Acceptance letter
ChekuriLakshminarayanaAcademic Editor© 2025 Lakshminarayana ChekuriThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
8 Jan 2025

PONE-D-24-30536R3 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tsai, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Lakshminarayana Chekuri 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
AttachmentSubmitted filename: pone.0317815.docx
Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
S1 Table

## Keywords/operators/truncation used in databases for systematic review.
(DOCX)
S1 Checklist

## PRISMA 2020 checklist.
(DOCX)
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response Letter.docx
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Editor comments 12-15-24.docx
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response Letter 12.17.24.docx
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Academic Editor comments 12-26-24.docx
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response Letter 12.30.24.docx
AttachmentSubmitted filename: pone.0317815.docx

## Data Availability Statement
All relevant data are within the manuscript. This is a review paper so there is no specific datasets. We do provide the syntax for our literature search in the Supplementary Information.