pmcCochrane Database Syst RevCochrane Database Syst Rev3102cochrev14651858The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews1469-493X1361-6137John Wiley and Sons, Inc. and the Cochrane LibraryPMC11613325PMC11613325.111613325116133253962507310.1002/14651858.CD009362.pub4CD009362.pub4CD0093621Child healthSkin disordersInsurance medicineWoundsPRESSURE ULCERSDressings and topical agents for preventing pressure ulcers
Cochrane Central Editorial ServicePattonDeclan Study populationRR not estimable440(1 RCT)⊕⊝⊝⊝ Very loweSilicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of adverse events compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain(silicone foam dressing group: 0%, 0/220; no‐dressing group: 0%, 0/220).0 per 10000 per 1000(0 to 0)Adverseevents: Study populationRR not estimable1633(1 RCT)⊕⊝⊝⊝ Very lowfSilicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of adverse events, but the evidence is very uncertain(silicone foam dressing group: 3%, 33/1087; no‐dressing group: unknown).Unknown33 adverse eventsAdverseevents: Study populationRR not estimable244(1 RCT)⊕⊝⊝⊝ Very loweSilicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of adverse events, but the evidence is very uncertain(silicone foam dressing group: 50%, 58/117; no‐dressing group: unknown).Unknown58 participants had an adverse event*The risk in the intervention group (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the mean risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI). CI: confidence interval; RCT: randomised controlled trial; RR: risk ratio; SD: standard deviationGRADE Working Group grades of evidence High certainty: we are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect. Moderate certainty: we are moderately confident in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different. Low certainty: our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect. Very low certainty: we have very little confidence in the effect estimate: the true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect. 

## Background

## Description of the condition
A pressure ulcer is defined as localised damage to the skin, underlying tissue, or both, as a result of pressure or pressure in combination with shear ( ). A meta‐analysis identified that the pooled prevalence of pressure ulcers in over 1.36 million hospitalised adults was 12.8%, and the pooled incidence in over 680,000 hospitalised adults was 5.4 per 10,000 patients ( ). Pressure ulcers are classified by increasing visible tissue loss into four stages (1 to 4), with two additional presentations: unstageable and suspected deep tissue injury ( ; ). The most common anatomical sites for pressure ulcers to occur are the sacrum and the heels, and the majority are stage 1 or stage 2 in severity ( ; ; ).
Understanding of the aetiology of pressure ulcers has advanced in the past decade ( ). Pressure, both intense and prolonged, and shear, underpin skin and tissue damage. Pressure is equal to force divided by area: the same amount of force applied to a small area, when compared with a larger area, will result in greater pressure ( ). Shear is the mechanical stress acting parallel to a plane of interest, which occurs when a person sitting in bed begins to slide down the bed, with their skin remaining in the same place because it ‘sticks’ to the bed linen ( ). Intense or prolonged pressure and shear forces increase the mechanical load on tissues and appear to lead to pressure ulcer development. Cell deformation ( ; ), inflammation ( ), and local ischaemia (lack of oxygen) ( ; ) result in tissue damage. Other factors, such as impaired interstitial fluid flow and lymphatic drainage ( ) and reperfusion injury (injury to cells caused by the restoration of blood supply to tissues) ( ), are also purported to result in tissue damage. These mechanisms, alone, or in combination, lead to cell damage and inevitable tissue destruction. Another factor that influences the development of a pressure ulcer is the microclimate, described as the temperature, humidity, and airflow around the area of the skin ( ). When there is increased warmth and humidity, the skin becomes more vulnerable to injury. Minimising both pressure and shear on the body, along with ensuring the skin is not too warm or excessively moist, has the potential to decrease the risk of pressure ulcer development ( ; ).
Numerous factors that influence mechanical load, pressure ulcer susceptibility, and tissue tolerance increase the risk of pressure ulcer development ( ). For example, immobility, poor perfusion, malnourishment, and conditions such as infection and oedema may have either an indirect or direct relationship with the development of a pressure ulcer ( ). Critically ill or injured people, those with spinal cord injuries or other neurologic conditions, older individuals, and those with diabetes mellitus are at an increased risk of pressure ulcer ( ). The heel is particularly vulnerable to pressure ulcer development, given its anatomical shape, which is curved and sharp ( ). As a result, tissues in the heel become highly distorted, stretched, compressed and sheared, making pressure ulcer development highly likely unless prevention strategies are quickly employed ( ). Certain people with Stage 1 pressure ulcers are also at increased risk of the pressure ulcer progressing to stage 4 ( ). For example, individuals with hypotension, contractures, or a history of a cerebral vascular accident, tend to develop more serious pressure ulcers despite standard preventive measures ( ). Thus, a clear focus on the adoption of targeted prevention strategies is important at the outset, so that the individual is not exposed to pressure ulcers in the first instance ( ).
Pressure ulcers have a negative impact on an individual’s quality of life. Indeed, the emotional, physical, mental, and social domains of life are all profoundly affected ( ). Pain is described as one of the most significant problems for individuals with pressure ulcers, and many of the treatment regimens adopted exacerbate this adverse effect ( ; ; ). Thus, it is important to consider the impact of prevention and treatment strategies on the individual, and to choose those that will reduce discomfort and enhance rehabilitation wherever possible ( ). Pressure ulcers are also associated with increased mortality ( ). Whether this relates to the fact that pressure ulcers occur in a population that is for the most part debilitated, with a high incidence of comorbidities, or whether it relates to the presence of a pressure ulcer alone, remains unclear ( ).
Pressure ulcers impose a significant financial burden on healthcare systems, and more so for treatment than prevention ( ; ). predicted that, in 2017/2018, pressure ulcers cost the UK National Health Service an estimated 1.74 billion pounds sterling (GBP) (or GBP 1740 million) in the first 12 months from onset. Another UK analysis of 273 hospitals showed pressure ulcers resulted in over 15 excess bed days per ulcer, and the loss of 26 healthy life years ( ). In Australian public hospitals, the annual cost of pressure ulcers, including opportunity cost of excess length of stay, treatment costs, and productivity loss, is 9.1 billion Australian dollars (AUD) (or AUD 9100 million) ( ). In the USA, hospital‐acquired pressure ulcers cost an average USD 10,708 per patient and about USD 26.8 billion (USD 26,800 million) per annum ( ). A systematic review of 17 studies found that, annually, nations spend from 121.4 to 2.6 billion euros (EUR) (or EUR 121,400 million to 2,600 million) or EUR 275,761 million to EUR 126.15 million per 100,000 people ( ). In fact, an Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) report on the economics of patient safety conservatively estimates that 15% of hospital expenditure is spent on treating safety failures, with pressure ulcers being the most burdensome ( ).

## Description of the intervention
Pressure ulcer prevention involves a range of interventions, including risk assessment ( ), nutritional support ( ), use of pressure redistribution surfaces ( ; ; ; ; ), repositioning ( ; ), and early mobilisation ( ). Implementation of skin care regimens – to help ensure skin is clean, hydrated, and moisturised – is also important in preventing pressure ulcers ( ; ). Skin care regimens may include a selection of topical therapies where creams or ointments are applied directly to the skin ( ), or impregnated in dressings applied to the skin. Topical interventions are widely used within clinical settings in isolation, or in combination with other preventive strategies such as dressings ( ). For the purposes of this review, we define a topical agent as 'any product or substance applied to the skin'.
Dressings to protect the skin from damage are increasingly used in clinical settings as another pressure ulcer prevention strategy. While the certainty of evidence for using prophylactic dressings remains low ( ; ), their clinical effectiveness has been demonstrated in large multisite trials in acute and critical care patient populations ( ; ; ).
There is a wide range of dressings for the prevention of pressure ulcers, although those that are most reviewed in the literature are ( ):
film dressings;
hydrocolloid dressings;
foam dressings.

Of these, multilayered silicone foam dressings are the most widely evaluated ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ), and their use is recommended by international guidelines ( ).

## How the intervention might work
Our understanding of how prophylactic dressings and topical agents prevent pressure ulcers has improved ( ; ). Previous hypotheses suggested these dressings and topical agents prevented pressure ulcers by reducing friction forces ( ). Recent evidence confirms prophylactic dressings prevent pressure ulcers by either minimising friction forces exerted on the skin, preventing the skin from stretching or tearing, or absorbing skin surface moisture ( ). It must be noted that commercially available prophylactic dressings have substantial differences in their design and composition, which determines the dressing’s biomechanical performance in terms of tissue protection and durability ( ; ). Hence, dressing selection must align with both the patient and clinical needs ( ; ). Furthermore, international guidelines recommend the use of prophylactic dressings as an adjunct to offloading pressure and other prevention strategies, such as repositioning ( ; ). In relation to topical agents, there is a lack of empirical evidence to confirm how they prevent pressure ulcers ( ). It is hypothesised that topical agents applied directly to the skin will moisturise and protect the skin by reducing dryness, a known risk factor for pressure ulcer development. Optimal skin conditioning is of paramount importance, especially for individuals with low sebum production, such as the elderly. This preparation is essential to fortify the skin against mechanical stress and promote improved circulation. Additionally, these interventions play a pivotal role in maintaining skin pH balance, reinforcing the skin's barrier integrity, and establishing a protective occlusive layer ( ; ; ).

## Why it is important to do this review
The use of dressings and topical agents for preventing pressure ulcers is discussed in the literature and in international pressure ulcer prevention guidelines. Prior to the publication of the original version of this review ( ), the level of evidence to support these recommendations had not been systematically assessed ( ). The use of adjunct therapies (for example, dressings, creams, or lotions) as part of prevention strategies adds to the overall costs. Therefore, it is important to explore whether the use of these therapies provides potential benefit to patients ( ). This is the third update of this review.

## Objectives
To evaluate the effects of dressings and topical agents on pressure ulcer prevention, in people of any age without existing pressure ulcers, but at risk of developing one, in any healthcare setting.

## Methods

## Criteria for considering studies for this review

## Types of studies
Trials that randomised individuals (randomised controlled trials (RCTs)) or groups (cluster‐RCTs) were eligible for inclusion.

## Types of participants
People of any age without a pressure ulcer, but considered to be at risk of developing a pressure ulcer, in any care setting.

## Types of interventions
The intervention was any wound dressing or topical agent applied to the skin at any frequency with the aim of preventing the development of a pressure ulcer. We included studies comparing the use of dressings, topical agents, or topical agents with dressings, compared with a different dressing, topical agent, combined topical agent and dressing, no intervention or standard care, or any other intervention.

## Types of outcome measures

## Primary outcomes
Pressure ulcer incidence (the proportion of people developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage). For the purpose of this review, we defined a pressure ulcer as a localised injury to the skin, underlying tissue, or both, usually over a bony prominence, as a result of pressure, or pressure in combination with shear. This review included all stages of pressure ulcer damage, following the definition of the . We accepted trial authors' definitions of, and methods for measuring, pressure ulcer incidence. We extracted data from the longest follow‐up period reported in the individual studies.

## Secondary outcomes
Stage of any new pressure ulcer(s)
Time to ulcer development
Anatomical location of pressure ulcer development
Costs of interventions
Quality of life, measured on a validated scale
Pain at dressing change, measured using a validated scale
Acceptability of the intervention (or satisfaction) with respect to patient comfort
Adverse events
Length of hospital stay

## Search methods for identification of studies

## Electronic searches
We searched the following electronic databases to identify reports of relevant clinical trials:
Cochrane Wounds Specialised Register (searched 3 November 2022);
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL; 2022, Issue 10) in the Cochrane Library (searched 3 November 2022);
MEDLINE Ovid including In‐Process & Other Non‐Indexed Citations (1946 to 3 November 2022);
Embase Ovid (1974 to 3 November 2022);
CINAHL Plus EBSCO (Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature; 1937 to 3 November 2022).

The search strategies for electronic databases can be found in . We combined the Ovid MEDLINE search with the Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search Strategy for identifying randomised trials in MEDLINE: sensitivity‐ and precision‐maximising version (2008 revision) ( ). We combined the Embase search with the Ovid Embase filter developed by the UK Cochrane Centre ( ). We combined the CINAHL Plus search with the trial filter developed by . There were no restrictions with respect to language, date of publication, or study setting.
We also searched the following clinical trial registries:
US National Institutes of Health Ongoing Trials Register, ClinicalTrials.gov (www.clinicaltrials.gov; searched 9 November 2022);
World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (www.who.int/clinical-trials-registry-platform; searched 9 November 2022).
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL; 2022, Issue 10) in the Cochrane Library (searched 3 November 2022).

Search strategies for clinical trial registries can be found in . Details of the search strategies used for the previous version of the review are given in .

## Searching other resources
Searching reference lists of included trials and relevant reviews
We aimed to identify other potentially eligible trials or ancillary publications by searching the reference lists of retrieved included trials, as well as relevant systematic reviews, meta‐analyses, and health technology assessment reports. However, we identified no further eligible trials.
Searching by contacting individuals or organisations
We contacted 19 authors of key papers and abstracts to request further information regarding registered trials. We received one reply, and the author reported the trial was not conducted.
Adverse effects
We did not perform a separate search for adverse effects of interventions used. We considered adverse effects described in the included studies only.

## Data collection and analysis
We carried out data collection and analysis according to methods stated in the published protocol ( ), which were based on the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ).

## Selection of studies
Two review authors independently assessed titles and, where available, abstracts of the trials identified by the search strategy against the eligibility criteria for inclusion in the review. We obtained full versions of potentially relevant trials and the two review authors independently screened these against the inclusion criteria. Any differences in opinion were resolved by discussion and, where necessary, reference to Cochrane Wounds editorial base. We completed a PRISMA flowchart to summarise this process ( ; ).
 

## Data extraction and management
Two review authors independently extracted data from eligible trials using a data extraction sheet. Specifically, we extracted the following information:
author, title, source;
date of trial, trial's geographical location;
funding source;
care setting;
inclusion/exclusion criteria;
participant characteristics;
balance of groups at baseline;
trial design details;
method of randomisation;
allocation concealment;
sample size calculation and sample size;
intervention details; concurrent interventions;
type of dressing and frequency of dressing change;
use of additional dressing materials;
participants' length of hospital stay;
outcome measures;
blinding (of the participants/outcome assessors);
length of follow‐up;
loss to follow‐up;
results;
intention‐to‐treat analysis; and
conclusions as reported by the trial authors.

We resolved any differences in opinion by discussion and, where necessary, with reference to Cochrane Wounds editorial base. If data were missing from reports, we attempted to contact trial authors to obtain the missing information.

## Assessment of risk of bias in included studies
Two review authors independently assessed the included trials using the original Cochrane risk of bias (RoB 1) tool for assessing risk of bias ( ). This tool addresses six specific domains: sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding, incomplete outcome data, selective outcome reporting, and other issues (e.g. extreme baseline imbalance). See for details of the criteria on which our judgements were based. We assessed the overall risk of bias for each study.

## Measures of treatment effect
For dichotomous outcomes, we calculated the risk ratio (RR) plus 95% confidence intervals (CI). For continuous outcomes, we calculated a mean difference (MD) plus 95% confidence intervals. We planned to analyse time‐to‐event data (e.g. time to ulceration) as survival data, using the appropriate analytical method (as per the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions; ). If time‐to‐event data had been incorrectly presented as continuous data, we would have presented the data in a narrative format in the review. We planned to collect data only from those trials where scales had been validated and were self‐reported or completed by an independent rater or relative (not the therapist or investigator). We planned to use the standardised mean difference as the summary statistic in any meta‐analysis of such data ( ).

## Unit of analysis issues
Ideally, a trial would be designed with participant‐level randomisation and analysis, and there would only be one pressure ulcer per participant (adjustment for clustering not necessary in this case). However, in pressure ulcer literature, it is not unusual to find trials that report outcomes for multiple pressure ulcers per randomised participant without adjusting for the cluster effect.
In such cases, we planned to contact the trial authors to attempt to obtain:
participant‐level data or results;
data or results for one pressure ulcer per participant; or
pressure ulcer‐level data.

We then planned to perform multilevel regression to calculate the adjusted effect. We then would have combined the adjusted results in the meta‐analysis with those of participant‐level trials (using the generic‐inverse method), and performed sensitivity analyses ( ). When we were unsuccessful in obtaining the additional data required, we assessed each study individually and determined whether to include the trial in the meta‐analysis. We took these studies into account in the risk of bias assessment when included.

## Dealing with missing data
If there was evidence of missing data, we contacted the trial authors to request the information. Where trial authors could not provide missing data, we assessed the risk of bias in the missing data and decided if the missing data were of 'low' or 'high' risk of bias according to our risk of bias criteria ( ). Or, if we considered data to be missing at random, we analysed the available information. Where outcome data were missing, we used an available‐case analysis, based on the numbers of participants for whom outcome data were known.

## Assessment of heterogeneity
We explored clinical heterogeneity by examining potentially influential factors: for example, type of topical agent or dressing, care setting, or participant characteristics, such as level of mobility. We assessed statistical heterogeneity using the I2 measure ( ). This examines the percentage of total variation across trials due to clinical or methodological heterogeneity, or both, rather than to chance. Values of I2 over 75% indicate a high level of heterogeneity.

## Assessment of reporting biases
We assessed reporting bias according to guidelines in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ). Reporting bias may occur for a number of reasons, including a greater likelihood of studies being published that report positive findings, and selective reporting of only those outcomes that favour the experimental intervention. We assessed reporting bias in each study as part of our risk of bias evaluation. To inspect for evidence of publication bias, we created a funnel plot for study data for two review outcomes (pressure ulcer incidence; pressure ulcer stage) in which we pooled the data from at least 10 trials.

## Data synthesis
We conducted a structured narrative summary of the trials reviewed. We entered quantitative data into Review Manager (RevMan) ( ), and conducted analyses using RevMan software. For dichotomous outcomes, we calculated risk ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI). RR is the ratio of the risk of the event of interest (e.g. pressure ulcers developed) in the experimental group divided by the risk of this event in the control group and indicates the chances of pressure ulcer development for people in the experimental group compared with the control group ( ). An RR of 1 means that there is no difference between two groups in terms of their risk of pressure ulcer development, whereas an RR of greater than 1, or of less than 1, usually means that use of a specific topical agent or dressing either increases (RR > 1) or decreases (RR < 1) the risk of pressure ulcer development ( ). As, by definition, the risk of an event occurring in the control group is 1, then the RR reduction associated with using an experimental treatment is 1‐RR. The RR indicates the relative benefit of a therapy, but not the actual benefit; that is, it does not take into account the number of people who would have developed a pressure ulcer anyway, without the intervention ( ). For continuous outcomes, we calculated the mean difference (MD) with 95% confidence intervals. The MD is a standard statistic that measures the absolute difference between the mean value of two groups in a clinical trial. It estimates the amount by which the experimental intervention changes the outcome on average compared with the control. Interpretation of the results is the same as RR, except the point of no effect is 0 rather than 1 ( ).
We carried out statistical pooling on groups of trials that we considered to be sufficiently similar (where populations, interventions, and methods were considered sufficiently similar). Where heterogeneity was absent or low (I2 = 0% to 25%), we used a fixed‐effect model. If there was evidence of heterogeneity (I2 more than 25%), we used a random‐effects model. If heterogeneity was very high (I2 over 75%), we did not plan to pool trials.

## Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity
We planned to conduct a subgroup analysis investigating the effects of any dressing or topical application on trials conducted in the community versus trials conducted in hospitals to compare effects due to differences in patient characteristics. However, we were unable to conduct this analysis as there were no comparisons which included both types of studies (i.e. those conducted in hospital versus in the community). No further subgroup analysis was conducted.

## Sensitivity analysis
We did not consider any of the trials at low risk for our pre‐defined key domains, so no sensitivity analyses were conducted.

## Summary of findings and assessment of the certainty of the evidence
We have prioritised comparisons based on clinical and patient importance/relevance to current practice and have presented these in summary of findings tables. Summary of findings tables present key information concerning the certainty of the evidence, the magnitude of the effects of the interventions examined, and the sum of the available data for the main outcomes ( ). Summary of findings tables also include an overall grading of the evidence related to each of the main outcomes using the GRADE approach ( ). This approach defines the certainty of a body of evidence with regard to the extent to which one can be confident that an estimate of effect or association is close to the quantity of specific interest. To assess the overall body of evidence, we developed summary of findings tables using .
We included summary of findings tables for comparisons where:
the intervention was similar, but controls differed, as long as there was no significant clinical or statistical heterogeneity between trials;
the intervention and controls were similar between trials.

We assessed the certainty of the body of evidence against five principal domains: limitations in design and implementation (for example, we assessed blinding and completeness of outcome data); indirectness of evidence or generalisability of findings; inconsistency of results (for example, unexplained heterogeneity and inconsistent findings); imprecision of results where confidence intervals are wide; and publication bias ( ). We used the following decision rules for downgrading the evidence for each of the five domains.
If no serious concern existed, we did not downgrade evidence certainty from the baseline certainty (e.g. high for RCTs).
If serious concern existed, we downgraded the evidence by one level (e.g. from high to moderate (‐ 1)).
If very serious concern existed, we downgraded the evidence by two levels (e.g. from high to low (‐ 2)) ( ).

We presented the following outcomes in the summary of findings tables:
pressure ulcer incidence (the proportion of people developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage);
pressure ulcer stage;
adverse events.

## Results

## Description of studies

## Results of the search
The original search identified 19 potentially relevant trials, nine of which we included in the review. The second updated search yielded 496 records and six additional records from other sources; from these, we selected nine additional studies for inclusion in the review. The review then included 17 published trials and one unpublished trial, yielding a total of 18 trials. For this third update, we identified 1306 records, which yielded a total of 60 trials potentially eligible for inclusion, based on screening of full texts, abstracts, trial registry records, and references identified from citation checking. From these, we included 33 new studies in the review (see ). Therefore, this version of the review now includes a total of 51 trials.

## Included studies
The review includes results from 51 trials, with a total of 13,303 participants (mean: 665, standard deviation (SD): 1355) ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Of these, three studies were cluster‐RCTs ( ; ; ). See .
We attempted to contact 11 trial authors to seek additional information. We were unable to locate , , and . We received no response from , , , , , or . Two authors, from the and studies, responded and provided answers to several questions.

## Participants
The mean age of participants in 45 of the trials varied between 27.4 weeks ( ) and 86.6 years ( ). Participants' age was not reported in five trials ( ; ; ; ; ).
Seven of the trials were conducted in Spain ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ); six in Australia ( ; ; ; ; ; ); seven in China ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ); six in Iran ( ; ; ; ; ; ); four in Italy ( ; ; ; ); three each in Singapore ( ; ; ), Brazil ( ; ; ), and the UK ( ; ; ); two each in Turkey ( ; ), Japan ( ; ), the USA ( ; ), and the Netherlands ( ; ); and one each in Germany ( ), Portugal ( ), South Korea ( ), and Belgium ( ).
An inclusion criterion for 23 trials was that the participants were at high risk of pressure ulcer development according to the Braden pressure ulcer risk assessment scale ( ) (these 23 studies were: ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). For one trial, the individuals had a Norton pressure sore risk‐assessment scale score of between five and 14 ( ), meaning high or very high risk ( ). For a further three trials, the participants had a Waterlow score of 18 to 23 ( ), meaning high or very high risk ( ), a score of 10 and higher ( ), or a score of 15+ ( ). In , participants had to have a prePURSE (Prevention and Pressure Ulcer Risk Score Evaluation) score of 21 or higher, or a Braden score above 19. The remaining trials used other risk criteria. For example, used what was defined as a "clinical risk score"; included elderly continuing care patients with "intact skin"; recruited elderly, high‐risk orthopaedic patients; and included high‐risk people in intensive care units (ICU). In , participants were aged 65 years and older with a hip fragility fracture. In , participants were adults over the age of 18 years, with acute respiratory failure requiring non‐invasive ventilation (NIV). In , participants were patients also requiring non‐invasive ventilation. In , eligibility criteria specified children who were consecutively intubated with silicone nasotracheal tubes. In , participants were hospitalised patients in the preoperative period of digestive or cardiac elective surgery. In , participants were hospitalised patients with a fragility hip fracture diagnosis. In , participants were people undergoing surgery, and in , participants were undergoing thoracolumbar surgery in the prone position. In , participants were children aged three years and older who underwent surgery for flat foot. In , participants were adults in the ICU at high or very high pressure ulcer risk. In , participants were newborns under 30 weeks of gestation or with a birth weight under 1250 g, undergoing treatment with binasal prongs (either continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or nasal intermittent positive pressure ventilation). In , participants were hospital inpatients with persistent severe diarrhoea, fragile skin, or both. In , participants were hospitalised adults with respiratory failure. In and , participants were adult ICU patients. In , , , and , the inclusion criteria were unclear.
Eleven studies were conducted in a general ICU ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), one in a paediatric ICU ( ), and one in a neonatal ICU ( ). Six studies were conducted in a medical/surgical/trauma intensive care unit, a cardiac intensive care unit ( ; ; ; ; ), or a high dependency unit ( ). Eighteen studies were conducted in an acute medical, surgical ( ; ; ; ; ; ), orthopaedic ( ; ; ; ; ; ), or general hospital setting ( ; ; ; ; ; ). In , participants were drawn from three university or teaching hospitals and five general hospitals, including ICU and non‐ICU wards. In , participants were drawn from hospital and socio‐sanitary centres in eight locations. Nine studies were conducted amongst elderly hospitalised or nursing home patients ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). In , people with paralysis or coma were included, and participants in were immobilised people living at home. In , the study setting was not stated.

## Interventions
See for the composition of the topical agents and dressings. In all the reported RCTs, both the control and intervention groups received standard pressure ulcer prevention, with the intervention groups additionally receiving either dressings or topical agents.
 

## Dressings
A dressing was the intervention of interest in 31 included trials.
In , a dressing known as PPD (pressure ulcer preventive dressing) was applied in the intervention group. This consists of a skin adhesive layer (hydrocolloid) containing an intercellular lipid‐ceramide, a support layer (urethane film) and an outer layer of multi‐filament nylon fibres. They applied the dressing to either the right or left greater trochanter (depending on randomisation) of the participant. The dressing was replaced weekly. No dressing was applied in the control arm of the trial.
In , a polyurethane film and foam dressing ("Kang' huier" transparent strip and foam dressing) was the intervention. They applied the dressing to the pressure areas of the participants during surgery. The control group did not have any dressings applied.
In , the classic padded bandage was compared with a polyurethane foam heel.
In , a transparent polyurethane film was compared to a group receiving a hydrocolloid dressing. They applied the dressings bilaterally to the trochanteric and sacral regions of the participants and changed them only if there was loss of adhesiveness, shear, excessive moisture, friction, presence of wrinkles, or the combination of these factors.
In , a hydrocolloid nasal barrier dressing applied during binasal CPAP therapy was compared to no barrier dressing.
In , a foam dressing was compared with a transparent film on vulnerable pressure areas.
In , a hydrocellular foam was compared with a hydrocolloid plate over the sacrum and trochanters.
In , a hydrocolloid dressing applied to the nasal columella of the ala was compared with a control group receiving usual care.
In , olive oil‐soaked gauze was compared with fish oil‐soaked gauze applied to participants’ heels.
The study compared a transparent film applied to participants before their oronasal mask was placed, with a control group receiving no dressing.
In , the comparison was a hydroactive dressing versus standard medical tape, applied to the nasal ala to which the nasotracheal tube was affixed.
In , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and , multilayered polyurethane foam dressings were applied to the sacrum, coccyx, buttocks, heels, or nasal areas, and were compared with usual pressure ulcer prevention care.

## Topical application and dressing
Both dressings and topical agents were the intervention of interest in four included trials.
In , participants were allocated into one of four groups; (1) a control group; (2) an adhesive thin polyurethane foam dressing (ATD) group; (3) an adhesive foam dressing (AFD) group; or (4) a group which received hyperoxygenated fatty acids (HOFA), gently applied without rubbing, on the chin, cheekbones, nasal bridge, and forehead. In groups 2 and 3, the dressings were placed over the nasal bridge and cheekbones.
In , participants were allocated to one of three groups: (1) silicone foam dressing to the sacrum, in addition to standard care; (2) fatty acid oil spray to the sacrum plus standard care; (3) standard care only.
In , participants were allocated to one of three groups: (1) multilayer silicone foam dressing in addition to standard care; (2) fatty acid oil spray on the sacrum in addition to standard care; (3) standard care only.
In , participants in the control group received a foam dressing applied to anatomical areas at risk of developing a pressure ulcer. In the intervention group, participants received Sanyrene cream applied to the anatomical areas at risk of developing a pressure ulcer, followed by application of a foam dressing.

## Topical applications
We included 16 trials where a topical application was the intervention of interest.
In , the intervention was a lotion described as "active", containing hexachlorophane 0.5%, saturated hydrocarbons (squalene (Cosbiol 3%) and glyoxyle diureide), allantoin 0.2%, antioxidants, lanolin, fatty acids, fatty acid esters, fatty alcohols, preservatives, and distilled water. For the control group, they applied a lotion described as "inert", containing lanolin, fatty acids, fatty acid esters, fatty alcohols, preservatives, distilled water, and mineral oils. They applied the lotions manually to pressure areas (sacral, trochanteric, heel, shoulder, and other areas, as indicated), and avoided excess friction. They inspected the participants' skin every two hours, and, if the participant was incontinent, they washed the skin with soap and water, then dried it and applied the relevant lotion. In the absence of incontinence, they carried out routine washing and reapplication of lotion every six hours.
In , Conotrane was the topical application for the intervention, which includes silicone cream, 20% dimethicone 350, and a broad spectrum antiseptic (0.05% hydrargaphen). They described the topical application in the control group as a bland cream known as Unguentum. For both groups, as part of the routine skin care regimen, they washed participants' skin when required, with water, then dried it thoroughly and applied the ointment.
In , Prevasore was the topical application, which includes hexyl nicotinate, zinc stearate, isopropyl myristate, dimethicone 350, cetrimide, and glycol. In the control group, the topical application was Dermalex, which includes hexachlorophane, squalene, and allantoin. In both groups, they washed and dried the participants' buttocks and sacral areas, and applied the topical application at least twice daily, and again after changing, if the individual was wet or soiled.
In , Mepentol was the topical application for the intervention group, a hyperoxygenated fatty acid compound consisting of oleic acid, palmitic acid, stearic acid, palmitoleic acid, linoleic acid, gamma linoleic acid, arachidonic acid, and eicosenoic acid. The control group topical application was a compound consisting of triisostearin (99.4%) and perfume (0.6%). In both groups, they applied the topical application twice daily to at least three areas of the body: sacrum, trochanters, and heels.
In , participants were allocated to one of three groups, as follows. (1) "DMSO‐cream" was the intervention, which consists of 5% dimethyl sulfoxide in Vaseline‐cetomacrogol cream; participants also had a 30° position change every six hours. (2) Placebo topical application was a three‐minute massage of the buttock, heel, and ankle regions with an "indifferent" cream (Vaseline‐cetomacrogol), combined with a 30° position change every six hours for four weeks. (3) Control group, in which no topical application was applied, but the participants had a 30° position change every six hours for four weeks.
In , the intervention was a solution of 99% of hyperoxygenated glycerides of essential fatty acids (including linoleic acid 60%, linolenic acid, tocopherol, and vitamin E) and aniseed perfume 1%, known as Sanyrene, combined with two‐ to three‐hourly changes of position in the intervention group. They applied the topical agent on the participants’ sacrum, buttocks, and heels at every change of position from the day of admission. The control group received two‐ to three‐hourly changes of position only.
In , the intervention group received a new topical agent (IPARZINE‐4A‐SKR): the product was applied according to the following procedure: on at least 3 pressure ulcer risk areas; namely, sacrum, trochanters, and heels. Application frequency was every 12 hours. The control group received a placebo topical agent. The product was applied according to the following procedure: on at least 3 pressure ulcer risk areas; namely, sacrum, trochanters, and heels. Application frequency was every 12 hours.
In , a hyperoxygenated fatty acid compound, Mepentol, in the control group was compared with extra virgin olive oil (Oleicopiel) in the experimental group. They applied the topical treatments every 12 hours to risk areas of the skin.
In , a hyperoxygenated fatty acid product containing Equisetum arvense, Hypericum perforatum, and perfume in the intervention group, was compared with an olive oil product containing 97% extra virgin olive oil and 3% Hypericum perforatum and peppermint in the control group. They used two applications of the topical treatments on the skin areas of the sacrum, hips, and heels.
In , the intervention group received a 15 cubic centimetre (cc) premium and standard formula olive oil. This oil was applied gently once a day on the following areas of the participants’ bodies without any massaging: earlobes (0.5 cc each), shoulders (1.5 cc each), spine (1.5 cc), waist (1.5 cc), buttocks (1.5 cc each), iliac (1 cc), sacrum (1cc), elbows (0.5 cc each), heels (0.5 cc each), and ankles (0.5 cc each).
In , pure aloe vera gel was compared with placebo (water and starch) rubbed on the hips, sacrum, and heels twice a day (hours of 9 and 21), in addition to routine nursing care.
In , peppermint gel was compared with placebo gel, rubbed on the skin of areas at risk for pressure ulcers, including the participants' hip area, and bony prominences such as both elbows, knees, heels, and shoulder, three times daily.
In , a hyperoxygenated fatty acid product applied to pressure ulcer risk areas in addition to usual care procedures, twice a day, was compared with olive oil.
In , participants were allocated to one of three groups: (1) sweet almond oil; (2) paraffin; (3) control.
In , extra virgin olive oil, applied to the sacrum, trochanteric regions, and heels, was compared with standard pressure ulcer prevention.
In , participants were allocated to one of four groups: (1) aloe vera gel; (2) olive oil; (3) compound aloe vera gel plus olive oil; (4) control.
None of the trials using topical applications applied any additional dressings. They applied the topical agent directly to the skin and the skin was then left bare.

## Outcomes
All the trials included the development of a pressure ulcer as their primary outcome. Three used the European Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel (EPUAP) 1999 scale ( ; ; ). Three used the EPUAP/NPUAP (National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel) 2009 scale ( ; ; ). Nine used the EPUAP/National Pressure Injury Advisory Panel (NPIAP)/Pan Pacific Pressure Injury Alliance (PPPIA) 2014 scale ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Six used the revised National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel Pressure Injury Staging System (2016) ( ; ; ; ; ; ). Six used the EPUAP/NPIAP/PPPIA 2019 scale ( ; ; ; ; ; ). reported the use of an international measurement for pressure ulcers titled "WCET" ( ). used a five‐point scale. used the classification. used a five‐point scale. used the four‐point staging system of the Australian Wound Management Association. and used the GNEAUPP (Grupo Nacional para el Estudio y Asesoramiento en Úlceras por Presión y Heridas Crónicas) classification for pressure ulcer staging ( ). Finally, 17 studies did not identify the classification system used ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Ethics and consent
Nineteen studies did not provide any information about ethics approval or participant consent ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). The and studies had ethical approval, but they did not report participants' consent. The remaining trials provided information on ethics and consent ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Funding
Fifteen studies reported receiving support from the manufacturers of the interventional product ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Four studies did not provide any details about sponsorship ( ; ; ; ). Investigators in were involved in developing the dressing used in the trial. The corresponding author in was an employee of the company producing the intervention product. The manufacturers provided the dressings in . Seventeen trials received funding from a non‐commercial source ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Four studies did not receive any funding ( ; ; ; ), and nine trials did not state whether funding was received ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Excluded studies
The previous version of this review excluded 16 trials ( ). In this third update, we excluded a further seven trials ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Two of these trials related to interventions for treating pressure ulcers rather than for prevention of pressure ulcers. One study did not include a dressing or a topical agent; one was a protocol for a planned study; two were non‐randomised studies; and one did not randomise individuals, instead they randomised sites (left/right chest). See .

## Ongoing studies
We identified 19 ongoing studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). We contacted the investigators of five ongoing studies. We received no response from and . In the three remaining studies, we learned that data collection is complete, but analysis is not yet available ( ; ; ). See .

## Risk of bias in included studies
See for the risk of bias summary and for the risk of bias graph.
 

## Allocation

## Random sequence generation
Thirty‐one trials provided details of appropriate methods used for generating the allocation sequence ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ); we judged these to be at low risk of bias in this domain. Twenty‐eight used a computer‐generated list ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ); one stated that they had used a lottery to generate the sequence ( ); one trial used the throw of a die to generate the sequence ( ); and one randomised individuals using specifically designed random number tables ( ). Four studies did not describe appropriate methods for generating the allocation sequence, and we judged these to be at high risk of bias in this domain ( ; ; ; ). The remaining trials did not clearly state their method for sequence generation and were therefore judged at unclear risk of bias in this domain ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Allocation concealment
Sixteen trials used adequate allocation concealment methods; we judged these to be at low risk of bias in this domain ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Two studies did not describe appropriate methods for generating the allocation sequence, and we judged these to be at high risk of bias in this domain ( ; ). We judged the remaining 33 trials to be at unclear risk of bias in this domain as their methods for concealing group allocation were unclear ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Blinding
We assessed 12 studies as having a low risk of performance and detection bias as they were reported as double‐blind ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
Five studies ensured blinding of the outcome assessors only ( ; ; ; ; ). Therefore, we judged these studies to be at low risk of detection bias, but high risk of performance bias.
We assessed 21 studies to be at high risk of performance and detection bias, as participants, carers, and outcome assessors were not blinded ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
We assessed and as having a high risk of performance bias and unclear risk of detection bias. had an unclear risk of performance bias, and a high risk of detection bias (no blinding of outcome assessment). For one study ( ), there was low risk of performance bias and unclear risk of detection bias.
For the remaining trials, the authors did not state whether the studies were blinded, and thus, we judged these to be at unclear risk of performance and detection bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Incomplete outcome data
We judged that outcome data reporting for 43 trials was at low risk of attrition bias because either all participants randomised were analysed, or missing outcome data was balanced in numbers across intervention groups, with similar reasons for missing data cited across the study groups ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). In the remaining eight trials, the proportion of missing outcomes compared with observed event risk was enough to induce clinically relevant bias in the intervention effect estimate ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ); we judged these trials to be at high risk of attrition bias.

## Selective reporting
We assessed 17 studies to be at low risk of reporting bias, as they reported all planned outcomes ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
We judged the remaining 34 studies to be at unclear risk of reporting bias, as it was unclear whether all planned outcomes were reported ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Other potential sources of bias
We assessed a total of 10 studies as having an unclear risk of bias for other potential sources of bias. For six of these studies, we had only limited information about the methods used, including in and . Additionally, only abstracts from conference presentations were available for translation for , , , and , so it is possible that there may have been biases about which we were unaware.
In the remaining four studies, there were either baseline imbalances or a lack of information about baseline characteristics. In , 33% more participants in the placebo group were incontinent for urine, and 25% more were incontinent for faeces, than in the treatment group, and they did not adjust for this in the analysis. The study did not provide any baseline characteristics, so it is unclear if risks for the development of pressure ulcers were equal between groups. In , the sample size calculation was based on a control event rate of 4.0% (presumably this was known from existing hospital data). In the study, the control event rate was 13.1%, raising questions about the accuracy of pressure ulcer diagnosis in the control group during the study. In , there was an unequal number of participants allocated to each group and a 28% loss to follow‐up in the olive oil group compared with 34% in the HOFA group.
We judged five studies to be at high risk for 'other' bias. In , , and , the three cluster‐randomised studies included in the review, authors analysed data at the level of the individual rather than by clusters.
The authors of and were members of the groups that developed the intervention products, thus introducing a high risk of bias, such as risk of overestimating the treatment effect.

## Effects of interventions
See: ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; 
We have presented results for dichotomous variables as risk ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI). We generated 20 comparisons to report outcomes.

## Comparison 1: silicone foam dressing versus no dressing (19 studies, 6029 participants)

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
We were able to extract data from 18 studies for this outcome ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). had four trial arms and had three trial arms. For this comparison, we used data from two study groups for (silicone dressing group, with 74 participants; no‐dressing group, with 39 participants), and two groups for (silicone dressing group, with 129 participants; no‐dressing group, with 202 participants).
Silicone foam dressings may reduce pressure ulcer incidence (any stage) compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing group 180/3192, 5.6%; no‐dressing group 281/2711, 10.4%; RR 0.50, 95% CI 0.33 to 0.77; 18 studies, 5903 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of bias, primarily performance, detection bias, and other bias, or unclear risk of bias, primarily selection bias; downgraded once for inconsistency (I2 = 73%)).
In , although the authors reported that fewer pressure ulcers occurred in the silicone foam dressing group, they provided no details of the number of pressure ulcers that developed in each of the study groups. Therefore, we could not conduct any further analysis on the data from this study.

## Secondary outcomes

## Stage of any pressure ulcers
 ; 
Eleven trials reported stage of any pressure ulcer ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Stage 1 pressure ulcer
Silicone foam dressings may reduce the incidence of stage 1 pressure ulcers compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing group 15/904, 2%; no‐dressing group 56/919, 6%; RR 0.32, 95% CI 0.13 to 0.79; 8 studies, 1823 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of bias or unclear risk of bias, primarily performance and detection bias; downgraded once for inconsistency (I2 = 44%); downgraded once for imprecision due to a very wide 95% confidence interval; the risk ratio is large, but we did not upgrade as there is uncertainty around the effect size).

## Stage 2 pressure ulcer
Silicone foam dressings may reduce the incidence of stage 2 pressure ulcers compared to no dressing (silicone foam dressing group 33/1426, 2%; no‐dressing group 74/1447, 5%; RR 0.47, 95% CI 0.30 to 0.73; 10 studies, 2873 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias and unclear risk of selection bias; downgraded once for inconsistency due to a very wide 95% confidence interval; the risk ratio is large, but we did not upgrade as there is uncertainty around the effect size).

## Stage 3 pressure ulcer
Silicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of stage 3 pressure ulcers compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing group 1/355, 0.3%; no‐dressing group 5/363, 1%; RR 0.45, 95% CI 0.06 to 3.21; 3 studies, 718 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias; downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small number of events and a very wide confidence interval which includes 1. The risk ratio is large, but we did not upgrade as there is uncertainty around the effect size).

## Stage 4 pressure ulcer
Silicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of stage 4 pressure ulcers compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing group 0/299, 0%; no‐dressing group 4/311, 1%; RR 0.21, 95% CI 0.02 to 1.77; 2 studies, 610 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias; downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small number of events and a very wide confidence interval which includes 1. The risk ratio is large, but we did not upgrade as there is uncertainty around the effect size).

## Unstageable pressure ulcer
Silicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of unstageable pressure ulcers compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing group 0/184, 0%; no‐dressing group 2/182, 1%; RR 0.20, 95% CI 0.01 to 4.09; 1 study, 366 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias; downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small number of events and a very wide confidence interval which includes 1. The risk ratio is large, but we did not upgrade as there is uncertainty around the effect size).

## Deep tissue injury
Silicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of deep tissue injury compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing group 3/422, 0.7%; no‐dressing group 11/418, 3%; RR 0.32, 95% CI 0.09 to 1.08; 3 studies, 840 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias; downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small number of events and a very wide confidence interval which includes 1. The risk ratio is large, but we did not upgrade as there is uncertainty around the effect size).

## Time to pressure ulcer development
Four trials reported time to pressure ulcer development ( ; ; ; ).
In , the survival analysis (Cox proportional hazards model) shows that the time to pressure ulcer development was slightly longer in the silicone foam dressing group, compared with the no‐dressing group (hazard ratio (HR) 0.12, 95% CI 0.02 to 0.98; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high or unclear risk of bias across multiple domains; downgraded once for imprecision due to a wide confidence interval).
In , no standard deviations are provided with the mean time to pressure ulcer development. Therefore, we report the authors' results. The mean time to pressure ulcer development in the silicone group was 3.52 days, and 3.50 days in the no‐dressing group (low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high or unclear risk of bias across multiple domains).
For the remaining studies, the follow‐up time was not the same and, therefore, we did not undertake meta‐analysis ( ). In , silicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the mean time to pressure ulcer development compared to no dressing, but the evidence was very uncertain (mean time to pressure ulcer development, silicone foam dressing group: 5.9 days, SD 1.60; no‐dressing group: 2.7 days, SD 0.96; MD 3.20, 95% CI 2.57 to 3.83; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for unclear risk of performance, detection, and selective reporting bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to very few events and a small sample size).
In , silicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the mean time to pressure ulcer development compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (mean time to pressure ulcer development, silicone foam dressing group: 10.8 days, SD 10.1; no dressing group: 13.5 days, SD 13.86; MD ‐2.70, 95% CI ‐5.01 to ‐0.39; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of performance bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due a small number of events and a very wide confidence interval).

## Anatomical location of pressure ulcer development
 
Five studies reported the anatomical location of pressure ulcer development: ; (sacrum only); ; ; .

## Sacral pressure ulcer
Silicone foam dressings may reduce the incidence of sacral pressure ulcer compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing group 44/1690, 3%; no‐dressing group 77/1178, 7%; RR 0.39, 95% CI 0.24 to 0.65; low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias).

## Heel pressure ulcer
Silicone foam dressings may reduce the incidence of heel pressure ulcer compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing group 23/1574, 1%; no‐dressing group 39/1050, 4%; RR 0.44, 95% CI 0.21 to 0.95; low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias).

## Cost of the intervention
Four studies reported the cost of the intervention ( ; ; ; ).
 provided cost estimates based on an assumption that participants would remain in hospital for 20 days and that costs for treating ulcers would not change during this time (see the secondary reference for this trial for cost‐benefit analysis). The estimated average cost for the silicone foam dressing group was AUD 70.82 compared with the no‐dressing group of AUD 144.56. In , the mean cost of the silicone foam dressing was USD 16.8 (SD 24.5) per patient stay. In , overall prevention costs were calculated, which included repositioning, mattresses, and dressings. However, given that there were no dressings used in the control group, we have not extracted any data for costs from this trial. Finally, reported that the total additional direct costs of pressure ulcer prevention in the silicone dressing group were EUR 31,972.42 with an average cost of EUR 150.81 per patient (see the secondary reference for this trial for cost‐benefit analysis).

## Quality of life (measured by any validated scale)
One study reported quality of life ( ), and measured this outcome using the EuroQol visual analogue scale (VAS) of 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating a higher quality of life ( ). The authors report a median score of 70.0 (interquartile range (IQR) 0 to 100) versus 70.0 (IQR 0 to 98) in the dressing and control groups, respectively, at baseline, and 70.0 (IQR 0 to 98) versus 68.5 (IQR 0 to 100) in the silicone foam dressing and control groups, respectively, at discharge.

## Pain at dressing change (measured by any validated scale)
Two studies reported pain at dressing change ( ; ). Both studies assessed pain using a numeric rating scale, with values from 0 to 10, with a higher score indicating higher pain levels. In , in the silicone foam dressing group, 68.4% (26/38) had pain and in the no‐dressing group, 59.5% (25/42) had pain. In , the median VAS score for total pain (days 3 to 8) was 2.1 (IQR 0 to 9.6) in the silicone foam dressing group and 1.8 (IQR 0 to 7.7) in the no‐dressing group. The median VAS score for sacral pain (days 3 to 8) was 0.05 (IQR 0 to 4.8) in the silicone foam dressing group and 0.03 (IQR 0 to 7.9) in the no‐dressing group.

## Acceptability of/satisfaction with the intervention (with respect to participants' comfort)
Two trials reported acceptability of/satisfaction with the intervention ( ; ).
In , participants were asked to rate the comfort of the dressing on 131 occasions. On six (4.6%) occasions, participants found the dressing uncomfortable. No further analysis was carried out.
In , discomfort was assessed using a numeric rating scale, with values from 0 to 10, with a higher score indicating greater discomfort. The median VAS score (days 3 to 8) for total discomfort was 2.2 (IQR 0 to 9.5) in the silicone foam dressing group and 2.4 (IQR 0 to 9.1) in the no‐dressing group, and for sacral discomfort (days 3 to 8) the median VAS score was 0.05 (IQR 0 to 4.1) in the silicone foam dressing group and 0.07 (IQR 0 to 9.1) in the no‐dressing group.

## Adverse events
Three studies reported adverse events ( ; ; ).
In , silicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of adverse events compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing group: 0%, 0/220; no‐dressing group: 0%, 0/220; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias and unclear risk of selection bias; downgraded once for very high imprecision due to no events).
In , adverse events were related to the device used in the trial. Silicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of adverse events, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing group: 3%, 33/1087; no‐dressing group, n = 547: unknown; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias; downgraded once for very high imprecision due to no adverse events measured in the control group).
In , adverse events were related to the device used in the trial. Silicone foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of adverse events, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing group: 50%, 58/117; no‐dressing group: n = 127: unknown; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias; downgraded once for very high imprecision due to no adverse events measured in the control group).

## Length of hospital stay
Not reported.

## Funnel plots
We assessed funnel plots for the outcomes of pressure ulcer incidence (any stage) ( ), and pressure ulcer stage ( ).
 

## Comparison 2: foam dressing versus film dressing (3 studies, 569 participants)
Three trials compared a foam dressing with a transparent film dressing ( ; ; ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
Even though the populations, interventions, and comparators in these studies were similar, there was substantial heterogeneity (I² = 76%), so we used a random‐effects model for the meta‐analysis.
Foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of pressure ulcers compared to film dressings, but the evidence is very uncertain (foam dressing group 46/285, 16%; film dressing group 75/284, 26.4%; RR 0.72, 95% CI 0.20 to 2.67; 3 studies, 569 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high or unclear risk of performance and detection bias and unclear risk of selection bias and reporting bias; downgraded once for inconsistency (I2 = 76%); downgraded once for imprecision due to a wide confidence interval which includes 1).

## Secondary outcomes

## Stage of any pressure ulcers
 ; 
One trial (270 participants) reported stage of pressure ulcer ( ).

## Stage 1 pressure ulcer
Foam dressings may reduce stage 1 pressure ulcer incidence compared to film dressings, but the evidence is very uncertain (foam dressing group 33/135, 24.4%; film dressing group 59/135, 43.7%; RR 0.56, 95% CI 0.39 to 0.80; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias, and once for imprecision due to a small sample size).

## Stage 2 pressure ulcer
Foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of stage 2 pressure ulcers compared to film dressings, but the evidence is very uncertain (foam dressing group 1/135, 0.7%; film dressing group 1/135, 0.7%; RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.06 to 15.82; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias, and twice for imprecision due to a small sample size, a small number of events, and a very wide confidence interval which includes 1).

## Deep tissue injury
Foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of deep tissue injury compared to film dressings, but the evidence is very uncertain (foam dressing group 2/135, 1.5%; film dressing group 3/135, 2.2%; RR 0.67, 95% CI 0.11 to 3.93; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias; downgraded twice for imprecision due to small sample size, a small number of events, and a very wide confidence interval which includes 1).

## Remaining review outcomes
None of the studies included in this comparison reported any of our remaining secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 3: hydrocellular foam dressing versus hydrocolloid dressing (1 study, 80 participants)
One study compared a foam dressing with a transparent film dressing ( ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
Hydrocellular foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of pressure ulcers compared to hydrocolloid dressings, but the evidence is very uncertain (hydrocellular foam dressing group 0/40, 0%; hydrocolloid dressing group 0/40, 0%; RR not estimable; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of performance and detection bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to no events and a small sample size).

## Secondary outcomes
The study did not report any of our secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 4: silicone foam dressing type 1 versus silicone foam dressing type 2 (2 studies, 376 participants)
Two studies compared two different types of silicone foam dressings ( ; ). There were four study groups in , and we used data from two groups for this comparison: the silicone foam dressing type 1 group (n = 35) and the silicone foam dressing type 2 group (n = 39).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
Silicone foam dressing type 1 may have little to no effect on the incidence of pressure ulcers compared to silicone foam dressing type 2, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing 1, 22/164, 13.4%; silicone foam dressing 2, 31/212, 14.6%; RR 0.80, 95% CI 0.56 to 1.15; 2 studies, 376 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of selection, performance, detection, and attrition bias, and unclear risk of performance, reporting bias, and other bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to a small number of events and a very wide confidence interval).

## Secondary outcomes

## Cost of interventions
Only assessed the cost of interventions, reporting that there was a dressing cost difference per patient: AUD 10.29 for silicone foam dressing 1 and AUD 28.84 for silicone foam dressing 2.

## Remaining review outcomes
Neither of the two studies included in this comparison reported any of the other secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 5: foam dressing versus fatty acid (2 studies, 300 participants)
Two studies compared a foam dressing with fatty acid ( ; ). In this comparison, we used data from two of the four study arms in : foam (n = 74) and fatty acid (n = 39).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
Foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of pressure ulcers compared to fatty acid, but the evidence is very uncertain (foam dressing 52/160, 32.5%; fatty acid 15/140, 8%; RR 1.67, 95% CI 0.49 to 5.72; 2 studies, 300 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance, detection, and attrition bias, and unclear risk of reporting bias; downgraded once for inconsistency (I2 = 70%); downgraded twice for imprecision due to the wide confidence interval and the small sample size. The risk ratio is very large, but we did not upgrade as there is a lot of uncertainty around the effect size).

## Secondary outcomes
Neither of the two studies included in this comparison reported any of our secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 6: polyurethane film versus hydrocolloid dressing (1 study, 160 participants)
One trial compared a polyurethane film dressing with a hydrocolloid dressing ( ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; .
Polyurethane film dressing may have little to no effect on the incidence of pressure ulcers compared to hydrocolloid dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (polyurethane film 7/80, 9%; hydrocolloid 12/80, 15%; RR 0.58, 95% CI 0.24 to 1.41; 1 study, 160 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of performance bias and unclear risk of selection, detection, and reporting bias; downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small number of events and a wide confidence interval which includes 1).

## Secondary outcomes
 did not report any of our secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 7: hydrocolloid dressing versus no dressing (2 studies, 230 participants)
Two trials compared a hydrocolloid dressing with no dressing ( ; ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
Even though the populations, interventions, and comparators were similar in the two studies, there was substantial heterogeneity (I² = 93%), so we used a random‐effects model for the meta‐analysis.
Hydrocolloid dressings may reduce pressure ulcer incidence compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (hydrocolloid dressing 44/113, 38.9%; no dressing 76/117, 65%; RR 0.60, 95% CI 0.46 to 0.78; 2 studies, 230 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of performance and detection bias and unclear risk of reporting bias; downgraded once for imprecision due to a small sample size).

## Secondary outcomes

## Stage of any pressure ulcers
 ; 
One trial provided data for this outcome ( ).

## Pressure ulcer stage 1
Hydrocolloid dressings may reduce stage 1 pressure ulcer incidence compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (hydrocolloid dressing 13/53, 25%; no dressing 25/55, 45%; RR 0.54, 95% CI 0.31 to 0.94; 1 study, 108 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of performance and detection bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to small number of events and a small sample size).

## Pressure ulcer stage 2
Hydrocolloid dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of stage 2 pressure ulcers compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (hydrocolloid dressing 5/53, 9%; no dressing 6/55, 10%; RR 0.86, 95% CI 0.28 to 2.66; 1 study, 108 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of performance and detection bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to a small number of events, a small sample size, and a wide confidence interval which includes 1).

## Cost of interventions
Only provided data for this outcome, reporting that the average total cost of barrier dressings was AUD 68.65 per infant.

## Remaining review outcomes
Neither of the two studies included in this comparison reported any of the remaining secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 8: Kang' huier dressing versus no dressing (1 study, 100 participants)
One trial compared a Kang' huier dressing with no dressing ( ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
 It is very uncertain whether a Kang' huier dressing makes any difference to pressure ulcer incidence compared to routine care (Kang’ huier 2/49, 4%; routine care 5/51, 10%; RR 0.42, 95% CI 0.08 to 2.05; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of performance and detection bias, and unclear risk of selection, reporting, and other bias; downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small number of events and a very wide confidence interval which includes 1).

## Secondary outcomes
 did not report any of our secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 9: silicone foam dressing versus silicone foam dressing and Sanyrene (1 study, 150 participants)
One trial compared a silicone foam dressing with a topical agent, Sanyrene, with a silicone foam dressing ( ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
 A silicone foam dressing with Sanyrene may reduce pressure ulcer incidence compared to a silicone foam dressing alone, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing 18/75, 24%; silicone foam dressing and Sanyrene 7/75, 9%; RR 2.57, 95% CI 1.14 to 5.79; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for unclear risk of selection, performance, detection, and reporting bias; downgraded twice for imprecision due to a small number of events, a small sample size, and a very wide confidence interval).

## Secondary outcomes

## Stage of any pressure ulcers
 ; 
One trial provided data for this outcome ( ).

## Pressure ulcer stage 1
A silicone foam dressing with Sanyrene may reduce stage 1 pressure ulcer incidence compared to a silicone foam dressing alone, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing 15/75, 20%; silicone foam dressing and Sanyrene 6/75, 8%; RR 2.50, 95% CI 1.03 to 6.09; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for unclear risk of selection, performance, detection, and reporting bias; downgraded twice for imprecision due to a small number of events, a small sample size, and a very wide confidence interval).

## Pressure ulcer stage 2
A silicone foam dressing with Sanyrene may have little to no effect on the incidence of pressure ulcer stage 2 compared to a silicone foam dressing alone, but the evidence is very uncertain (silicone foam dressing 3/75, 4%; silicone foam dressing and Sanyrene 1/75, 1.3%; RR 3.00, 95% CI 0.32 to 28.19; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for unclear risk of selection, performance, detection, and reporting bias; downgraded twice for imprecision due to a small number of events, a small sample size, and a very wide confidence interval which includes 1).

## Remaining review outcomes
 did not report any of the remaining secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 10: pressure ulcer preventative dressing versus no dressing (1 study, 74 participants)
One trial compared a pressure ulcer preventive dressing (PPD) dressing with no dressing ( ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
 In , no pressure ulcers developed in either arm of the trial. However, the trial authors reported the presence of persistent erythema in both groups. We have interpreted the presence of persistent erythema as a stage 1 pressure ulcer. Pressure ulcer preventative dressings (PPD) may have little to no effect on the incidence of pressure ulcer compared to no dressing, but the evidence is very uncertain (PPD 2/37, 5%; no dressing 11/37, 29%; RR 0.18, 95% CI 0.04 to 0.76; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of performance, detection, and other bias, and unclear risk of selection and reporting bias; downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small number of events, a small sample size, and a wide confidence interval).

## Secondary outcomes
 did not report any of our secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital st

## Comparison 11: polyurethane foam dressing versus padded bandage (1 study, 409 participants)
One trial compared a polyurethane foam dressing with a padded bandage ( ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
 Polyurethane foam dressings may have little to no effect on the incidence of pressure ulcers compared to padded bandages, but the evidence is very uncertain (polyurethane foam dressing group 3/208, 2.4%; padded bandage group 7/201, 3.5%; RR 0.41, 95% CI 0.11 to 1.58; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for unclear risk of selection, performance, detection, and reporting bias; downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small number of events and a very wide confidence interval which includes 1).

## Secondary outcomes
 did not report any of our secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 12: gauze soaked in olive oil versus gauze soaked in fish oil (1 study, 100 participants)
One trial compared gauze soaked in olive oil with gauze soaked in fish oil ( ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
 In , no participant developed a pressure ulcer in either study group. Gauze soaked in olive oil may have little to no effect on the incidence of pressure ulcers compared to gauze soaked in fish oil, but the evidence is very uncertain (gauze soaked in olive oil 0/50, 0%; gauze soaked in fish oil group 0/50, 0%; RR not estimable; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of performance bias, and unclear risk of selection and reporting bias; downgraded once for serious imprecision due to no events and a very small sample size).

## Secondary outcomes

## Adverse events
In , no adverse reactions due to the use of dressings soaked in olive oil or fish oil were observed in the participants’ heels in the two groups. Gauze soaked in olive oil may have little to no effect on the incidence of adverse events compared to gauze soaked in fish oil, but the evidence is very uncertain (gauze soaked in olive oil group: 0%, 0/50; gauze soaked in fish oil group: 0%, 0/50, RR not estimable; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of performance bias and unclear risk of reporting bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to no events and a small sample size).

## Remaining review outcomes
 did not report any of the remaining secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 13: hydroactive dressings versus tape (1 study, 450 participants)
One trial compared a hydroactive dressing with tape ( ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
 Hydroactive dressings may reduce pressure ulcer incidence compared to tape, but the evidence is very uncertain (hydroactive dressing group 10/225, 4.4%; tape group 32/225, 14.2%; RR 0.31, 95% CI 0.16 to 0.62; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of attrition bias; downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small number of events and a wide confidence interval).

## Secondary outcomes
 did not report any of our secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 14: fatty acid versus placebo (6 studies, 2201 participants)
Six studies compared fatty acid to placebo ( ; ; ; ; ; ). There were three study groups in , and we used data from two of the study groups in this comparison: the fatty acid group (n = 36) and the placebo group (n = 36).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
Fatty acid may have little to no effect on pressure ulcer incidence compared to placebo, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid group 80/1075, 7%; placebo group 100/1126, 9%; RR 0.86, 95% CI 0.54 to 1.36; 6 studies, 2201 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of performance and attrition bias and unclear risk of selection, reporting, and other bias; downgraded once for inconsistency (I2 = 57%); downgraded once for serious imprecision due to a wide confidence interval which crosses 1).

## Secondary outcomes

## Time to pressure ulcer development
One trial reported this outcome ( ). Ulcers appeared approximately one day later in the fatty acid group than in the placebo group (fatty acid 9.8 days versus placebo 8.7 days), but the trial report did not state whether these were mean or median values.

## Anatomical location of pressure ulcer development
 . Two trials reported this outcome ( ; ).

## Sacral pressure ulcer
Fatty acid may have little to no effect on sacral pressure ulcer incidence compared to placebo, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid 11/319, 3%; placebo 7/324, 2%; RR 1.56, 95% CI 0.63 to 3.86; 2 studies, 643 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of attrition bias and unclear risk of selection and reporting bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to the small number of events and an extremely wide confidence interval, which includes 1).

## Heel pressure ulcer
Fatty acid may have little to no effect on heel pressure ulcer incidence compared to placebo, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid 6/319, 2%; placebo 5/324, 2%; RR 1.20, 95% CI 0.39 to 3.69; 2 studies, 643 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of performance and attrition bias and unclear risk of selection and reporting bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to the small number of events and an extremely wide confidence interval, which includes 1).

## Shoulder pressure ulcer
Fatty acid may have little to no effect on shoulder pressure ulcer incidence compared to placebo, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid 2/36, 5%; placebo 3/36, 8%; RR 0.67, 95% CI 0.12 to 3.75; 1 study, 72 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of attrition bias and unclear risk of selection bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to the small number of events and an extremely wide confidence interval, which includes 1).

## Adverse events
 ; 
Three trials reported adverse effects ( ; ; ).
Fatty acid may have little to no effect on the incidence of adverse events compared to placebo, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid 3/481, 0.6%; placebo group 0/486, 0%; RR 4.38, 95% CI 0.50 to 38.30; 3 studies, 967 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of attrition bias and unclear risk of reporting bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to the small number of events and an extremely wide confidence interval which includes 1. The risk ratio is very large, but we did not upgrade as there is a lot of uncertainty around the effect size).

## Remaining review outcomes
None of the studies included in this comparison reported data for the remaining secondary outcomes (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 15: fatty acid versus usual care (7 studies, 1058 participants)
Seven studies compared fatty acid to usual care ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
 , , and each had three study groups. We only included data from a fatty acid group and a control group for each of these studies: : fatty acid group n = 310, control group n = 383; : fatty acid group n = 36, control group n = 36; : fatty acid group n = 101, control group n = 159. There were four study groups in , and we used data from two of these: fatty acid (olive oil) group (n = 60) and the control group (n = 60).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
All seven studies included in this comparison provided data for this outcome ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Fatty acid may reduce pressure ulcer incidence compared to usual care, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid: 10.9%, 52/476; usual care: 15.6%, 91/582; RR: 0.62, 95% CI 0.46 to 0.84; 7 studies, 1058 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of selection, performance, detection, and attrition bias; downgraded once for imprecision due to a relatively small sample size).

## Secondary outcomes

## Stage of any pressure ulcers
 ; 
Two trials reported this outcome ( ; ).

## Pressure ulcer stage 1
Fatty acid may have little to no effect on pressure ulcer incidence stage 1 compared to usual care, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid 13/90, 14.4%; usual care 13/90, 14.4%; RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.49 to 2.03; 2 studies, 180 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of selection, performance, and detection bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to a small sample size, a small event size, and a wide confidence interval which crosses 1).

## Pressure ulcer stage 2
The evidence suggests fatty acid results in a large reduction in stage 2 pressure ulcer development compared to usual care (fatty acid: 4.4%, 4/90; usual care: 23.3%, 21/90; RR 0.19, 95% CI 0.07 to 0.53; 2 studies, 180 participants; low‐certainty evidence). We downgraded twice for high risk of selection, performance, detection, and attrition bias, and once for imprecision due to a small sample size. The risk ratio is large, and while the confidence interval is slightly wide, the limits fall almost entirely within a range considered to indicate a large effect. Thus, we upgraded the evidence certainty by one level.

## Time to pressure ulcer development
One study reported time to pressure ulcer development ( ). Fatty acid may increase the mean time to pressure ulcer development compared to usual care, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid: 10.45, SD 5.20; usual care: 7.50, SD 5.43; MD 2.95, 95% CI 1.11 to 4.79; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for unclear risk of selection, performance, detection, and reporting bias; downgraded twice for imprecision due to a small sample size and a wide 95% CI; ).

## Anatomical location of pressure ulcer development
 ; 
Three trials reported this outcome ( ; ; ).

## Sacral pressure ulcer
Fatty acid may reduce sacral pressure ulcer incidence compared to usual care, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid 7/126, 5%; usual care 23/126, 18%; RR 0.32, 95% CI 0.15 to 0.69; 3 studies, 252 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of selection, performance, detection, and attrition bias; downgraded twice for imprecision due to a small sample size and a small number of events. The risk ratio is large, but we did not upgrade as there is uncertainty around the effect size) ( ; ; ).

## Buttock pressure ulcer
Fatty acid may have little to no effect on buttock pressure ulcer incidence compared to usual care, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid 6/90, 6.7%; usual care 10/90, 11.1%; RR 0.60, 95% CI 0.23 to 1.58; 2 studies, 180 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of selection, performance, and detection bias; downgraded twice for imprecision due to a small sample size, a small event size, and a wide confidence interval which crosses 1) ( ; ).

## Iliac pressure ulcer
Fatty acid may have little to no effect on iliac pressure ulcer incidence compared to usual care, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid 2/90, 2.2%; usual care 2/90, 2.2%; RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.18 to 5.66; 2 studies, 180 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of selection, performance, and detection bias; downgraded twice for imprecision due to a small sample size, a small event size, and a wide confidence interval which crosses 1) ( ; ).

## Shoulder pressure ulcer
Fatty acid may have little to no effect on shoulder pressure ulcer incidence compared to usual care, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid 3/66, 5%; usual care 3/66, 5%; RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.21 to 4.77; 2 studies, 132 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of selection, performance, detection, and attrition bias; downgraded twice for imprecision due to a small sample size, a small event size, and a wide confidence interval which crosses 1) ( ; ).

## Earlobe pressure ulcer
Fatty acid may have little to no effect on earlobe pressure ulcer incidence compared to usual care, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid 0/30, 0%; usual care 1/30, 3.3%; RR 0.33, 95% CI 0.01 to 7.87; 1 study, 60 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of selection, performance, and detection bias; downgraded twice for imprecision due to a small sample size, a small event size, and a wide confidence interval which crosses 1. The risk ratio is large, but we did not upgrade as there is uncertainty around the effect size) ( ).

## Heel pressure ulcer
Fatty acid may have little to no effect on heel pressure ulcer incidence compared to usual care, but the evidence is very uncertain (fatty acid 0/36, 0%; usual care 2/36, 5%; RR 0.20, 95% CI 0.01 to 4.03; 1 study, 72 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for attrition bias; downgraded twice for imprecision due to a small sample size, a small event size, and a wide confidence interval which crosses 1) ( ).

## Adverse events
One trial reported this outcome ( ). The authors reported no adverse events in the fatty acid group.

## Remaining review outcomes
None of the seven studies included in this comparison reported data for the remaining secondary outcomes (i.e. cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 16: cream versus fatty acid (1 study, 120 participants)
One trial compared a cream to fatty acid ( ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
Cream may have little to no effect on pressure ulcer incidence compared to fatty acid, but the evidence is very uncertain (cream 3/60, 2%; fatty acid 1/60, 5%; RR 3.00, 95% CI 0.32 to 28.03; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded twice for high risk of attrition and other bias and unclear risk of selection, detection, and reporting bias; downgraded twice for serious imprecision due to a small number of events and a very wide confidence interval which includes 1).

## Secondary outcomes
 did not report any of our secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 17: cream versus placebo (3 studies, 513 participants)
Three trials compared a cream to placebo ( ; ; ). There were three study groups in . For this comparison, we used data from two of these: the cream group (n = 29) and the placebo group (n = 32).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
Even though the populations, interventions, and comparators were similar, there was substantial heterogeneity (I² = 76%), so we used a random‐effects model for the meta‐analysis.
Cream may have little to no effect on pressure ulcer incidence compared to placebo, but the evidence is very uncertain (cream group 62/257, 24.1%; placebo group 64/256, 25%; RR 1.18, 95% CI 0.59 to 2.36; 3 studies, 513 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for high risk of other bias and unclear risk of selection and reporting bias; downgraded once for inconsistency (I2 = 76%); downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small sample size and a confidence interval which crosses 1).

## Secondary outcomes

## Stage of any pressure ulcers
 ; 
One trial reported data for this outcome ( ).

## Pressure ulcer stage 3
Cream may have little to no effect on the incidence of stage 3 pressure ulcer compared to placebo, but the evidence is very uncertain (cream group 5/129, 3.9%; placebo group 4/129, 3.1%; RR 1.25, 95% CI 0.34 to 4.55; 1 study, 258 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for unclear risk of selection, reporting, and other bias; downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small sample and event size, and a very wide confidence interval which crosses 1).

## Pressure ulcer stage 4
Cream may have little to no effect on the incidence of stage 4 pressure ulcer compared to placebo, but the evidence is very uncertain (cream group 0/129, 0%; placebo group 1/129, 0.7%; RR 0.33, 95% CI 0.01 to 8.11; 1 study, 258 participants; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for unclear risk of selection, reporting and other bias; downgraded twice for very serious imprecision due to a small sample and event size, and a very wide confidence interval which crosses 1).

## Remaining review outcomes
None of the three studies included in this comparison reported data for the remaining secondary outcomes (i.e. time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location of pressure ulcer development; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 18: cream versus usual care (1 study, 47 participants)
One trial compared a cream with usual care ( ). There were three study groups in . For this comparison, we used data from two: cream group (n = 29) and usual care group (n = 18).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage
 ; 
Cream may have little to no effect on the incidence of pressure ulcer compared to usual care, but the evidence is very uncertain (cream group: 62%, 18/29; usual care group: 39%, 7/18; RR 1.60, 95% CI 0.84 to 3.04; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded once for unclear risk of selection bias and other bias, where the effect of the clustering was not accounted for in the analysis; downgraded twice for imprecision due to a small number of events and a small sample size).

## Secondary outcomes
 did not report any of our secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 19: aloe vera versus aloe vera and oil (1 study, 120 participants)
One trial compared aloe vera with aloe vera and oil ( ). There were four study groups in . For this comparison, we used data from two: aloe vera group (n = 60) and aloe vera plus oil group (n = 60).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 ; 
 Aloe vera may increase the incidence of pressure ulcer compared to aloe vera and oil, but the evidence is very uncertain (aloe vera group 20/60, 33%; aloe vera and oil group 10/60, 16.7%; RR 2.00, 95% CI 1.02 to 3.91; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded three times for extremely serious imprecision due to a small sample size, a small number of events, and a wide confidence interval).

## Secondary outcomes

## Stage of any pressure ulcers
 ; 

## Pressure ulcer stage 1
Aloe vera may have little to no effect on the incidence of stage 1 pressure ulcer compared to aloe vera and oil, but the evidence is very uncertain (aloe vera group 13/60, 21.7%; aloe vera and oil group 8/60, 13.3%; RR 1.63, 95% CI 0.73 to 3.63; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded three times for extremely serious imprecision due to a small sample size, a small number of events, and a wide confidence interval which crosses 1).

## Pressure ulcer stage 2
Aloe vera may have little to no effect on the incidence of stage 2 pressure ulcer compared to aloe vera and oil, but the evidence is very uncertain (aloe vera group 7/60, 11.7%; aloe vera and oil group 2/60, 3.3%; RR 3.50, 95% CI 0.76 to 16.17; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded three times for extremely serious imprecision due to a small sample size, a small number of events, and a wide confidence interval which crosses 1).

## Anatomical location of pressure ulcer development

## Sacral pressure ulcer
Aloe vera may have little to no effect on the incidence of sacral pressure ulcer compared to aloe vera and oil, but the evidence is very uncertain (aloe vera group 9/60, 15%; aloe vera and oil group 3/60, 5%; RR 3.00, 95% CI 0.85 to 10.54; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded three times for extremely serious imprecision due to a small sample size, a small number of events, and a wide confidence interval which crosses 1; ).

## Buttock pressure ulcer
Aloe vera may have little to no effect on the incidence of buttock pressure ulcer compared to aloe vera and oil, but the evidence is very uncertain (aloe vera group 6/60, 10%; aloe vera and oil group 6/60, 10%; RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.34 to 2.93; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded three times for extremely serious imprecision due to a small sample size, a small number of events, and a wide confidence interval which crosses 1; ).

## Iliac pressure ulcer
Aloe vera may have little to no effect on the incidence of iliac pressure ulcer compared to aloe vera and oil, but the evidence is very uncertain (aloe vera group 5/60, 8.3%; aloe vera and oil group 1/60, 1.7%; RR 5.00, 95% CI 0.60 to 41.53; very low‐certainty evidence: downgraded three times for extremely serious imprecision due to a small sample size, a small number of events, and a wide confidence interval which crosses 1; ).

## Remaining review outcomes
 did not report data for the remaining secondary outcomes (i.e. time to pressure ulcer development; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Comparison 20: gel versus placebo (2 studies, 217 participants)
Two trials compared a gel with a placebo ( ; ).

## Primary outcome: pressure ulcer incidence (proportion of participants developing any new pressure ulcer(s) of any stage)
 
 Gel probably results in a large reduction in pressure ulcer development compared to placebo (gel group: 17.4%, 19/109; placebo group: 11%, 66/108; RR 0.29, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.44; 2 studies, 217 participants; moderate‐certainty evidence; ). We downgraded once for high risk or unclear risk of selection bias, and once for imprecision due to a small number of events and a small sample size. However, the risk ratio is large, based on data from two RCTs, and the range of the confidence interval is relatively narrow, and so we upgraded the evidence by one level.

## Secondary outcomes
Neither of the two studies included in this comparison reported any of our secondary outcomes of interest (i.e. stage of any pressure ulcers; time to pressure ulcer development; anatomical location; cost of interventions; quality of life; pain at dressing change; acceptability/satisfaction; adverse events; length of hospital stay).

## Discussion

## Summary of main results
This systematic review examined the evidence from 51 trials, with a total of 13,303 participants, on the effects of interventions aimed at reducing the incidence of pressure ulcers amongst at‐risk persons. Thirty‐one trials explored the use of a dressing; in four trials, both dressings and topical agents were the intervention of interest; and sixteen trials explored the use of a topical application. We generated 20 comparisons to report outcomes: 13 comparisons were related to dressings and seven comparisons were related to topical agents. This is the third update of the review, with the previous version including 18 trials ( ).

## Dressings

## Primary outcome: development of new pressure ulcers
We evaluated the effectiveness of dressings in relation to pressure ulcer incidence, making a total of 13 comparisons with 9027 participants. We present seven prioritised comparisons in the summary of findings (SoF) tables as follows:
silicone foam dressing versus no dressing (18 trials, 5903 participants);
foam dressing versus film dressing (3 trials, 569 participants);
hydrocellular foam dressing versus hydrocolloid dressing (1 trial, 80 participants);
silicone foam dressing type 1 versus silicone foam dressing type 2 (2 trials, 376 participants);
foam dressing versus fatty acid (2 trials, 300 participants);
polyurethane film versus hydrocolloid dressing (1 trial, 160 participants);
hydrocolloid dressing versus no dressing (2 trials, 230 participants).

Apart from the comparison of silicone foam dressing versus no dressing, all other comparisons have very few trials (mean = 2), and very few participants (mean = 285). All comparisons were associated with low‐ or very low‐certainty evidence. The main reasons for this relate to the risk of bias and imprecision (see ). Thus, the evidence is uncertain about the effect of dressings on pressure ulcer development.
For the comparison of silicone foam dressing versus no dressing, there were 19 trials and 6029 participants. For the primary outcome, we analysed data from 18 trials, with 5903 participants. Despite the number of trials in this comparison, it is also affected by some elements of risk of bias and imprecision in the study results, and we downgraded the certainty of the evidence for these reasons (see ). Thus, although silicone foam dressings may reduce pressure ulcer incidence compared to no dressing, the evidence is very uncertain.

## Secondary outcomes
Pressure ulcer stage was reported in the three following comparisons.
Silicone foam dressing versus no dressing:
pressure ulcer stage 1 (8 trials, 1823 participants;
pressure ulcer stage 2 (10 trials, 2873 participants);
pressure ulcer stage 3 (3 trials, 718 participants);
pressure ulcer stage 4 (2 trials, 610 participants);
unstageable pressure ulcer (1 trial, 366 participants);
Deep tissue injury (3 trials, 840 participants).
Foam dressing versus film dressing:
pressure ulcer stage 1, 2, 3 (1 trial, 270 participants).
Hydrocolloid dressing versus no dressing:
pressure ulcer stage 1, 2 (1 trial, 108 participants).

In one comparison, adverse events were reported (silicone foam dressing versus no dressing; 3 trials, 2317 participants), in addition to the time to pressure ulcer development (4 trials, 1059 participants), the anatomical location of pressure ulcer development (5 trials, 2871 participants), the cost of the interventions (4 trials, 1267 participants), quality of life (1 trial, 244 participants), pain (2 trials, 324 participants), and acceptability (2 trials, 321 participants). Two additional comparisons explored costs associated with the intervention: silicone foam dressing 1 versus silicone foam dressing 2 (1 trial, 302 participants), and polyurethane film versus hydrocolloid dressing (1 trial, 108 participants). All comparisons were associated with low‐ or very low‐certainty evidence. The main reasons for this relate to the risk of bias and imprecision (see ). Therefore, the evidence is uncertain about the effect of dressings on any of the secondary outcomes outlined.

## Summary
We assessed the body of evidence from the included trials as being of low or very low certainty. Therefore, it is very uncertain whether any of the dressings included in this review make any difference to the incidence of pressure ulcer development, adverse events, stage of pressure ulcer, time to pressure ulcer development, or anatomical location of the pressure ulcer. There is limited evidence pertaining to the cost, pain, and acceptability of the dressings, and just one study reported on quality of life.

## Topical agents

## Primary outcome: development of new pressure ulcers
We evaluated the effectiveness of topical agents in relation to pressure ulcer incidence, making a total of seven comparisons in our analysis, with 4276 participants. We present five prioritised comparisons in the SoF tables as follows:
fatty acid versus placebo (6 trials, 2201 participants);
fatty acid versus usual care (7 trials, 1058 participants);
cream versus fatty acid (1 trial, 120 participants);
cream versus placebo (3 trials, 513 participants);
cream versus usual care (1 trial, 47 participants).

All comparisons were associated with very low certainty evidence. The main reasons for this relate to the risk of bias and imprecision (see ). In all the comparisons, it is, therefore, very uncertain whether the interventions make any difference to pressure ulcer development.

## Secondary outcomes
Two comparisons reported pressure ulcer stage: fatty acid versus usual care (pressure ulcer stage 1: 2 trials, 180 participants; pressure ulcer stage 2: 2 trials, 180 participants), and cream versus placebo (pressure ulcer stage 3: 1 trial, 258 participants; pressure ulcer stage 4: 1 trial, 258 participants). One comparison reported adverse events: fatty acid versus placebo (3 trials, 967 participants). One comparison reported time to pressure ulcer development: fatty acid versus placebo (1 trial, 167 participants). Finally, two comparisons reported the anatomical location of pressure ulcer development: fatty acid versus placebo (2 trials, 643 participants), and fatty acid versus usual care (3 trials, 252 participants).
All comparisons were associated with low‐ or very low‐certainty evidence. The main reasons for this relate to the risk of bias and imprecision (see ). It is, therefore, uncertain whether the interventions make a difference to any of the secondary outcomes outlined.

## Summary
It is uncertain whether any of the topical agents included in this review make any difference to pressure ulcer incidence, pressure ulcer stage, adverse events, time to pressure ulcer development, or anatomical location of pressure ulcer development when compared to control/placebo.

## Overall completeness and applicability of evidence
Participants recruited to the trials exploring the use of dressings and new pressure ulcer development were representative of at‐risk individuals. Participants included neonates, infants and children, adults, and older people. Most of the dressing trials were conducted in hospital clinical settings that report high pressure ulcer incidence rates, including critical and intensive care, emergency departments, operating room, medical and surgical units. Few dressing trials were conducted in geriatric and long‐term care facilities, hence further investigation into this population and setting is warranted.
We separated results for pressure ulcer stage. However, in most clinical pressure ulcer prevention trials, severe categories, including stages 3 and 4, rarely occur. Therefore, though we were interested in the effect on all stages of pressure ulcer development, it is important to emphasise this clinical reality, especially when considering the impact on overall pressure ulcer incidence.
The trials exploring topical agents mainly included at‐risk adults and older people in hospitals, geriatric medicine, and nursing homes. Thus, topical agents require greater investigation across other patient populations and clinical settings.
Economic and cost‐effectiveness analyses were reported in four dressing trials: three in adults and one in infants. There were no economic data on topical agents. Three trials reported intervention‐related adverse events: and reported dressing‐related adverse events for the intervention group, while reported no dressing adverse events.
Scant evidence exists on participants’ satisfaction with dressings for pressure ulcer prevention ( ; ), and pain experienced ( ; ), with more research needed on these issues. Just one of the dressing trials measured the impact on participants' quality of life ( ).
Potential conflicts of interest and bias are noted. Fifteen (29.0%) trials reported receiving support from manufacturers, either financial (n = 14) or product (n = 1). Furthermore, one group of investigators were developers of the dressing they subsequently evaluated in their trial, and one author in another study was an employee of the product manufacturer. Another 17 (33%) trials received non‐commercial funding. The trials in this review were conducted across 16 countries, with most located in Europe, Asia, and the Pacific region.

## Quality of the evidence

## Limitations in trial design and implementation
In this third update of the review, we continued to include only RCTs to enable a thorough assessment of risk of bias for each trial. Most trials provided details of appropriate random sequence allocation, which resulted in an overall low risk of bias. However, we judged several trials as having an unclear or high risk of bias due to a lack of detail regarding sequence generation. Broadly speaking, we assessed most studies as having an unclear or high risk of bias for allocation concealment and blinding of participants and personnel. While some trials of topical agents had success in blinding participants and personnel, most of the dressing trials were not able to blind participants and personnel (a somewhat expected result). However, one dressing trial was able to blind outcome assessment using photography ( ). Outcome data were generally well reported. However, a few trials did not analyse participants randomised to the intervention, and we therefore judged these to be at high risk of attrition bias. Selective reporting and other potential sources of bias were also evident to some extent, but we judged most trials as having a low or unclear risk of bias in these domains ( ).
Of the three cluster‐RCTs, the trial allocated participants to one dressing type, alternating between silicone dressing 1 and silicone dressing 2, in three monthly cycles. The trial randomised participants by ward, not individual. In , each facility included in the study (rather than individuals within the facility) was randomised to either the intervention or control group. Participants in the trial acted as their own control; that is, no dressing was applied to the opposite trochanter, thereby increasing the risk of unit of analysis error.
In terms of assessment of the certainty of the evidence using GRADE criteria, in the comparison of fatty acid to usual care, we upgraded the evidence certainty by one level for the outcome 'pressure ulcer stage 1', because the risk ratio was large, and although the confidence interval was slightly wide, the limits fall almost entirely within a range considered as indicating a large effect. However, we also downgraded the evidence for high risk of selection, performance, detection, and attrition bias, as well as for imprecision due to a small sample size. For the remaining comparisons, we downgraded the evidence for outcomes to low or very low certainty. Reasons for downgrading included concerns over the risk of bias across multiple domains (as summarised above), and imprecision. Other reasons included serious imprecision, a small number of events, wide confidence intervals, and small sample sizes.

## Indirectness of evidence
Although the review was limited by variations in both the experimental and the control interventions, we did not downgrade the evidence for indirectness as it covers the population, intervention, and outcomes stipulated in the protocol.

## Imprecision of results
As summarised above, the low number of events and small sample sizes resulted in wide confidence intervals in most of the pooled estimates of outcomes. However, in the analyses of silicone dressing versus no dressing, confidence intervals were narrower and results statistically significant for any pressure ulcer, and stage 1 and stage 2 pressure ulcers. Where there were wide confidence intervals, precision was reduced and created uncertainty around the estimate of effect for both topical agents and dressings trials.

## Publication bias
In this update, we attempted to obtain additional information from three trial authors, but without success. This reflects the difficulties we experienced in trying to contact authors for information whilst developing the previous versions of the review. As summarised above, reporting of trial information was done reasonably well with few issues related to selective reporting. However, we acknowledge that statistically significant findings are more likely to be published (particularly from studies with smaller sample sizes). As such, there is a possibility ‘negative results’ were not reported, which may lead to a spurious positive effect, favouring the intervention ( ).

## Potential biases in the review process
To limit potential biases in the review process, we implemented systematic and rigorous methods that were transparent and reproducible ( ). The broad electronic database literature searches included studies published in any language and setting, and without date limiters. The first update of this review included , a Chinese publication requiring a translator to aid with data extraction. In this second review, the newly added trials were all published in English. As noted above, we attempted to contact three trial authors to seek additional information, but without success. We acknowledge that it is possible that trials published in journals outside our search strategy may have been missed. Whilst participants and staff can be blinded to the use of topical agents, this is almost impossible in relation to prophylactic dressings; thus, most dressing trials are unavoidably at risk of performance bias.

## Agreements and disagreements with other studies or reviews
Pressure ulcer prevention is a significant patient safety issue and, as such, there are several recent pressure ulcer prevention systematic reviews that include dressings, topical agents, or both. For example, undertook a systematic review exploring the effectiveness of prophylactic sacral protective dressings. From the six studies included in the meta‐analysis, an overall effect in favour of the prophylactic dressing was identified. In a systematic review of 21 papers on multicomponent pressure ulcer prevention programmes in the intensive care unit (ICU) setting, Lin and colleagues included two quality improvement studies that had incorporated prophylactic dressings as one component of the intervention, with both showing that the multicomponent intervention reduced pressure ulcers ( ). Another review of 14 nursing interventions for pressure ulcer prevention in ICU patients included four studies of prevention bundles that incorporated prophylactic dressings ( ), with various beneficial effects associated with bundle use. In their systematic review, Gaspar and colleagues assessed 26 studies that focused on the effectiveness of pressure ulcer prevention strategies, six of which were specifically on prophylactic dressings ( ). They found five of the six dressing studies demonstrated statistically significant decreases in pressure ulcers. In the sixth study, a gel mattress was compared to a multilayered foam dressing, with no statistically significant differences in sacral pressure ulcers between the two groups. Finally, Tezcan and colleagues carried out a systematic review of studies investigating pressure ulcer treatment in healthcare workers arising from their use of protective equipment during the COVID‐19 pandemic ( ). This review included six studies exploring the use of prophylactic dressings and assessed various outcomes. Studies that included pressure ulcers as an outcome generally found dressings were effective. To the best of our knowledge, this Cochrane review is the only systematic review that assesses dressings and topical agents for pressure ulcer prevention.

## Authors' conclusions

## Implications for practice
Pressure ulcers are a relatively common acquired complication that occurs in community dwellers and across all care settings. Their prevention is a priority for healthcare providers, yet this review of 51 trials found that many uncertainties exist in the evidence for the use of dressings and topical agents for the prevention of pressure ulcers. While several dressing types were used in the trials we evaluated and were assessed against a variety of comparators (including no dressing, a placebo, or alternative dressing), the main type was silicone (18 studies, 5903 participants). Three of the recent studies on silicone dressings we reviewed showed evidence of benefit ( ; ; ). While all of these studies were at high risk of bias on some criteria, this was often because blinding of participants (and sometimes outcome assessors) was not undertaken. Thus, while silicone foam dressings may reduce pressure ulcer incidence (any stage) compared to no dressing, the evidence is very uncertain.
The trials we assessed tested a vast array of topical agents, with fatty acid being the most common agent – tested in 13 trials and a total of 3259 participants. These trials were at high risk of bias and the body of evidence was very uncertain. The trials of other topical agents were also at high risk of bias in numerous domains. Overall, topical agents may have little to no effect on pressure ulcer incidence, but the evidence is very uncertain.

## Implications for research
There are numerous topical agents and dressings advocated for pressure ulcer prevention. However, as yet we do not clearly know whether any of the products make any difference to pressure ulcer development. Given the plethora of products available, future studies should engage with patients, the public, and decision‐makers to determine priority interventions to test in future research. Once these priorities are identified, there needs to be a very clear and detailed description of the intervention. Given that dressing costs vary, adequately powered, high‐quality head‐to‐head trials of different types of dressings, such as silicone versus foam, is one potential area to pursue. Associated with this, we found only a few studies that examined crude costs and found no cost‐effectiveness research, clearly an important consideration for decision‐makers. Planning for a cost‐effective analysis a priori, led by an experienced health economist, should be considered in future trials. Furthermore, researchers undertaking future trials should register their trial in a World Health Organization (WHO) International Clinical Trials Registry Platform member registry, prior to recruitment of the first participant.
There are other issues trialists should address. Many studies we reviewed did not blind outcome assessors. However, one‐third of studies included in the review were able to achieve this (17/51; 33%). Determining the target population to study is an important consideration as many of the dressings trials focused on people in intensive care or in hospital. There was much less research on aged care residents or individuals living in the community, although several studies of topical agents were undertaken on the elderly, either those accessing community health care or residing in nursing homes/long‐term care facilities. Thus, the extent to which dressings and topical agents have benefit in a wider variety of populations should be considered. Further, given many of the studies we reviewed had small samples, it is important that accurate sample size calculations are completed for the particular target population to avoid undertaking an underpowered trial. Finally, the recent advances in determining a core outcome set for pressure ulcer research provides future researchers with opportunities to standardise and justify their choice of outcome measures ( ). For example, three outcomes specified in this work include the acceptability and comfort of the intervention, adherence or compliance, and adverse events or safety. All of these outcomes may be important for trials of dressings, given dressings can ‘malfunction’ and can result in blistering.

## What's new
 

## History
Protocol first published: Issue 10, 2011 Review first published: Issue 8, 2013
 

## Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Joan Webster for her contributions to the protocol and previous versions of the review.

## Editorial and peer‐reviewer contributions
Cochrane Wounds supported the authors in the development of this update.
The following people conducted the editorial process for this article:
Sign‐off Editor (final editorial decision): Emma Sydenham, Cochrane;
Managing Editor (selected peer reviewers, provided editorial guidance to authors, edited the article): Luisa Fernandez Mauleffinch, Cochrane Central Editorial Service;
Editorial Assistant (conducted editorial policy checks, collated peer‐reviewer comments and supported editorial team): Sara Hales‐Brittain, Cochrane Central Editorial Service;
Copy Editor (copy editing and production): Faith Armitage, Cochrane Central Production Service;
Peer‐reviewers (provided comments and recommended an editorial decision): Prof Dr Jan Kottner, Charité‐Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany (clinical/content review); Rujan Shrestha, Infectious Diseases Data Observatory (IDDO), University of Oxford, Old Road Campus, Oxford, UK (consumer review); Jennifer Hilgart, Cochrane (methods review); Gemma Villanueva, Cochrane Response (methods/content review); Jo Platt, Central Editorial Information Specialist (search review); and Michael Clark, Birmingham City University (clinical/content review).

## Appendices

## Appendix 1. International NPUAP‐EPUAP pressure ulcer classification system for ulcer grading

## Category/Stage 1: non‐blanchable redness of intact skin
Intact skin with non‐blanchable erythema of a localised area usually over a bony prominence. Discolouration of the skin, warmth, oedema, hardness or pain may also be present. Darkly pigmented skin may not have visible blanching. Further description: the area may be painful, firm, soft, warmer or cooler than adjacent tissue. Category/stage 1 may be difficult to detect in individuals with dark skin tones. May indicate 'at risk' individuals.

## Category/Stage 2: partial thickness skin loss or blister
Partial thickness loss of dermis presenting as a shallow open ulcer with a red pink wound bed, without slough. May also present as an intact or open/ruptured serum‐filled or sero‐sanguinous‐filled blister. Further description: presents as a shiny or dry shallow ulcer without slough or bruising. This category/stage should not be used to describe skin tears, tape burns, incontinence‐associated dermatitis, maceration or excoriation.

## Category/Stage 3: full thickness skin loss (fat visible)
Full thickness tissue loss. Subcutaneous fat may be visible but bone, tendon or muscle are not exposed. Some slough may be present. May include undermining and tunnelling. Further description: the depth of a category/stage 3 pressure ulcer varies by anatomical location. The bridge of the nose, ear, occiput and malleolus do not have (adipose) subcutaneous tissue and category/stage 3 ulcers can be shallow. In contrast, areas of significant adiposity can develop extremely deep category/stage 3 pressure ulcers. Bone/tendon is not visible or directly palpable.

## Category/Stage 4: full thickness tissue loss (muscle/bone visible)
Full thickness tissue loss with exposed bone, tendon or muscle. Slough or eschar may be present. Often includes undermining and tunnelling. Further description: the depth of a category/stage 4 pressure ulcer varies by anatomical location. The bridge of the nose, ear, occiput and malleolus do not have (adipose) subcutaneous tissue and these ulcers can be shallow. Category/stage 4 ulcers can extend into muscle and/or supporting structures (e.g. fascia, tendon or joint capsule) making osteomyelitis or osteitis likely to occur. Exposed bone/muscle is visible or directly palpable.
Abbreviations: NPUAP: National Pressure Injury Advisory Panel; EPUAP: European Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel

## Appendix 2. Search strategy
Cochrane Wounds Specialised Register
1 MESH DESCRIPTOR Biological Dressings EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
2 MESH DESCRIPTOR occlusive dressings EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
3 MESH DESCRIPTOR Bandages, Hydrocolloid EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
4 MESH DESCRIPTOR Hydrogels EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
5 MESH DESCRIPTOR Alginates EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
6 dressing* AND INREGISTER
7 (hydrocolloid* or alginate* or hydrogel* or foam or bead or film or films or tulle or gauze or non‐adherent or non adherent) AND INREGISTER
8 MESH DESCRIPTOR Anti‐Bacterial Agents EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
9 MESH DESCRIPTOR Administration, Topical EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
10 #8 AND #9
11 (topical near2 antibiotic*) AND INREGISTER
12 MESH DESCRIPTOR Anti‐Infective Agents EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
13 MESH DESCRIPTOR Anti‐Inflammatory Agents EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
14 MESH DESCRIPTOR Glucocorticoids EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
15 #13 OR #14
16 #9 AND #15
17 (topical near2 (steroid* or corticosteroid* or glucocorticoid*)) AND INREGISTER
18 MESH DESCRIPTOR Estrogens EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
19 #18 AND #9
20 (topical near2 (oestrogen or estrogen)) AND INREGISTER
21 MESH DESCRIPTOR Enzymes EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
22 #21 AND #9
23 (topical near2 enzym*) AND INREGISTER
24 MESH DESCRIPTOR Growth Substances EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
25 #24 AND #9
26 (topical near2 growth factor*) AND INREGISTER
27 MESH DESCRIPTOR Collagen EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
28 #27 AND #9
29 (topical near2 collagen) AND INREGISTER
30 (topical near2 silver) AND INREGISTER
31 MESH DESCRIPTOR Honey EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
32 honey* AND INREGISTER
33 MESH DESCRIPTOR Ointments EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
34 (ointment* or lotion* or cream* or gel* or oil*) AND INREGISTER
35 (topical next (agent* or preparation* or therap* or treatment*)) AND INREGISTER
36 #35 OR #34 OR #33 OR #32 OR #31 OR #30 OR #29 OR #28 OR #26 OR #25 OR #23 OR #22 OR #20 OR #19 OR #17 OR #16 OR #12 OR #11 OR #10 OR #7 OR #6 OR #5 OR #4 OR #3 OR #2 OR #1
37 MESH DESCRIPTOR Pressure Ulcer EXPLODE ALL AND INREGISTER
38 (pressure next (ulcer* or sore* or injur*)) AND INREGISTER
39 (decubitus next (ulcer* or sore*)) AND INREGISTER
40 (bedsore* or (bed next sore*)) AND INREGISTER
41 #37 OR #38 OR #39 OR #40
42 #36 AND #41
The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Clinical Trials (CENTRAL)
#1 MeSH descriptor: [Biological Dressings] explode all trees
#2 MeSH descriptor: [Occlusive Dressings] explode all trees
#3 MeSH descriptor: [Bandages, Hydrocolloid] explode all trees
#4 MeSH descriptor: [Hydrogels] explode all trees
#5 MeSH descriptor: [Alginates] explode all trees
#6 dressing*:ti,ab,kw
#7 (hydrocolloid* or alginate* or hydrogel* or foam or bead or film or films or tulle or gauze or non‐adherent or non adherent):ti,ab,kw
#8 MeSH descriptor: [Anti‐Bacterial Agents] explode all trees
#9 MeSH descriptor: [Administration, Topical] explode all trees
#10 #8 and #9
#11 (topical near/2 antibiotic*):ti,ab
#12 MeSH descriptor: [Anti‐Infective Agents, Local] explode all trees
#13 MeSH descriptor: [Anti‐Inflammatory Agents] explode all trees
#14 MeSH descriptor: [Glucocorticoids] explode all trees
#15 #13 or #14
#16 #9 and #15
#17 (topical near/2 (steroid* or corticosteroid* or glucocorticoid*)):ti,ab,kw
#18 MeSH descriptor: [Estrogens] explode all trees
#19 #9 and #18
#20 (topical near/2 (oestrogen or estrogen)):ti,ab,kw
#21 MeSH descriptor: [Enzymes] explode all trees
#22 #9 and #21
#23 (topical near/2 enzym*):ti,ab,kw
#24 MeSH descriptor: [Growth Substances] explode all trees
#25 #9 and #24
#26 (topical near/2 growth factor*):ti,ab,kw
#27 MeSH descriptor: [Collagen] explode all trees
#28 #9 and #27
#29 (topical near/2 collagen):ti,ab,kw
#30 (topical near/2 silver):ti,ab
#31 MeSH descriptor: [Ointments] explode all trees
#32 (ointment* or lotion* or cream* or gel* or oil*):ti,ab,kw
#33 MeSH descriptor: [Honey] explode all trees
#34 honey.ti,ab,kw
#35 (topical next (agent* or preparation* or therap* or treatment*)):ti,ab,kw
#36 (#1 or #2 or #3 or #4 or #5 or #6 or #7 or #10 or #11 or #12 or #16 or #17 or #19 or #20 or #22 or #23 or #25 or #26 or #28 or #29 or #30 or #31 or #32 or #33 or #34 or #35)
#37 MeSH descriptor: [Pressure Ulcer] explode all trees
#38 pressure next (ulcer* or sore* or injur*):ti,ab,kw
#39 decubitus next (ulcer* or sore*):ti,ab,kw
#40 (bed next sore*) or bedsore*:ti,ab,kw
#41 (#37 or #38 or #39 or #40)
#42 #36 and #41 in Trials
Ovid MEDLINE
1 exp Biological Dressings/
2 exp Occlusive Dressings/
3 exp Bandages, Hydrocolloid/
4 exp Hydrogels/
5 exp Alginates/
6 dressing$.ti,ab.
7 (hydrocolloid$ or alginate$ or hydrogel$ or foam or bead or film or films or tulle or gauze or non‐adherent or non adherent).ti,ab.
8 exp Anti‐Bacterial Agents/
9 exp Administration, Topical/
10 and/8‐9
11 (topical adj2 antibiotic$).ti,ab.
12 exp Antiinfective Agents, Local/
13 exp Anti‐Inflammatory Agents/
14 exp Glucocorticoids/
15 or/13‐14
16 9 and 15
17 (topical adj2 (steroid$ or corticosteroid$ or glucocorticoid$)).ti,ab.
18 exp Estrogens/
19 9 and 18
20 (topical adj2 (oestrogen or estrogen)).ti,ab.
21 exp Enzymes/
22 9 and 21
23 (topical adj2 enzym$).ti,ab.
24 exp Growth Substances/
25 9 and 24
26 (topical adj2 growth factor$).ti,ab.
27 exp Collagen/
28 9 and 27
29 (topical adj2 collagen).ti,ab.
30 (topical adj2 silver).ti,ab.
31 exp Honey/
32 honey$.ti,ab.
33 exp Ointments/
34 (ointment$ or lotion$ or cream$ or gel$ or oil$).ti,ab.
35 (topical adj (agent$ or preparation$ or therap$ or treatment$)).ti,ab.
36 or/1‐7,10‐12,16‐17,19‐20,22‐23,25‐26,28‐35
37 exp Pressure Ulcer/
38 (pressure adj (ulcer$ or sore$ or injur$)).ti,ab.
39 (decubitus adj (ulcer$ or sore$)).ti,ab.
40 (bedsore$ or (bed adj sore$)).ti,ab.
41 or/37‐40
42 36 and 41
43 randomized controlled trial.pt.
44 controlled clinical trial.pt.
45 randomi?ed.ab.
46 placebo.ab.
47 clinical trials as topic.sh.
48 randomly.ab.
49 trial.ti.
50 or/43‐49
51 exp animals/ not humans.sh.
52 50 not 51
53 42 and 52
Ovid Embase
1 exp foam dressing/
2 exp gauze dressing/
3 exp hydrocolloid dressing/
4 exp hydrogel dressing/
5 exp Wound Dressing/
6 exp Hydrogel/
7 exp Calcium Alginate/
8 dressing*.ti,ab.
9 (hydrocolloid* or alginate* or hydrogel* or foam or bead or film or films or tulle or gauze or non‐adherent or non adherent).ti,ab.
10 exp Antibiotic Agent/
11 exp Topical Drug Administration/
12 and/10‐11
13 (topical adj2 antibiotic*).ti,ab.
14 exp Antiinfective Agent/
15 11 and 14
16 exp Antiinflammatory Agent/
17 exp Corticosteroid/
18 exp Glucocorticoid/
19 or/16‐18
20 11 and 19
21 (topical adj2 (steroid* or corticosteroid* or glucocorticoid*)).ti,ab.
22 exp Estrogen/
23 11 and 22
24 (topical adj2 (oestrogen or estrogen)).ti,ab.
25 exp Enzymes/
26 11 and 25
27 (topical adj2 enzym*).ti,ab.
28 exp Growth Factor/
29 11 and 28
30 (topical adj2 growth factor*).ti,ab.
31 exp Collagen/
32 11 and 31
33 (topical adj2 collagen).ti,ab.
34 (topical adj2 silver).ti,ab.
35 exp Honey/
36 honey*.ti,ab.
37 exp Ointments/
38 (ointment* or lotion* or cream* or gel* or oil*).ti,ab.
39 (topical adj (agent* or preparation* or therap* or treatment*)).ti,ab.
40 or/1‐9,12‐13,15,20‐21,23‐24,26‐27,29‐30,32‐39
41 exp Decubitus/
42 (pressure adj (ulcer* or sore* or injur*)).ti,ab.
43 (decubitus adj (ulcer* or sore*)).ti,ab.
44 (bedsore* or (bed adj sore*)).ti,ab.
45 or/41‐44
46 40 and 45
47 Randomized controlled trial/
48 Controlled clinical study/
49 Random$.ti,ab.
50 randomization/
51 intermethod comparison/
52 placebo.ti,ab.
53 (compare or compared or comparison).ti.
54 ((evaluated or evaluate or evaluating or assessed or assess) and (compare or compared or comparing or comparison)).ab.
55 (open adj label).ti,ab.
56 ((double or single or doubly or singly) adj (blind or blinded or blindly)).ti,ab.
57 double blind procedure/
58 parallel group$1.ti,ab.
59 (crossover or cross over).ti,ab.
60 ((assign$ or match or matched or allocation) adj5 (alternate or group$1 orintervention$1 or patient$1 or subject$1 or participant$1)).ti,ab.
61 (assigned or allocated).ti,ab.
62 (controlled adj7 (study or design or trial)).ti,ab.
63 (volunteer or volunteers).ti,ab.
64 human experiment/
65 trial.ti.
66 or/47‐65
67 (random$ adj sampl$ adj7 (cross section$ or questionnaire$1 or survey$ or database$1)).ti,ab. not (comparative study/ or controlled study/ or randomi?ed controlled.ti,ab. or randomly assigned.ti,ab.)
68 Cross‐sectional study/ not (randomized controlled trial/ or controlled clinical study/ or controlled study/ or randomi?ed controlled.ti,ab. or control group$1.ti,ab.)
69 (((case adj control$) and random$) not randomi?ed controlled).ti,ab.
70 (Systematic review not (trial or study)).ti.
71 (nonrandom$ not random$).ti,ab.
72 Random field$.ti,ab.
73 (random cluster adj3 sampl$).ti,ab.
74 (review.ab. and review.pt.) not trial.ti.
75 we searched.ab. and (review.ti. or review.pt.)
76 update review.ab.
77 (databases adj4 searched).ab.
78 (rat or rats or mouse or mice or swine or porcine or murine or sheep or lambs or pigs or piglets or rabbit or rabbits or cat or cats or dog or dogs or cattle or bovine or monkey or monkeys or trout or marmoset$1).ti. and animal experiment/
79 Animal experiment/ not (human experiment/ or human/)
80 or/67‐79
81 66 not 80
82 46 and 81
EBSCO CINAHL Plus
S63 S39 AND S62
S62 S61 NOT S60
S61 S40 OR S41 OR S42 OR S43 OR S44 OR S45 OR S46 OR S47 OR S48 OR S49 OR S50 OR S51 OR S52 OR S53 OR S54
S60 S58 NOT S59
S59 MH (human)
S58 S55 OR S56 OR S57
S57 TI (animal model*)
S56 MH (animal studies)
S55 MH animals+
S54 AB (cluster W3 RCT)
S53 MH (crossover design) OR MH (comparative studies)
S52 AB (control W5 group)
S51 PT (randomized controlled trial)
S50 MH (placebos)
S49 MH (sample size) AND AB (assigned OR allocated OR control)
S48 TI (trial)
S47 AB (random*)
S46 TI (randomised OR randomized)
S45 MH cluster sampl
S44 MH pretest‐posttest design
S43 MH random assignment
S42 MH single‐blind studies
S41 MH double‐blind studies
S40 MH randomized controlled trials
S39 S33 and S38
S38 S34 or S35 or S36 or S37
S37 TI decubitus or AB decubitus
S36 TI ( bed sore* or bedsore* ) or AB ( bed sore* or bedsore* )
S35 TI ( pressure ulcer* or pressure sore* or pressure injur*) or AB ( pressure ulcer* or pressure sore* or pressure injur* )
S34 (MH "Pressure Ulcer")
S33 S1 or S2 or S3 or S6 or S7 or S8 or S9 or S10 or S12 or S13 or S15 or S16 or S18 or S19 or S21 or S22 or S26 or S27 or S28 or S29 or S30 or S31 or S32
S32 TI ( topical agent* or topical preparation* or topical therap* or topical treatment*) or AB ( topical agent* or topical preparation* or topical therap* or topical treatment*)
S31 TI ( ointment* or lotion* or cream* or gel* or oil*) or AB ( ointment* or lotion* or cream* or gel* or oil*)
S30 (MH "Ointments")
S29 TI honey* or AB honey*
S28 (MH "Honey")
S27 TI topical* N2 silver* or AB topical* N2 silver*
S26 S5 and S25
S25 S23 or S24
S24 (MH "Silver Sulfadiazine")
S23 (MH "Silver")
S22 TI collagen* or AB collagen*
S21 S5 and S20
S20 (MH "Collagen")
S19 TI topical* N2 growth factor* or AB topical* N2 growth factor*
S18 (S5 and S17)
S17 (MH "Growth Substances+")
S16 TI topical* N2 enzyme* or AB topical* N2 enzyme*
S15 S5 and S14
S14 (MH "Enzymes+")
S13 TI ( topical* N2 oestrogen* or topical* N2 estrogen* ) or AB ( topical* N2 oestrogen* or topical* N2 estrogen* )
S12 S5 and S11
S11 (MH "Estrogens+")
S10 TI ( topical* N2 steroid* or topical* N2 corticosteroid* or topical* N2 glucocorticoid* ) or AB ( topical* N2 steroid* or topical* N2 corticosteroid* or topical* N2 glucocorticoid* )
S9 (MH "Antiinflammatory Agents, Topical+")
S8 (MH "Antiinfective Agents, Local+")
S7 TI topical* N2 antibiotic* or AB topical* N2 antibiotic*
S6 S4 and S5
S5 MH "Administration, Topical+")
S4 (MH "Antibiotics+")
S3 TI ( dressing* or pad or pads or gauze or tulle or film or bead or foam* or non‐adherent or non adherent or hydrocolloid* or alginat* or hydrogel* ) or AB (dressing* or pad or pads or gauze or tulle or film or bead or foam* or non‐adherent or non adherent or hydrocolloid* or alginat* or hydrogel* )
S2 (MH "Alginates")
S1 (MH "Bandages and Dressings+")
US National Institutes of Health Ongoing Trials Register (ClinicalTrials.gov)
dressing OR pad OR gauze OR tulle OR film OR bead OR foam OR hydrocolloid OR alginate OR hydrogel OR honey OR silicone OR gel OR topical OR anti bacterial OR oil OR ointment OR lotion OR cream | Pressure Ulcer
World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform
pressure ulcer* [Title] AND dressing OR pad OR gauze OR tulle OR film OR bead OR foam OR hydrocolloid OR alginate OR hydrogel OR honey OR silicone OR gel OR topical OR anti bacterial OR oil OR ointment OR lotion OR cream
pressure ulcer* [condition] AND dressing OR pad OR gauze OR tulle OR film OR bead OR foam OR hydrocolloid OR alginate OR hydrogel OR honey OR silicone OR gel OR topical OR anti bacterial OR oil OR ointment OR lotion OR cream
pressure injur* [Title] AND dressing OR pad OR gauze OR tulle OR film OR bead OR foam OR hydrocolloid OR alginate OR hydrogel OR honey OR silicone OR gel OR topical OR anti bacterial OR oil OR ointment OR lotion OR cream
pressure injur* [Condition] AND dressing OR pad OR gauze OR tulle OR film OR bead OR foam OR hydrocolloid OR alginate OR hydrogel OR honey OR silicone OR gel OR topical OR anti bacterial OR oil OR ointment OR lotion OR cream

## Appendix 3. 'Risk of bias' criteria

## 1. Was the allocation sequence randomly generated?

## Low risk of bias
The investigators describe a random component in the sequence generation process such as: referring to a random number table; using a computer random number generator; coin tossing; shuffling cards or envelopes; throwing dice; drawing of lots.

## High risk of bias
The investigators describe a non‐random component in the sequence generation process. Usually, the description would involve some systematic, non‐random approach; for example: sequence generated by odd or even date of birth; sequence generated by some rule based on date (or day) of admission; sequence generated by some rule based on hospital or clinic record number.

## Unclear
Insufficient information about the sequence generation process provided to permit a judgement of low or high risk of bias.

## 2. Was the treatment allocation adequately concealed?

## Low risk of bias
Participants and investigators enroling participants could not foresee assignment because one of the following, or an equivalent method, was used to conceal allocation: central allocation (including telephone, web‐based and pharmacy‐controlled randomisation); sequentially‐numbered drug containers of identical appearance; sequentially‐numbered, opaque, sealed envelopes.

## High risk of bias
Participants or investigators enroling participants could possibly foresee assignments and thus introduce selection bias, such as allocation based on: use of an open random allocation schedule (e.g. a list of random numbers); assignment envelopes without appropriate safeguards (e.g. envelopes were unsealed, non‐opaque, or not sequentially numbered); alternation or rotation; date of birth; case record number; any other explicitly unconcealed procedure.

## Unclear
Insufficient information provided to permit a judgement of low or high risk of bias. This is usually the case if the method of concealment is not described, or not described in sufficient detail to allow a definite judgement; for example, if the use of assignment envelopes is described, but it remains unclear whether envelopes were sequentially numbered, opaque and sealed.

## 3. Blinding ‐ was knowledge of the allocated interventions adequately prevented during the study?

## Low risk of bias
Any one of the following.
No blinding, but the review authors judge that the outcome and the outcome measurement are not likely to be influenced by lack of blinding.
Blinding of participants and key study personnel ensured, and unlikely that the blinding could have been broken.
Either participants or some key study personnel were not blinded, but outcome assessment was blinded and the non‐blinding of others unlikely to introduce bias.

## High risk of bias
Any one of the following.
No blinding or incomplete blinding, and the outcome or outcome measurement is likely to be influenced by lack of blinding.
Blinding of key study participants and personnel attempted, but likely that the blinding could have been broken.
Either participants or some key study personnel were not blinded, and the non‐blinding of others likely to introduce bias.

## Unclear
Either of the following.
Insufficient information to permit judgement of low or high risk of bias.
The study did not address this outcome.

## 4. Were incomplete outcome data adequately addressed?

## Low risk of bias
Any one of the following.
No missing outcome data.
Reasons for missing outcome data are unlikely to be related to true outcome (for survival data, censoring unlikely to be introducing bias).
Missing outcome data are balanced in numbers across intervention groups, with similar reasons for missing data across groups.
For dichotomous outcome data, the proportion of missing outcomes compared with the observed event risk is not enough to have a clinically relevant impact on the intervention effect estimate.
For continuous outcome data, a plausible effect size (difference in means or standardised difference in means) among missing outcomes is not enough to have a clinically relevant impact on the observed effect size.
Missing data have been imputed using appropriate methods.

## High risk of bias
Any one of the following.
Reason for missing outcome data are likely to be related to the true outcome, with either an imbalance in numbers or reasons for missing data across intervention groups.
For dichotomous outcome data, the proportion of missing outcomes compared with the observed event risk is enough to induce clinically relevant bias in the intervention effect estimate.
For continuous outcome data, a plausible effect size (difference in means or standardised difference in means) among missing outcomes is enough to induce a clinically relevant bias in the observed effect size.
'As‐treated' analysis done with a substantial departure of the intervention received from that assigned at randomisation.
Potentially inappropriate application of simple imputation.

## Unclear
Either of the following.
Insufficient reporting of attrition/exclusions to permit a judgement of low or high risk of bias (e.g. number randomised not stated, no reasons for missing data provided).
The study did not address this outcome.

## 5. Are reports of the study free of suggestion of selective outcome reporting?

## Low risk of bias
Either of the following.
The study protocol is available and all of the study’s prespecified (primary and secondary) outcomes that are of interest in the review have been reported in the prespecified way.
The study protocol is not available but it is clear that the published reports include all expected outcomes, including those that were prespecified (convincing text of this nature may be uncommon).

## High risk of bias
Any one of the following.
Not all of the study’s prespecified primary outcomes have been reported.
One or more primary outcomes is/are reported using measurements, analysis methods, or subsets of the data (e.g. subscales) that were not prespecified.
One or more reported primary outcomes was/were not prespecified (unless clear justification for their reporting is provided, such as an unexpected adverse effect).
One or more outcomes of interest in the review is/are reported incompletely so that they cannot be entered in a meta‐analysis.
The study report fails to include results for a key outcome that would be expected to have been reported for such a study.

## Unclear
Insufficient information provided to permit a judgement of low or high risk of bias. It is likely that the majority of trials will fall into this category.

## 6. Other sources of potential bias

## Low risk of bias
The study appears to be free of other sources of bias.

## High risk of bias
There is at least one important risk of bias. For example, the study:
had a potential source of bias related to the specific study design used; or
has been claimed to have been fraudulent; or
had some other problem.

## Unclear
There may be a risk of bias, but there is either:
insufficient information to assess whether an important risk of bias exists; or
insufficient rationale or evidence that an identified problem will introduce bias.

## Data and analyses
 

## Characteristics of studies

## Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of ongoing studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Differences between protocol and review
We added the words, "or any other intervention" under the heading 'Types of interventions.'
We added the words, 'we completed a PRISMA flowchart to summarise this process' to the section 'Selection of studies.'
We added a section, 'Summary of findings table and GRADE assessment of the certainty of the evidence' to the methods.
We have changed the wording in the 'Unit of analysis issues' to: "Ideally a trial would be designed with participant‐level randomisation and analysis, and only one pressure ulcer per participant (adjustment for clustering not necessary in this case). However, in the pressure ulcer literature, it is not unusual to find trials that report on multiple pressure ulcers per participant, randomised or analysed, or both, at wound level, and unadjusted for clustering. In such cases, we planned to contact the trial authors and attempt to obtain: patient‐level data or results; data or results for one pressure ulcer per participant; or pressure ulcer‐level data, and then perform multilevel regression to calculate the adjusted effect. We would then combine the adjusted results in the meta‐analysis with those of participant‐level trials (using the generic inverse method), and performed sensitivity analyses ( ). If we had been unsuccessful in obtaining the additional data required, then we would have excluded the trial from the meta‐analysis."

## Differences between this version of the review and the previous version
We have analysed and presented data for the anatomical location of pressure ulcer development if these data were reported by the study authors.
We removed the line 'If heterogeneity was very high (I2 over 75%), we did not plan to pool trials.' While an I2 value above75% is high, studies with higher values are regularly combined, caution is emphasised in relation to any conclusions, and the evidence is downgraded for inconsistency during the GRADE appraisal.

## Contributions of authors
Declan Patton: designed and coordinated the review update; checked the quality of data extraction; checked quality assessment; checked the quality of the statistical analysis; contributed to writing and editing the review update; approved the final review update prior to submission and is a guarantor of the review update.
Zena Moore: conceived the review; extracted data; checked the quality of data extraction; analysed or interpreted data; undertook and checked quality assessment; performed statistical analysis; checked the quality of the statistical analysis; produced the first draft of the review update; contributed to writing and editing the review update; approved the final review update prior to submission and is a guarantor of the review update.
Rachel Walker: contributed to writing and editing the review update; approved the final review update prior to submission.
Wendy Chaboyer: contributed to writing and editing the review update; approved the final review update prior to submission.
Sharon Latimer: contributed to writing and editing the review update; approved the final review update prior to submission.
Fiona Boland: analysed or interpreted data; undertook and checked quality assessment; performed statistical analysis; checked the quality of the statistical analysis; contributed to writing and editing the review update; approved the final review update prior to submission.
Pinar Avsar: extracted data; checked the quality of data extraction; analysed or interpreted data; undertook and checked quality assessment; performed statistical analysis; checked the quality of the statistical analysis; produced the first draft of the review update; contributed to writing and editing the review update; wrote to trial authors/experts/companies and approved the final review update prior to submission.

## Sources of support

## Internal sources
RCSI University of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ireland
This work was supported by RCSI University of Medicine and Health Sciences

## External sources
National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR), UK
This project was supported by the NIHR, via Cochrane Infrastructure funding to Cochrane Wounds until 31 March 2023. The views and opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Evidence Synthesis Programme, NIHR, National Health Service or the Department of Health and Social Care.

## Declarations of interest
Declan Patton: no declarations of interest.
Zena Moore: has received an honorarium for speaking at a professional meeting for 3M, for Smith & Nephew Inc, and for HARTMANN USA, INC; advisor on a wound assessment tool for Smith & Nephew, Inc.
Rachel Walker: has declared a grant to her institution, Griffith University, from Becton, Dickinson and Co. Involvement in conducting a study eligible for inclusion in the review ( ). Therefore, did not make study eligibility decisions about, extract data from, carry out the risk of bias assessment for, or perform GRADE assessments of that study.
Wendy Chaboyer: no declarations of interest.
Sharon Latimer: Wounds Australia membership, editorial board member of Wounds Practice and Research.
Fiona Boland: no declarations of interest.
Pinar Avsar: no declarations of interest.