253envhperEnvironmental Health PerspectivesEnviron Health PerspectAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1325079813250798132507984228300410.1021/EHP.6c00320A New Start
KaufmanJoel D 1
Departments of Environmental &
Occupational Health Sciences, Medicine, and Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195, United States
552026134111–21162026© 2026 American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2026 Apr 17; Accepted 2026 Apr 17; Collection date 2026 May 5.

The May 2026
issue marks the
return of Environmental Health Perspectives (EHP) in a new publishing home. Now published by ACS Publications,
the journal resumes a trajectory that began in 1972 at the National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. EHP did
not simply track the emergence of environmental health sciences (EHS);
it helped organize and shape the field.
In a closing editorial
published by EHP at NIEHS,
I reviewed the journal’s history and briefly noted the somewhat
chaotic forces that led to the end of new submissions in April 2025
and a final issue published in June of last year. We will return to this history in future editorials, but
for now, we can have a fresh start with a new publisher committed
to continuing the journal’s legacy. The journal has reopened
to submissions, is releasing manuscripts that were accepted but not
fully published, and is restoring its archive. Over the next few months,
prior EHP content will reappear on the new journal
site, alongside new manuscripts that are published as they are accepted.
The scope of EHP is unchanged, and we anticipate
that the bar for publication will remain high. The journal will continue
to consider work across the EHS disciplines including toxicology,
epidemiology, exposure science, methods, risk assessment, policy,
and community-based researchfocused on addressing the human
health impacts of environmental factors. We aim to highlight all the
steps along the translational path in environmental health, from scientific
discovery, through careful interdisciplinary investigation, and ultimately
to public health action and evaluation. The expectation, however, is not breadth alone. Papers should generally
provide novel evidence or approaches, elucidate mechanisms, strengthen
inference, or alter how evidence is used in practice or policy. Rigor
and transparency in reporting remain essential. Category names have
been updated to match ACS Publications conventions (e.g., Research
Articles are now Articles, Seminars are Forums, Research Letters are
Letters to the Editor), but the substance of what is considered publishable
has not shifted.
Furthering our emphasis on continuity, we are
reconstituting the
editorial structure. Although we celebrate the retirement of former
Deputy Editor Manolis Kogevinas, we welcome back Sara Adar, Dana Barr,
B. Paige Lawrence, and Jennifer Peel as Executive Editors. Former
Associate Editors are being recruited back to the journal, and additional
appointments will follow.
One of the essential elements of EHP’s
success over the years was the editorial independence that NIEHS leadership
granted to the journal. The journal has been able to focus on rigorous
science and well-supported scientific perspectives. A succession of
NIEHS institute directors, starting with David Rall, made a clear
commitment not to interfere with editorial decisions. ACS Publications
has affirmed that its governance structure maintains that separation:
academic editors retain authority over what is published and how decisions
are made. These guarantees are critical as we navigate the journal’s
future and to assure our readers and authors that editorial decisions
are not influenced by the financial interests of the publisher’s
parent society, the American Chemical Society.
The outpouring
of support for the return of EHP has been a key driver
of this relaunch. While this launch is a source
of celebration, it is important to acknowledge that many valuable
aspects of EHP Publishing at NIEHS have been lost. Most important
is the inability to maintain the editorial and management staff and
contractorsthe people who were primarily responsible for the
quality and integrity of the journal. While most have found new positions,
the human impact of the journal’s closure at NIEHS is real
and represents a loss to the EHS community. There are many other losses
as well. The discontinuation of the Journal of Health and
Pollution, which provided a venue for work from low- and
middle-income countries and Indigenous communities, leaves a gap that
has yet to be filled.
Please join me in thanking ACS Publications
for shepherding EHP into its next chapter. I hope
that the supportive response
from authors, readers, reviewers, and editors will translate into
a successful relaunch for the journal. The measure of this relaunch
will not be the fact of return. It will be whether the journal reestablishes
itself as a trusted venue for reading and publishing consequential
research that advances understanding and management of environmental
risks to improve human health. That outcome will depend on what is
submitted, how it is reviewed, and the standards that are applied.
Welcome back to EHP.

Views expressed
in this editorial are those of the author and not necessarily the
views of the ACS.

## References