pmcJ Law BiosciJ Law Biosci2964jlb101633120jlbJournal of Law and the Biosciences2053-9711Oxford University PressPMC13148527PMC13148527.113148527131485274210000410.1093/jlb/lsag015lsag0151EssayAcademicSubjects/SCI01050AcademicSubjects/LAW00490Patents, genetic resources, and traditional knowledge: the WIPO treaty and the global access and benefit-sharing regime complex
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9499-8670Perron-WelchFrédéric (GRATK Treaty) in May 2024 was a remarkable development in the evolution of the global intellectual property (IP) system. It is the first World IP Organization (WIPO) Treaty initiated by developing countries, and the first to clearly recognize the role of Indigenous Peoples and local communities (IPLC) as holders and stewards of genetic resources (GRs) and associated traditional knowledge (ATK). By April 2026, the Treaty had 44 signatories and three Parties: Albania, Malawi, and Uganda. 
While the GRATK Treaty is fundamentally a patent treaty originating from within a core IP institution, it also forms part of the global access and benefit-sharing (ABS) regime complex. The Treaty overlaps substantively with the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and contains provisions that facilitate regime coherence. Consequently, it can contribute to achieving the aims of other parts of the global ABS regime complex, including the objectives of environmental treaties like the CBD and its Nagoya Protocol on Access to GRs and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising from their Utilization (Nagoya Protocol), public health agreements like the World Health Organization Pandemic Agreement, and human rights instruments like the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP). 
This essay seeks to examine how the GRATK Treaty is situated in, and contributes to, the objectives of the global ABS regime complex, with a focus on benefit appropriation (see below). Section I delimits the global ABS regime complex and its different sub-regimes. Section II discusses the background and origins of the GRATK Treaty, while Section III focuses on the Treaty itself, particularly the disclosure requirement, sanctions and remedies, its relationship with other relevant international instruments, and institutional arrangements.
 
II.

## THE GLOBAL ACCESS AND BENEFIT-SHARING REGIME COMPLEX: CORE INSTITUTIONS AND REGIME SUB-COMPLEXES
Global ABS governance consists of over a dozen international institutions and processes which form the global ABS regime complex (see ). Acknowledging that the regime ‘is complex, evolving, and incompletely theorized’, the CBD is the only institution fully regulating the subject area, addressing both ABS. The CBD affects all other institutions in the regime complex and is affected by them in turn. Interaction among other key institutions is more limited and focused within three sub-complexes (geographical specialization, sectoral specialization, and benefit appropriation). 
The global ABS regime complex is shaped by collective interplay management, where actors and groups try to ‘address and improve institutional interaction and its effects … in pursuit of collective objectives as enshrined in the institutions in question’. This differs in each sub-complex, with their individual interaction logics, distinctive types of division of labor, and varying dynamics. The benefit appropriation sub-regime is ‘characterized by conflict between competing objectives supported by different stakeholders’. Since 2000, collective interplay management has occurred under the aegis of the CBD, the WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (IGC), and the World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of IP Rights (TRIPS) Council. The following sub-sections provide an overview of relevant TRIPS and CBD provisions, the two main treaties defining the benefit appropriation sub-regime, and the most relevant human rights instrument: UNDRIP. 
II.A.

## The Agreement on Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights
One root of the GRATK Treaty lies in the debates over patents over genetically modified life forms during WTO negotiations in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The emergence of modern biotechnology in the 1970s led to the recognition of new domains for patent protection, with an expansive approach adopted by the US Supreme Court in 1980 laying the foundation for biotechnology patents over human-made living organisms. This broad approach was adopted by TRIPS, which sets minimum standards for national patent laws, backed by enforcement provisions and trade disciplines. 
In Article 27(1), WTO Members agree to apply the uniform patentability criteria of novelty, inventive step, and utility, so that all new, non-obvious, and useful inventions are patentable—both products and processes—without discrimination to the field of invention. During negotiations, the question of whether life patents could be forbidden and commercial exploitation prohibited proved particularly controversial. To assuage this, Article 27(2) allows Members to exclude biotechnological inventions from patentability if preventing their commercial exploitation is necessary to protect ordre public or morality—including to protect human, animal, or plant life or health or to avoid significant prejudice to the environment. This is not a low threshold, since the exclusion cannot be simply based on the exploitation being prohibited by law—it engages the issue of necessity. 
Article 27.3(b) establishes Members’ duties on biotechnology. The exception to patentability contained within ‘reflects the outstanding differences, among industrialized countries themselves and between them and developing countries, existing at the time of the TRIPS negotiations about the patenting of plants and animals’. It grants Members the right to exclude ‘products of nature’ from patentability, including plants and animals other than micro-organisms, as well as essentially biological methods of producing plants or animals other than non-biological and microbiological methods. This is likely limited to ‘traditional breeding methods, while preserving the possibility to obtain protection, for instance, on developments based on cell manipulation or, with the advances in biotechnology, the transfer of genes’. The exclusion ceases to operate when a ‘product of nature’ has been turned into a ‘human-made’ ontologically independent, stable ‘object’ like a micro-organism. Members must also protect plant varieties by patents, an effective sui generis system (eg plant breeders’ rights) or any combination thereof. This obligation expanded IP into agriculture—a field that was outside IP protection in many developing countries —but Members retain ‘considerable room to develop their own systems of protection, including the modality and level of protection’. 
Article 27.3(b) is the only TRIPS provision subject to early revision (four years after entry into force). The process began in 1999 and was incorporated into the 2001 Doha Development Agenda, but developed countries took a defensive stance, seeking to limit the revision to reviewing the implementation of the provision, not its revision or amendment. In 2006, a handful of developing countries proposed to move towards text-based negotiations on the disclosure of origin requirement through a new Article 29bis that would create a disclosure obligation on the source of origin of biological resources and traditional knowledge in patent applications, and compliance with national ABS requirements. An updated draft decision consistent with the Nagoya Protocol was submitted for consideration in April 2011, but was not adopted. While this subject still appears on the TRIPS Council agenda, negotiations have stalled due to deep philosophical divides over the relevance of a mandatory disclosure requirement and sui generis IP rights. 

II.B.

## The Convention on Biological Diversity
The second root of the GRATK Treaty lies in the debate on the sharing of benefits from the use of GR first expressed in the 1980 World Conservation Strategy and incorporated into CBD negotiations in 1990. ABS was sensitive for many biodiversity-rich provider countries during negotiations given the historical lack of benefit-sharing from the use of biological resources in the colonial period (‘biopiracy’). On the CBD’s entry into force in 1993, an international ABS regime was established that sought to balance the interests of ‘user’ and ‘provider’ countries as part what has been called the ‘grand bargain’. The regime’s aim is established in the CBD’s third objective: the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of GR, building on appropriate access to GR, and appropriate transfer of relevant technologies. Appropriate access and appropriate transfer must consider all rights over GR and technologies, and appropriate funding should be provided. Articles 8(j), 15, 16, and 19 and elaborate the substantive core of the ABS regime. 
1.

## Article 8(J): Traditional Knowledge
The CBD recognizes the key role of IPLC in in situ conservation through their knowledge, innovations, and practices in Article 8(j). Parties commit to, as far as possible and as appropriate, subject to national law:
respect, preserve and maintain knowledge, innovations and practices [TKIP] of indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and promote their wider application with the approval and involvement of the holders of … [TKIP] and encourage the equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of … [TKIP].
Article 8(j) is the main avenue for acknowledging the contributions of traditional knowledge and IPLC to CBD objectives, functioning as a guideline that leaves the particulars of implementation and interpretation to States and the Conference of the Parties (COP). COP guidelines have been adopted that elaborate this provision, most recently the Mo’otz Kuxtal Guidelines. COP 16 elevated Article 8(j)’s importance by establishing a permanent Subsidiary Body on Article 8(j) and Other Provisions of the Convention Related to IPLC that first met in October 2025. 

2.

## Article 15: Access to Genetic Resources
The foundation for ABS is laid in Article 15, which elaborates on the first part of the CBD’s third objective: the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of GR, including by appropriate access to GR, taking into account all rights over GR. Article 15(1) elaborates the sovereign right to control access to GR based on national law, counterbalanced by the duty to facilitate access to GR for environmentally sound purposes in Article 15(2). The concept of ‘country of origin’ or ‘source’ emerges in Article 15(3), while Articles 15(4)–(5) establish that access must be based on mutually agreed terms (MAT) and prior informed consent (PIC). Article 15(6) calls for GR providing countries’ participation in scientific research, while Article 15(7) creates the obligation of fair and equitable benefit-sharing from utilization. 

3.

## Article 16: Access to and Transfer of Technology
Article 16 addressing technology transfer is controversial, complex and ambiguous, reflecting a political compromise expressing ‘the broad consensus of the international community that the development, transfer, adaptation and diffusion of technology, and in particular environmentally sound technologies, are crucial for achieving sustainable development’. It forms part of the ‘grand bargain’, as expressed in the second part of the CBD’s third objective: the ‘fair and equitable sharing of the benefits resulting from the utilization of … [GR], including by … appropriate transfer of relevant technologies … taking into account all rights … to technologies’. 
The connection between ABS, technology transfer, and patents is expressed in Article 16(3), which calls on Parties to ensure that provider countries receive access to and transfer of technology using their GR, on MAT—including patent-protected technology—in accordance with international law. The main disagreement has been over the extent of industrialized Parties’ duty to transfer privately owned, patent-protected technologies to developing countries, and State practice has largely limited implementation to benefit-sharing in ABS agreements. 
Article 16(5) calls on Parties to cooperate to ensure that patent rights support and do not run counter to the CBD’s objectives, acknowledging that patents may influence—positively or negatively—attainment of the its goals, implying a need for continued efforts to build synergies between the two legal fields. Parties must cooperate to ensure that the CBD’s objectives are not undermined by patent rights, but the ambit of cooperation is constrained by international and national patent law—particularly TRIPS. 

4.

## Article 19: Handling of Biotechnology and Distribution of its Benefits
Article 19 focuses specifically on ‘biotechnology’, containing two more ABS-relevant provisions. Article 19(1) ‘provides that Parties … are to take measures to include countries that provide … [GR] in biotechnology research activities …’ Article 19(2) calls on Parties to ‘share access to the results and benefits of biotechnology’ by taking ‘all practicable measures to promote and advance priority access on a fair and equitable basis by … Parties, especially developing countries, to the results and benefits arising from biotechnologies based upon … [GR] provided by those Parties … [on MAT]’. This recognizes that GR have value, entitling the providing State to returns that must be preferential, fair and equitable, and mutually agreed.

II.C.

## United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
UNDRIP’s solemn proclamation by the UN General Assembly in 2007 as ‘a standard of achievement to be pursued in a spirit of partnership and mutual respect’ included Article 31, which is ‘the reference point for any credible discussion of the interlink between the cultural and … [IP] rights of Indigenous Peoples’. Article 31(2) requires States to take effective measures to recognize and protect the exercise of certain rights in conjunction with Indigenous Peoples. Article 31(1) defines these as follows:
Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their … traditional knowledge … [and] the manifestations of their sciences, technologies and cultures, including... [GR], seeds, medicines, knowledge of the properties of fauna and flora, oral traditions, [and] literatures …. They also have the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their … [IP] over such … traditional knowledge.
For Indigenous Peoples and some States, the GRATK Treaty negotiations were a way to contribute to achieving Article 31’s aims.

III.

## BACKGROUND AND ORIGINS OF THE GRATK TREATY (1992–2024)
III.A.

## From CBD/TRIPS to the Early Years of the WIPO IGC (1992–2008)
While the misappropriation of GR and ATK by actors in the Global North was not traditionally perceived of as WIPO-appropriate subject matter, the adoption of the CBD in 1992 and TRIPS in 1994 led to a change in dynamics and the emergence of the concept of a disclosure of origin requirement for GR and ATK. The creation of the WIPO Global Issues Division in 1998 led to fact-finding projects on the existence, creation, and protection of folklore, GRs, and Indigenous knowledge as IP, and raised awareness among WIPO Members of these subjects. After the failure of the 1999 WTO Seattle Ministerial Conference, where a proposal had been made to revise TRIPS and introduce a new negotiation mandate on sui generis protection for the traditional knowledge of local or indigenous communities, Colombia introduced a proposal for a disclosure requirement for GR and ATK in patent applications ahead of the WIPO Diplomatic Conference to adopt the PLT. The ensuing impasse was only resolved after the WIPO Director-General proposed a compromise: to establish an IGC as a forum to discuss and address these new normative claims. 
Following the IGC’s creation in 2000, disclosure of origin made it on the IGC 2 agenda in 2001. Yet, demandeurs soon realized that their calls for transparency were being discussed in a venue strongly supportive of the patent system and the interests of patent holders. Indeed, the IGC’s mandate was only exploratory in its early years, focusing on developing a conceptual, philosophical and pragmatic understanding of IP issues in its remit. States focused on identifying core policy objectives and principles for protection within the IP system, and establishing key questions to be answered. In this early period, the IGC also received proposals from States ‘outlining the desired objectives, principles, and substantive elements of the envisioned international framework …’, the most consequential being a 2005 proposal from the European Union (EU) and its Member States advocating for the introduction of a mandatory disclosure requirement in patent applications. 

III.B.

## Evolution of the International Access and Benefit-Sharing Regime (2002–10)
CBD COP 6 in April 2002 adopted the Bonn Guidelines on Access to GRs and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising out of their Utilization (Bonn Guidelines) to clarify the benefit-sharing provisions found in the CBD in a voluntary manner. The Bonn Guidelines established the connection between CBD Articles 8(j), 15, 16, and 19, and mention a patent disclosure requirement in the context of adopting appropriate legal, administrative, or policy measures to support compliance with PIC and MAT, including measures encouraging the disclosure of the country of origin of the GR and the origin of traditional knowledge, innovations, and practices of IPLC in applications for IP rights. 
This was followed by a call at the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) to ‘promote the wide implementation of and continued work on the … [Bonn Guidelines] as an input to assist [CBD] Parties … when developing and drafting legislative, administrative or policy measures on … [ABS], and contracts and other arrangements under … [MAT for ABS]’. The WSSD also called for States to negotiate, within the CBD framework and bearing in mind the Bonn Guidelines, ‘an international regime to promote and safeguard the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of … [GR]’. 
From 2004–10, a broad coalition of developing countries advocated for a mandatory disclosure requirement in patent applications as part of the future international ABS regime. However, developed countries and relevant private sector interests rejected this, pointing to ongoing talks at the WTO and WIPO as the relevant institutions. As a result, the Nagoya Protocol does not contain a disclosure requirement, but Parties can adopt such a requirement as a mechanism to fulfill their duty to monitor GR utilization in their jurisdiction. The Protocol also allows Parties to develop and implement ‘other relevant international agreements’ if they are supportive of, and do not run counter to, the objectives of the CBD and Nagoya Protocol—like the GRATK Treaty. This made some developing countries ‘more favorably inclined to engage in the IGC negotiations’. 

III.C.

## IGC Negotiations: From Text-Based Negotiations to the GRATK Treaty (2009–24)
IGC discussions made little progress until 2009, when developing countries pushed for an expedited start to formal negotiations on a binding instrument/instruments on GR and ATK. At IGC 14 in mid-2009, the African Group proposed to start text-based negotiations on a legally binding treaty or treaties, which failed to reach consensus due to its proposed legally binding nature. Consensus was achieved on the 2010–11 IGC mandate by focusing text-based negotiations on an ‘international legal instrument’ rather than a legally binding treaty. This was a major shift in the IGC’s work, raising the expectations of developing countries and IPLC that misuse and misappropriation of their genetic and cultural resources would be addressed by WIPO. It also demonstrated a convergence of positions between developing and some developed countries, especially developing countries with endemic GRs and significant IPLC, and developed countries with disclosure requirements like some European countries and Switzerland. Yet, some States and stakeholders maintained their pursuit of a nonbinding instrument throughout, including at the Diplomatic Conference. The USA in particular did not sign the Final Act adopting the GRATK Treaty. 
Friction in balancing demands for global justice, trade and investment disciplines, technology and development priorities, and international politics slowed progress in the text-based negotiations given WIPO Members’ differing perspectives on different elements of justice, and the role of international law in addressing them. It took until 2022 before the African Group was able to trigger a vote at the Sixty-Third WIPO General Assembly by leveraging unrelated geopolitical developments in Ukraine, leading to agreement on convening a Diplomatic Conference in 2024 In May 2024, aiming to adopt a legally binding instrument developed from within the global IP system, Members debated the Basic Proposal over two weeks at the Diplomatic Conference, steered by Guardrail Principles. Most of the Basic Proposal remained unchanged, but some modifications and deletions led to a more modest compromise striking a fine balance between the international harmonization of patent procedure and the exercise of national sovereignty. 

IV.

## THE GRATK TREATY: FACILITATING INTERACTION IN THE GLOBAL ABS REGIME COMPLEX TO COMBAT BIOPIRACY
The GRATK Treaty aims ‘to facilitate equitable and transparent access to genetic and cultural resources, benefit-sharing with their rightful holders, and a reduction in the grant of patents improperly covering such resources’. However, it is a path-dependent instrument designed to fit within the existing benefit appropriation sub-regime, not a revolutionary one rebalancing how benefits from GR and ATK are appropriated. The Treaty does not create a sui generis right to GR or ATK—instead, it is the first WIPO Treaty to not create a positive IP right. But, its provisions can improve the functioning of the benefit appropriation sub-regime to combat biopiracy, reducing conflict between competing objectives and increasing mutual supportiveness between its core instruments. It has been argued that the Treaty contains only two substantive provisions: Articles 3 (Disclosure Requirement) and 5 (Sanctions and Remedies). Consequently, the following subsections focus on Articles 3 and 5 considering their relevance to facilitating regime interaction in the benefit appropriation regime sub-complex, the relevance of the principle of mutual supportiveness in Article 7, and the institutional framework enabling the Treaty’s implementation in Articles 10 and 11.
IV.A.

## The Disclosure Requirement (Article 3)
Article 3 addresses the pre-grant phase of patent prosecution—the application and examination stages. Its main obligation requires Parties to impose a duty on applicants to disclose the country of origin or source in cases where a claimed invention is ‘based on’ GR or ATK (or both). This ‘validates Indigenous ways of knowing and fulfills a moral imperative to reflect the value of GRs and [A]TK in legal systems’. A two-pronged test establishes whether an invention is ‘based on’ GR or ATK. For GR, it must constitute an essential element of the claimed invention, and second, the invention must demonstrably rely on its specific properties. This limits disclosure to only those GR that are essential to the claimed invention. Where they are essential, Parties must require applicants to disclose either the country of origin of the GR or the source if the country of origin is unknown/does not apply. This reflects the narrow trigger supported by non-demandeurs, who were unequivocal in their stance that digital sequence information (DSI) is not covered by the Treaty. 
For ATK, the trigger requires that the ATK is necessary for the claimed invention, and that the invention depends on ATK—which is less stringent language than for GR. When these conditions are met, Parties must require applicants to disclose the IPLC from which they obtained the ATK, the source of the ATK if they do not know the IPLC, or the source was not an IPLC. In the former case, the applicant should disclose the IPLC providing ATK ‘as applicable’, but this does not make disclosure of the IPLC voluntary. Rather, it speaks to the diversity of circumstances and contexts in which ATK is held—including with ‘Indigenous Peoples in the developed countries of the world whose claims to indigeneity are already recognized, as well as their counterparts in the developing countries whose claims to indigeneity may be inchoate and contested but who fit within the less technical category of “local communities,” as used in the … [CBD]’. If the applicant does not know the IPLC, or the origin was not an IPLC, the source must be provided. 
A limited exception is provided for cases where applicants are unaware of the origin or source of GR and/or ATK. Where this is the case, Parties must require applicants to (i) declare their ignorance, and (ii) affirm that the declaration’s content is true and correct to their best knowledge. This article was elaborated at the Diplomatic Conference to ensure some protection against the submission of misleading or knowingly false declarations, making it more than a ‘mere declaration’ without ‘any duty of undertaking best efforts to obtain the required information or other qualified criteria in case of lack of knowledge’. By referring to the applicant’s best knowledge, it suggests that due diligence must underlie the declaration, but does not establish ‘the scope of the applicant’s duty to investigate in cases where the required information is not evident or easily accessible’. Parties thus have some leeway in establishing the appropriate procedure or practices for due diligence, which may be more or less stringent. 
Parties must provide patent applicants with guidance on how to meet the disclosure requirement, which could be achieved through clear, standardized guidelines issued by patent offices, and support to applicants in the pre-grant stage. Applicants must also be given the chance to rectify a failure to include the minimum information required by Articles 3.1 and 3.2 or correct any erroneous or incorrect disclosures. This is broadly consistent with the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), which allows rectification of obvious errors and the amendment of claims. However, Article 3.5 prevents Parties from requiring patent or IP offices to verify the authenticity of information disclosed by the applicant as offices do not typically have the competencies required for verification—their competence pertains to prior art. This does not prohibit Parties from having a different governmental entity verify the authenticity of disclosure like a competent national authority under the Nagoya Protocol. 
Parties must make publicly available the information disclosed under Articles 3.1–3.3 according to established patent procedures, while also protecting confidential information. Regrettably, the Treaty does not define ‘confidential information’, creating constructive ambiguity around its meaning. Read neutrally, it could refer to the type of confidential information covered by trade secrets or other IP rights, or information that Indigenous Peoples prefer to leave undisclosed. As this provision underpins the Treaty’s objective of increasing transparency, Parties will need to carefully delineate the limits to disclosure where applicants express an interest in confidentiality. Inspiration could be drawn from approaches adopted for implementing user measures under the Nagoya Protocol like EU Regulation 511/2014. 

IV.B.

## Sanctions and Remedies (Article 5)
Article 5 strikes a fine balance between the interests of demandeur and non-demandeur States. It ‘reflects the high-stakes exchange between demandeurs’ inclination for stronger consequences, notably patent revocation as a post-grant sanction for non-disclosure … [compared to] the non-demandeurs’ slap-on-the-wrist or persuasive approach that offers an opportunity for rectifying the failure to disclose information …’ While the desire of non-demandeurs for limits to penalties under patent law was achieved (ie universally prescribing patent invalidation for non-compliance),  demandeurs secured respect for existing national and regional disclosure measures establishing sanctions for non-compliance. This reflects a careful tradeoff between demandeurs and non-demandeurs. However, the lack of a floor for sanctions is a significant shortcoming.
If the Treaty enters into force, Parties will need to establish sanctions and remedies for non-compliance with the disclosure requirement and establish enforcement procedures. Parties must establish appropriate, effective and proportionate legal, administrative, and/or policy measures to address failures to disclose. Both pre-grant and post-grant sanctions and remedies can be used, but Parties must consider their compatibility with their obligations under other IP treaties like TRIPS. However, before implementing sanctions or directing remedies, Parties must provide an opportunity to rectify a failure to disclose the required information. Applicants must be allowed to correct and supplement the information initially provided, with a deadline to correct errors in disclosure. To increase the incentive for applicants to correctly disclose information in the application or during patent prosecution, Article 5.2(bis) allows Parties to exclude cases of fraudulent conduct or intent from the right of rectification, as prescribed by national law. But, once a patent has been granted, Parties cannot revoke, invalidate or render unenforceable conferred patent rights solely because an applicant failed to disclose the information specified in Article 3. 
This confirms that the disclosure requirement aims to ensure transparency through a formality requirement rather than a substantive requirement that creates grounds for patent invalidation. However, Parties can use patent law remedies where there is more than a mere failure to disclose, ie where a subjective accusation of deception can be proven. To address this, Parties can provide for post grant sanctions or remedies where there has been fraudulent intent regarding the patent disclosure requirement, in accordance with national law. Referring to national law maintains flexibility in implementation as Members do not have a common understanding of ‘fraudulent intent’, but it is not a low threshold since the burden of proving intent rests with the State or interested third party challenging the patent—not the patent holder. 

IV.C.

## Relationship with Other International Agreements
Article 7 is very concise, stating simply that the Treaty must be implemented in a mutually supportive manner with other relevant international agreements. Mutual supportiveness is particularly important considering the complexity of international norm-setting on GR and ATK, where greater coordination and cross-fertilization are needed between the global IP and ABS regimes. In recent treaties, it has been transformed from a policy objective to a specific obligation. The principle has multiple dimensions, ranging from treaty interpretation, to international law-making, to the process of treaty implementation. 
Two footnotes clarify the application of the principle of mutual supportiveness, which proved surprisingly contentious at the Diplomatic Conference. The first calls for amendment of the PCT Regulations or Administrative Instructions, reflecting mutual supportiveness in its law-making dimension, which places a duty on States ‘to pursue good faith negotiations aimed at concluding agreements capable of accommodating the different concerns underlying a given legal situation’. The second footnotes states that ‘nothing in this Treaty shall derogate from or modify any other international agreement’—an addition that resulted from concerns over the lack of an agreed definition for ‘mutual supportiveness’ and whether it might require the renegotiation of existing treaties (ie TRIPS). This establishes that the law-making dimension of the principle is confined to rules under the PCT, and that mutual supportiveness is mainly referred to in the GRATK Treaty as an interpretative principle that aims to avoid conflicts and redundancies between treaties, connecting with the principle of systemic integration as one of its objectives. 
This facet of mutual supportiveness invites ‘a conciliatory reading of potentially conflicting rules …’ and calls for greater ex post synchronization between treaty regimes to ensure that the international patent regime positively and actively promotes the objectives of the Protocol in a mutually supportive manner. The Treaty’s relationship with the CBD and Nagoya Protocol was an important part of the negotiating context for many WIPO Members. The Nagoya Protocol contains guidance on developing and implementing other relevant international instruments, permitting agreements that support and do not run counter to the objectives of the CBD and Protocol. It must be implemented in a mutually supportive manner with other relevant international instruments, including the GRATK Treaty if it enters into force. Ex post synchronization will occur at the GRATK Treaty Assembly, the CBD COP and Nagoya Protocol COP-MOP. 
Parties to the Nagoya Protocol must also take appropriate measures to monitor and enhance transparency about the utilization of GR to support its compliance provisions. This includes the designation of one or more checkpoints to collect or receive relevant information, including on the source of the GR. While Parties must designate at least one checkpoint, the Protocol leaves open which organization will play that role. Checkpoints must monitor the utilization of GR ‘to support the possible detection of user’s violations of domestic ABS frameworks in other countries’ and be supported by domestic measures to obtain relevant information from users, like measures implementing a patent disclosure requirement. Although nothing prevents Parties from designating patent or IP offices as checkpoints, few have done so, and the Treaty is unlikely to change this. An IP checkpoint could be effective and relevant, but care is needed to ensure effective disclosure while not causing excessive delays in patent prosecution. 
Parties to the Nagoya Protocol must take appropriate, effective and proportionate measures to address non-compliance with information requirements, aligning with Article 5.1 of the GRATK Treaty, but only for GR. Disclosed information on GR must be provided to relevant national authorities, the Party providing access, and the ABS Clearing-House, as appropriate and without prejudice to the protection of confidential information. The Treaty situates this duty in the relevant field of law, mandating public disclosure while protecting confidential information according to patent procedures. Lastly, the Protocol requires designated checkpoints to be effective and be relevant to the utilization of GR or the collection of relevant information at all stages of research, development, innovation, pre-commercialization or commercialization. 

IV.D.

## Institutional Arrangements
Articles 10 and 11 of the Treaty address its institutional arrangements, with the former focusing on the workings of the Assembly, and the latter addressing the functioning of the international bureau. This section focuses on Article 10, which establishes an Assembly to govern the implementation of the Treaty. Typically, WIPO governing bodies are State driven processes, but Article 10 also encourages the effective participation of representatives of IPLC as observers to the Assembly and invites Parties to consider financial arrangements for their participation. This helps embed the effective participation of IPLC into the Treaty’s institutional framework, ensuring ‘that their voices, advice, concerns, insights, and objections will not be … [missing] in the development and shaping of the treaty’. 
The Assembly is authorized to undertake a host of activities, including ‘all matters concerning the maintenance and development of this Treaty as well as its application and operation’, the admission of select intergovernmental organizations as a party, conducting the review referred to in Article 8, deciding on convening a Diplomatic Conference to revise the Treaty, and establishing technical working groups as appropriate. 
Within four years of the Treaty’s entry into force, the Parties will review ‘the scope and contents of this Treaty, addressing issues such as the possible extension of the disclosure requirement in Article 3 to other areas of IP and to derivatives and addressing other issues arising from new and emerging technologies that are relevant for the application of this Treaty’. This means that the Treaty’s scope could be broadened through a Diplomatic Conference to include claimed inventions based on a derivative or DSI. This could facilitate resource mobilization for the new Cali Fund for the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits from the Use of Digital Sequence Information on GRs established by CBD COP 16. 

V.

## CONCLUSION
The international IP regime establishes common rules that significantly shape the global patent system but only regulate part of the subject matter—leaving considerable leeway for States to legislate in alignment with national interests and priorities. These flexibilities are integral to the IP system and resulted in the adoption of over thirty patent disclosure requirements at national and regional levels before the adoption of the GRATK Treaty. But, biopiracy cannot be tackled effectively solely under these diverse national and regional laws because most biotechnology patents are sought and obtained in a few economically dominant jurisdictions that do not require disclosure of origin of GR or ATK, making it a logical area for international norm-setting and harmonization. 
Successful IP treaties in sensitive policy areas often address subjects that are difficult or impossible to address only under national law due to technical, political or economic circumstances, and harmonization has historically been used to respond to challenges that require international solutions. The Treaty is an important step forward in the harmonization of rules on disclosure of origin, but given the degree of disagreement over disclosure, extensive changes to the benefit appropriation sub-regime were unlikely. Consequently, a significant rebalancing away from appropriation towards fair and equitable benefit-sharing did not take place. A path-dependent development that did not disrupt the existing division of labour between core sub-regime institutions was the most likely outcome, which is reflected in the fact that the Treaty strongly resembles the 2005 EU proposal at the IGC for a mandatory patent disclosure requirement and the 2006 TRIPS proposal for an Article 29bis, despite taking nearly two decades more to finalize. 
The Treaty maintains a formal separation between patent law and ABS, focusing on issues under WIPO’s institutional mandate—eg creating a more effective, transparent, and high-quality global patent system and avoiding the erroneous granting of patents. It does not require applicants to furnish proof of ABS compliance, and limits the sanctions and remedies applicable to a failure to comply with the disclosure requirement. However, disclosure supports compliance with national and regional ABS laws by increasing transparency and making it easier to track and monitor the use of GR and ATK in patented inventions. Increased transparency should contribute to the objectives of the global ABS regime by ensuring that patent applicants adhere to its rules, promoting the legal and ethical use of GR and ATK and compensation for provider countries and IPLC including through technology transfer as called for in the CBD and Nagoya Protocol. But, regardless of whether the Treaty enters into force, the growing interconnectedness of the global patent system means that detecting misappropriation continues to become easier, as the internet democratizes access to patent information and makes it readily accessible to a global audience, including competent national authorities under the CBD and Nagoya Protocol. 
While the CBD regime remains at the core of global ABS governance, the Nagoya Protocol allows Parties to develop and implement international agreements that are supportive of and do not run counter to its objectives and the CBD’s. Many Parties negotiated the GRATK Treaty with this in mind and sought to enable greater regime interaction within the benefit appropriation sub-complex. As a result, the Treaty does not create or enhance inconsistencies or conflict with other elemental regimes; its entry into force would create greater stability in the inter-institutional equilibrium. But to be effective, the Treaty must be ratified, implemented and enforced by WIPO Members and national IP offices where the commercialization of patented bio-inventions is most likely and profitable. Only once this occurs will it contribute to aligning global patenting practices with the objectives of the global ABS regime. Crucially, its effectiveness ‘curiously depends on the actions of [S]tates least amenable to its existence (and least likely to ratify it), and on IP offices with clients whose interests are most likely in tension with robust compliance with mandatory disclosure’. 
It is too soon to tell whether the Treaty will be successful. So far, most signatories are developing countries, and the two industrialized signatories are relatively insignificant in the biotechnology patent landscape. Life sciences and IP lawyers, scholars, policymakers, researchers, innovators, and IPLC should closely monitor developments as biotechnology companies, pharmaceutical firms, and agribusinesses using GR and ATK will need to integrate traceability mechanisms to comply with disclosure rules. But, with the biotechnology sector shifting away from using tangible genetic material towards using intangible genetic information, big data and artificial intelligence, rightsholders and stakeholders should expect continued debate and negotiation on this topic for years to come. 

## Footnotes
1WIPO Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge, opened for signature May 24, 2024, WIPO Lex No. TRT/GRATK/001 (not in force) [hereinafter GRATK Treaty].
2Ian Goss, 25 Years in the Making: The WIPO Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge, 66 Harv. Int’l L.J. 35, 73 (2025).
3GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art 2: ‘genetic material [ie any material of plant, animal, microbial or other origin containing functional units of heredity] of actual or potential value’. Per art 2, note 1, this does not include human GR, in line with how the term is understood in the CBD.
4Goss, supra note 2, at 38.
5WIPO, WIPO Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge, WIPO-Administered Treaties, https://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/gratk/index.html (accessed Sep. 28, 2025).
6Sebastian Oberthür & Justyna Pożarowska, Managing Institutional Complexity and Fragmentation: The Nagoya Protocol and the Global Governance of Genetic Resources, 13 Glob. Environ. Politics 100, 107 (2013); Ruth L. Okediji, Making Room at the Table: Theoretical Foundations and Practical Implications of the WIPO Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge, 66 Harv. Int’l L.J. 1, 23 (2025).
7Convention on Biological Diversity, opened for signature Jun. 5, 1992, 1760 U.N.T.S. 79 (entered into force Dec. 29, 1993) [hereinafter CBD].
8Oberthür & Pożarowska, supra note 6, at 106–8; Okediji, supra note 6, at 4.
9Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity, opened for signature Oct. 29, 2010, 3008 U.N.T.S. 3 (entered into force Oct. 12, 2014) [hereinafter Nagoya Protocol].
10WHO Pandemic Agreement, 64 I.L.M. 1455 (not open for signature).
11Resolution 61/295. United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, UN Doc. A/RES/61/295 (2007) [hereinafter UNDRIP].
12Okediji, supra note 6, at 5.
13Oberthür & Pożarowska, supra note 6, at 106. These were acknowledged in Nagoya Protocol negotiations, including through CBD Conference of the Parties (COP) decisions.
14Elisa Morgera, Inter-State Benefit-Sharing from Access to Genetic Resources, in  Fair and Equitable Benefit-sharing in International Law 46, 46 (Oxford University Press 2024).
15Oberthür & Pożarowska, supra note 6, at 106.
16
Id.

17
Id. at 106–9.
18
Id. at 103.
19
Id. at 106.
20
Id. at 108.
21Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, opened for signature Apr. 15, 1994, 1869 U.N.T.S. 299 (entered into force Jan. 1, 1995) [hereinafter TRIPS].
22Charles Lawson, Relationship Between the Work of the WIPO IGC and Other Forums, in  Protecting Traditional Knowledge 56, 67–69 (Daniel F Robinson et al. eds., Routledge 2017).
23Frédéric Perron-Welch, Bio-Based Innovation and the Global Patent System: Exploring the WIPO Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge, 74 GRUR Int’l 436, 437 (2025).
24
Diamond v Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303 (1980); Rebecca S. Eisenberg, The Story of Diamond v Chakrabarty: Technological Change and the Subject Matter Boundaries of the Patent System, in  Intellectual Property Stories 327, 348–57 (Jane C. Ginsburg & Rochelle Cooper Dreyfuss eds., Foundation Press 2006); Naomi Hawkins, Patents and the Public Interest: A Multi-Faceted Approach, in  Patenting Biotechnical Innovation: Eligibility, Ethics and Public Interest 196, 196 (Naomi Hawkins ed., Edward Elgar 2022).
25J.H. Reichman, Universal Minimum Standards of Intellectual Property Protection under the TRIPS Component of the WTO Agreement, 29 Int. Lawyer 345, 347 (1995).
26Andreas Neef & Susanne Reyes-Knoche, Article 27, in WTO - Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 469, 482–86 (Peter-Tobias Stoll et al. eds., Brill Nijhoff 2009).
27Susanne Reyes-Knoche, Article 27.2, in WTO - Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 489, 490 (Peter-Tobias Stoll et al. eds., Brill Nijhoff 2009).
28Neef & Reyes-Knoche, supra note 26, at 482.
29
Senai W. Andemariam, The Concept of Necessity in Other WTO Agreements, the TBT, SPS and TRIPS Agreements in Particular 273–74, 314–19 (Brill Nijhoff 2024).
30
Carlos Maria Correa, Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights: A Commentary on the TRIPS Agreement 284 (Oxford University Press 2nd ed. 2020).
31Michael S. Carolan, The Mutability of Biotechnology Patents: From Unwieldy Products of Nature to Independent ‘Object/s’, 27 Theory Cult. Soc. 110, 113–8 (2010).
32Susanne Reyes-Knoche, Article 27.3 Lit. b, in WTO - Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 501, 504–7 (Peter-Tobias Stoll et al. eds., Brill Nijhoff 2009).
33
Correa, supra note 30, at 286.
34Carolan, supra note 31, at 118.
35Reyes-Knoche, supra note 32, at 507–8.
36
Correa, supra note 30, at 286.
37
Id.

38
Id. at 287.
39
Id. at 288; Chidi Oguamanam, The WIPO Treaty on Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge: A Negotiating, Contextual and Conceptual Appraisal, 43 B.U. Int’l L.J. 321, 337 (2025).
40
Doha Work Programme – The Outstanding Implementation Issue on the Relationship Between the Trips Agreement and the Convention on Biological Diversity, WTO Doc. IP/C/W/474; Lawson, supra note 22, at 66–67.
41
Draft Decision to Enhance Mutual Supportiveness Between the TRIPS Agreement and the Convention on Biological Diversity, WTO Doc. TN/C/W/59.
42Reyes-Knoche, supra note 32, at 509; Jagjit Plahe et al., Review of Article 27.3(b) and the Patenting of Life Forms: Hitting a BRIC Wall in the WTO?, 26 Int’l Negot. 289, 299–305 (2021); Lawson, supra note 22, at 67.
43IUCN et al., World Conservation Strategy: Living Resource Conservation for Sustainable Development 57 (IUCN 1980); see further Cyril De Klemm, Conservation of Species: The Need for a New Approach, 9 Env. Policy Law 118, 124–28 (1982).
44UNEP, Final Report of the Sub-Working Group on Biotechnology, UN Doc. UNEP/Bio.Div/SWGB.1/5/Rev.1, 7–12.
45See, eg Ikechi Mgbeoji, Global Biopiracy: Patents, Plants and Indigenous Knowledge (University of British Columbia 2006).
46Kerry Ten Kate & Sarah A. Laird, Biodiversity and Business: Coming to Terms with the ‘Grand Bargain’, 76 International Affairs 241 (2000); Timothy J. Hodges & Anne Daniel, Promises and Pitfalls: First Steps on the Road to the International ABS Regime, 14 Rev. Eur. Comp. Int’l Envtl. Law 148 (2005).
47CBD, supra note 7, art. 1.
48
Id.
49
Thomas Greiber et al., An Explanatory Guide to the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-Sharing 8–10 (IUCN 2012).
50Oguamanam, supra note 39, at 336.
51
Chidi Oguamanam, International Law and Indigenous Knowledge: Intellectual Property, Plant Biodiversity, and Traditional Medicine 81 (University of Toronto Press 2006); Oguamanam, supra note 39, at 336.
52CBD Secretariat, Mo’ otz Kuxtal Voluntary guidelines for the development of mechanisms, legislation or other appropriate initiatives to ensure the ‘prior and informed consent’, ‘free, prior and informed consent’ or ‘approval and involvement’, depending on national circumstances, of indigenous peoples and local communities for accessing their knowledge, innovations and practices, for fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of their knowledge, innovations and practices relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, and for reporting and preventing unlawful appropriation of traditional knowledge (CBD Secretariat 2019).
53CBD COP Decision 16/5. Institutional arrangements for the full and effective participation of indigenous peoples and local communities in the work undertaken under the Convention on Biological Diversity, UN Doc CBD/COP/DEC/16/5, para 1.
54CBD, supra note 7, art. 1.
55
Id. art. 15(3): ‘For the purpose of this Convention, the … [GR] being provided by a … Party, as referred to in this Article and Articles 16 and 19, are only those that are provided by … Parties that are countries of origin of such resources or by the Parties that have acquired the … [GR] in accordance with this Convention’.
56Jorge Cabrera Medaglia & Frederic Perron-Welch, The Benefit-Sharing Principle in International Law, 14 JIPLP 62, 65 (2019).
57Mara Ntona, Technology Transfer, in  Biodiversity and Nature Protection Law 358, 358 (Elisa Morgera & Jona Razzaque eds., Edward Elgar 2017).
58CBD, supra note 7, art. 1.
59Elisa Morgera, Inter-State Benefit-Sharing as Scientific and Technological Cooperation, in  Fair and Equitable Benefit-sharing in International Law 95, 104–5 (Oxford University Press 2024).
60Ntona, supra note 57, at 366–67.
61
Lyle Glowka et al., A Guide to the Convention on Biological Diversity 91 (IUCN 1994).
62CBD, supra note 7, art. 2: ‘any technological application that uses biological systems, living organisms, or derivatives thereof, to make or modify products or processes for specific use’.
63Kathryn Garforth et al., Biosafety, the Cartagena Protocol, and Sustainable Development, in  Legal Aspects of Implementing the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 19, 21 (Marie-Claire Cordonier Segger et al. eds., Cambridge University Press 2013). See CBD, supra note 7, art. 19(1), which establishes that these can be legislative, administrative or policy measures.
64
Id.

65UNDRIP, supra note 11, preamble.
66Mauro Barelli, The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: A Human Rights Framework for Intellectual Property Rights, in  Indigenous Intellectual Property: A Handbook of Contemporary Research 48 (Matthew Rimmer ed., Edward Elgar 2015).
67UNDRIP, supra note 11, art 31(2).
68Goss, supra note 2, at 39.
69See Frédéric Hendrickx et al., Access to Genetic Resources: A Legal Analysis, in  Biodiplomacy: Genetic Resources and International Relations 139, 148 (Vicente Sánchez & Calestous Juma eds., African Centre for Technology Studies 1994); The Crucible Group, People, Plants, and Patents: The Impact of Intellectual Property on Biodiversity, Conservation, Trade, and Rural Society 68 (International Development Research Centre 1994); Oguamanam, supra note 39, at 333–34.
70Lawson, supra note 22, at 71; Goss, supra note 2, at 40.
71Ahmed Abdel-Latif, Revisiting the Creation of the IGC: The Limits of Constructive Ambiguity?, in  Protecting Traditional Knowledge: The WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore 10, 13 (Daniel Robinson et al. eds., Routledge 2017).
72María Vásquez Callo-Müller et al., The WIPO Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge: Situating a Landmark Development in International Intellectual Property Governance, 73 GRUR Int’l 1128, 1130 (2024); Goss, supra note 2, at 40.
73Goss, supra note 2, at 40; Oguamanam, supra note 39, at 341.
74
Report, WIPO Doc. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/2/16.
75Abdel-Latif, supra note 71, at 24.
76Oguamanam, supra note 39, at 342.
77Goss, supra note 2, at 40.
78
Id. at 41.
79
Disclosure of Origin or Source of Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge in Patent Applications, WIPO Doc. WIPO/GRTKF/IC/8/11, Annex, 5. Per Id. at 41, this proposal played an important role during the negotiation phase (2010–24).
80Decision VI/24. Access and Benefit-Sharing as Related to Genetic Resources, UN Doc UNEP/CBD/COP/VI/24, Annex [hereinafter Bonn Guidelines].
81Cabrera Medaglia & Perron-Welch, supra note 56, at 66.
82Bonn Guidelines, supra note 50, para. 16(d)(ii). Id.
83Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, UN Doc A/CONF.199/20, Resolution 2, Annex, para 44(o); Jorge Cabrera Medaglia, The Relationship Between the Access and Benefit Sharing International Regime and Other International Instruments: The World Trade Organization and the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants, 10 Sustainable Dev. Law Policy 24 (2010).
84Including the African Group, the Group of Like-Minded Mega-Diverse Countries, the Group of Latin American and Caribbean Countries, and the Group of Like-Minded Asia Pacific Countries. See Oberthür & Pożarowska, supra note 6, at 111.
85
Id.

86Claudio Chiarolla, Intellectual Property from a Global Environmental Law Perspective: Lessons from Patent Disclosure Requirements for Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge, 8 Transnatl. Environ. Law 503, 505 (2019).
87Nagoya Protocol, supra note 9, art. 4(2).
88Okediji, supra note 6, at 23–24.
89Goss, supra note 2, at 41.
90
Id.

91
Id. at 42.
92
Id.

93
Id.

94Peter K. Yu, WIPO Negotiations on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge, 57 Akron Law Rev. 277, 306 (2024).
95
Final Act, WIPO Doc. GRATK/DC/9, 2.
96Chiarolla, supra note 86, at 504–5; Morgera, supra note 14, at 50.
97WIPO, Basic Proposal for an International Legal Instrument Relating to Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge Associated with Genetic Resources, WIPO Doc. GRATK/DC/3 [hereinafter Basic Proposal]; Goss, supra note 2, at 59–60; Okediji, supra note 6, at 16–18.
98Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 437.
99Yu, supra note 94, at 282–83. As Yu notes at 293, Art. 4 on exceptions and limitations was the only substantive provision from the Basic Proposal that failed to make it into the Treaty.
100Goss, supra note 2, at 38.
101Oberthür & Pożarowska, supra note 6, at 108, notes that while the CBD promotes the fair and equitable sharing of benefits between providers and users of GR and ATK, TRIPS favors benefit appropriation by users by ensuring IP rights for their inventions without proof of legal access or benefit-sharing, and WIPO treaties tend to support effective IP protection.
102Richard Milchior, WIPO Treaty on IP, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge: A New International Agreement, But Does It Really Create a Full New IP Right?, 20 JIPLP 129, 129 (2025).
103Okediji, supra note 6, at 5.
104Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 442. See further Alan J. Morrison, Biotechnology Law: A Primer for Scientists 60–8 (Columbia University Press 2019).
105GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, arts. 3(1) and (2); Okediji, supra note 6, at 2.
106
Id. at 19.
107GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 2; Id. at 3.
108GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 2; Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 442.
109
Id. art. 3(1)(a)-(b). Per Id. art. 3 footnote 2, if there is more than one country of origin, the applicant must only disclose the providing country.
110Oguamanam, supra note 39, at 358. For more on DSI, see CBD COP Decision 15/9. Digital Sequence Information on Genetic Resources, UN Doc. CBD/COP/DEC/15/9 (2022).
111GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 2; Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 442.
112
Id. art. 3(2)(a)-(b); Id.
113
Id. art. 3(2)(a).
114
Id. art. 3 footnote 3.
115Chidi Oguamanam, Documentation and Digitization of Traditional Knowledge and Intangible Cultural Heritage, in  Intangible Cultural Heritage and Intellectual Property: Communities, Cultural Diversity and Sustainable Development 357, 360 (Toshiyuki Kono ed., Intersentia 2009).
116GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 2 defines source non-exhaustively as ‘any source from which the applicant has obtained the … [ATK], such as scientific literature, publicly accessible databases, patent applications and patent publications’.
117
Id. art. 3(3). This is similar to a statutory declaration, where an intentionally false statement can attract legal consequences, see Christian Prip et al., The Australian ABS Framework: A Model Case for Bioprospecting? 10 (Fridjof Nansen Institute 2014).
118Pedro Henrique D Batista, The WIPO IGC Chair’s Draft on IP and Genetic Resources—Reasons for Concern, 19 JIPLP 328, 333 (2024).
119
Id. at 331.
120Gert Würtenberger & Stephan Freischem, GRUR Taskforce IGC: The WIPO Draft International Legal Instrument Relating to Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge Associated with Genetic Resources – Overview and Analysis, 73 GRUR Int’l 139, 148 (2024); Oguamanam, supra note 39, at 355.
121See further María Julia Oliva, Private Standards and the Implementation of the Nagoya Protocol: Defining and Putting in Practice Due Diligence in the EU Regulation on ABS 280, 295–307 (Brendan Coolsaet et al. eds., Brill Nijhoff 2015).
122GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 3(4); Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 443.
123
Id.

124Patent Cooperation Treaty, opened for signature Jun. 19, 1970, 1160 U.N.T.S. 232 (entered into force Jan. 24, 1978) [hereinafter PCT].
125
Id. arts. 19 & 34; Regulations under the PCT rule 91, Jun. 19, 1970, WIPO Lex No. TRT/PCT/021 (as in force from Jul. 1, 2024).
126Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 443; Oguamanam, supra note 39, at 355.
127Nagoya Protocol, supra note 9, art. 13(2).
128GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 3(6).
129Yu, supra note 94, at 287.
130
Id. at 288–89.
131Würtenberger & Freischem, supra note 120, at 149.
132See eg, Regulation (EU) No 511/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 Apr. 2014 on Compliance Measures for Users from the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization in the Union, OJ L 150/59, art. 7(5).
133Oguamanam, supra note 39, at 359.
134Okediji, supra note 6, at 25.
135Margo A Bagley, Of Disclosure ‘Straws’ and IP System ‘Camels’: Patents, Innovation, and the Disclosure of Origin Requirement, in  Protecting Traditional Knowledge: The WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore 85, 98–9 (Daniel F Robinson et al. eds., Routledge 2017) notes that non-demandeurs sought to set a ceiling prohibiting all post-grant patent law sanctions and remedies, but ultimately the Treaty sets a ceiling that is consistent with Art. 10.1 of the PLT.
136Okediji, supra note 6, at 26.
137GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, arts. 9(1)–(2) require Parties to adopt measures necessary to ensure the Treaty’s application but allow Parties to determine how to implement the Treaty’s provisions within their own legal systems and practices – which could include patent, civil, criminal, and administrative law measures. See Batista, supra note 118, at 329–30.
138GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 5(1).
139Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 443.
140GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 5(2).
141Batista, supra note 118, at 332; Würtenberger & Freischem, supra note 120, at 150. This is consistent with the rule in Art. 10(2) of the PLT on intended revocation or invalidation.
142These could include cases where false information is provided in response to arts. 3.1 and/or 3.2, or where an applicant makes a fraudulent declaration under art. 3.3.
143GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 5(3).
144Würtenberger & Freischem, supra note 120, at 151.
145
Id. at 150. This is because obfuscation can mask compliance issues (eg a failure to access GR or ATK with PIC and MAT).
146GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 5(4).
147Author’s notes (on file); Batista, supra note 118, at 332.
148GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 7; Yu, supra note 94, at 298. Preambular para. 5 of the GRATK Treaty is more specific, but only provides context: ‘recognizing that this Treaty and other international instruments related to … [GR and ATK] should be mutually supportive’.
149
Id.

150
Xiaoou Zheng, The Complementarity Between the Nagoya Protocol and Human Rights: Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities 26 (Springer 2023).
151Riccardo Pavoni, Mutual Supportiveness as a Principle of Interpretation and Law-Making: A Watershed for the ‘WTO-and-Competing-Regimes’ Debate?, 21 Eur. J. Int’l Law 649, 678 (2010); Zheng, supra note 150, at 26.
152Author’s notes (on file).
153Pavoni, supra note 151, at 678. GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 7 footnote 4 contains an Agreed Statement that calls for the possible amendment of the PCT Regulations and/or Administrative Instructions to enable applicants filing an international application to comply with national stage patent disclosure requirements, which resembles Switzerland’s 2003 IGC proposal. See Jacques de Werra, Fighting Against Biopiracy: Does the Obligation to Disclose in Patent Applications Truly Help?, 42 Vand. J. Transnat’l Law 143, 148 (2009).
154Author’s notes (on file); Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 445.
155
Campbell Mc
Lachlan, The Principle of Systemic Integration in International Law 197–201 (Oxford University Press 2024).
156Pavoni, supra note 151, at 678.
157Laurence Boisson de Chazournes & Makane Moïse Mbengue, ‘Footnote as a Principle’: Mutual Supportiveness and Its Relevance in an Era of Fragmentation, in  Coexistence, Cooperation and Solidarity: Liber Amicorum Rudiger Wolfrum 1615, 1632 (Holder P Hestermeyer et al. eds., Martinus Nijhoff 2012).
158By the Diplomatic Conference, the CBD had nearly universal membership and the Nagoya Protocol had over 140 Parties.
159Nagoya Protocol, supra note 9, art. 4(2); Greiber et al., supra note 49, at 78–79.
160
Id. art. 4(3); Id. at 79.
161GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, arts. 10(1)–(2)
162Nagoya Protocol, supra note 9, art. 17(1); Elisa Morgera et al., Article 17. Monitoring the Utilization of Genetic Resources, in  Unraveling the Nagoya Protocol: A Commentary on the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing to the Convention on Biological Diversity 271, 272 (Brill Nijhoff Jan. 2015).
163
Id. art. 17(1)(a)(i); Greiber et al., supra note 49, at 176–7; Chiarolla, supra note 86, at 505.
164Morgera et al., supra note 162, at 276.
165
Id. at 274.
166Nagoya Protocol, supra note 9, art. 17(1)(a)(ii); Id. at 275.
167Chiarolla, supra note 86, at 505–6.
168Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 445.
169
Id.

170Nagoya Protocol, supra note 9, art. 17(1)(a)(ii); Morgera et al., supra note 162, at 275.
171
Id. art. 17(1)(a)(iii).
172GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 3(6).
173Nagoya Protocol, supra note 9, art. 17(1)(a)(iv).
174GRATK Treaty, supra note 1, art. 10.1(a)-(c); Oguamanam, supra note 39, at 364.
175
Id. art. 10(1)(c). For past practice, see Charles Lawson et al., The Perils of Parliamentarism: The World Intellectual Property Organization and Indigenous Peoples, 39 Oxf. J. Le. Stud. 285, 299–315 (2019).
176
Id. art. 10.2(a).
177
Id. arts. 10.2(b) and 12.2: ‘The Assembly may decide to admit any intergovernmental organization to become party to this Treaty which declares that it is competent in respect of, and has its own legislation binding on all its Member States on, matters covered by this Treaty and that it has been duly authorized, in accordance with its internal procedures, to become party to this Treaty’.
178
Id. art. 10.2(c). The Treaty’s scope could be expanded to cover other IP domains following the Art. 8 review
179
Id. arts. 10.2(d) and 14.
180
Id. art. 10.2(e).
181
Id. art. 8.
182Nagoya Protocol, supra note 9, art. 2(e): ‘a naturally occurring biochemical compound resulting from the genetic expression or metabolism of biological or … [GR], even if it does not contain functional units of heredity’.
183WIPO already requires applicants to disclose genetic sequence data in international patent applications, see WIPO, Standard ST.26, https://www.wipo.int/pct/en/news/2022/news_0039.html (accessed April 15, 2026).
184CBD COP Decision 16/2. Digital sequence information on genetic resources, UN Doc. CBD/COP/DEC/16/2, paras. 1–2 and Annex; Florian Rabitz et al., A Turning Point in Global Biodiversity Governance?, Environmental Politics 1, 5 (2025), https://doi.org/10.1080/09644016.2025.2565867.
185Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 445.
186
Id. at 442, 445.
187
Id. at 445. European Commission Joint Research Centre, Exploring the Global Landscape of Biotech Innovation: Preliminary Insights from Patent Analysis (Publications Office of the European Union 2024) identifies China, the EU and the US as the dominant jurisdictions.
188Chiarolla, supra note 86, at 505; Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 445.
189de Werra, supra note 153, at 148–50; Goss, supra note 2, at 41.
190Oberthür & Pożarowska, supra note 6, at 114. Following the adoption of the Treaty, the CBD, WIPO, and WTO still address the same regulatory subsets of the overall issue area.
191See eg PATENTSCOPE, https://www.wipo.int/patentscope/en/; United States Patent and Trademark Office Database, https://www.uspto.gov/patents/search; European Patent Office Espacenet, https://worldwide.espacenet.com/patent/; China National Intellectual Property Administration Patent Search and Analysis, https://pss-system.cponline.cnipa.gov.cn/conventionalSearchEn (accessed April 15, 2026).
192Chiarolla, supra note 86, at 512; Batista, supra note 118, at 329.
193Chiarolla, supra note 86, at footnote 16.
194As noted by Okediji, supra note 6, at 33.
195Perron-Welch, supra note 23, at 446; Okediji, supra note 6, at 27–28; See further Charles Lawson et al., Access and Benefit Sharing Biological Materials for Machines: Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Deep Learning, 7 Plants, People, Planet 1485 (2025).