pmcCochrane Database Syst RevCochrane Database Syst Rev3102cochrev10090974714651858The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews1469-493X1361-6137John Wiley and Sons, Inc. and the Cochrane LibraryPMC11812092PMC11812092.111812092118120923993210310.1002/14651858.CD001920.pub4CD001920.pub4CD0019201Heart & circulationNeurologyPREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF COMPLICATIONS FOLLOWING STROKEPhysical rehabilitation approaches for the recovery of function and mobility following stroke
Cochrane Central Editorial ServiceTodhunter-BrownAlexalex.todhunterbrown@gcu.ac.uk ‐See commentsSMD 1.32 higher (1.08 higher to 1.56 higher)5403 (52)⊕⊕⊝⊝ Lowa,bCompared to no physical rehabilitation, physical rehabilitation may improve activities of daily living.A standard deviation of 1.32 represents a large difference between groups.Primary outcome: Motor function scalesImmediately after intervention(Higher number indicates a better outcome) ‐See commentsSMD 1.01 higher (0.80 higher to 1.22 higher)5669 (50)⊕⊕⊝⊝ Lowa,bCompared to no physical rehabilitation, physical rehabilitation may improve motor function.A standard deviation of 1.01 represents a large difference between groups.Secondary outcome: Balance (Berg Balance Scale)Immediately after intervention(Higher number indicates a better outcome) ‐The mean score in the no treatment group ranged from 31.1 to 53MD 4.54 higher (1.36 to 7.72 higher)452 (9)⊕⊕⊝⊝ Lowa,cThe evidence suggests that, compared to no physical rehabilitation, physical rehabilitation may improve balance, as measured by the Berg Balance Scale.Secondary outcome: Gait velocityImmediately after intervention(Higher number indicates a better outcome)  See commentsSMD 0.23 higher (0.05 to 0.42 higher)1131 (18)⊕⊕⊕⊝ Moderatec,dThe evidence suggests that, compared to no physical rehabilitation, physical rehabilitation is likely to improve gait velocity.A standard deviation of 0.23 represents a small difference between groups.Secondary outcome: Length of hospital stay(Low number indicates a better outcome)  The mean length of stay for the control group of the included study was 6.3 days.MD 0.80 higher (0.93 lower to 2.53 higher)110 (1)⊕⊝⊝⊝ Very lowe,fThe evidence is very uncertain about the effect of physical rehabilitation on the length of inpatient hospital stay.Secondary outcome: Adverse events(Any adverse events during the intervention period, including serious adverse events and falls, which were defined by the study investigators as possibly, probably, or definitely related to the study/intervention) ; RR 8.70 (2.90 to 26.06)‐‐283 (5)⊕⊝⊝⊝ Very lowf,gThe evidence is very uncertain about the effect of physical rehabilitation on adverse events.GRADE Working Group grades of evidence. High certainty: Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect. Moderate certainty: Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate. Low certainty: Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate. Very low certainty: We are very uncertain about the estimate.Abbreviations: ADL: activities of daily living; CI: confidence interval; MD: mean difference; RR: risk ratio; SMD: standardised mean difference 

## Background

## Stakeholder involvement
This review update was conducted with the involvement of key stakeholders (stroke survivors, carers, and physiotherapists). Stakeholder involvement in the 2014 update of this Cochrane review informed the categorisation of physical rehabilitation treatment components within the review. This is described in the previous version of the review ( ) and in an article describing the methods of stakeholder involvement ( ). To ensure the continued relevance and accessibility of this review, for the current update, a new stakeholder group was convened.
Details of the stakeholder involvement are provided in and referred to as appropriate within the review.

## Description of the condition
Worldwide, stroke is the leading cause of disability and the second leading cause of death ( ). The most common and widely recognised impairment caused by stroke is motor impairment, which can be regarded as loss or limitation of function in muscle control or movement or limitation in mobility ( ). Motor impairment after stroke typically affects the control of movement of the face, arm, and leg on one side of the body ( ) and is the most common impairment after stroke ( ). Around two‐thirds of stroke survivors have initial limb impairment and/or mobility deficits ( ; ; ), and six months after a stroke, more than 30% of survivors still cannot walk independently ( ; ; ). Recovery of mobility is commonly perceived as an unmet need by stroke survivors ( ; ). Therefore, much of the focus of stroke rehabilitation, in particular the work of physiotherapists (also known as physical therapists or rehabilitation therapists), is focused on recovery of physical independence and functional ability during activities of daily living; commonly the ultimate goal of therapy is to improve the function of walking and recovery of balance and movement ( ; ).

## Physical rehabilitation 'approaches': historical context
Various approaches to physical rehabilitation can be used after stroke and, historically, the relative effectiveness of these approaches has been an important question ( ; ). briefly summarises the historical context for physical rehabilitation approaches, and provides an overview of key 'named' approaches.
Previous versions of this review have concluded that "physical rehabilitation should not be limited to compartmentalised, named rehabilitation approaches, but should comprise clearly defined, well‐described, evidence‐based physical treatments regardless of historical or philosophical origin" ( ). Thus, in line with recommendations arising from previous versions, this updated Cochrane review will primarily focus on the content of physical rehabilitation, regardless of any 'named' approach or historical origin.

## Physical rehabilitation: evidence‐based description
Since the last version of this review, the need for an evidence‐based description of 'rehabilitation' has been raised, with a lack of agreement and understanding of the meaning of rehabilitation highlighted ( ; ).
A recent Cochrane Rehabilitation project has developed a consensus‐based definition of rehabilitation for research purposes as a “multimodal, person‐centered, collaborative process” including interventions targeting a person’s “capacity (by addressing body structures, functions, and activities/participation) and/or contextual factors related to performance” ( ).
Based on this definition of rehabilitation, the intervention of relevance to this review ‐ physical rehabilitation ‐ must comprise more than one different treatment component, delivered as a "programme" of rehabilitation. We use the phrase "physical" rehabilitation to indicate the focus on physical functioning and mobility.
The individual treatment components included within a programme of physical rehabilitation may vary between patients, as these may be selected according to an assessment of each patient's individual needs. However, some approaches to physical rehabilitation may be more structured, with all patients receiving the same or similar treatment components.
Thus, this Cochrane review is focussed on programmes of physical rehabilitation delivered to people who have had a stroke, with an aim of improving function and mobility. We are interested in whether different programmes of/approaches to physical rehabilitation are effective, and whether any particular approaches to physical rehabilitation are any more effective than other approaches.
We are interested in the content of the physical rehabilitation, rather than in the 'name' of the approach. We aim to explore this by considering the individual treatment components that make up physical rehabilitation and grouping similar 'approaches' together. Physical rehabilitation can be delivered in a number of different ways, such as one‐to‐one sessions, group classes, or self‐practice sessions. For this review, stakeholders developed a framework to describe the physical rehabilitation interventions within the studies included in this review: see and . This framework was informed by the intervention taxonomy within the previous version of the review ( ), papers around definitions and descriptions of rehabilitation ( ; ; ; ; ), and the lived experience of the stakeholder group members (see ).
 

## How the intervention might work
Mechanisms of recovery from motor impairment and loss of function resulting from a stroke can be complex ( ). The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) framework identifies that loss of functioning may involve impairments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions. Interventions that target motor recovery may therefore work through a number of different, inter‐related mechanisms ( ), and may target the health condition, body function/structure or activity, or a combination of these.
Interventions may aim to change a person's:
Health condition. This could be through recovery/restoration of function in brain areas affected by the stroke, or activation of alternative areas of neural tissue so that other areas of the brain take on a new function ('compensation').
Body functions and structures. For example, through recovery of muscle strength or soft tissue length, through use of alternative movement patterns ('adaptation') or by using assistive aids or devices to replace or support impaired body function to complete a task ('substitution').
Ability to carry out an activity. For example, by re‐learning movement patterns or by learning to perform the task in a new way, or by using different techniques.

As described above, physical rehabilitation comprises a programme of treatment components, often selected according to a patient's individual needs ( ). How each of these treatment components may work can vary, according to the target of the rehabilitation. For example, treatment components based on neurophysiological principles and comprising normal movement patterns may work through neuroplastic changes and recovery of brain function; treatment components involving the training or practice of a specific task or function may work through the (re) learning of movement patterns; treatment components involving muscle strengthening or stretching may work by changing body function and structures. The use of modalities and assistive devices (for example, orthotics, walking sticks, electrical stimulation, biofeedback, robotic devices) may work by supporting or facilitating an impaired function and enabling the execution of a movement. The effectiveness of physical rehabilitation may be enhanced by strategies (e.g. goal‐setting) that support or encourage motivation and/or behaviour change, and by the provision of opportunities for practice of movement or activities when away from the therapist (e.g. by providing exercise sheets, or by teaching family members to assist).

## Why it is important to do this review
Identifying the best ways of improving mobility and walking after stroke remains a top priority of stroke survivors ( ; ; ).
Continued debate about the relative effectiveness of physical rehabilitation approaches and evidence of clear preferences for particular named approaches in some parts of the world, despite increasing calls for this to change, justify the importance of this review.
National guidelines are inconsistent in their recommendations. For example, a 2023 update of the UK National Clinical Guidelines for Stroke concludes that "Exercise and repetitive task practice should be the principal rehabilitation approaches, in preference to other therapy approaches including Bobath" ( ); while, in contrast, the 2022 Evidence‐Based Review of Stroke Rehabilitation, supported by the Canadian Partnership for Stroke Recovery, concludes that evidence remains mixed in relation to the relative effectiveness of motor relearning programmes and the Bobath approach ( ); the Australian and New Zealand Living Clinical Guidelines for Stroke Management do not make any specific recommendations relating to physical rehabilitation approaches ( ).
Since the publication of the last version of this review ( ), a number of other reviews have concluded that the Bobath (or neurodevelopment) approach is not more effective, and may be less effective, than other interventions ( ; ; ). New trials exploring the effectiveness of different approaches to rehabilitation continue to be planned and conducted around the world, including multiple trials exploring the effectiveness of the Bobath approach/neurodevelopmental approach (e.g. ; ) and task‐specific training/motor re‐learning approach (e.g. ; ; ), and trials directly comparing these approaches (e.g. ). New trials continue to explore the effectiveness of other 'named' approaches, such as Vojta therapy (e.g. ), conductive education (e.g. ), and lower‐limb constraint‐induced therapy (e.g. ; ; ). This growing body of new trials demonstrates the continued importance of this review and justifies the need for an update.

## Objectives
Primary objective: To determine whether physical rehabilitation is effective for recovery of function and mobility in people with stroke, and to assess if any one physical rehabilitation approach is more effective than any other approach.
For this update of the review, we sought to answer four key questions:
Is physical rehabilitation more effective than no (or minimal) physical rehabilitation?
Is physical rehabilitation more effective than attention control?
Does additional physical rehabilitation*, delivered as an adjunct to 'usual' or 'conventional' rehabilitation, improve outcomes?
Is any one approach to physical rehabilitation more effective than any other approach to physical rehabilitation?

Secondary objective: To explore factors that may impact the effectiveness of physical rehabilitation approaches. These include: time after stroke, geographical location of the study, dose and duration of the intervention, provider of the intervention and treatment components included within an intervention.
Stakeholder involvement: To ensure the relevance and accessibility of this review. Key aims of stakeholder involvement were to clarify the focus of the review, inform decisions about subgroup analyses, and co‐produce statements relating to key implications arising from the review. Physical rehabilitation was described using a co‐produced framework for categorising physical rehabilitation treatment components (see and ).
*We were only interested in 'additional' physical rehabilitation where the approach to physical rehabilitation provided as 'additional' therapy differed from that of the 'usual' or 'conventional' rehabilitation. Questions about dose/amount of therapy (where the approach to therapy was the same, but the amount differed) are addressed in another Cochrane review ( ).

## Methods

## Criteria for considering studies for this review

## Types of studies
We included controlled trials if the participants were randomly assigned to one of two or more treatment groups. Random assignment gives each participant entering the trial the same, predetermined chance of receiving each of the possible treatments (e.g. by using sequentially numbered, opaque, sealed envelopes, or computer‐generated random numbers). We included trials with or without blinding of participants, physiotherapists, and assessors. We excluded trials with quasi‐random assignment, as these are at higher risk of introducing bias, with greater likelihood of baseline differences between participants.

## Types of participants
We included trials enrolling adult participants (over 18 years of age) with a clinical diagnosis of stroke (World Health Organization (WHO) definition; ), which could be ischaemic or haemorrhagic in origin (confirmation of the clinical diagnosis by imaging was not compulsory). Where trials enrolled a mixed population (e.g. participants with stroke plus participants with other acquired brain injuries), we included such trials with only a subset of eligible participants only if the data for participants with stroke were available separately. If the only data available were for a mixed population, we excluded the trial.

## Types of interventions
We included physical rehabilitation approaches that were aimed at promoting recovery of function and mobility. This included interventions that were specifically aimed at improvement of walking, or functions relating to walking (e.g. standing balance, stepping), as well as interventions that had a more generalised stated aim, such as improving functional ability, where this included walking ability.
We excluded rehabilitation approaches that were primarily aimed at promoting recovery of upper limb movement or upper limb function, or which were focussed on a specific function (e.g. sit‐to‐stand) or training of a specific body part (e.g. trunk training). In line with definitions of rehabilitation ( ), we excluded studies that explored the effectiveness of a single component (only), but we included studies in which these components were part of a wider programme of rehabilitation (e.g. electrical stimulation, treadmill training, balance platform training, robotic devices). Further, to avoid duplication, we excluded studies that explored the effectiveness of specific programmes of physical rehabilitation that have been addressed within other Cochrane reviews (e.g. Tai Chi, yoga). We also excluded studies that were specifically focussed on the mode of delivery (e.g. remote/telerehabilitation, circuit classes); this included studies focussed on the amount, or dose, of physical rehabilitation as we were interested in the approach to physical rehabilitation, rather than the amount of (the same type of) therapy. provides details of interventions that are excluded from this review, with justifications for these decisions.
 During the screening of potential studies from Chinese databases for this review update, we identified that there are now hundreds of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) exploring the effectiveness of programmes of stroke rehabilitation that include a physical rehabilitation element as part of a broader post‐stroke rehabilitation programme. These are often described using phrases such as 'comprehensive nursing intervention', 'systematic rehabilitation nursing', 'stroke unit nursing', or 'rehabilitation nursing training', and often described as 'early' interventions (e.g. 'early rehabilitation nursing'). The interventions were multi‐faceted, involving speech and language and psychological therapy, as well as physical therapy and training to enhance function during activities of daily living. These trials often included measures of motor function and activities of daily living. The review authors made the decision that (i) it was not practical to include this large body of evidence within this review and (ii) the studies exploring the effectiveness of these multi‐faceted rehabilitation programmes do not directly address the research question addressed by this Cochrane review, which is specifically focussed on the effect of different approaches to physical rehabilitation. We consider that these trials would best be synthesised within a separate (new) Cochrane review.

## Types of outcome measures
Eligible studies were included regardless of the outcomes reported.

## Primary outcomes
We defined primary outcomes as measures of disability (activity limitations; ; ) and the relevant measures are as follows.
Independence in activities of daily living (ADL) scales.
These include Barthel Activities of Daily Living Index ( ), Functional Independence Measure (FIM) ( ), Modified Rankin Scale ( ), Katz Index of Activities of Daily Living ( ), and Rehabilitation Activities Profile ( ).
Motor function scales.
These include Motor Assessment Scale (MAS) ( ), Fugl‐Meyer Assessment (lower limb section) ( ), Rivermead Mobility Index ( ), and Rivermead Motor Assessment ( ).

Where studies reported more than one relevant measure, we used the one listed first in the lists above.

## Secondary outcomes
Balance (Berg Balance Scale) ( ; ).
Gait velocity.
We included measures of gait speed (a measure of distance/time), a timed walk (a measure of time to walk a set distance), a Timed Up and Go Test, or any other measure directly relating to gait velocity. Where studies reported more than one of these, we used the first from this list.
Where gait velocity was measured in different conditions (e.g. at comfortable and fast speeds), we used comfortable speed.
We accepted measures where participants used assistive devices.
The six‐minute walking test (6MWT), or other measures of distance walked in a set time, generally considered measures of exercise tolerance or fitness, were classed as 'other measures'.
Length of hospital stay.
Adverse events, as reported by the trial investigators.
We collected any data relating to any adverse events, including serious adverse events and falls, that were defined by the study authors as possibly, probably, or definitely related to the study/intervention.

We were interested in outcomes that were assessed both immediately after the end of an intervention period ('immediate outcome') and at a follow‐up period ('persisting outcomes').

## Search methods for identification of studies
We searched for trials in all languages and arranged translation of relevant papers where necessary.

## Electronic searches
For this update, the search strategies used for this review have been significantly revised and updated to account for newly identified relevant terms and to improve sensitivity and specificity. All discontinued versions of the search strategies used are still available in the previous version of this review ( )
We searched the Cochrane Stroke Specialised Register (an international register of stroke trials that was maintained until April 2021), using a comprehensive search strategy for retrieval of references on stroke health care ( ), and the following electronic databases on 24 November 2022:
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL; 2022, Issue 10 of 12) in the Cochrane Library; );
MEDLINE Ovid (from 1946 to 24 November 2022; );
Embase Ovid (from 1974 to 24 November 2022; );
CINAHL EBSCO (Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature; from 1937 to 24 November 2022; );
AMED (Allied and Complementary Medicine; from 1985 to 24 November 2022; );
Chinese Biomedical Literature Database (CBM; sinomed.imicams.ac.cn; last searched 22 February 2022; ).

The search strategies utilised in this update have been comprehensively updated since the previous version of this review was published to account for newly identified relevant unqualified terms and controlled vocabulary terms. The search strategy includes the Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search Strategy for identifying randomised trials in MEDLINE Ovid: sensitivity‐maximising version (2008 revision), as described in , and Cochrane Stroke's search strategies for the identification of 'stroke' studies in respective databases and other resources. These are supplemented with strategies to identify exercise interventions. The MEDLINE Ovid search was translated into Simplified Chinese and adapted for use in the CBM interface; the decision to search CBM was made as more than half of the relevant studies in the last version of this review had been conducted in China.
Additionally, we used Cochrane’s Screen4Me workflow to help assess the search results. Screen4Me comprises three components: known assessments – a service that matches records in the search results to records that have already been screened in Cochrane Crowd and been labelled as an RCT or as Not an RCT; the RCT classifier (a machine learning model that distinguishes RCTs from non‐RCTs); and, if appropriate, Cochrane Crowd (Cochrane’s citizen science platform where the Crowd help to identify and describe health evidence) ( ; ; ; ; ).

## Searching other resources
We screened the reference lists of all trials found using the above search methods.
In order to identify other published, unpublished, and ongoing studies, we searched for ongoing studies using the following registries ( ) on 24 November 2022:
US National Institutes of Health Ongoing Trials Register ClinicalTrials.gov (clinicaltrials.gov/);
World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP; trialsearch.who.int).

We also searched REHABDATA (National Rehabilitation Information Center) on 24 November 2022 (https://www.naric.com/?q=en/REHABDATA; ).
We contacted researchers of all ongoing studies to check publication status. If required for clarification, we contacted study authors to obtain additional information or clarification on potentially relevant studies.

## Data collection and analysis

## Selection of studies
We used Covidence to manage the selection of studies. Title and abstract screening was conducted independently by two review authors (from ATB, CS, PC, GB, JM, PLC). The translate to English function was used for abstracts published in languages other than English. Disagreements were resolved through discussion (between ATB and either CS or GB).
Full‐text review of all English language papers, and all papers where full texts could be satisfactorily translated into English using Google Translate, was conducted independently by two review authors (ATB and CS). Disagreements were resolved through discussion (with GB for English‐language papers or PLC for Chinese‐language papers).
Full‐text review of Chinese language papers that could not be satisfactorily translated into English using Google Translate was conducted through discussion with one review author (PLC) translating relevant sections and verbally providing information to other review authors in English (AP, PC).

## Data extraction and management
One review author extracted study characteristics from study reports into a pre‐piloted standardised form and a second author checked the extracted study characteristics (involving CS, JC, PC, ATB). Outcome data were extracted independently by two review authors (CS, ATB); one extracted data into a pre‐piloted standardised form and the other extracted data directly into , and data were compared to identify any discrepancies. The review authors resolved disagreements by discussion, involving a third review author if necessary.
Data extracted included the following (when possible): study aim; trial setting (e.g. hospital, community); geographical location; details of participants (side of hemiplegia, type of stroke, time since stroke); health equity (using PROGRESS domains, ); inclusion and exclusion criteria; all assessed outcomes; intervention details; funding and conflicts of interest. The review authors resolved disagreements by discussion and contacted study authors for clarification when necessary. For papers published in the Chinese language, one review author (PLC) verbally translated relevant sections of text, during an audio‐recorded meeting with a second author (PC), who documented relevant data extraction items. For papers published in languages other than English or Chinese, we sought a relevant translation of the paper.
Extracted data were managed in Excel. We categorised all studies according to whether they had data suitable for inclusion within quantitative analysis, or were included in qualitative synthesis only; and the nature of the study comparison. We categorised each study comparison with consideration of the dose of delivered interventions, as follows:
Physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation or versus limited physical rehabilitation (dose differs).
Limited physical rehabilitation was defined as being a dose of < 50% of the treatment group.
Physical rehabilitation versus attention control (dose of physical rehabilitation differs between groups; dose of intervention equivalent in both groups).
Additional physical rehabilitation plus usual therapy versus usual therapy.
Comparison of different physical rehabilitation approaches (dose equivalent).
This was further subcategorised according to whether the treatment groups were receiving any other physical rehabilitation (i.e. both groups may have received some 'standard' intervention).

These categories informed the analyses in which studies were included (for studies included in quantitative analyses).

## Assessment of risk of bias in included studies
For this update, we used Cochrane's new risk of bias tool (RoB 2) ( ) and the Excel tool to implement RoB 2 (available at www.riskofbias.info/welcome/rob-2-0-tool). We assessed the risk of bias for all studies included in meta‐analyses for our primary and secondary outcomes (see ):
Independence in activities of daily living ‐ 'immediate' and 'persisting' time points
Motor function ‐ 'immediate' and 'persisting' time points
Balance ‐ 'immediate' time point only
Gait velocity ‐ 'immediate' time point only
Length of stay ‐ 'immediate' time point only
Adverse events ‐ 'immediate' time point only

Assessment of risk of bias was conducted independently by two authors (ATB, JC). For the assessment of risk of bias in studies that were included in the previous review version, the two review authors (ATB, JC) independently assessed risk of bias, and resolved any disagreements through discussion. During this time, notes were taken to guide decisions relating to different sets of circumstances/trial details. Subsequently, the two review authors conducted assessments for all newly included trials (ATB, JC), and one author entered the data into RevMan (ATB). Where there were disagreements that could be resolved by referring to the notes collected from the previous review version or by checking study reports, this was performed by one author (ATB); where necessary, disagreements were discussed between two authors.
We used the RoB 2 tool to consider the risk of bias in the following domains:
Bias arising from the randomisation process.
Bias due to deviations from intended interventions.
Bias due to missing outcome data.
Bias in measurement of the outcome.
Bias in selection of the reported result.

We investigated the effect of assignment to intervention at baseline, regardless of whether the interventions were received as intended or not. For each of the five domains, using the Excel tool, we answered all signalling questions with response options 'Yes', 'Probably Yes', 'Probably No', 'No', or 'No Information', and recorded reasons within the free‐text boxes. We considered the proposed risk of bias judgement from the algorithm within the Excel tool for each domain and reached a final risk of bias judgement of 'Low', 'High', or 'Some concerns'.
Specifically, for domain 2 'Bias due to deviations from intended interventions', we paid particular attention to whether the same rehabilitation professionals delivered treatments to both intervention and 'usual care' groups (and considered that this had the potential to introduce bias). For domain 3 'Bias due to missing outcome data', we assumed that the data presented were for all recruited participants, unless the study authors discussed dropouts; where there were dropouts reported, we considered whether this was evenly distributed between groups, or could potentially have influenced the results. For domain 4 'Bias in measurement of the outcome', we generally considered that studies with a blinded outcome assessor would be at low risk of bias, and those without ‐ or where it was unclear whether the assessor was blinded ‐ to be at high risk of bias. For domain 5 'Bias in selection of the reported result', we considered whether there was a published protocol or a trial registration, registered prior to the start of trial; where we were unable to identify either of these, we generally considered this to be of some concerns, unless further concerns were identified relating to bias in selection.
To reach an overall judgement for an outcome, we first considered that studies judged to be at low risk of bias for all domains should have an overall judgement of low risk of bias; that studies judged to have some concerns in at least one domain should have an overall judgement of some concerns; and that studies judged to be at high risk of bias in at least one domain should have an overall judgement of high risk of bias. We then considered whether we agreed with this judgement, or whether there were reasons not to follow the proposed RoB 2 algorithm, and recorded our reasons using free text. Risk of bias assessment findings were viewed and critiqued by members of the Cochrane Methods Support Unit, and a number of assessment decisions were amended in response to feedback.
For cross‐over RCTs, we only considered data from the first period prior to the cross‐over; we used the main RoB 2 tool by following guidance in and and considered (within domain 5 'Risk of bias in selection of the reported result' of the main RoB 2 tool) the possibility that the phase one result was selected because it was preferred to a result based on both periods, i.e. data from phase one reported when carry‐over was observed by the study investigators. If we include any cluster‐randomised trials in future updates, we will follow the relevant guidance in , and consider the additional domain of bias arising from the identification or recruitment of individual participants within clusters.

## Measures of treatment effect
We presented outcome measures of independence in ADL, motor function, balance, gait velocity, and length of stay as continuous data. For outcomes of independence in ADL, motor function, and gait velocity, we calculated standardised mean differences (SMDs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). For outcomes of balance (Berg Balance Scale) and of length of stay, we calculated mean differences (MDs) and 95% CIs. We used a random‐effects model for all outcomes analysed.
For measures of gait velocity, we considered a higher value to denote a better outcome, and we multiplied assessments where this was reversed (e.g. time to walk a set distance, where a lower time denotes a better outcome) by minus one.
We presented the outcome measure of adverse events as count data. We used data that pertained to the number of participants experiencing an adverse event (rather than the total number of adverse events). We calculated risk ratios using Mantel‐Haenszel fixed‐effect meta‐analysis methods, as this has been shown to have better statistical properties when there are few events ( ).

## Unit of analysis issues
We did not anticipate any specific unit of analysis issues. We anticipated that the unit of analysis for studies included in this review would be individual participants. If the unit of analysis was not individual participants (e.g. in the case of cluster trials), we planned to record this and adjust accordingly. For cross‐over trials, we only used data for the first phase of the study (i.e. before the cross‐over, so individual participants only had one intervention). For studies where outcomes were reported at several different time points, we used (i) the 'immediate' time point (i.e. outcome assessed immediately after the end of the period of treatment) and (ii) a 'persisting' time point (i.e. a follow‐up measure). Where studies reported multiple follow‐up measures, we used the shortest time point, and recorded the time point that we used. Where trials had more than one eligible active intervention group within the same comparison, we divided the control group data between the multiple pairwise comparisons to ensure there was no double counting of participants within any one analysis.

## Dealing with missing data
For studies included in the 2014 and earlier versions, we contacted and ‐ where possible ‐ obtained missing data from study authors. Due to the number of studies included in the 2023 update, missing data were not obtained from study authors.
Where studies reported a mean but no standard deviation, but instead either a confidence interval or P value, we used the calculator within Review Manager (RevMan) to calculate a standard deviation ( ).
Where studies reported a median, but no mean, and measures such as minimum, maximum, range and/or interquartile range, we imputed the medians and used methods recommended by to estimate standard deviations, using the provided Excel spreadsheets for calculations. We noted whether our estimate was based on the minimum or maximum, or on interquartile ranges, within analysis footnotes. We conducted sensitivity analyses to explore the effect of including these values.
Where there were missing standard deviations for the results data, but standard deviations reported for baseline data, we used these values as estimates of the standard deviations.
Where there were missing data, and we were unable to use the above approaches, we did not include the study within the analysis.

## Assessment of heterogeneity
We visually inspected forest plots to explore whether the confidence intervals of individual studies overlap; where there were visual outliers, we checked the data (for data extraction or entry errors) and considered reasons for heterogeneity (e.g. a very high treatment dose). We considered the I2 statistic as reported in forest plots, and used the following as a rough guide to interpretation:
I2 of 0% represents no heterogeneity;
0% < I2 < 30% may represent some heterogeneity;
30% ≤ I2 < 50% may represent moderate heterogeneity;
50% ≤ I2 < 75% may represent substantial heterogeneity;
I2 ≥ 75% may represent considerable heterogeneity.

We conducted subgroup and sensitivity analyses to further explore heterogeneity ( ).
For the current update, we pre‐planned that we would group the main analyses for outcomes of ADL, motor function, and gait velocity according to the method of assessment (i.e. outcome measure), to explore whether the outcome tool contributed to heterogeneity. We were not able to do this for the analyses comparing different types of treatment approach, as here the groups had to reflect the types of treatment compared in order to make these analyses meaningful. For these analyses, we noted the outcome tool in the footnotes, and visually inspected plots to explore whether outliers may be related to the type of outcome measure.

## Assessment of reporting biases
We compared the availability of our planned outcomes (i.e. as listed in study protocols or methods) with those reported in the included trials. We noted where study authors described an outcome as measured but did not report it or where data were unavailable for analysis. We incorporated this information into our judgement of risk of bias for each outcome measure (for the domain of bias in selection of the reported result).
We produced funnel plots for comparisons of (i) physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation and (ii) effect of additional physical rehabilitation for our primary outcomes of independence in ADL and motor function. These were produced in RevMan Web, plotting the SMD (horizontal axis) against the standard error of the effect estimate (vertical axis). We visually inspected funnel plots for asymmetry, considering whether any asymmetry could be explained by non‐reporting biases, poor methodological quality leading to spuriously inflated effects in smaller studies, true heterogeneity, or other reasons ( ).

## Data synthesis
The previous version of this review compared active (physical rehabilitation) interventions versus no treatment, versus usual care/control, and versus another active intervention ( ). Based on discussions with our stakeholder group, for this updated version we changed to the comparisons below:
Physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation
Physical rehabilitation versus attention control
Additional physical rehabilitation (plus usual therapy compared to usual therapy only)
Different approaches to physical rehabilitation (one physical rehabilitation approach compared to another physical rehabilitation approach)

All eligible studies with data on independence in activities of daily living or motor function ( ), or on balance, gait velocity, length of stay, or adverse events ( ), were included in quantitative analyses.
For studies included in quantitative analyses: for Comparisons 1 to 3, we created subgroups based on type of outcome measure. For Comparison 4, we created subgroups based on an assessment and categorisation of the content of the different physical rehabilitation approaches, using the framework for describing physical rehabilitation that was co‐produced with stakeholders (see ; ; ). For Comparison 4, we combined data from different outcome measures within the analyses using SMDs, noting the outcome tool used within the footnotes.
For studies included in qualitative syntheses only, their study details are summarised in , and reasons for not being included in quantitative (meta‐) analyses are reported.

## Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity
For our comparisons of 'Physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation' and 'Additional physical rehabilitation plus usual therapy versus usual therapy alone', for outcomes 'Independence in ADL' and 'Motor function' (see ), we carried out subgroup analyses to explore the following:
Time post‐stroke of participants ‐ early (two weeks or less post‐stroke) or later (more than two weeks post‐stroke).
These groups were determined pragmatically, aiming to get two groups of approximately equal numbers of trials.
Geographical location of the study ‐ Asia or any other continent.
The decision to group studies according to Asia or 'other' continent was due to the large proportion of studies conducted in Asia.
Dose of intervention ‐ more than or less than 2.5 hours per week.
For the comparison 'Additional physical rehabilitation plus usual therapy versus usual therapy alone', we further subdivided the group 'More than 2.5 hours per week' into 'Between 2.5 and 5 hours per week' or 'More than 5 hours per week'. This was pursued as very few studies delivered physical rehabilitation for less than 2.5 hours a week.
Duration of intervention ‐ short (≤ 2 months) or longer (> 2 months).
These groups were determined pragmatically, aiming to get two groups of approximately equal numbers of trials.
Focus of treatment components.
The groupings explored were determined from an exploration of the data extracted relating to individual treatment components.
For the comparison 'Physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation', the physical rehabilitation approaches were grouped according to whether there was a focus on functional task training or comprised mixed treatment components.
For the comparison 'Additional physical rehabilitation plus usual therapy versus usual therapy alone', we explored groups where functional task training was added to a less functional approach, or a neurophysiological approach was added to mixed or other approaches.
Named approaches.
For the comparison 'Physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation', we explored subgroups based on the intervention 'name' provided by the study authors, considering physical rehabilitation described as a 'three‐stage' or 'Bobath' approach.
Profession of the person who delivered the intervention.
We planned to categorise studies according to the professional background of the intervention provider, but due to insufficient reported information we instead grouped studies according to whether the intervention was reported to be delivered by 'medical/therapeutic staff', 'medical/therapeutic staff with input from family/carers', or 'others/not stated'.

These subgroups were informed by our stakeholder group (see ). The stakeholder group also highlighted the importance of mode of delivery (face‐to‐face or virtual sessions; and one‐to‐one or group rehabilitation) and whether rehabilitation was individualised or followed a standard/prescribed set of exercises or treatments. However, we had insufficient data to explore these within subgroup analyses (due to either lack of reporting, or because a large majority of the included trials all had the same mode of delivery).

## Sensitivity analysis
We carried out sensitivity analyses to explore the effects of risk of bias in included studies, for our primary outcomes, for all four comparisons. We adopted a sequential approach, exploring the effect of removing: studies with an overall high risk of bias, studies with concerns relating to data entered, and studies where ≥ 4 domains were judged as 'some concerns' using the RoB 2 tool. We tabulated the results of all sensitivity analyses and noted whether there were any changes from the main analysis result.

## Summary of findings and assessment of the certainty of the evidence
We presented our findings for each of our four main comparisons, for our primary and secondary outcomes at the 'immediate' time point and for adverse events, in summary of findings tables created in . We summarised the results for outcomes at the 'persisting' time point (long‐term effects) within an additional table.
We rated our certainty in the cumulative evidence for each synthesis using GRADE methodology and considering design, inconsistency, indirectness, imprecision, and publication bias ( ). We considered our overall RoB 2 judgements during the GRADE assessment, as well as the results of sensitivity analyses to remove studies judged to be of some concerns or high risk of bias. We categorised our certainty in the body of evidence as 'high', 'moderate', 'low', or 'very low', and provided explanations for our judgements.

## Results

## Description of studies

## Results of the search
Results of the search for this update are displayed in . For this update, we screened 20,644 de‐duplicated records (including 107 studies carried over from the previous review version). We assessed 508 full‐text articles for eligibility criteria and included 267 studies (including 81 from previous review versions). See . This update also identified eight studies awaiting classification ( ) and 36 ongoing studies ( ). Details of the screening done using Cochrane's Screen4Me workflow and Cochrane Crowd are provided in .
 For details of the searches for and studies included/excluded from previous versions of this review, please see ; ; .

## Included studies
We included 267 studies (21,838 participants) in this review update. Details are summarised in .

## Study size
The mean number of participants was 82 (SD 84.4); 254 of the 267 studies included fewer than 200 participants. Two studies had more than 1000 participants ( , n = 1365; , n = 1078); six had between 250 and 1000 participants ( , n = 364; , n = 408; , n = 488; , n = 250; , n = 380; , n = 300). Fourteen studies included fewer than 20 participants ( n = 14; , n = 17; , n = 18; , n = 11; , n = 12; , n = 16; , n = 13; , n = 14; , n = 18; , n = 14; , n = 7; , n = 18; , n = 18; , n = 13).

## Settings
 lists the study settings and geographical locations of the included studies. summarises studies according to comparison and region, and illustrates the included studies by country income level.
 Studies were conducted in Australia (n = 5), Austria (n = 1), Brazil (n = 1), Burundi (n = 1), Canada (n = 11), China (n = 133), Denmark (n = 1), France (n = 2), Germany (n = 2), Ghana (n = 1), Hong Kong (n = 4), India (n = 16), Indonesia (n = 1), Iran (n = 5), Italy (n = 1), Korea (n = 18), Mexico (n = 1), Netherlands (n = 3), New Zealand (n = 3), Nigeria (n = 2), Norway (n = 4), Pakistan (n = 1), Philippines (n = 1), Poland (n = 3), Romania (n = 1), Saudi Arabia (n = 2), South Africa (n = 2), Spain (n = 1), Suriname (n = 1), Sweden (n = 3), Switzerland (n = 1), Taiwan (n = 2), Turkey (n = 5), United Kingdom (n = 16), United States (n = 8), and Vietnam (n = 1), with two studies carried out in multiple countries (Australia + Germany; Germany + United States). Overall, 63% (168/267) of studies were conducted in East Asia and Pacific regions, with 50% (133/267) from China.
Of the studies comparing physical rehabilitation with no physical rehabilitation, 81% (81/100) were conducted in East Asia and Pacific regions; this is compared to 58% (31/53) of studies exploring additional rehabilitation and 49% (39/80) comparing different approaches.

## Participants
Details of study participants are summarised in .
 The time since stroke was:
7 days or less for 28/267 studies;
14 days or less for 23/267 studies;
14 days to 6 weeks for 34/267 studies;
6 weeks to 6 months for 36/267 studies;
more than 6 months for 15/267 studies;
wide‐ranging for 52/267 studies;
unclear or not reported for 79/267 studies.

## Interventions
Intervention details are provided in . Intervention dose (duration, frequency, and session length) and intervention provider are provided in .
 Further details of the interventions within studies included in quantitative analyses are provided in , , , , and .
 

## Comparisons
Among the 267 included studies, 246 were parallel‐group studies, and 21 had more than one treatment group. For 8 of these 21 studies, only one comparison (i.e. two of the treatment groups) was relevant to this review, and we have dealt with these as parallel‐group studies. For the remaining 13 studies: seven had two relevant comparisons ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ), five had three relevant comparisons ( ; ; ; ; ), and one had six relevant comparisons ( ). This brings us to a total of 289 relevant comparisons from the 267 included studies.
The studies included in this review update addressed the following pre‐defined comparisons:
Physical rehabilitation versus no (or minimal) physical rehabilitation ‐ 105 studies ( ).
Physical rehabilitation versus attention control ‐ 19 studies ( ).
Additional physical rehabilitation + usual rehabilitation versus usual rehabilitation ‐ 56 studies ( ).
Comparison of different approaches to physical rehabilitation ‐ 92 studies ( ).

Three studies did not clearly fit into any of these pre‐stated comparisons ( ; ; ). These studies are described in and summarised in ; data were not included in quantitative analysis.
 

## Studies included in quantitative analysis
Of the included studies, 194 of 267 were suitable for inclusion in the quantitative synthesis (meta‐analysis). Six of the 194 studies were multi‐arm studies and included in more than one of the comparisons ( ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Interventions and comparisons
For studies included in quantitative synthesis:
79 studies compared physical rehabilitation with no physical rehabilitation. These are summarised in . Across these studies there were 85 interventions (four studies ‐ ; ; ; ‐ had more than one active intervention); the mode of delivery of each trial is shown in and summarised below:
23/85 were a one‐to‐one treatment session with a therapist, 4/85 were a group session, and 1/85 was mixed. (It was unclear for 57 interventions.)
77/85 interventions were delivered face‐to‐face, while 2/85 reported some element of virtual/remote‐delivered intervention and 1/85 was mixed. (It was unclear for six interventions.)
18/85 interventions were either definitely or probably individualised according to each patient, while 26/85 delivered a standardised (i.e. not individualised) intervention. (This was unclear for 41 interventions.)
13 studies compared physical rehabilitation with attention control; across these studies, there were 26 interventions (i.e. 13 physical rehabilitation and 13 attention control interventions). These are summarised in ; the mode of delivery of each trial is shown in and summarised below:
2/26 were a one‐to‐one treatment session with a therapist, 15/26 were a group session, and 1/26 was a self‐guided treatment. (It was unclear for eight interventions.)
19/26 interventions were delivered face‐to‐face, while 2/26 reported a mix of face‐to‐face with some element of virtual/remote‐delivered intervention. (This was not applicable to 1/26, where the treatment was self‐guided, and was unclear for four interventions)
11/26 interventions were either definitely or probably individualised according to each patient, while 8/26 delivered a standardised (i.e. not individualised) intervention. (This was unclear for seven interventions.)
43 studies explored additional physical rehabilitation; across these studies, there were 88 interventions. These are summarised in ; the mode of delivery of each trial is shown in and summarised below:
28/88 were a one‐to‐one treatment session with a therapist, 1/88 was a group session, and 2/88 were mixed. (It was unclear for 57 interventions.)
68/88 interventions were delivered face‐to‐face, while 1/88 reported some element of virtual/remote‐delivered intervention. (It was unclear for 19 interventions.)
16/88 interventions were either definitely or probably individualised according to each patient, while 20/88 delivered a standardised (i.e. not individualised) intervention, and 2/88 used a menu‐based approach. (This was unclear for 50 interventions.)
63 studies compared different approaches to physical rehabilitation. These are summarised in ; across these studies, there were 130 interventions; the mode of delivery of each trial is shown in and summarised below:
43/130 were a one‐to‐one treatment session with a therapist, and 13/130 were a group session. (It was unclear for 74 interventions.)
117/130 interventions were delivered face‐to‐face, while 1/130 reported some element of virtual/remote‐delivered intervention. (It was unclear for 12 interventions.)
51/130 interventions were either definitely or probably individualised according to each patient, while 20/130 delivered a standardised (i.e. not individualised) intervention and 1/118 used a menu‐based approach. (This was unclear for 58 interventions.)

## Outcome measures
For outcomes of independence in ADL, motor function, balance, gait velocity, and length of stay, , , , and report the outcome measures reported by the included studies and provides a summary of the outcome measures included within different comparisons in this review. and summarise data available on adverse events: only 19/267 studies reported adverse events in detail ( ). A further 69/267 studies provided limited details of adverse events and study dropouts ( ).
 

## Studies included in qualitative synthesis only
Of the included studies, 73 of 267 were included in qualitative synthesis only. These are summarised in . The main reasons for not being included in quantitative synthesis were that no relevant outcomes were measured and/or reported (n = 25), data were reported in a way that was not suitable for inclusion in meta‐analyses (n = 30), and the study comparisons did not fit within our review comparisons (n = 11).
 

## Excluded studies
A total of 49 studies were excluded at the full‐text screening stage ( ); reasons for exclusion are listed in . The majority (30/49) were excluded because they focussed on a trunk training intervention, which is covered by a Cochrane review of trunk training and is not included in this review. A further 4/49 were excluded as they explored interventions covered in other Cochrane reviews, and were therefore not eligible for inclusion; 7/49 were excluded as the intervention did not meet the inclusion criteria. We excluded 2/49 that did not include a relevant randomised comparison, and 6/49 had been listed in previous versions of this review as awaiting assessment, but there was still insufficient information to support a decision and no new information was expected.

## Risk of bias in included studies
We performed risk of bias assessments using the RoB 2 tool for studies included in meta‐analyses for primary outcomes (independence in ADL and motor function) at both immediate and persisting time points, and for secondary outcomes (balance, gait velocity, and length of stay) at the immediate time point only. The risk of bias assessments are visually presented within the forest plots with traffic lights. RoB 2 assessment data are available on request from the authors.
For the comparison of 'Physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation':
52 studies had data on independence in ADL at an immediate time point; of these, four were judged to be at low risk; 23 were judged to have some concerns; and 25 were judged to be at high risk of bias.
50 studies had data on motor function at an immediate time point; of these, only three were judged to be at low risk; 24 were judged to have some concerns; and 23 were judged to be at high risk of bias.

For the comparison 'Physical rehabilitation versus attention control':
Two studies had data on independence in ADL at an immediate time point; one study was judged to be low risk of bias for all domains; and one study was judged to have an overall high risk of bias.
Five studies had data on motor function at an immediate time point; of these, one was judged to have low risk for all domains; two were judged to have some concerns relating to overall risk of bias; and two were judged to have an overall high risk of bias.

Across the two primary outcomes for comparisons 'Physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation' and 'Physical rehabilitation versus attention control' the majority of high risk of bias judgements were related to concerns about potential deviations from intended interventions, often with concerns about potential for contamination between groups (with no treatment/control group participants receiving the intervention). There were also high risk of bias judgements for a number of studies due to inadequate description of the randomisation process and/or concerns about imbalance between groups, and uncertainty about whether the outcome assessor was blinded, with particular concerns when it appeared that study authors were assessing outcomes. Very few studies had a protocol available, resulting in some concerns about selection of the reported result for a majority of the studies. Few studies reported sufficient information relating to methods of randomisation and allocation concealment or measurement of the outcome, resulting in frequent judgements of some concerns. We judged most studies to be at low risk of bias for missing outcome data, but we judged a small number to have some concerns or high risk of bias due to imbalances between groups and/or unexplained missing outcome data for a relatively high number of participants.
For the comparison 'Additional physical rehabilitation plus usual therapy versus usual therapy alone':
21 studies had data on independence in ADL at an immediate time point; of these, none were judged to have low risk for all domains; 13 were judged to have some concerns relating to overall risk of bias; and eight were judged to have an overall high risk of bias.
22 studies had data on motor function at an immediate time point; of these, only one was judged to have low risk for all domains; 11 were judged to have some concerns relating to overall risk of bias; and 10 were judged to have an overall high risk of bias.

Inadequate reporting of randomisation, allocation concealment, and blinding of outcome assessor, and the absence of a study protocol were common across studies within these comparisons, resulting in the majority of studies being judged to have some concerns. Judgement of high risk of bias was most commonly due to concerns about lack of blinding of outcome assessors. As above, we judged most studies to be at low risk of bias for missing outcome data.
For the comparison 'Physical rehabilitation with a focus on functional task training versus other approaches with less/no focus on functional task training':
22 studies had data relating to independence in ADL at an immediate time point; of these, only one was judged to have low risk for all domains; 16 were judged to have some concerns relating to overall risk of bias; and five were judged to have an overall high risk of bias.
20 studies reported data on motor function at an immediate time point; of these only one was judged to have low risk for all domains; 13 were judged to have some concerns relating to overall risk of bias; and six were judged to have an overall high risk of bias.

For the comparison of 'Physical rehabilitation with a focus on neurophysiological treatment components versus other approaches':
14 studies had data on independence in ADL at an immediate time point; of these, none were judged to have low risk for all domains; 12 were judged to have some concerns relating to overall risk of bias; and two were judged to have an overall high risk of bias.
13 studies had data on motor function at an immediate time point; of these, none were judged to have low risk for all domains; 10 were judged to have some concerns relating to overall risk of bias; and three were judged to have an overall high risk of bias.

Across the two primary outcomes for the aforementioned comparisons, inadequate reporting of randomisation, allocation concealment, and blinding of outcome assessor and the absence of a study protocol were common, resulting in the majority of studies being judged to have some concerns. However, we judged a number of these studies to clearly report having a blinded outcome assessor, resulting in a judgement of low risk of bias for measurement of the outcome. As above, we judged most studies to be at low risk of bias for missing outcome data. Reasons for high risk of bias judgements varied across these studies.
Detailed risk of bias assessment data with consensus responses to the signalling questions in the RoB 2 Excel tool are available on reasonable request.

## Non‐reporting bias
 summarises the number of studies with different comparisons that report outcomes relevant to this review. Only 42% (114/272) of studies report our primary outcome of independence in ADL and 41% (111/272) our primary outcome of motor function. Balance, gait velocity, and length of stay were reported by 23% (62/272), 33% (89/272), and 0.7% (2/272) respectively. Funnel plots for primary outcomes of independence in ADL and motor function for comparisons of physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation and additional physical rehabilitation are provided in ; ; ; and . Visual inspection of these funnel plots demonstrates asymmetry (particularly for the comparison of physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation) ( ; ), suggesting that some small studies report larger effect sizes.
 

## Effects of interventions
See: ; ; ; ; 

## Comparison 1. Physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation
Seventy‐nine studies provided data on 83 comparisons of physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation. See .

## Primary outcomes

## Independence in ADL scales
Physical rehabilitation was more effective than no physical rehabilitation for immediate outcome (SMD 1.32, 95% CI 1.08 to 1.56; I² = 93%; 52 studies, 5403 participants; low‐certainty; ).
Sensitivity analysis, removing studies with high risk of bias (n = 25) or considerable uncertainty (n = 16), did not change this conclusion (SMD 0.60, 95% CI 0.25 to 0.94; I² = 84%; 11 studies, 876 participants) ( ).
Evidence suggests that this benefit may be sustained long‐term (i.e. at a follow‐up time point a period of time after the intervention has stopped) ( ; ).
 

## Motor function scales
Physical rehabilitation was more effective than no physical rehabilitation for immediate outcome (SMD 1.01, 95% CI 0.80 to 1.22; I² = 92%; 50 studies, 5669 participants; low‐certainty; ).
Sensitivity analysis, removing studies with high risk of bias (n = 23) or considerable uncertainty (n = 15), did not change this conclusion (SMD 0.87, 95% CI 0.41 to 1.33; I² = 91%; 12 studies, 981 participants) ( ).
Evidence suggests that this benefit may be sustained long‐term ( ; ).

## Secondary outcomes
Balance (Berg Balance Scale):
Physical rehabilitation was more effective than no physical rehabilitation for immediate outcome (MD 4.54, 95% CI 1.36 to 7.72; I² = 91%; 9 studies, 452 participants; low‐certainty; ).
This benefit was not sustained long‐term ( ; ).
Gait velocity:
Physical rehabilitation was more effective than no physical rehabilitation for immediate outcome (SMD 0.23, 95% CI 0.05 to 0.42; I² = 53%; 18 studies, 1131 participants; moderate‐certainty; ).
This benefit was not sustained long‐term ( ; ).
Length of stay: Only one study (110 participants) assessed length of stay, providing very low‐certainty evidence ( )

## Adverse events
Five studies actively monitored and reported adverse events ( ; ; ; ; ; ). The reported data suggest that there may be an increase in the risk of adverse events for those undergoing physical rehabilitation (RR 8.70, 95% CI 2.90 to 26.06; I² = 45%; 5 studies, 283 participants; very low‐certainty; ). The majority of adverse events come from one study ( ); this study reported "related, probably related and possible related adverse events and serious adverse events", while other studies reported serious adverse events only. Further, and both reported the number of adverse events, rather than the number of participants experiencing an adverse event. This evidence, from only five studies, is insufficient to support generalised conclusions.
One study also reported longer‐term follow‐up data on adverse events, reporting the total number of events that were related, probably related, or possibly related to the intervention ( ). This provides very low‐certainty evidence ( ).

## Subgroup analyses
The results of subgroup analyses are provided in , and in Analysis 9 (independence in ADL) and Analysis 10 (motor function). These indicated that there were differences between subgroups, based on the following:
 Geographical location, with a greater treatment effect in studies conducted in Asia, for the outcomes of independence in ADL (P = 0.03; ) and motor function (P < 0.00001; ).
Amount of treatment, with a smaller treatment effect when treatment was less than 2.5 hours/week, for independence in ADL (P = 0.02; ), but not motor function (P = 0.32; ).

No other differences between subgroups were observed (see ).

## Comparison 2. Physical rehabilitation versus attention control
Thirteen studies provided data on 13 comparisons of physical rehabilitation versus attention control. See .

## Primary outcomes

## Independence in ADL
Physical rehabilitation was more effective than attention control for the immediate outcome (SMD 0.91, 95% CI 0.06 to 1.75; I² = 76%; 2 studies, 106 participants; very low‐certainty; ).
No studies assessed long‐term/follow‐up outcomes ( ).

## Motor function
Physical rehabilitation was no more effective than attention control for immediate outcome (SMD 0.13, 95% CI ‐0.13 to 0.38; I² = 0%; 5 studies, 237 participants; very low‐certainty; ).
This finding is similar at long‐term/follow‐up time points ( ; ).

## Secondary outcomes
Balance (Berg Balance Scale):
Physical rehabilitation was no more effective than attention control for immediate outcome (MD 6.61, 95% CI ‐0.45 to 13.66; I² = 94%; 4 studies (240 participants); very low‐certainty; ).
No studies assessed long‐term/follow‐up outcomes.
Gait velocity:
Physical rehabilitation may be more effective than attention control for immediate outcome (SMD 0.27, 95% CI ‐0.01 to 0.55; I² = 51%; 9 studies, 474 participants; and SMD 0.34, 95% 0.14 to 0.54; I² = 0%; 7 studies, 405 participants, when only direct gait speed data are included; moderate‐certainty; ).
This benefit was not sustained long‐term ( ; ).
Length of stay: Only one study (30 participants) assessed length of stay, providing very low‐certainty evidence ( ).

## Adverse events
Three studies actively monitored and reported adverse events ( ; ; ; ). The reported data suggest that there was no increase in the risk of adverse events for those undergoing physical rehabilitation (RR 1.92, 95% CI 0.75 to 4.93; I² = 0%; 3 studies, 290 participants; very low‐certainty; ), but this evidence is insufficient to support generalised conclusions.

## Comparison 3. Additional physical rehabilitation + usual therapy versus usual therapy alone
Forty‐three studies provided data on 44 comparisons exploring additional physical rehabilitation. See .

## Primary outcomes

## Independence in ADL
Additional physical rehabilitation was beneficial for immediate outcome (SMD 1.26, 95% CI 0.82 to 1.71; I² = 95%; 21 studies, 1972 participants; low‐certainty; ).
Sensitivity analysis to remove studies at high risk of bias (n = 8) did not change this conclusion, but the benefit was no longer observed when studies with considerable uncertainty (n = 8) were also removed (SMD 0.71, 95% CI ‐0.03 to 1.45; I² = 90%; 5 studies, 394 participants) ( ).
No studies assessed long‐term/follow‐up outcomes ( ).

## Motor function
Additional physical rehabilitation was beneficial for immediate outcome (SMD 0.69, 95% CI 0.46 to 0.92; I² = 82%; 22 studies, 1965 participants; low‐certainty; ).
Sensitivity analysis to remove studies at high risk of bias (n = 10) did not change this conclusion, but the benefit was no longer observed when studies with considerable uncertainty (n = 7) were also removed (SMD 0.18, 95% CI ‐0.04 to 0.39; I² = 0%; 5 studies, 338 participants) ( ).
The benefit was not seen at long‐term/follow‐up time points ( ; ).

## Secondary outcomes
Balance (Berg Balance Scale):
Additional physical rehabilitation was beneficial for immediate outcome (MD 5.74, 95% CI 3.78 to 7.71; I² = 86%; 15 studies, 795 participants; low‐certainty; ).
No studies assessed a long‐term/follow‐up outcome.
Gait velocity:
Additional physical rehabilitation was beneficial for immediate outcome (SMD 0.59, 95% CI 0.26 to 0.91; I² = 79%; 19 studies, 1004 participants; low‐certainty; ).
This benefit was not sustained long‐term ( ; ).
Length of stay: No studies assessed length of stay.

## Adverse events
Four studies actively monitored and reported adverse events ( ; ; ; ; ). Our meta‐analysis suggests that there was no increase in the risk of adverse events for those undergoing additional physical rehabilitation, and that the risk may be lower than for the 'usual care only' group (RR 0.80, 95% CI 0.64 to 0.98; I² = 0%; 4 studies, 702 participants; very low‐certainty; ). The majority of adverse events come from a single study ( ), with a statistical weighting of 79.9%; this study reported a wide range of different adverse events, while other studies reported limited types of adverse events only. Further, and both reported the total number of adverse events, rather than the number of participants experiencing at least one adverse event. This evidence, from only four studies, is insufficient to support generalised conclusions.
No studies reported follow‐up data relating to adverse events.

## Subgroup analyses
The results of subgroup analyses are provided in and in Analysis 11 (independence in ADL) and Analysis 12 (motor function). These indicated that there were differences between subgroups, based on the following:
 Geographical location, with a greater treatment effect in studies conducted in Asia, for independence in ADL (P < 0.00001; ) and motor function (P = 0.0001; ; ).
Amount of treatment, with a greater treatment effect the greater the amount of additional therapy, for independence in ADL (P = 0.0007; ) and motor function (P = 0.0001; ).
Duration of intervention, with a greater treatment effect in studies with a shorter duration, for independence in ADL (P = 0.0003; ) but not for motor function (P = 0.68; ). Studies with shorter duration tended to have a higher treatment dose (amount per week).
Focus of treatment, with a greater treatment effect when the additional therapy focussed on functional task training rather than neurophysiological approaches, for independence in ADL (P = 0.02; ), but not for motor function (P = 0.49; ).

A difference between subgroups was also found when comparing studies in which there was (or was not) input from families/carers reported, with a greater effect size in studies reporting input from families/carers for motor function (P < 0.0001; ), but not for independence in ADL (P = 0.25; ).
No other differences between subgroups were observed (see ).

## Comparison 4. Comparisons of different physical rehabilitation approaches
Sixty‐three studies provided data on 65 comparisons of different approaches to physical rehabilitation. These studies were divided into those that compared the following:
An intervention with a focus on functional task training to another approach (an intervention with much less, or no, functional task training).
An intervention with a focus on neurophysiological treatment components with an intervention with a different approach to physical rehabilitation.
Other comparisons (three trials had intervention comparisons that did not fit within the above two groups).

## 4.1. Functional task training versus other approaches
See .

## Primary outcomes

## Independence in ADL
Functional task training was more effective than other approaches (SMD 0.58, 95% CI 0.29 to 0.87; I² = 86%; 22 studies, 1535 participants; low‐certainty; ).
Sensitivity analysis, removing studies with high risk of bias (n = 5) or considerable uncertainty (11), did not change this conclusion (SMD 0.61, 95% CI 0.34 to 0.88; I² = 6%; 6 studies, 243 participants) ( ).
Functional task training remained more effective than other approaches at a long‐term/follow‐up time point ( ; ).

## Motor function
Functional task training was more effective than other approaches (SMD 0.72, 95% CI 0.21 to 1.22; I² = 95%; 20 studies, 1671 participants; very low‐certainty; ).
Sensitivity analysis to remove studies at high risk of bias (n = 6) did not change this conclusion, but the benefit was no longer observed when studies with considerable uncertainty (n = 9) were also removed (SMD 1.01, 95% C ‐0.39 to 2.42; I² = 6%; 5 studies, 333 participants) ( ).
Functional task training remained more effective than other approaches at a long‐term/follow‐up time point ( ; ).

## Secondary outcomes
Balance (Berg Balance Scale):
Functional task training was not more effective than other approaches for immediate outcome (MD 2.16, 95% CI ‐0.24 to 4.53; I² = 94%; 25 studies, 1194 participants; very low‐certainty; ), but it was more effective for the subgroup of studies where the other approach comprised 'less' functional task training (MD 2.56, 95% CI 0.47 to 4.64; I² = 89%; 19 studies, 988 participants; Analysis 7.3.1).
This benefit was not sustained long‐term ( ; ).
Gait velocity:
Functional task training was not more effective than other approaches for immediate outcome (SMD 0.28, 95% CI ‐0.01 to 0.56; I² = 87%; 27 studies, 1719 participants; very low‐certainty; ).
This finding was sustained long‐term ( ; ).
Length of stay:
Only one study (75 participants) assessed length of stay, providing very low‐certainty evidence ( ).

## Adverse events
Six studies actively monitored and reported adverse events ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Meta‐analysis suggests that there was no increase in the risk of adverse events for those receiving functional task training, compared to those receiving less functional task training (RR 1.33, 95% CI 0.91 to 1.94; I² = 0%; 6 studies, 473 participants; very low‐certainty; ). The majority of adverse events come from one study ( ), with a statistical weighting of 89.8%. This study recorded mild/moderate adverse events such as fatigue and muscle soreness, while other studies gathered data on more limited types of adverse events only. Further, reported the total number of adverse events, rather than the number of participants experiencing an adverse event. The very low‐certainty evidence is insufficient to support generalised conclusions.
One study reported follow‐up data relating to adverse events, collecting data at 12 months following the intervention ( ) ( ; ).

## 4.2. Neurophysiological approach versus other approaches
See .

## Primary outcomes

## Independence in ADL
A neuropsychological approach was less effective than other approaches (SMD ‐0.34, 95% CI ‐0.63 to ‐0.06; I² = 70%; 14 studies, 737 participants; low‐certainty; ).
Sensitivity analysis, removing studies with high risk of bias (n = 2) or considerable uncertainty (n = 8), did not change this conclusion and removed heterogeneity (SMD ‐0.33, 95% CI ‐0.66 to ‐0.01; I² = 0%; 4 studies, 149 participants) ( ).
A neuropsychological approach remained less effective than other approaches at a long‐term/follow‐up time point ( ; ).

## Motor function
A neuropsychological approach was no different from other approaches (SMD ‐0.60, 95% CI ‐1.32 to 0.12; I² = 94%; 13 studies, 663 participants; low‐certainty; ).
Sensitivity analysis, removing studies with high risk of bias (n = 3) or considerable uncertainty (n = 6), did not change this conclusion and removed heterogeneity (SMD 0.07, 95% CI ‐0.39 to 0.54; I² = 0%; 4 studies, 72 participants) ( ).
A neuropsychological approach remained no different from other approaches at a long‐term/follow‐up time point ( ; ).

## Secondary outcomes
Balance (Berg Balance Scale):
A neuropsychological approach was no different from other approaches for immediate outcome (MD 0.06, 95% CI ‐5.90 to 6.03; I² = 94%; 9 studies, 292 participants; low‐certainty; ).
There remained no difference long‐term ( ; ).
Gait velocity:
A neuropsychological approach was no different from other approaches for immediate outcome (SMD ‐0.17, 95% CI ‐0.62 to 0.27; I² = 85%; 16 studies, 630 participants; very low‐certainty; ).
There remained no difference long‐term ( , ).
Length of stay:
No studies assessed length of stay between a neurophysiological approach versus other approaches.

## Adverse events
Two studies actively monitored and reported adverse events ( ; ; see ), but only data from were suitable for analysis. However, this study reported no adverse events that were considered related to the intervention in both arms, and the effect size is therefore not estimable (1 study, 40 participants; very low‐certainty; ). This evidence is insufficient to support generalised conclusions.
No studies reported follow‐up data relating to adverse events.

## Comparisons of other approaches
Three studies compared physical rehabilitation approaches that did not fit within the groups above. Results of these individual trials are reported in .

## Discussion

## Key findings
This review included 267 studies (21,838 participants) that explored the effects of different physical rehabilitation approaches; data from 194 (15,815 participants) were included in meta‐analyses. Half of these studies (133/267) were carried out in China.

## Is physical rehabilitation more effective than no rehabilitation?
A total of 105 studies compared physical rehabilitation with no physical rehabilitation. Compared to no physical rehabilitation, the evidence suggests the following:
Physical rehabilitation may improve independence in ADL, motor function, and balance immediately after intervention (low‐certainty evidence).
Physical rehabilitation likely improves gait speed immediately after intervention (moderate‐certainty evidence).
The evidence is very uncertain about the effects of physical rehabilitation on length of stay and adverse events (very low‐certainty evidence).

Improvements in independence of daily living and motor function may be sustained in the long term. Our certainty in the effect size is low (moderate for gait speed), due to variations between participants, interventions, and outcome measures, and poor reporting. Certainty in long‐term outcomes is limited by lack of data with very low numbers of studies reporting follow‐up data for independence in ADL (n = 12), motor function (n = 11), balance (n = 4), or gait velocity (n = 7).

## Can we explain the heterogeneity in these findings?
There was substantial heterogeneity in all meta‐analyses. Removing studies at high risk of bias or considerable uncertainty did not change conclusions. Exploration of subgroups demonstrated that, for the primary outcomes of independence in ADL and motor function:
Physical rehabilitation had a greater treatment effect in studies conducted in Asia than in studies conducted elsewhere. However, relatively few studies were conducted in countries other than China (only 6/52 and 3/50 studies for outcomes of independence in ADL and motor function respectively). Further, the studies conducted in continents other than Asia all recruited participants who were living at home and/or were several months or years post‐stroke, while the majority of those conducted in Asia recruited hospital inpatients. Differences in risk of bias were also noted, with more concerns about risk of bias in studies from Asia. Thus, this subgroup difference may be a reflection of the different research designs, conduct, and reporting, and not an indication that there are differences in outcomes for patients living in different countries.
Studies delivering less than 2.5 hours/week had a smaller treatment effect than those delivering more. There was a statistically significant subgroup difference for independence in ADL but not for motor function, but considerable heterogeneity between studies limiting certainty in findings.

No subgroup effects were found for time post‐stroke, duration of intervention, focus of treatment components, name of approach, or provider of intervention.

## Is physical rehabilitation more effective than attention control?
A total of 19 studies compared physical rehabilitation with attention control. Limited evidence suggests that, compared to attention control:
Physical rehabilitation may improve independence in ADL, but the evidence is very uncertain (very low‐certainty evidence).
Physical rehabilitation likely improves gait speed (moderate‐certainty evidence).
Physical rehabilitation may not improve motor function or balance, but the evidence is very uncertain (very low‐certainty evidence).
The evidence is very uncertain about the effects of physical rehabilitation on length of stay and adverse events (very low‐certainty evidence).

Our certainty in these findings is limited by the volume of data, variations between participants, interventions, and outcome measures, and poor reporting. There was insufficient evidence to support conclusions about the long‐term benefits of physical rehabilitation compared to attention control.

## Is additional physical rehabilitation beneficial?
We identified 56 studies that explored the effect of additional physical rehabilitation (added to usual rehabilitation). The evidence suggests that:
Additional physical rehabilitation plus usual therapy may improve independence in ADL, motor function, balance, and gait speed (low‐certainty evidence). Our certainty in these findings is low, due to variations between participants, interventions, outcomes, and poor reporting.
None of the 56 studies reported data on length of stay.
The evidence is very uncertain about the effect of additional physical rehabilitation on adverse events (very low‐certainty evidence).

There was very limited data for follow‐up measures, providing insufficient evidence to support conclusions about long‐term benefits.

## Can we explain the heterogeneity in these findings?
There was substantial heterogeneity in all meta‐analyses. Removing studies at high risk of bias did not change conclusions, but the benefits of additional physical rehabilitation were no longer observed when studies with considerable uncertainty were removed. Exploration of subgroups demonstrated that, for primary outcomes of independence in ADL and motor function:
Additional physical rehabilitation had a greater treatment effect in studies conducted in Asia than in studies conducted elsewhere. As above, there are a number of factors ‐ particularly time post‐stroke of participants and risk of bias ‐ which may explain this finding.
The greater the amount of additional physical rehabilitation, the greater the treatment effect. The majority of studies (12/21 and 11/21 respectively for independence in ADL and motor function) delivered more than five hours/week of additional rehabilitation.
There was a smaller treatment effect in studies of longer duration, for independence in ADL, but not for measures of motor function. In general, studies with longer duration tended to have a lower treatment dose (amount per week).
Studies involving families/carers (in addition to medical/therapeutic staff) had a greater effect size than studies not reporting any family/carer involvement, for measures of motor function but not for independence in ADL.
Studies delivering additional therapy that focussed on functional task training had a greater effect size than those where the additional therapy focussed on neurophysiological approaches, for measures of motor function, but not for independence in ADL.

No subgroup effects were found for subgroups based on time post‐stroke.

## Is one approach to physical rehabilitation better than any other approach to physical rehabilitation?
A total of 92 studies explored the effect of different approaches to physical rehabilitation. The evidence relating to functional task training suggests that, compared to other approaches:
Functional task training approaches may improve independence in ADL. This is low‐certainty evidence.
Functional task training approaches may improve motor function, but this evidence is of very low certainty.
Functional task training approaches may not improve balance when compared to neurophysiological approaches, but may improve balance when compared to approaches with less functional task training. However, this evidence is of very low certainty.
Functional task training approaches may not improve gait speed, but the evidence is very uncertain.
There is considerable uncertainty about the effects of functional task training on length of stay and adverse events (very low‐certainty evidence).

The evidence relating to neurophysiological approaches suggests that, compared to other approaches:
Neurophysiological approaches may be less effective for independence in ADL. This is based on low‐certainty evidence.
Neurophysiological approaches may be no different from other approaches for motor function or balance. This is low‐certainty evidence.
Neurophysiological approaches may be no different from other approaches for gait speed, but this evidence is of very low certainty.
No conclusions can be made about length of stay, as none of the studies reported this outcome.
There is considerable uncertainty about the effect of neurophysiological approaches on adverse events (very low‐certainty evidence).

Our certainty in these findings is low to very low, due to variations between participants, interventions, outcomes, and comparisons, and poor reporting. Removing studies at high risk of bias did not change conclusions relating to functional task training for primary outcomes, but removing studies with considerable uncertainty changed the findings for the motor function (but not the independence in ADL) outcome. Removing studies at high risk of bias did not change conclusions relating to neurophysiological approaches for the primary outcomes.

## Identification of relevant trials
The identification of all relevant trials was confounded by several factors.
Inconsistent and poorly defined terminology: Electronic searching was difficult because the names given to different physiotherapy rehabilitation approaches are poorly documented, often have several derivations, and have varied over time. Furthermore, the interventions were not always described as 'physiotherapy' or 'physical therapy,' but sometimes were described as 'rehabilitation,' 'training', or 'exercise.' In an attempt to identify all relevant trials, we used broad and multiple search terms to identify interventions that may meet our definition of physical rehabilitation to improve function and mobility. However, the challenges of inconsistent terminology and poor descriptions of rehabilitation interventions introduced considerably uncertainty and subjectivity into the process of study identification and selection.
Change in focus of the review: As described above, for this update of the review, additional criteria were introduced to limit the scope of this review. No change to the search strategy or to the selection criteria was implemented, and we do not believe that any changes would be justified. These criteria have narrowed the scope of the review, so we are confident that decisions made relating to the exclusion of studies from the search results for previous versions of this review would not be different in light of the changed focus. However, selection of relevant trials for this review has always been challenging, and we do not believe that the change in focus of the review has affected study selection in one direction or another.
Lack of detail within the abstracts: Lack of information on study methods, participants, and interventions potentially increases the chance that a relevant trial may be excluded.
Material published in Chinese language: A substantial number of the included studies were carried out in China and were published in Chinese language. For this version of the review, we conducted searches of Chinese databases, increasing our chances of identifying relevant RCTs published in Chinese language. However, these searches identified thousands of RCTs of rehabilitation (including but not limited to physical rehabilitation) for people after stroke. Due to the numbers involved, we made many decisions to exclude based on abstracts and did not always obtain full papers. Further, due to limitations in the time and resources for this review update, we did not complete screening of the search results of Chinese‐language databases. These actions may have led to the exclusion of some relevant trials. However, given the large number of (small) heterogeneous trials included in this review, we are confident that inclusion of further trials is unlikely to change the conclusions of this review.

We note the search for this large‐scale review update was performed in November 2022 and recognise this as a potential limitation. However, it is unlikely that evidence that has emerged since November 2022 would substantially alter our current findings/conclusions. Furthermore, given the sheer size of this review, future updates in its current form may lead to versions being too large to be useful for decision‐making. Therefore, we advise against an update of this review in its current form and will commit to revisiting the review scope with relevant stakeholders to ensure the most pertinent questions for decision‐making are explored.

## Completeness of published studies
Reporting was considered poor or incomplete for the majority of included studies. For example, time since stroke was unclear or not reported in almost one‐third of all included studies, and for over half of the reported interventions, it was not clear if the mode of delivery involved a one‐to‐one treatment session.
Reporting of methodological details required to judge risk of bias was generally incomplete. Often studies reported the number of included participants, inferring that there were no dropouts. While we have taken this information at face value, we suspect that in some cases, study authors have excluded dropouts from the results, potentially introducing biases.
Many of the relevant trials that we included were published only as abstracts or as brief reports. This was frequently the case for studies published in Chinese, for which published versions were often less than two pages long. Due to the number of studies included in this review, we did not have the time or resources to contact all study authors for further information on trial design or study results. Thus, in general, the completeness of study information is low, resulting in a high number of studies for which risk of bias judgements are 'unclear' and a high number of studies that do not contribute data to the analyses.

## Completeness of outcome data
Very few studies had a published protocol that we were able to access (only five studies with primary outcome data contributing to analysis of physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabilitation; and only two studies with primary outcome data contributing to analysis of additional physical rehabilitation). The lack of protocol made it impossible to judge whether reporting of outcomes and outcome data was as pre‐stated, reducing our certainty in the evidence.
There was insufficient evidence to reach any conclusions relating to length of stay, with only three studies reporting data on this as an outcome.
Relatively few studies followed up with participants after the intervention had ended: data were available immediately at the end of intervention for 114 studies for the independence in ADL outcome and for 111 studies for the motor function outcome, but only for 24 and 28 studies, respectively, for a longer‐term follow‐up outcome. Follow‐up data from studies comparing physical rehabilitation with no physical rehabilitation demonstrate that the beneficial effect of intervention is maintained for primary outcomes. Limited evidence from studies comparing different approaches to physical rehabilitation also suggests that effects may be sustained long‐term. However, in the comparisons of physical rehabilitation versus attention control and effects of additional physical rehabilitation, there were insufficient primary outcome data to support conclusions about long‐term effects. Lack of follow‐up data therefore limits the ability of review authors to draw generalisable conclusions relating to whether observed benefits are maintained for some comparisons.

## Reporting of adverse events
Only 19 studies actively monitored adverse events. There was significant inconsistency in the way adverse events and dropouts were reported in the studies, making synthesis problematic. Some study reports distinguished between adverse events and dropouts; others reported no adverse events but detailed participants dropping out due to adverse events. Some did not report on adverse events at all, or simply stated that none occurred. A post‐hoc decision was made to focus on adverse events that were possibly, probably, or definitely related to the study/study interventions, as attributed by the study authors. This decision was made in order to exclude data about adverse events that were clearly unrelated to the study (e.g. reactions to drugs). However, inconsistencies were noted in judgements across our author team as to whether adverse events, where reported, could possibly be related to the study or not. For example, some studies considered some (or any) cardiovascular events (e.g. stroke progression, transient ischaemic attack (TIA)) to be possibly related to the study, while others did not. Further, studies reporting the greatest number of adverse events tended to have procedures in place to gather information about mild/moderate events (e.g. muscle strains and fatigue) while other studies did not gather data relating to these events. Studies gathering information about these mild/moderate events often reported the total number of reported events, rather than the number of participants experiencing an adverse event. These differences mean that we have very low confidence in the findings of the analyses of adverse events.

## Descriptions of interventions
Clear, concise documentation of complex physical interventions is exceptionally difficult to achieve. Information provided by study authors regarding interventions administered in the included trials is in the . Although many of the included studies attempt to describe all administered interventions, the available documentation is often insufficient to allow confident and accurate repetition of the applied rehabilitation approach. Problems with documentation of interventions generally are not the fault of researchers or therapists, but rather are due to the fundamental problem of recording methods of physical handling skills and techniques, and the nature of the relationship between stroke survivor and physiotherapist. Documentation of this process would generally be complex and 'wordy'; therefore, often it is not possible to present within research papers with limitations on length. These problems are confounded by the fact that treatments applied are often ultimately the decision of a single physiotherapist, based on an individual assessment of a unique stroke survivor's movement disorders, and adapted or modified throughout a treatment session. However, it is important to note that the interventions we have included, which have this variability, align with the definition of rehabilitation ( ) and with the interventions stated as relevant to our review.
Furthermore, the common basis of physical rehabilitation 'approaches' is that they are holistic. All body parts and movements can be assessed and treated based on the selected approach; however, a physiotherapist may select to concentrate on the treatment of one particular body part or movement during a treatment session. Subsequently, treatments given to specific stroke survivors by individual therapists may vary enormously. This review attempted to limit this variation slightly by excluding trials that had provided interventions only to the upper limb or trunk. Nevertheless, although we attempted to explore the use of different treatment components through subgroup analyses, it remains conceivable that substantial differences exist between the physical rehabilitation interventions given to participants within the same subgroups.
Furthermore, we found that 'basic' information about the interventions (such as whether it was delivered face‐to‐face, the number and frequency of sessions, and who provided the intervention) was often inadequate: templates to promote adequate and consistent reporting of interventions are essential.

## Categorisation of treatment components within interventions
The comparisons carried out within the review relied on categorisation of treatment components that were described within the published papers. One review author categorised the described treatments using agreed definitions of individual treatment components, and a second review author checked these. This categorisation process relied on adequate descriptions within published papers. Papers that published only very brief descriptions of interventions therefore may have resulted in categorisations that were not truly reflective of the intervention delivered.
Furthermore, this process of categorisation was highly dependent on the language and terminology provided within a written description. For example, an author may state "activities aimed at improved gait." This description would result in categorisation only within the functional task training component of "walking". However, in practice, this intervention could have included components such as active or active‐assisted movement, sensorimotor facilitation, and muscle strengthening. Therefore, our method of categorisation is likely to have underestimated rather than overestimated the numbers of treatment components and intervention categories. Hence, if any inaccuracy exists, the interventions are likely to be more "mixed" and eclectic than has been captured by our method of categorisation.
A number of difficulties were encountered in distinguishing between interventions that included only functional task training components and those that also included musculoskeletal (active) components. In particular, the review authors encountered difficulties in determining whether an intervention focused on a functional task might also include active or active‐assisted movement. This reality was due to the fact that all functional task training necessitates active movement, and overlap between practice of an active movement and practice of a functional task can be inevitable. The framework for categorisation of treatment components was co‐produced in partnership with our stakeholder group for this review update (see ; ); this was developed as there was no suitable existing framework. Further work is required to explore and refine the clinical relevance and validity of this framework.

## Treatment components within named approaches
We were aware when developing the definitions for categorisation of described interventions that a number of studies have stated a named approach (e.g. 'Bobath,' 'Motor‐relearning programme') without providing any description of the treatment components included within the approach. We therefore wrote definitions such that these studies could be captured by our system of categorisation of individual treatment components. However, including studies that have provided only the name of an approach without providing any description potentially introduces a number of biases. These biases occur as a result of the fact that the content of named approaches potentially changes over time and in keeping with geographical or personal preferences and biases. In particular, several studies reported that the intervention was 'Bobath', and much debate has surrounded the content of physiotherapy interventions based on the Bobath concept. This debate arises largely from the fact that the content of the Bobath approach has changed over time, published descriptions are limited, and the content of current therapy is variable ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). A summary of the philosophy or theory of some of the key named approaches was drawn up for the first version of this review and is provided in . Some of the studies included in this review described the intervention as "Bobath" without providing any further details (e.g. ; ; ), and some described techniques that may be considered outdated (e.g. "Bobath shaking hands technique", ); thus we cannot be confident about the relevance or applicability of the content of the interventions delivered in these studies.
Thirty studies, all conducted in China, described the intervention as a 'three‐staged' approach. Generally, there was a description ‐ often relatively detailed ‐ of the intervention/treatment components involved in this named approach. However, we did note a number of differences between trials in the treatment components that were described as comprising part of this. These differences led to differences in how we categorised the treatment components of these studies, with some categorised as comprising a mix of functional task training, musculoskeletal and neurophysiological components (e.g. ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), and some categorised as being primarily focussed on functional task training (e.g. ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). We are unclear as to whether these differences were due to variations in the delivered intervention, or differences in the reporting of the intervention.

## Translation into English
The review team worked in English language, and the majority of screening and trial selection was conducted in English. We used the translation function within Covidence to translate foreign‐language abstracts into English. There is a risk of translation errors leading to inadvertent exclusion of studies. Where we were uncertain about the 'sense' of the English translation, we sought input from a person who was fluent in the relevant language.
All of the included full papers were published in either English or Chinese language. For the Chinese‐language papers, we sought translation of the intervention description into English. We also used Google Translate to translate sections of text from some of Chinese‐language studies, and this translated text was used during full‐text screening and data extraction from included studies. Our Chinese‐speaking review member checked a random 10% of the data extracted from papers where we used Google Translate, and this did not identify any serious errors or concerns. Again, where there were any uncertainties in the Google Translate text, we sought input from our Chinese‐speaking review author (PLC) or volunteers (see ). While we acknowledge that there are limitations associated with the use of Google Translate (that concerns have been raised about the accuracy of technical translations) and that this may have introduced some errors within our data extraction, we do not think that our use of Google Translate (as opposed to in‐person translation) should have affected the conclusions. Numerical data within Chinese‐language papers were generally presented as Arabic numerals within tables, aiding accurate extraction of results data.
In addition, several included studies were carried out in China and the papers were published in English, but by authors for whom English clearly was not the first language. These translations provided a number of challenges in relation to the interpretation of meanings and subsequent classification of treatment components. For example, in several papers, it was unclear whether 'standing up training' referred to activities carried out in standing (i.e. training to promote standing balance) or to sit‐to‐stand training. In these cases, decisions were made based on discussion between two review authors (one of whom was a Chinese‐speaking physiotherapist (PLC)).

## Geographical location of studies
Different cultures and healthcare systems: This review brings together trial evidence from 36 countries around the world. Consequently, we have combined data from very heterogeneous settings, where culture, beliefs, and healthcare practice vary substantially. As 50% of the studies were carried out in China, our subgroup analyses focussed on comparing the results of studies carried out in China with studies carried out in the rest of the world. These subgroup analyses indicated that studies carried out in China may have a greater effect size than those carried out elsewhere in the world. This finding may be due to reporting biases and may reflect biases associated with publication, location, citation, and language. This finding may also reflect a true difference in the effects of interventions carried out in different geographical locations, which may be a result of differences in culture, traditions, training, and implementation of interventions. However, all studies that compared physical rehabilitation against no physical rehabilitation in the acute phase of stroke were carried out in China; this is a reflection of the fact that 'usual care' can comprise no routine physical rehabilitation within these geographical settings. Hence, studies conducted in China generally had participants who had a shorter time since stroke, and this provides a likely explanation for the greater treatment size observed in studies conducted in Asia.

## Risk of bias in included studies
Judgement of certainty of evidence was very difficult because of poor, incomplete, or brief reporting of information. Only 13 studies included in the analyses were judged to be at low risk of bias for all domains. We carried out sensitivity analyses to explore the effect of including studies with high or unclear risk of bias. These sensitivity analyses generally found that removal of studies with high or unclear risk of bias did not alter the direction (or significance) of the results. Thus, although the quality of most of the evidence included in this review remains uncertain, the fact that inclusion of these studies does not affect the direction of results gives us greater confidence in our findings. The main message arising from this review in relation to certainty of the evidence is that it is essential that reporting of methodological features of RCTs of physical rehabilitation interventions is improved, and that studies are reported using the CONSORT guidelines for reporting ( ).
Studies that used quasi‐random assignment are excluded from this review. However, we found information about the method of randomisation particularly difficult to judge in a number of studies, particularly studies published in Chinese, in which use of the term 'random' in English abstracts did not always reflect the descriptions provided in Chinese versions of the study. There is an urgent need for trialists to address the issue of adequate reporting of methods of randomisation. It is possible that we have inadvertently included in this review trials that used quasi‐random assignment, rather than true random assignment.
The nature of rehabilitation interventions and the ethical requirement to obtain informed consent often make it difficult, if not impossible, to blind participants. It is generally impossible to blind the treating therapist because treating therapists have to be familiar with the intervention they are administering. Therapists who strongly favoured one approach over another could introduce performance bias. In several studies, the same therapist administered treatment to participants in both study groups; this potentially introduced considerable contamination between groups. The 'beliefs' of stroke survivors and therapists may further contribute to biases within many of these studies, and the large number of different geographical locations in which studies were carried out means that the studies were carried out with participants living in a wide variety of cultures, which could potentially impact the response to physical rehabilitation. Frequently there was insufficient evidence to judge if there was likely to have been bias due to deviations from the intended interventions. Many of the included trials did not state whether they used a blinded assessor. Lack of blinding of assessors potentially introduces considerable bias into the study results. This is particularly important in studies in which therapists often have strong beliefs in support of a particular approach.
We judged the majority of studies included in the analyses to have a low risk of bias due to missing outcome data. This is generally because studies did not report any dropouts. However, while for these studies we found no evidence to suggest that there were unreported dropouts, often we lacked confidence in these judgements. It is challenging, if not impossible, to identify information that trialists have failed to report.
We identified published protocols for very few of the included trials, meaning that there was considerable uncertainty about potential biases in the selection of the reported result. We did not have protocols for any of the Chinese‐language trials; there is a chance that we have failed to find these due to the fact that (other than our searching of Chinese electronic databases) we conducted all our searching in the English language.
The most frequent risk of bias judgement for all domains (except for bias due to missing outcome data; see above) was one of 'uncertain'. This is due to the poor nature of reporting across the trials. Where trials reported more detail, this sometimes led to a judgement of high risk of bias; thus, it is possible that the poor reporting in some trials resulted in an overly 'generous' risk of bias judgement (i.e. 'uncertain' rather than 'high' risk of bias).

## Heterogeneity of included trials
In addition to the limitations of the study methods, the trials included in the review had considerable heterogeneity. The key areas of heterogeneity were related to interventions and to participants.
Interventions: Although attempts have been made to categorise the interventions using a systematic, rigorous, and valid method, considerable variation may still exist between studies that have used similar types of treatment components. Furthermore, substantial variations in dose and intensity and in the length of the treatment period were noted. Also different is the fact that some interventions were carried out only when a therapist was present, whilst in other studies, independent practice of activities outside therapy sessions was encouraged.
Participants: The participant populations in the different included studies were heterogeneous. They varied from limited populations (e.g. pure motor stroke only) to those inclusive of all stroke survivors. Considerable variation in the time since stroke was also noted. The validity of combining results from such heterogeneous samples is debatable. We previously recommended that updates consider subgroup analysis to explore the initial impairment of included participants; however, there remains a lack of data relating to initial impairment in the majority of included studies.

Although we have carried out subgroup analyses to explore issues relating to the heterogeneity of both the interventions (i.e. dose, duration, components) and the participants (time since stroke) and other issues (geographical location, provider of intervention), it is likely that a complex interrelationship exists between some of the subgroups that we have been unable to explore. For example, studies carried out in China tended to be those with the least time since stroke, meaning that effects found that have been attributed to geographical location could be due equally to time since stroke (and vice versa). We believe that this may be true for a number of other variables. An example of this was demonstrated by the finding within a subgroup analysis that studies with a shorter duration had a greater benefit (see ; ): exploration reveals that studies with a shorter treatment duration generally had a greater daily dose, and it seems reasonable to assume that there may also be a difference in participants, as participants who are able to comply with a high daily dose may differ from those who cannot.

## Publication bias
As has been discussed above, the identification of all relevant trials was confounded by a number of factors, and, despite a rigorous search strategy, we are not fully confident that we will have successfully identified all studies. Consequently, this review may be biased towards particular types of studies and publications.
In the last version of this review ( ), we identified a large proportion of relevant studies that were conducted in China. This led to the decision to search the Chinese Biomedical Literature Database for this update, and provides some explanation for the proportion (133/267) of Chinese‐language studies included in this update. However, we did not search any other non‐English language databases. Therefore, this review may be biased towards studies listed in English‐ and Chinese‐language databases, and we may be missing other non‐English studies or studies published in journals that are not included in the electronic databases that we searched.
Further, despite our searching of the Chinese Biomedical Literature Database, we are not confident that we will have successfully identified all relevant studies published in China, or in the Chinese language.

## Non‐reporting bias
Results of funnel plots revealed that some small studies report larger effect sizes. This could be an indication that small studies, with poor methodological quality, have spuriously inflated effects ( ). Our sensitivity analyses, removing studies at high or unclear risk of bias from analyses, generally did not change the conclusion (although the effect size may change/reduce): these sensitivity analyses increased our confidence in the findings of our analyses.
A small number of studies presented data that we were not able to incorporate into meta‐analyses. Very few studies had published study protocols that we were able to access, limiting our ability to make judgements relating to potential reporting biases (e.g. only 3/52 studies in and 3/50 in were judged as low risk of bias for bias in selection of the reported result, with the remaining uncertain due to lack of protocol).

## Subgroup analyses
We carried out subgroup analyses to explore seven different effect modifiers (see ). False‐negative and false‐positive significance tests increase in likelihood rapidly as more subgroup analyses are performed ( ), therefore there is a risk of errors as a result of the number of effect modifiers performed. We have included these effect modifiers as these were considered of high importance by our stakeholder group and the list of these important subgroups was decided prior to completion of the analyses, meaning that this decision was not influenced by the study findings. However, this is a high number of subgroup analyses within a large and complex review, and exploration of these potentially introduces errors and misleading findings. Future updates of this review should consider, identify, and pre‐state a smaller number of priority effect modifiers to explore.

## Treatment components and categorisation of interventions
We introduced a method of categorisation of interventions that was agreed by a stakeholder group of physiotherapists, stroke survivors, and carers. This method of categorisation has not been tested or explored further, and such testing is necessary to confirm the relevance and validity of the identified categories. In the absence of any other suitable method of categorisation of treatment components, we believe that we have adopted a robust, justifiable method—based on consensus between physiotherapists, stroke survivors, and carers. We argue that the involvement of this expert stakeholder group has considerably enhanced our review and is substantially advantageous compared with the alternative of having researchers make decisions over the categorisation of interventions and the structure of comparisons. Feedback from the stakeholder group members confirms that the group perceived that their input benefited the format of the review and made the review more clinically relevant. Due to the limited nature of our resources, members of the stakeholder group were based in the UK; however, two international webinars were held at which the proposed framework for categorising the physical rehabilitation interventions was presented and feedback received. This did not identify any concerns from international stakeholders with the framework that had been developed. Nevertheless, given known differences in physiotherapy practice in different parts of the world, we recommend that the proposed categories are explored and amended to reflect international practices in relation to stroke rehabilitation.
We recognise that the terminology used, particularly in the titles of the categories, may not be universally accepted or understood. We acknowledge that the appropriateness of terms such as 'functional,' 'neurophysiological', and 'musculoskeletal' can be debated when used in the way we have used them within this review. However, these terms were selected by the stakeholder group to have clinical meaning, and our stakeholder group reached a consensus on definitions of all terms used to categorise the interventions ( ; ).

## Appraisal of quality in Chinese‐language papers
As described earlier, while no language restrictions were applied, and studies were conducted in 36 different countries, all included studies were published in either English or Chinese language. Chinese papers included in the review for which we were unable to use Google Translate (due to formatting issues in obtained papers) were discussed between one review author with the language skills to translate relevant sections of the papers and a second author who did not speak Chinese. The review author with Chinese language skills also possessed the necessary quality appraisal skills and had detailed expertise of physiotherapy and stroke rehabilitation. These two authors discussed the papers and completed data extraction together. Audio recordings of discussions/live translations were made to enable the review team to refer back to these if further information was required. Thus, although two review authors did consider the quality of these non‐English language papers, the assessment of the second review author was based entirely on the translation provided by the first review author. This method means that if the first review author made any errors in translation, or missed information provided in the non‐English text, the second review author will not have identified this. Thus, although having two review authors for these papers offers advantages, it does not provide the same level of 'independence' as the process of having two independent review authors for the English language papers. However, given the volume of Chinese‐language papers that we have included, and the available resources for this review, we believe that we have taken all steps available to us to minimise potential biases in this process.

## Conclusions arising from this review
Following completion of the analyses and results of this review, this information was presented to our stakeholder group, which comprised physiotherapists, stroke survivors, and carers. For each of the main comparisons and associated subgroup analyses, group members discussed the clinical implications and key messages arising from the results. The points discussed have been incorporated within the and sections of this review. In particular, the stakeholder group members highlighted the need to specifically draw out information pertaining to the dose of interventions delivered within the studies, as this was believed to have important implications for clinical practice. We believe that this process of consultation considerably removes potential biases from the process of reaching conclusions from this review, as the conclusions reflect the views of expert clinicians, stroke survivors, and carers, rather than only the potentially biased viewpoints of researchers and academics.

## Previous version of this review
The previous version of this review concluded that "no one approach to physical rehabilitation is more (or less) effective in promoting recovery of function and mobility after stroke" and that "physical rehabilitation, using a mix of components from different approaches, is effective for recovery of function and mobility after stroke" ( ).
These findings supported the conclusion that "physical rehabilitation should not be limited to compartmentalised, named rehabilitation approaches, but should comprise clearly defined, well‐described, evidence‐based physical treatments regardless of historical or philosophical origin". This updated review agrees with, and adds considerable evidence to, these previous conclusions. While the 2014 version concluded that evidence indicates that there is no difference between physical rehabilitation approaches, this updated version provides evidence that physical rehabilitation focussing on functional task training is most effective, with some evidence that treatments described as "Bobath" approach may be less effective than other approaches to rehabilitation.

## Other reviews
This updated review is in agreement with the conclusions of other published reviews. A number of other published reviews agree with the conclusion that physiotherapists should not use compartmentalised, named approaches, but should select clearly defined and described techniques and task‐specific treatments, regardless of their historical or philosophical origin ( ; ; ; ). A number of reviews have specifically addressed questions relating to the efficacy of 'Bobath' or 'neurodevelopmental' approaches, and agree with the conclusion that the Bobath (or neurodevelopment) approach is not more effective, and may be less effective, than other interventions ( ; ; ; ; ).
A scoping review has highlighted serious concerns about the description and consideration of Bobath therapy within randomised controlled trials and has provided an "updated Bobath clinical framework" to inform practice and research ( ; ). The framework co‐produced with our stakeholder group and used in this review did not consider this published framework, as the focus was on the description of individual treatment components, regardless of the philosophical origin.
 aimed specifically to review RCTs that compared rehabilitation versus standard care after stroke in China. This review pooled evidence from 31 trials (5220 participants) that reported independence in ADL (Barthel Index) and 27 trials (4501 participants) that reported motor function (Fugl‐Meyer Assessment). Meta‐analyses supported the conclusion that "there is some evidence that rehabilitation post‐stroke is more effective than no rehabilitation, improving activities of daily living and reducing disability." highlighted limitations relating to low reporting quality and study heterogeneity. Our updated review adds to this review, providing greater certainty that physical rehabilitation is more effective than no rehabilitation.
 conducted a systematic review focussed on rehabilitation for physical function in people with severe stroke, including 28 trials (2677 participants) of interventions including early mobilisation and upper limb rehabilitation, as well as lower limb therapy. The review authors concluded that additional lower limb rehabilitation therapy improved ADL independence, but that this effect may not be sustained long‐term (at six months). Our findings are in agreement with this conclusion, with our review providing further information relating to the content and dose of the interventions.

## Authors' conclusions

## Implications for practice
Physical rehabilitation compared to no physical rehabilitation: Physical rehabilitation, using a mix of different treatment components, appears more effective than no physical rehabilitation for recovery of function and mobility after stroke. There is low‐certainty evidence that, compared to no physical rehabilitation, physical rehabilitation may improve independence in ADL, motor function, and balance. There is moderate‐certainty evidence that physical rehabilitation likely improves gait speed. There is insufficient evidence to reach conclusions about the effects on length of stay or adverse events. There is some evidence of greater improvements in measures of activities of daily living when more than 2.5 hours/week of physical rehabilitation was delivered.
Physical rehabilitation compared to attention control: There is very low‐certainty evidence that, compared to attention control, physical rehabilitation may improve independence in ADL, and moderate‐certainty evidence that physical rehabilitation likely improves gait speed. However, there is very low‐certainty evidence that physical rehabilitation may not improve motor function or balance. There is insufficient evidence to reach conclusions about the effects on length of stay or adverse events.
Additional physical rehabilitation: There is low‐certainty evidence that additional rehabilitation (i.e. provided in addition to usual/conventional rehabilitation) may improve independence in ADL, motor function, balance, and gait speed. The greater the amount of additional physical rehabilitation, the greater the treatment effect may be. There is insufficient evidence to reach conclusions about the effects on length of stay or adverse events.
Different approaches to physical rehabilitation:Functional task training: Physical rehabilitation focussing on functional task training (the active practice of real‐life tasks with the aim of acquiring, or re‐acquiring, a skill) comprises a mixture of treatment components, selected according to the individual needs of the patient, and does not align with any "named" rehabilitation approach. Physical rehabilitation that focusses on functional task training appears to be more effective than other approaches: there is low‐certainty evidence that functional task training may improve independence in ADL and very low‐certainty evidence that it may improve motor function. However, there was very low‐certainty evidence that functional task training may not improve gait speed or balance more than other approaches. Neurophysiological approaches: Neurophysiological approaches to physical rehabilitation are not superior to, and may be less effective than, other physical rehabilitation approaches: there is low‐certainty evidence that neurophysiological approaches may be less effective than other approaches for independence in ADL, low‐certainty evidence that neurophysiological approaches may be no different from other approaches for motor function and balance, and very low‐certainty evidence that neurophysiological approaches may be no different from other approaches for gait speed. Evidence is insufficient to support any conclusions about the effects of different approaches to physical rehabilitation on length of stay or adverse events.
Evidence relating to the dose of physical rehabilitation is limited by substantial heterogeneity and does not support robust conclusions. While the optimum amount of physical rehabilitation remains unknown, evidence does suggest that a greater dose may bring greater benefits, especially where the dose is more than 2.5 hours/week, and that intensive periods of physical rehabilitation may be beneficial even when delivered for a short period of time. Some limited evidence also suggests that the involvement of families/carers as part of the process of physical rehabilitation may bring positive impacts.
Members of the stakeholder group for this review discussed and agreed on the key implications for practice that they perceived as arising from this evidence (see ).

## Implications for research
Physical rehabilitation using a mixture of treatment components and focussed on functional task training appears beneficial, and additional ‐ or a higher dose of ‐ physical rehabilitation appears to bring greater benefit. However, the current evidence base remains limited; key factors limiting conclusions that can be supported by the current research studies include:
Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) are generally small (often single‐centre studies, with a mean of only 82 participants (standard deviation 84.4)).
Poor reporting of RCTs, including lack of published/publicly available protocols and failure to adhere to CONSORT reporting guidance.
Lack of consistency between RCTs. Except for a body of trials investigating "Three‐stage rehabilitation", trials all address different questions (i.e. different treatment components, different doses and duration, different populations).

Further, many of the research studies explore interventions that may not be feasible to deliver in real‐world clinical settings. For example, delivering doses that are considerably higher than might be feasible in many settings.
These factors limit certainty in the evidence within this review, which is largely low to very low, due to substantial heterogeneity, with mainly small studies and important differences between populations and interventions in different studies.
This review synthesises the evidence in relation to function and mobility after stroke. Further small trials are unlikely to change the conclusions of this review. However, future research should consider the full range of outcomes that may be associated with improved function and mobility. These outcomes include the clinical and cost benefits potentially associated with a reduction in falls or emergency hospital admissions and the impact of community and social care teams and services. All benefits in relation to stroke survivor‐perceived quality of life, psychological mood, social participation, return to work, and carer strain and well‐being should be considered. This review found that many RCTs did not assess long‐term follow‐up, and it is essential that future RCTs plan follow‐up assessments as a key feature of their design. Adequate resources should be sought to ensure that follow‐up assessments are possible. Furthermore, future research should consider the effects of long‐term, follow‐up physiotherapy assessment, self‐management, and treatment in maintaining benefits and preventing deterioration, and the effects of shorter‐duration periods of intensive rehabilitation. Self‐referral systems that will enable stroke survivors to gain follow‐up physiotherapy when they believe it is necessary should also be explored. The potential impact of family involvement on rehabilitation outcomes was an important finding that should be more fully explored.
Continued conduct of multiple, heterogeneous, small, poorly reported RCTs is of very limited value and is potentially wasteful. There is an urgent need for researchers in this field to come together to find new, collaborative, innovative approaches to address the limitations in the current evidence. For future updates of this Cochrane review, authors and editors should consider pre‐stating minimum standards for reporting and minimum study size as additional selection criteria. However, given the size of this review, future updates of the review in its current form are likely to result in a review that risks being too large to be clinically useful for decision makers. We therefore advise against an update of this review in its current form, and urge key stakeholders to come together and reach consensus on the most important questions that need answering to inform optimal physical rehabilitation for stroke. Researchers and stakeholders should work in partnership to determine the optimal way to address these questions, which could potentially involve splitting the review into separate reviews, each exploring evidence for specific approaches, or conducting a network meta‐analysis.
A stakeholder group was central to this review update, and this update has demonstrated that user involvement in Cochrane reviews is feasible and valued and can significantly impact the review structure and methods. We recommend similar models of user involvement within other Cochrane reviews and evidence syntheses, and continued exploration to develop the best ways of involving people and optimal ways for reporting the method and impact of involving people.

## What's new
 

## History
Protocol first published: Issue 1, 2000 Review first published: Issue 2, 2003
 

## Risk of bias
 

## Acknowledgements

## Previous versions of this review
For acknowledgements regarding previous versions of this review, please see ; ; .
Previous authors: We would like to thank Anne Forster and Valerie M Pomeroy for their contributions as authors to previous versions of this review.

## Stakeholder group
The stakeholder group was formed specifically to support the update of this review, with the goal of ensuring that the review was clinically relevant and accessible. Details of the contributions of the stakeholder group members are provided in . All members of the stakeholder group made enthusiastic and effective contributions to this review, volunteering their time to deal with often complex information. These members included Sheila Cameron; Rashmi Kumar; Wendy Juner, NHS Lothian; Roger Lambert; Sarah McNeish, NHS Highland; Diane Ormsby, Balance Neuro Physiotherapy; and a further nine people who have chosen to remain anonymous.

## Chinese database searching and screening
We would like to thank Alexis Lai, Leo Tsui, and Yuan Chi who screened many thousands of Chinese studies and responded to queries about translation and terminology within Chinese studies.
We would also like to thank a volunteer who translated and refined the search strategies for use in the Chinese databases and downloaded records.  

## Cochrane Crowd
We would like to thank the 111 people who voluntarily screened studies within Cochrane Crowd. The following gave consent to be acknowledged by name:
Jamiu Aderonmu; Orighomisan Agboghoroma; Adeola Ajayi; Fatai Momodu Akemokwe; Basem Emad Ali; Roberto Altamirano; Aisling Armstrong; Nicole Askin; Thidar Aung; Daniel Beales; Deirdre Beecher; Emma Branch; Anna Brown; Chet Chaulagai; Camilo Chavez Farias; Bernardo Costa; Tineke Crawford; Therese DalsbÃ; Ziona Dsouza; Brian Duncan; Abhijit Dutta; Nicole Edworthy; Emmet Farragher; Nuno Fernandes; Darren Finck; Charlotte Flahou; Fazal Ghani; Mohamed Hassan Dirar; Georgina Johnstone; Sarah Khalid Khan; Diamantis Kyriakakis; Leire Leache; Vinicius Leduc; Karen Ma; Shammas Mohammed; SarahJane Moll; Hariklia Nguyen; Anna Noel‐Storr; Stella Maria O'Brien; Artem Oganesyan; Sunday Onagbiye; Gesiane Pajarinen; Aleksandra Pelczarska; Ana Beatriz Pizarro Nule; Rachel Playforth; Basavaraj Poojar; Gaby Razzouk; Sydney Roshan Rebello Rebello; Vahid Reisi‐vanani; Anna Resolver; David Santos; Zainab Sari; Sinjini Sarkar; Abdul Rahaman Shaik; Abdul Shakoor; Kamal Sharif; Nikolaos Sideris; Denise Vitalone; Abhijna Vithal Yergolkar; Susanna Wisniewski; Lois Woods; Mohammed Deeb Zakkor

## Tables, formatting, and copy editing
We would like to thank Bridget Davis and Katie Thomson for their many hours spent assisting with checking, editing, and formatting drafts of this review.

## Methods support
We would like to thank members of the Cochrane Evidence Production and Methods Directorate, particularly Rachel Richardson, Emma Axon, and Afroditi Kanellopoulou, for their feedback on our risk of bias assessments and reporting and for our data analyses, and Leslie Choi for his support and feedback in relation to the review structure and presentation of summary data.

## Editorial and peer reviewer contributions
Cochrane Stroke supported the authors in the development of this review update. We thank Aryelly Rodriguez Carbonell, former statistician of Cochrane Stroke (closed in March 2023), for her advice and response to questions relating to statistical analyses within this review. Alex Todhunter‐Brown and Peter Langhorne were former editors of Cochrane Stroke (closed in March 2023) but were not involved in the editorial process or decision‐making for this review update.
The following people conducted the editorial process for this review update:
Sign‐off Editor (final editorial decision)*: Derick Wade, Department of Sport, Health Sciences and Social Work, Oxford Brookes University.
Managing Editor (provided editorial guidance to authors, edited the article): Joey Kwong, Cochrane Central Editorial Service.
Editorial Assistant (selected peer reviewers, collated peer reviewer comments, conducted editorial policy checks, supported the editorial team): Sara Hales‐Brittain, Cochrane Central Editorial Service.
Copy Editor (copy‐editing and production): Jenny Bellorini, Cochrane Central Production Service.
Peer reviewers (provided comments and recommended an editorial decision): Tamaya Van Criekinge, Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, KU Leuven Bruges (clinical/content review); Jitka Veldema, Department of Sport Science, Bielefeld University, Germany (clinical/content review); Brian Duncan (consumer review); Nuala Livingstone, Cochrane Evidence Production and Methods Directorate (methods review); Yuan Chi, Beijing Health Technology Co. Ltd.; McMaster University (search review).

*Stefano Negrini, University La Statale, Italy, submitted the first post‐peer‐review decision in January 2024.

## Appendices

## Appendix 1. Stakeholder involvement in this review update

## Aims of stakeholder involvement in this review
The pre‐stated aims of the stakeholder group were to (i) clarify the focus of the review (including how physical rehabilitation was categorised within the review), (ii) inform decisions about subgroup analyses, and (iii) co‐produce statements relating to key implications arising from the review. Members of the stakeholder group later clarified that their role was to:
update and inform the description and categorisation of physical rehabilitation following stroke, and make it useful and accessible to all interested parties;
ask the right questions in physical rehabilitation research, informing the structure and conduct of analyses and subgroup analyses within the Cochrane review of physical rehabilitation following stroke;
consider implications for clinical practice arising from the results of the Cochrane review of physical rehabilitation following stroke;
help shape plans for dissemination of the synthesised research evidence, so that it reaches – and is useful to ‐ the right people/organisations.

## Description of stakeholder involvement in this review
This description of stakeholder involvement in this review is structured using the ACTIVE framework ( ), with an additional question about 'what changed'.
Who was involved?
A stakeholder group was formed. Members included four stroke survivors, four carers, and seven physiotherapists working in stroke care. Stakeholders were from England (n = 7), Scotland (n = 6), Wales (n = 1), and Ireland (n = 1). One stroke survivor and 1 physiotherapist dropped out of the group during the course of the review update.
How were stakeholders recruited?
An advert for stakeholder group members was circulated through local and national networks, via email, and through social media. Interested people contacted the research team, who provided a role description (including details of all planned meeting dates) and requested some personal/demographic details. Responses to personal/demographic details were collated anonymously and used to select a 'representative' sample. Representation considered: geographical location, time since stroke (stroke survivors and carers), years of experience, and area of work (physiotherapists).
What was the mode of involvement?
Stakeholder group members attended a series of online meetings (using Microsoft Teams). Five meetings of the stakeholder group were held between 25 November 2021 and 25 May 2023, supplemented with additional communication by email and individual telephone calls. In addition, two international webinars were held in order to gain wider perspectives on decisions around categorisation of physical rehabilitation within the review.
At what stage in the review process did involvement occur? What was the level of involvement at each stage?
This was planned as a 'top and tail' approach, with involvement at the initial and final stages, but no involvement during the conduct of the review search or data collection itself ( ). We use standard terms to define the level of involvement: see below for definitions.
Meetings 1 to 3 were held at the start of the review update with the aim of informing the methods/ways of bringing studies of physical rehabilitation together. Stakeholders considered they had a range of different levels of involvement, ranging from controlling to receiving (see definitions below). However, all stakeholders agreed that their input had influenced decisions around categorisation of physical rehabilitation interventions and conduct of analyses within the review.
Meetings 4 and 5 were held when the included studies were identified, and data extraction and (preliminary) analyses was complete. Again, stakeholders agreed that their input had influenced the review. Wording agreed by the stakeholders relating to the implications of the review results is presented within the review text. Stakeholders worked in partnership with the review team to write the plain language summary, sharing drafts and comments by email, influencing the final wording and content.
What changed as a result of the stakeholder involvement?
Key changes in the review arising from the involvement of stakeholders were:
(i) The previous method of categorisation of treatment components, comprising 27 defined treatment components, was revised and expanded. This revised framework for categorising physical rehabilitation treatment components is presented in . Further, discussions with the stakeholder group informed decisions to amend the comparisons addressed by this review. Previous versions of this review compared physical rehabilitation with (1) no treatment, (2) usual care or control and (3) another active physical rehabilitation intervention. Discussions highlighted that the comparison with usual care would benefit from further consideration, ensuring that the content of the usual care was explored in depth. Stakeholders considered that trials of (i) physical rehabilitation with no treatment should not be combined with trials of (ii) physical rehabilitation + "usual care" versus "usual care" when "usual care" comprised active physical rehabilitation. Stakeholders argued that the delivery of "usual" physical rehabilitation to both treatment groups could not be assumed to 'cancel out', as there could potentially be complex clinical interactions between "additional" physical rehabilitation and the "usual" physical rehabilitation. This was considered particularly important when the physical rehabilitation was based on different approaches to physical rehabilitation (which is the focus of this review). For example, if all participants were receiving physical rehabilitation based on neurophysiological approaches as the "usual" physical rehabilitation, and the intervention studied was functional task training, it was argued that there could potentially be an interaction between the neurophysiological physical rehabilitation and functional task training, which could impact on the benefit of the functional task training. Thus, the effect of functional task training on participants in a study comparing functional task training + neurophysiological physical rehabilitation with neurophysiological physical rehabilitation cannot be assumed to be the same as a study comparing functional task training (only with no physical rehabilitation).
This led to an amendment in the comparisons conducted within this update to comparisons (1) physical rehabilitation versus no (or minimal) physical rehabilitation (where minimal was defined as a dose of less than 50% of that of the active physical rehabilitation group), (2) physical rehabilitation versus attention control (where attention control was a non‐physical rehabilitation intervention, with an equivalent dose to that of the physical rehabilitation), (3) additional physical rehabilitation (i.e. a comparison of physical rehabilitation + usual rehabilitation versus usual rehabilitation), and (4) different physical rehabilitation approaches.
(ii) The stakeholder group highlighted the importance of mode of delivery (face‐to‐face or virtual sessions; and one‐to‐one or group rehabilitation) and whether rehabilitation was individualised or followed a standard/prescribed set of exercises or treatments. Following this input, we planned additional subgroup analyses to explore these intervention characteristics, but found we had insufficient data for these (due to either lack of reporting, or because a large majority of the included trials all had the same mode of delivery). In addition, the stakeholder group informed amendments to the subgroups explored in relation to dose of treatment. Previous subgroup analyses had used a pragmatic approach to division of trials into groups according to dose, but for this update ‐ informed by the stakeholder group ‐ we pre‐planned to explore the impact of doses which were less or more than 2.5 hours/week. This dose was considered important as stakeholders reported 30 minutes a day, 5 days/week as being a dose often delivered in clinical settings (a dose which falls short of UK guidance of 45 minutes/day). Stakeholder input also informed the decision to explore whether the involvement of family/carers might impact on outcomes.
(iii) Clarification of wording around key implications stated within this review (see below), and co‐production of the plain language summary. Wording was discussed with all stakeholders during meeting 4 and 5, and six provided comments on written drafts of the plain language summary, abstract, and implications for practice sections of the review.
Definitions of levels of involvement (from )
"LEADING: Initiating the review; lead responsibility for carrying out and completion of review. Tasks will include authorship of a review, and may include any activities associated with review completion, including key decisions relating to the methods and execution of the review.
CONTROLLING: Working in partnership with researchers, with varying degrees of control or influence over the review process. Making decisions and/or controlling one or more aspects of the review process, in collaboration with or under the guidance of the review authors. Tasks may include defining outcomes of interest, inclusion criteria, key messages arising from review findings and writing a plain language summary. In completing tasks people have control over final decisions, such as application of inclusion criteria, categorisation of interventions, or recommendations for clinical practice.
INFLUENCING: Stating, commenting, advising, ranking, voting, prioritising, reaching consensus. Providing data or information which should directly influence the review process, but without direct control over decisions or aspects of the review process. Tasks may include assisting with review tasks, such as hand‐searching, screening, data extraction and assessment of risk of bias, possibly in a co‐reviewer role. Tasks may include peer review, such as commenting on a protocol, systematic review or plain language summary.
CONTRIBUTING: Providing views, thoughts, feedback, opinions or experiences. Providing data or information which may indirectly influence the review process. People may be participants in a research study (e.g. focus groups or interviews). Tasks may include sharing views or opinions, for example within a focus group of interview. May include ranking, voting or prioritising as participants in a research study (e.g. Delphi study).
RECEIVING: Receiving information about the systematic review, or results of the review. Tasks may include attending events, or reading or listening to information about the review. While the results of a review may be discussed, these discussions do not influence the review process in any way."

## Stakeholder interpretation of evidence
Members of the stakeholder group for this review agreed that key implications for practice arising from this evidence are for personnel involved in planning and delivering stroke rehabilitation, and educating therapists, to recognise that:
Where a stroke survivor has limitations in independence in ADL or motor function, in order to maximise that patient’s potential, as much physical rehabilitation as possible (taking into account an individual’s tolerance and preference) should be delivered; 2.5 hours/week should be considered a minimum amount, with recognition that the greater the amount the greater the potential benefit.
Selection of physical rehabilitation treatment components should be based on an assessment of the individual stroke survivor, with consideration of the full range of treatment techniques that they have the skills and expertise to administer.
As concluded in previous versions of this Cochrane review, physical rehabilitation should not be limited/aligned to compartmentalised, named rehabilitation approaches, but should comprise clearly defined, well‐described, evidence‐based physical treatments, focused on practice of functional tasks, regardless of historical or philosophical origin.

## Appendix 2. Physical rehabilitation approaches: historical overview and named approaches

## Physical rehabilitation approaches: historical overview
Before the 1940s, physical rehabilitation approaches primarily consisted of corrective exercises based on orthopaedic principles related to contraction and relaxation of muscles, with emphasis placed on regaining function by compensating with the unaffected limbs ( ; ). In the 1950s and 1960s, techniques based on available neurophysiological knowledge were developed to enhance recovery of the paretic side. These new approaches included the methods of Bobath ( ; ), Brunnström ( ) and Rood ( ), as well as the proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation approach ( ; ). In the 1980s, the potential importance of neuropsychology and motor learning was highlighted ( ; ) and the motor learning, or relearning, approach was proposed ( ). This suggested that active practice of context‐specific motor tasks with appropriate feedback would promote learning and motor recovery ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). The practical application of these approaches appeared to result in substantial differences in patient treatment. Approaches based on neurophysiological principles seemingly involved the physiotherapist moving the patient through patterns of movement, with the therapist acting as problem solver and decision maker and the patient being a relatively passive recipient ( ). In direct contrast, motor learning approaches stressed the importance of active involvement by the patient ( ), and orthopaedic approaches emphasised muscle strengthening techniques and compensation with the non‐paretic side.
Since the 1980s, the need to base neurological physiotherapy on scientific research in relevant areas such as medical science, neuroscience, exercise physiology and biomechanics, and to test the outcomes of physical interventions to develop evidence‐based physiotherapy has been increasingly emphasised. However, anecdotal evidence and the results of questionnaire‐based studies ( ; ; ; ; ) suggest that, traditionally, many physiotherapists continued to base their clinical practice around a 'named' treatment approach. From the 1990s, the Bobath approach, based on neurophysiological principles, came to be recognised as the most widely used method in Sweden ( ), Australia ( ) and the UK ( ; ; ). As a consequence, since this time, physiotherapists have often sought evidence related to these 'named' approaches to the physical rehabilitation of stroke patients.
In some parts of the world, clear preferences for one 'named' approach have prevailed; however in others, physical rehabilitation approaches for stroke have developed with greater eclecticism, resulting in geographical preferences for mixing particular approaches, or components from different approaches, as well as preferences for single 'named' approaches (see below). For example, in China, where stroke rehabilitation is not yet considered standard care ( ), standard 'approaches' to rehabilitation have been proposed, including 'standardised tertiary rehabilitation' ( ; ; ) and 'standardised three‐phase rehabilitation' ( ; ; ). These approaches arguably appear to draw on the full range of treatment interventions available from all orthopaedic, neurophysiological and motor learning approaches described in Western literature, while incorporating traditional Chinese therapies such as acupuncture ( ; ).
At the time of the last update of this review, a growing research evidence base supported the use of clearly defined and described techniques and task‐specific treatments, regardless of their historical or philosophical origin ( ; ; ; ; ), and a move away from named approaches in preference of more evidence‐based approaches had been deliberately implemented in some countries, such as the Netherlands ( ; ). Despite this, debate continued about the evidence for doing this ( ), and some physiotherapists around the world continued to exhibit preferences for particular named approaches ( ; ; ).
Since the publication of the last version of this review there has been a growing body of evidence which shows that the Bobath (or neurodevelopment) approach is not more effective, and may be less effective, than other interventions ( ; ; ). However, concerns about the application of Bobath therapy within trials have been raised ( ; ) and the use of named approaches remain common in current clinical practice around the world.

## Physical rehabilitation approaches: overview of 'named' approaches
 

## Appendix 3. CENTRAL search strategy
ID Search Hits
#1 MeSH descriptor: [Cerebrovascular Disorders] this term only
#2 MeSH descriptor: [Basal Ganglia Cerebrovascular Disease] explode all trees
#3 MeSH descriptor: [Brain Ischemia] explode all trees
#4 MeSH descriptor: [Brain Infarction] this term only
#5 MeSH descriptor: [Brain Stem Infarctions] this term only
#6 MeSH descriptor: [Cerebral Infarction] this term only
#7 MeSH descriptor: [Infarction, Anterior Cerebral Artery] this term only
#8 MeSH descriptor: [Infarction, Middle Cerebral Artery] this term only
#9 MeSH descriptor: [Infarction, Posterior Cerebral Artery] this term only
#10 MeSH descriptor: [Ischemic Attack, Transient] this term only
#11 MeSH descriptor: [Carotid Artery Diseases] this term only
#12 MeSH descriptor: [Carotid Artery Thrombosis] this term only
#13 MeSH descriptor: [Carotid Stenosis] this term only
#14 MeSH descriptor: [Cerebral Arterial Diseases] this term only
#15 MeSH descriptor: [Intracranial Arteriosclerosis] this term only
#16 MeSH descriptor: [Intracranial Arteriovenous Malformations] explode all trees
#17 MeSH descriptor: [Intracranial Embolism and Thrombosis] explode all trees
#18 MeSH descriptor: [Intracranial Hemorrhages] this term only
#19 MeSH descriptor: [Cerebral Hemorrhage] this term only
#20 MeSH descriptor: [Cerebral Intraventricular Hemorrhage] this term only
#21 MeSH descriptor: [Intracranial Hemorrhage, Hypertensive] this term only
#22 MeSH descriptor: [Subarachnoid Hemorrhage] this term only
#23 MeSH descriptor: [Stroke] this term only
#24 MeSH descriptor: [Hemorrhagic Stroke] this term only
#25 MeSH descriptor: [Ischemic Stroke] explode all trees
#26 MeSH descriptor: [Vasospasm, Intracranial] this term only
#27 (stroke or poststroke or post‐stroke or cerebrovasc* or (cerebr* near/3 vasc*) or CVA* or apoplectic or apoplex* or (transient near/3 isch?emic near/3 attack) or tia* or SAH or AVM or ESUS or ICH or (cerebral small vessel near/3 disease*)):ti,ab,kw
#28 ((cerebr* or cerebell* or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil* or interhemispheric or hemispher* or intracran* or intracerebral or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA* or ((anterior or posterior) near/3 circulat*) or lenticulostriate or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr*) near/3 arter*)) near/3 (disease or damage* or disorder* or disturbance or dissection or syndrome or arrest or accident or lesion or vasculopathy or insult or attack or injury or insufficiency or malformation or obstruct* or anomal*)):ti,ab,kw
#29 ((cerebr* or cerebell* or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil* or interhemispheric or hemispher* or intracran* or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA* or ((anterior or posterior) near/3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr*) near/3 arter*) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle* or lacunar or cortical or ocular) near/3 (isch?emi* or infarct* or thrombo* or emboli* or occlus* or hypoxi* or vasospasm or obstruct* or vasoconstrict*)):ti,ab,kw
#30 ((cerebr* or cerebell* or vertebrobasil* or interhemispheric or hemispher* or intracran* or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA* or ((anterior or posterior) near/3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr*) near/3 arter*) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle* or subarachnoid* or arachnoid*) near/3 (h?emorrhag* or h?ematom* or bleed*)):ti,ab,kw
#31 ((carotid or cerebr* or cerebell* or intracranial or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr*) near/3 arter*)) near/3 (aneurysm or malformation* or block* or dysplasia or disease* or bruit or injur* or narrow* or obstruct* or occlusion or constriction or presclerosis or scleros* or stenos* or atherosclero* or arteriosclero* or plaque* or thrombo* or embol* or arteriopathy)):ti,ab,kw
#32 MeSH descriptor: [Hemiplegia] this term only
#33 MeSH descriptor: [Paresis] this term only
#34 MeSH descriptor: [Gait Disorders, Neurologic] explode all trees
#35 (hemipleg* or hemipar* or paresis or paraparesis or paretic):ti,ab,kw
#36 {or #1‐#35}
#37 MeSH descriptor: [Physical Therapy Modalities] this term only
#38 MeSH descriptor: [Exercise Movement Techniques] explode all trees
#39 MeSH descriptor: [Exercise Therapy] explode all trees
#40 MeSH descriptor: [Rehabilitation] this term only
#41 MeSH descriptor: [Feedback] this term only
#42 MeSH descriptor: [Feedback, Psychological] this term only
#43 MeSH descriptor: [Biofeedback, Psychology] explode all trees
#44 MeSH descriptor: [Exercise] this term only
#45 MeSH descriptor: [Orthopedic Procedures] this term only
#46 MeSH descriptor: [Physical Therapists] this term only
#47 MeSH descriptor: [Occupational Therapists] this term only
#48 (physiotherapy or physical therapy or exercise therapy or rehabilitation):ti,ab,kw
#49 (neurorehabilitation or feedback or biofeedback):ti,ab,kw
#50 (motor NEAR/5 (train* or re?train* or learn* or re?learn*)):ti,ab,kw
#51 (((neuromuscular or neurodevelopmental or neuro‐developmental) NEAR/2 (facilitation or trainin* or retrain$)) or PNF or NDT):ti,ab,kw
#52 (movement NEAR/5 (therap* or science)):ti,ab,kw
#53 (((neurodevelopmental or neurophysiological or orthop?edic) NEAR/5 (therap* or treatment* or rehabilitation or principle* or approach* or component* or concept*))):ti,ab,kw
#54 ((Bobath or Carr or Brunnstrom or Rood or Johnstone or NDT or (standardi?ed NEAR/2 three NEAR/2 stage*))):ti,ab,kw
#55 {or #37‐#54}
#56 #36 AND #55
#57 MeSH descriptor: [Cerebrovascular Disorders] this term only and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH]
#58 MeSH descriptor: [Basal Ganglia Cerebrovascular Disease] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH]
#59 MeSH descriptor: [Brain Ischemia] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH]
#60 MeSH descriptor: [Carotid Artery Diseases] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH]
#61 MeSH descriptor: [Intracranial Arterial Diseases] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH]
#62 MeSH descriptor: [Intracranial Embolism and Thrombosis] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH]
#63 MeSH descriptor: [Intracranial Hemorrhages] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH]
#64 MeSH descriptor: [Brain Infarction] 4 tree(s) exploded and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH] 47
#65 MeSH descriptor: [Vasospasm, Intracranial] this term only and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH] 0
#66 MeSH descriptor: [Vertebral Artery Dissection] this term only and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH] 0
#67 MeSH descriptor: [Hemiplegia] this term only and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH]
#68 MeSH descriptor: [Paresis] this term only and with qualifier(s): [rehabilitation ‐ RH]
#69 {or #57‐#68}
#70 #56 or #69
#71 MeSH descriptor: [Psychomotor Performance] explode all trees
#72 MeSH descriptor: [Learning] this term only
#73 MeSH descriptor: [Conditioning, Psychological] this term only
#74 MeSH descriptor: [Problem‐Based Learning] this term only
#75 MeSH descriptor: [Problem Solving] this term only
#76 MeSH descriptor: [Movement] this term only
#77 MeSH descriptor: [Locomotion] this term only
#78 MeSH descriptor: [Walking] this term only
#79 MeSH descriptor: [Gait] this term only
#80 MeSH descriptor: [Motor Activity] this term only
#81 MeSH descriptor: [Range of Motion, Articular] this term only
#82 MeSH descriptor: [Postural Balance] this term only
#83 MeSH descriptor: [Posture] explode all trees
#84 MeSH descriptor: [Supination] this term only
#85 MeSH descriptor: [Pronation] this term only
#86 MeSH descriptor: [Weight‐Bearing] this term only
#87 MeSH descriptor: [Lower Extremity] explode all trees
#88 MeSH descriptor: [Back] explode all trees
#89 (learning or conditioning):ti,ab,kw
#90 (movement or gait or locomotion or walking or walk or mobility):ti,ab,kw
#91 (equilibrium or balance or postur* or supination or pronation):ti,ab,kw
#92 (body sway or stance or strength or weight?bearing or body weight support):ti,ab,kw
#93 (locomotor NEAR/5 (recovery or training)):ti,ab,kw
#94 (weight NEAR/5 (distribut* or transfer*)):ti,ab,kw
#95 (sit or sitting or stand or standing or step or stepping or climb or climbing):ti,ab,kw
#96 (lower limb* or lower extremit* or ankle or leg or heel or calf or knee or hip or thigh or foot or trunk):ti,ab,kw
#97 {or #71‐#97}
#98 #70 AND #97 in Trials

## Appendix 4. MEDLINE Ovid search strategy
The stroke and intervention subject searches have been linked to the Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search Strategy (CHSSS) for identifying randomised trials (RCTs) in MEDLINE: sensitivity maximising version (2008 revision) (lines 43‐52), as referenced in the Box 3.d in .
1. cerebrovascular disorders/ or exp basal ganglia cerebrovascular disease/ or brain ischemia/ or brain infarction/ or brain stem infarctions/ or cerebral infarction/ or infarction, anterior cerebral artery/ or infarction, middle cerebral artery/ or infarction, posterior cerebral artery/ or ischemic attack, transient/ or carotid artery diseases/ or carotid artery thrombosis/ or carotid stenosis/ or cerebral arterial diseases/ or intracranial arteriosclerosis/ or exp intracranial arteriovenous malformations/ or exp "intracranial embolism and thrombosis"/ or intracranial hemorrhages/ or cerebral hemorrhage/ or cerebral intraventricular hemorrhage/ or intracranial hemorrhage, hypertensive/ or subarachnoid hemorrhage/ or stroke/ or hemorrhagic stroke/ or exp ischemic stroke/ or vasospasm, intracranial/ 2. (stroke or poststroke or post‐stroke or cerebrovasc$ or (cerebr$ adj3 vasc$) or CVA$ or apoplectic or apoplex$ or (transient adj3 isch?emic adj3 attack) or tia$ or SAH or AVM or ESUS or ICH).tw. 3. ((cerebr$ or cerebell$ or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil$ or interhemispheric or hemispher$ or intracran$ or intracerebral or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA$ or ((anterior or posterior) adj3 circulat$) or lenticulostriate or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 arter$)) adj3 ((blood adj5 clot$) or disease$ or damage$ or disorder$ or disturbance or dissection or lesion or syndrome or arrest or accident or lesion or vasculopathy or insult or attack or injury or insufficiency or malformation or obstruct$ or anomal$)).tw. 4. ((cerebr$ or cerebell$ or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil$ or interhemispheric or hemispher$ or intracran$ or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA$ or ((anterior or posterior) adj3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 arter$) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle$ or lacunar or cortical or ocular) adj3 (isch?emi$ or infarct$ or thrombo$ or emboli$ or occlus$ or hypoxi$ or vasospasm or obstruct$ or vasoconstrict$)).tw. 5. ((cerebr$ or cerebell$ or vertebrobasil$ or interhemispheric or hemispher$ or intracran$ or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA$ or ((anterior or posterior) adj3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 arter$) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle$ or subarachnoid$ or arachnoid$) adj3 (h?emorrhag$ or h?ematom$ or bleed$)).tw. 6. ((carotid or cerebr$ or cerebell$ or intracranial or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 arter$)) adj3 (aneurysm or malformation$ or block$ or dysplasia or disease$ or bruit or injur$ or narrow$ or obstruct$ or occlusion or constriction or presclerosis or scleros$ or stenos$ or atherosclero$ or arteriosclero$ or plaque$ or thrombo$ or embol$ or arteriopathy)).tw. 7. hemiplegia/ or paresis/ or exp gait disorders, neurologic/ 8. (hemipleg$ or hemipar$ or paresis or paretic or hemineglect).tw. 9. or/1‐8 10. physical therapy modalities/ or exp exercise movement techniques/ or exp exercise therapy/ or rehabilitation/ or neurological rehabilitation/ or stroke rehabilitation/ or occupational therapy/ or occupational therapists/ or physical therapists/ 11. feedback/ or feedback, physiological/ or exp biofeedback, psychology/ 12. exercise/ or orthopedic procedures/ 13. (physiotherap$ or ((physical or occupational or exercise) adj3 therap$) or rehabilitation).tw. 14. (neurorehabilitation or feedback or biofeedback).tw. 15. (motor adj5 (train$ or re?train$ or learn$ or re?learn$)).tw. 16. (((neuromuscular or neurodevelopmental or neuro‐developmental) adj2 (facilitation or trainin$ or retrain$)) or PNF or NDT).tw. 17. (movement adj5 (therap$ or science)).tw. 18. ((neurodevelopmental or neurophysiological or orthop?edic) adj5 (therap$ or treatment$ or rehabilitation or principle$ or approach$ or component$ or concept$)).tw. 19. (Bobath or Carr or Brunnstrom or Rood or Johnstone or NDT or (standardi?ed adj2 three adj2 stage$)).tw. 20. or/10‐19 21. 9 and 20 22. cerebrovascular disorders/rh or exp basal ganglia cerebrovascular disease/rh or brain ischemia/rh or brain infarction/rh or brain stem infarctions/rh or cerebral infarction/rh or infarction, anterior cerebral artery/rh or infarction, middle cerebral artery/rh or infarction, posterior cerebral artery/rh or ischemic attack, transient/rh or carotid artery diseases/rh or carotid artery thrombosis/rh or carotid stenosis/rh or cerebral arterial diseases/rh or intracranial arteriosclerosis/rh or exp intracranial arteriovenous malformations/rh or exp "intracranial embolism and thrombosis"/rh or intracranial hemorrhages/rh or cerebral hemorrhage/rh or cerebral intraventricular hemorrhage/rh or intracranial hemorrhage, hypertensive/rh or subarachnoid hemorrhage/rh or stroke/rh or hemorrhagic stroke/rh or exp ischemic stroke/rh or vasospasm, intracranial/rh 23. hemiplegia/rh or exp paresis/rh 24. neurological rehabilitation/ or stroke rehabilitation/ 25. 21 or 22 or 23 or 24 26. psychomotor performance/ or motor skills/ or "task performance and analysis"/ 27. learning/ or "conditioning (psychology)"/ or problem‐based learning/ or problem solving/ 28. movement/ or locomotion/ or walking/ or dependent ambulation/ or gait/ 29. motor activity/ or range of motion, articular/ 30. postural balance/ or exp posture/ or supination/ or pronation/ or weight‐bearing/ 31. exp lower extremity/ or exp back/ 32. (motor adj5 (skill$ or activit$ or function$)).tw. 33. (learning or conditioning).tw. 34. (movement or gait or locomotion or walking or walk or mobility).tw. 35. (equilibrium or balance or postur$ or supination or pronation).tw. 36. (body sway or stance or strength or weight?bearing or body weight support).tw. 37. (locomotor adj5 (recovery or training)).tw. 38. (weight adj5 (distribut$ or transfer$)).tw. 39. (sit or sitting or stand or standing or step or stepping or climb or climbing).tw. 40. (lower limb$ or lower extremit$ or ankle or leg or heel or calf or knee or hip or thigh or foot or trunk).tw. 41. or/26‐40 42. 25 and 41 43. randomized controlled trial.pt. 44. controlled clinical trial.pt. 45. randomized.ab. 46. placebo.ab. 47. randomly.ab. 48. trial.ab. 49. groups.ab. 50. or/43‐49 51. exp animals/ not humans.sh. 52. 50 not 51 53. 42 and 52

## Appendix 5. Embase Ovid search strategy
The subject search strategies have been linked to an adapted version of the Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search Strategy for identifying controlled trials in Embase: (2018 revision); Ovid format (lines 47‐64).
1. cerebrovascular disease/ or exp cerebrovascular accident/ or exp cerebrovascular malformation/ or exp basal ganglion haemorrhage/ or exp brain hemorrhage/ or exp brain infarction/ or exp brain ischemia/ or cerebral artery disease/ or exp carotid artery disease/ or brain atherosclerosis/ or exp intracranial aneurysm/ or occlusive cerebrovascular disease/ or basilar artery obstruction/ or exp cerebral sinus thrombosis/ or middle cerebral artery occlusion/ or vertebral artery stenosis/ or ocular ischemic syndrome/ or vertebrobasilar insufficiency/ or exp carotid artery/ or carotid artery surgery/ or carotid endarterectomy/ or stroke patient/ or stroke unit/ 2. (stroke or poststroke or post‐stroke or cerebrovasc$ or (cerebr$ adj3 vasc$) or CVA$ or apoplectic or apoplex$ or (transient adj3 isch?emic adj3 attack) or tia$ or SAH or AVM or (cerebral small vessel adj3 disease)).tw. 3. ((cerebr$ or cerebell$ or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil$ or interhemispheric or hemispher$ or intracran$ or intracerebral or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA$ or ((anterior or posterior) adj3 circulat$) or lenticulostriate or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 arter$)) adj3 (disease or damage$ or disorder$ or disturbance or dissection or lesion or syndrome or arrest or accident or lesion or vasculopathy or insult or attack or injury or insufficiency or malformation or obstruct$ or anomal$)).tw. 4. ((cerebr$ or cerebell$ or vertebrobasil$ or interhemispheric or hemispher$ or intracran$ or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA$ or ((anterior or posterior) adj3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 arter$) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle$ or subarachnoid$ or arachnoid$) adj3 (h?emorrhage or h?ematoma or bleed$ or microh?emorrhage or microbleed or (encephalorrhagia or hematencephal$))).tw. 5. ((cerebr$ or cerebell$ or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil$ or interhemispheric or hemispher$ or intracran$ or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA$ or ((anterior or posterior) adj3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 arter$) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle$ or lacunar or cortical or ocular) adj3 (isch?emi$ or infarct$ or thrombo$ or emboli$ or occlus$ or hypoxi$ or vasospasm or obstruct$ or vasculopathy or vasoconstrict$)).tw. 6. ((carotid or cerebr$ or cerebell$ or intracranial or basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 (aneurysm or malformation$ or dysplasia or disease or bruit or injur$ or obstruct$ or occlusion or constriction or presclerosis or scleros$ or stenos$ or atherosclero$ or arteriosclero$ or plaque$ or thrombo$ or embol$ or arteriopathy)).tw. 7. exp hemiplegia/ or exp paresis/ or neurologic gait disorder/ 8. (hemipleg$ or hemipar$ or paresis or paraparesis or paretic).tw. 9. or/1‐8 10. rehabilitation/ or physical therapy modalities/ or physiotherapists/ or occupational therapy modalities/ or occupational therapy techniques/ or occupational therapists/ or rehabilitation modalities/ or rehabilitation techniques/ or physiotherapy/ or physiotherapist/ or functional training/ or muscle training/ or exp neurorehabilitation/ or occupational therapy/ or occupational therapist/ or rehabilitation care/ or vocational rehabilitation/ 11. exp kinesiotherapy/ or exercise/ or stretching exercise/ or muscle exercise/ or exp orthopedic equipment/ 12. feedback system/ or exp biofeedback/ or physiological feedback/ or psychological feedback/ or exp sensory feedback/ 13. (physiotherap$ or ((physical or occupational or exercise) adj3 therap$) or rehabilitation).tw. 14. (neurorehabilitation or feedback or biofeedback).tw. 15. (motor adj5 (train$ or re?train$ or learn$ or re?learn$)).tw. 16. (((neuromuscular or neurodevelopmental or neuro‐developmental) adj2 (facilitation or trainin$ or retrain$)) or PNF or NDT).tw. 17. (movement adj5 (therap$ or science)).tw. 18. ((neurodevelopmental or neurophysiological or orthop?edic) adj5 (therap$ or treatment$ or rehabilitation or principle$ or approach$ or component$ or concept$)).tw. 19. (Bobath or Carr or Brunnstrom or Rood or Johnstone or NDT or (standardi?ed adj2 three adj2 stage$)).tw. 20. or/10‐19 21. 9 and 20 22. cerebrovascular disease/rh or basal ganglion hemorrhage/rh or cerebral artery disease/rh or cerebrovascular accident/rh or stroke/rh or exp carotid artery disease/rh or exp brain hematoma/rh or exp brain hemorrhage/rh or exp brain ischemia/rh or exp intracranial aneurysm/rh or exp occlusive cerebrovascular disease/rh 23. hemiparesis/rh or hemiplegia/rh or paresis/rh 24. neurological rehabilitation/ or stroke rehabilitation/ 25. 21 or 22 or 23 or 24 26. physical performance/ or motor performance/ or object manipulation/ 27. psychomotor performance/ or task performance/ 28. learning/ or conditioning/ or problem based learning/ 29. "movement (physiology)"/ or limb movement/ or locomotion/ or exp walking/ or leg movement/ or leg exercise/ or physical mobility/ or "range of motion"/ 30. motor activity/ or psychomotor activity/ 31. body equilibrium/ or body posture/ or sitting/ or standing/ or weight bearing/ 32. exp leg/ or exp back/ 33. (motor adj5 (skill$ or activit$ or function$)).tw. 34. (learning or conditioning).tw. 35. (movement or gait or locomotion or walking or walk or mobility).tw. 36. (equilibrium or balance or postur$ or supination or pronation).tw. 37. (body sway or stance or strength or weight?bearing or body weight support).tw. 38. (locomotor adj5 (recovery or training)).tw. 39. (weight adj5 (distribut$ or transfer$)).tw. 40. (sit or sitting or stand or standing or step or stepping or climb or climbing).tw. 41. (lower limb$ or lower extremit$ or ankle or leg or heel or calf or knee or hip or thigh or foot or trunk).tw. 42. or/26‐41 43. 25 and 42 44. Randomized Controlled Trial/ or "randomized controlled trial (topic)"/ 45. Randomization/ 46. Controlled clinical trial/ or "controlled clinical trial (topic)"/ 47. control group/ or controlled study/ 48. clinical trial/ or "clinical trial (topic)"/ or phase 1 clinical trial/ or phase 2 clinical trial/ or phase 3 clinical trial/ or phase 4 clinical trial/ 49. crossover procedure/ 50. single blind procedure/ or double blind procedure/ or triple blind procedure/ 51. placebo/ or placebo effect/ 52. (random$ or RCT or RCTs).tw. 53. (controlled adj5 (trial$ or stud$)).tw. 54. (clinical$ adj5 trial$).tw. 55. clinical trial registration.ab. 56. ((control or treatment or experiment$ or intervention) adj5 (group$ or subject$ or patient$)).tw. 57. (quasi‐random$ or quasi random$ or pseudo‐random$ or pseudo random$).tw. 58. ((control or experiment$ or conservative) adj5 (treatment or therapy or procedure or manage$)).tw. 59. ((singl$ or doubl$ or tripl$ or trebl$) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw. 60. (cross‐over or cross over or crossover).tw. 61. (placebo$ or sham).tw. 62. trial.ti. 63. (assign$ or allocat$).tw. 64. controls.tw. 65. or/44‐64 66. (exp animal/ or animal.hw. or nonhuman/) not (exp human/ or human cell/ or (human or humans).ti.) 67. 65 not 66 68. 43 and 67

## Appendix 6. CINAHL EBSCO search strategy
The subject search lines (S1‐S9, S10‐S21, S22‐S24, and S27‐S42) has been link to the Search filters for identifying randomized trials in CINAHL Plus (S44‐S60) from the Cochrane Centralized Search Service (CSS) and was published in February 2019 ( ).
S1 (MH "Cerebrovascular Disorders") OR (MH "Basal Ganglia Cerebrovascular Disease+") OR (MH "Carotid Artery Diseases") OR (MH "Carotid Artery Dissections") OR (MH "Carotid Artery Thrombosis") OR (MH "Carotid Stenosis") OR (MH "Cerebral Ischemia") OR (MH "Cerebral Ischemia, Transient") OR (MH "Hypoxia‐Ischemia, Brain") OR (MH "Cerebral Small Vessel Diseases") OR (MH "Cerebral Vasospasm") OR (MH "Cerebral Arterial Diseases") OR (MH "Cerebral Aneurysm") OR (MH "Intracranial Arteriosclerosis") OR (MH "Moyamoya Disease") OR (MH "Intracranial Embolism and Thrombosis+") OR (MH "Intracranial Hemorrhage") OR (MH "Subarachnoid Hemorrhage") OR (MH "Stroke+") OR (MH "Vertebral Artery Dissections")
S2 TI ( (stroke or poststroke or post‐stroke or cerebrovasc* or (cerebr* N3 vasc*) or CVA* or apoplectic or apoplex* or (transient N3 isch?emic N3 attack) or tia* or SAH or AVM or (cerebral small vessel N3 disease)) ) OR AB ( (stroke or poststroke or post‐stroke or cerebrovasc* or (cerebr* N3 vasc*) or CVA* or apoplectic or apoplex* or (transient N3 isch?emic N3 attack) or tia* or SAH or AVM or (cerebral small vessel N3 disease)) )
S3 TI ( ((cerebr* or cerebell* or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil* or interhemispheric or hemispher* or intracran* or intracerebral or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA* or ((anterior or posterior) N3 circulat*) or lenticulostriate or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr*) N3 arter*)) N3 (disease or damage* or disorder* or disturbance or dissection or lesion or syndrome or arrest or accident or lesion or vasculopathy or insult or attack or injury or insufficiency or malformation or obstruct* or anomal*)) ) OR AB ( ((cerebr* or cerebell* or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil* or interhemispheric or hemispher* or intracran* or intracerebral or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA* or ((anterior or posterior) N3 circulat*) or lenticulostriate or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr*) N3 arter*)) N3 (disease or damage* or disorder* or disturbance or dissection or lesion or syndrome or arrest or accident or lesion or vasculopathy or insult or attack or injury or insufficiency or malformation or obstruct* or anomal*)) )
S4 TI ( ((cerebr* or cerebell* or vertebrobasil* or interhemispheric or hemispher* or intracran* or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA* or ((anterior or posterior) N3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr*) N3 arter*) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle* or subarachnoid* or arachnoid*) N3 (h?emorrhage or h?ematoma or bleed* or microh?emorrhage or microbleed or (encephalorrhagia or hematencephal*))) ) OR AB ( ((cerebr* or cerebell* or vertebrobasil* or interhemispheric or hemispher* or intracran* or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA* or ((anterior or posterior) N3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr*) N3 arter*) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle* or subarachnoid* or arachnoid*) N3 (h?emorrhage or h?ematoma or bleed* or microh?emorrhage or microbleed or (encephalorrhagia or hematencephal*))) )
S5 TI ( ((cerebr* or cerebell* or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil* or interhemispheric or hemispher* or intracran* or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA* or ((anterior or posterior) N3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr*) N3 arter*) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle* or lacunar or cortical or ocular) N3 (isch?emi* or infarct* or thrombo* or emboli* or occlus* or hypoxi* or vasospasm or obstruct* or vasculopathy or vasoconstrict*)) ) OR AB ( ((cerebr* or cerebell* or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil* or interhemispheric or hemispher* or intracran* or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA* or ((anterior or posterior) N3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr*) N3 arter*) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle* or lacunar or cortical or ocular) N3 (isch?emi* or infarct* or thrombo* or emboli* or occlus* or hypoxi* or vasospasm or obstruct* or vasculopathy or vasoconstrict*)) )
S6 TI ( ((carotid or cerebr* or cerebell* or intracranial or basilar or brachial or vertebr*) N3 (aneurysm or malformation* or dysplasia or disease or bruit or injur* or obstruct* or occlusion or constriction or presclerosis or scleros* or stenos* or atherosclero* or arteriosclero* or plaque* or thrombo* or embol* or arteriopathy)) ) OR AB ( ((carotid or cerebr* or cerebell* or intracranial or basilar or brachial or vertebr*) N3 (aneurysm or malformation* or dysplasia or disease or bruit or injur* or obstruct* or occlusion or constriction or presclerosis or scleros* or stenos* or atherosclero* or arteriosclero* or plaque* or thrombo* or embol* or arteriopathy)) )
S7 (MH "Hemiplegia")
S8 TI (hemipleg* or hemipar* or paresis or paraparesis or paretic) OR AB (hemipleg* or hemipar* or paresis or paraparesis or paretic)
S9 S1 OR S2 OR S3 OR S4 OR S5 OR S6 OR S7 OR S8
S10 (MH "Physical Therapy") OR (MH "Rehabilitation") OR (MH "Home Rehabilitation+") OR (MH "Occupational Therapy") OR (MH "Therapeutic Exercise+") OR (MH "Neuromuscular Facilitation") OR (MH "Occupational Therapists") OR (MH "Occupational Therapy Assistants") OR (MH "Physical Therapist Assistants") OR (MH "Physical Therapists")
S11 (MH "Exercise+")
S12 (MH "Feedback") OR (MH "Biofeedback") OR (MH "Biofeedback (Iowa NIC)")
S13 (MH "Orthopedic Equipment and Supplies+")
S14 TI ( physiotherap* or ((physical or occupational or exercise) N3 therap*) or rehabilitation ) OR AB ( physiotherap* or ((physical or occupational or exercise) N3 therap*) or rehabilitation )
S15 TI ( neurorehabilitation or feedback or biofeedback ) OR AB ( neurorehabilitation or feedback or biofeedback )
S16 TI ( motor N5 (train* or re?train* or learn* or re?learn*) ) OR AB ( motor N5 (train* or re?train* or learn* or re?learn*) )
S17 TI (((neuromuscular or neurodevelopmental or neuro‐developmental) N2 (facilitation or trainin* or retrain*)) or PNF or NDT) OR AB (((neuromuscular or neurodevelopmental or neuro‐developmental) N2 (facilitation or trainin* or retrain*)) or PNF or NDT)
S18 TI ( movement N5 (therap* or science) ) OR AB ( movement N5 (therap* or science) )
S19 TI ((neurodevelopmental or neurophysiological or orthop?edic) N5 (therap* or treatment* or rehabilitation or principle* or approach* or component* or concept*)) OR AB ((neurodevelopmental or neurophysiological or orthop?edic) N5 (therap* or treatment* or rehabilitation or principle* or approach* or component* or concept*))
S20 TI ( Bobath or Carr or Brunnstrom or Rood or Johnstone or NDT or (standardi?ed N2 three N2 stage*) ) OR AB ( Bobath or Carr or Brunnstrom or Rood or Johnstone or NDT or (standardi?ed N2 three N2 stage*) )
S21 S10 OR S11 OR S12 OR S13 OR S14 OR S15 OR S16 OR S17 OR S18 OR S19 OR S20
S22 S9 AND S21
S23 MH "Cerebrovascular Disorders+/RH"
S24 MH "Hemiplegia/RH"
S25 MH "Gait Disorders, Neurologic/RH"
S26 S22 OR S23 OR S24 OR S25
S27 (MH "Psychomotor Performance") OR (MH "Motor Skills+") OR (MH "Task Performance and Analysis")
S28 (MH "Learning") OR (MH "Conditioning (Psychology)") OR (MH "Problem Solving") OR (MH "Skill Retention")
S29 (MH "Movement") OR (MH "Locomotion") OR (MH "Walking") OR (MH "Gait+") OR (MH "Pronation") OR (MH "Range of Motion") OR (MH "Rising") OR (MH "Sitting") OR (MH "Squatting") OR (MH "Stair Climbing") OR (MH "Standing+") OR (MH "Supination") OR (MH "Weight‐Bearing") OR (MH "Weight Shifting")
S30 (MH "Motor Activity")
S31 (MH "Balance, Postural")
S32 (MH "Back") OR (MH "Torso") OR (MH "Lower Extremity+")
S33 TI ( motor N5 (skill* or activit* or function*) ) OR AB ( motor N5 (skill* or activit* or function*) )
S34 TI ( learning or conditioning ) OR AB ( learning or conditioning )
S35 TI ( movement or gait or locomotion or walking or walk or mobility ) OR AB ( movement or gait or locomotion or walking or walk or mobility )
S36 TI ( equilibrium or balance or postur* or supination or pronation ) OR AB ( equilibrium or balance or postur* or supination or pronation )
S37 TI ( body sway or stance or strength or weight#bearing or body weight support ) OR AB ( body sway or stance or strength or weight#bearing or body weight support )
S38 TI ( locomotor N5 (recovery or training) ) OR AB ( locomotor N5 (recovery or training) )
S39 TI ( weight N5 (distribut* or transfer*) ) OR AB ( weight N5 (distribut* or transfer*) )
S40 TI ( sit or sitting or stand or standing or step or stepping or climb or climbing ) OR AB ( sit or sitting or stand or standing or step or stepping or climb or climbing )
S41 TI ( lower limb* or lower extremit* or ankle or leg or heel or calf or knee or hip or thigh or foot or trunk ) OR AB ( lower limb* or lower extremit* or ankle or leg or heel or calf or knee or hip or thigh or foot or trunk )
S42 S27 OR S28 OR S29 OR S30 OR S31 OR S32 OR S33 OR S34 OR S35 OR S36 OR S37 OR S38 OR S39 OR S40 OR S41
S43 S26 AND S42
S44 MH randomized controlled trials
S45 MH double‐blind studies
S46 MH single‐blind studies
S47 MH random assignment
S48 MH pretest‐posttest design
S49 MH cluster sample
S50 TI (randomised OR randomized)
S51 AB (random*)
S52 TI (trial)
S53 MH (sample size) AND AB (assigned OR allocated OR control)
S54 MH (placebos)
S55 PT (randomized controlled trial)
S56 AB (control W5 group)
S57 MH (crossover design) OR MH (comparative studies)
S58 AB (cluster W3 RCT)
S59 ( (MH animals+ OR MH (animal studies) OR TI (animal model*)) ) NOT MH (human)
S60 S44 OR S45 OR S46 OR S47 OR S48 OR S49 OR S50 OR S51 OR S52 OR S53 OR S54 OR S55 OR S56 OR S57 OR S58
S61 S60 NOT S59

## Appendix 7. AMED Ovid search strategy
1. cerebrovascular disorders/ or cerebral hemorrhage/ or cerebral infarction/ or cerebral ischemia/ or cerebrovascular accident/ or stroke/ 2. (stroke or poststroke or post‐stroke or cerebrovasc$ or (cerebr$ adj3 vasc$) or CVA$ or apoplectic or apoplex$ or (transient adj3 isch?emic adj3 attack) or tia$ or SAH or AVM or ESUS or ICH).tw. 3. ((cerebr$ or cerebell$ or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil$ or interhemispheric or hemispher$ or intracran$ or intracerebral or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA$ or ((anterior or posterior) adj3 circulat$) or lenticulostriate or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 arter$)) adj3 ((blood adj5 clot$) or disease$ or damage$ or disorder$ or disturbance or dissection or lesion or syndrome or arrest or accident or lesion or vasculopathy or insult or attack or injury or insufficiency or malformation or obstruct$ or anomal$)).tw. 4. ((cerebr$ or cerebell$ or arteriovenous or vertebrobasil$ or interhemispheric or hemispher$ or intracran$ or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA$ or ((anterior or posterior) adj3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 arter$) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle$ or lacunar or cortical or ocular) adj3 (isch?emi$ or infarct$ or thrombo$ or emboli$ or occlus$ or hypoxi$ or vasospasm or obstruct$ or vasoconstrict$)).tw. 5. ((cerebr$ or cerebell$ or vertebrobasil$ or interhemispheric or hemispher$ or intracran$ or corpus callosum or intracerebral or intracortical or intraventricular or periventricular or posterior fossa or infratentorial or supratentorial or MCA$ or ((anterior or posterior) adj3 circulation) or basal ganglia or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 arter$) or space‐occupying or brain ventricle$ or subarachnoid$ or arachnoid$) adj3 (h?emorrhag$ or h?ematom$ or bleed$)).tw. 6. ((carotid or cerebr$ or cerebell$ or intracranial or ((basilar or brachial or vertebr$) adj3 arter$)) adj3 (aneurysm or malformation$ or block$ or dysplasia or disease$ or bruit or injur$ or narrow$ or obstruct$ or occlusion or constriction or presclerosis or scleros$ or stenos$ or atherosclero$ or arteriosclero$ or plaque$ or thrombo$ or embol$ or arteriopathy)).tw. 7. hemiplegia/ 8. (hemipleg$ or hemipar$ or paresis or paretic or hemineglect).tw. 9. or/1‐8 10. physical therapy modalities/ or physiotherapists/ or occupational therapy modalities/ or occupational therapy techniques/ or occupational therapists/ or rehabilitation/ or rehabilitation modalities/ or rehabilitation techniques/ 11. exp exercise therapy/ or exercise/ or muscle stretching exercises/ or exp orthopedic equipment/ 12. feedback/ or biofeedback/ 13. exp neurodevelopmental therapy/ 14. (physiotherap$ or ((physical or occupational or exercise) adj3 therap$) or rehabilitation).tw. 15. (neurorehabilitation or feedback or biofeedback).tw. 16. (motor adj5 (train$ or re?train$ or learn$ or re?learn$)).tw. 17. (((neuromuscular or neurodevelopmental or neuro‐developmental) adj2 (facilitation or trainin$ or retrain$)) or PNF or NDT).tw. 18. (movement adj5 (therap$ or science)).tw. 19. ((neurodevelopmental or neurophysiological or orthop?edic) adj5 (therap$ or treatment$ or rehabilitation or principle$ or approach$ or component$ or concept$)).tw. 20. (Bobath or Carr or Brunnstrom or Rood or Johnstone or NDT or (standardi?ed adj2 three adj2 stage$)).tw. 21. or/10‐20 22. 9 and 21 23. psychomotor performance/ or exp motor skills/ or "task performance and analysis"/ 24. learning/ or conditioning/ or problem solving/ 25. balance/ or movement/ or exp gait/ or locomotion/ or walking/ or dependent ambulation/ or motor activity/ or pronation/ or "range of motion"/ or exp posture/ or sitting/ or weight bearing/ 26. exp back/ or exp leg/ 27. (motor adj5 (skill$ or activit$ or function$)).tw. 28. (learning or conditioning).tw. 29. (movement or gait or locomotion or walking or walk or mobility).tw. 30. (equilibrium or balance or postur$ or supination or pronation).tw. 31. (body sway or stance or strength or weight?bearing or body weight support).tw. 32. (locomotor adj5 (recovery or training)).tw. 33. (weight adj5 (distribut$ or transfer$)).tw. 34. (sit or sitting or stand or standing or step or stepping or climb or climbing).tw. 35. (lower limb$ or lower extremit$ or ankle or leg or heel or calf or knee or hip or thigh or foot or trunk).tw. 36. or/23‐35 37. 22 and 36 38. research design/ 39. clinical trials/ 40. randomized controlled trials/ 41. comparative study/ 42. double blind method/ 43. meta analysis/ 44. random allocation/ 45. program evaluation/ 46. placebos/ 47. (clinical trial or clinical trial phase iii or meta analysis or clinical trialb or clinical trials or multicenter study or multicentre study or comparative studies or comparative study or randomised controlled trial or randomized controlled trial or controlled clinical trial or controlled trial).pt. 48. random$.tw. 49. (controlled adj5 (trial$ or stud$)).tw. 50. (clinical$ adj5 trial$).tw. 51. ((control or treatment or experiment$ or intervention) adj5 (group$ or subject$ or patient$)).tw. 52. (quasi‐random$ or quasi random$ or pseudo‐random$ or pseudo random$).tw. 53. ((control or experiment$ or conservative) adj5 (treatment or therapy or procedure or manage$)).tw. 54. ((singl$ or doubl$ or tripl$ or trebl$) adj5 (blind$ or mask$)).tw. 55. (cross‐over or cross over or crossover).tw. 56. placebo$.tw. 57. sham.tw. 58. (assign$ or allocat$).tw. 59. controls.tw. 60. trial.ti. or (RCT or RCTs).tw. 61. or/38‐60 62. 37 and 61

## Appendix 8. Chinese Biomedical Literature Database (CBM) SinoMed search strategy
 
* SinoMed database does not allow for full text search or text search as the pdf cannot be analysed directly.
*Commonly used fields [常用字段] Consists of four search terms: Chinese title, abstract, keywords and subject terms.
* Wildcard [%] Use % to search for zero or more characters.

## Appendix 9. Clinical trial registry search strategies
US National Institutes of Health Ongoing Trials Register ClinicalTrials.gov (www.clinicaltrials.gov)
(physical rehabilitation OR physical therapy OR physiotherapy OR exercise OR rehabilitation OR occupational therapy OR activity OR feedback OR biofeedback OR neurorehabilitation OR neuromuscular OR neurodevelopmental OR neurophysiological ) AND AREA[StudyType] EXPAND[Term] COVER[FullMatch] "Interventional" AND AREA[ConditionSearch] ( Carotid Artery OR Cerebral Artery OR Hemorrhagic Stroke OR Intracranial Hemorrhages OR Brain Infarction OR Cerebral Hemorrhage OR Brain Ischemia OR Cerebrovascular Disorders OR Stroke OR Paresis OR Hemiparesis OR Hemiplegia ) AND AREA[InterventionSearch] Randomized AND AREA[StdAge] EXPAND[Term] COVER[FullMatch] ( "Adult" OR "Older Adult" )
World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (trialsearch.who.int/)
Condition: cerebrovascular OR stroke
Intervention: physical rehabilitation OR physical therapy OR physiotherapy OR exercise OR rehabilitation OR occupational therapy OR activity OR feedback OR biofeedback OR neurorehabilitation OR neuromuscular OR neurodevelopmental OR neurophysiological
Recruitment status is: ALL
Phases are: ALL

## Appendix 10. REHABDATA search terms
REHABDATA (National Rehabilitation Information Center (https://www.naric.com/?q=en/REHABDATA)
Title/Abstract: cerebrovascular OR stroke Title/Abstract:: physical rehabilitation OR physical therapy OR physiotherapy OR exercise OR rehabilitation OR occupational therapy OR activity OR feedback OR biofeedback OR neurorehabilitation OR neuromuscular OR neurodevelopmental OR neurophysiological

## Appendix 11. Cochrane Screen4Me and Cochrane Crowd screening
17510 records assessed in Screen4Me:
1080 assessed as possible RCTs (taken into Covidence for review author screening)
314 rejected as not RCTs
16,116 assessed using RCT classifier:
3840 rejected as not RCTs
12,276 assessed by volunteers within Cochrane Crowd
4084 rejected as irrelevant
8192 considered possibly relevant (taken into Covidence for review author screening)

Thus, from the 17,510 records assessed; a total of 8238 were rejected and 9272 taken into Covidence for review author screening.
There were 111 volunteer screeners within Cochrane Crowd (see ).

## Data and analyses
 

## Characteristics of studies

## Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

## Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of studies awaiting classification [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of ongoing studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Differences between protocol and review
For differences between the protocol and earlier versions of the review, see ; .

## Differences between the previous 2014 review version and this update
We summarise the differences (and similarities) between the 2014 review version ( ) and this updated version below:
Objectives: no change
Criteria for considering studies for this review:
Types of studies ‐ no change.
Types of participants ‐ no change.
Types of interventions ‐ we made additional clarifications for interventions classed as single components; in this update we excluded studies focussed on trunk training, which were previously included. We decided to exclude studies in which the intervention was a programme of stroke rehabilitation that included a physical rehabilitation element as part of a broader post‐stroke rehabilitation programme. These changes led to the exclusion of a number of studies that were previously included in this review (see ).
Types of outcomes ‐ primary outcomes: no change.
Types of outcomes ‐ secondary outcomes: we added clarification around which measures of gait velocity we would include. We added adverse events as a secondary outcome, defined as adverse events possibly, probably or definitely relating to the study/intervention, as attributed by the study authors.
Adverse events ‐ we added adverse events as an outcome measure (not previously systematically recorded).

Search methods and selection of studies: search strategies comprehensively updated. Use of Covidence for management of study selection.
Data extraction and management:
Methods: previously, two independent review authors performed data extraction for study characteristics and also outcome data. For this update, due to the number of studies included, one author extracted study characteristics from study reports, and a second checked this and entered these into RevMan.
Interventions: we used an updated framework to describe and categorise the interventions within the studies. This was co‐produced with our stakeholder group.
Comparisons: previously we grouped and analysed studies into three comparison groups (physical rehabilitation versus no treatment, physical rehabilitation versus usual care or attention control, different approaches to physical rehabilitation). For this update, we grouped and analysed studies into four comparison groups. The comparison of 'additional physical rehabilitation + usual rehabilitation versus usual rehabilitation' is new. Justification for this change is provided in .

Assessment of risk of bias: in this review version, we used the new risk of bias tool, RoB 2. Previously, we used the original Cochrane tool for assessing risk of bias.
Data analysis:
For outcomes of independence in activities of daily living, motor function, balance, gait velocity, or length of stay, there were no changes to methods of meta‐analysis. We did change how we entered data for the main analyses, grouping data according to the method of assessment (i.e. outcome measure) rather than the type of intervention. We made some minor changes to the groupings for our subgroup analyses, based on comments and feedback from our stakeholder group. We introduced and presented a structured, sequential approach to our sensitivity analyses.
For adverse events, we have introduced analyses of adverse events, calculating risk ratios using Mantel‐Haenszel fixed‐effect meta‐analysis methods. When planning this update, we anticipated that adverse events would be assessed and reported in a wide range of different ways, and would not be suitable for meta‐analyses. We therefore did not originally plan to conduct any quantitative analyses relating to adverse events. Instead, we planned to tabulate and describe available data relating to adverse events. However, during the course of the editorial process, we re‐evaluated this plan and eventually pursued analysis of the identified adverse event data.

Assessment of reporting biases: in this update, we have produced funnel plots, which were not previously described in the protocol.
Data synthesis: for this update, we received advice and support from the Cochrane Methods Support Unit. This led to a number of changes to the structure and presentation of the review, limiting the amount of information presented as text and using additional tables to summarise data (e.g. results of subgroup and sensitivity analyses; results of analyses for follow‐up data).
Summary of findings: for this review version, we only included outcomes measured at the 'immediate' time point in our summary of findings tables. We added findings on adverse events to the summary of findings tables.

## Contributions of authors
Contributions of authors to earlier versions of this review are detailed in ; ; . Contributions of authors to this updated version are as follows:
Alex Todhunter‐Brown (ATB, previously known as Alex Pollock): conception of the review; design of the review; co‐ordination of the review; search and selection of studies for inclusion in the review; collection of data for the review; assessment of the risk of bias in the included studies; analysis of data; assessment of the certainty in the body of evidence; interpretation of data; led stakeholder involvement and wrote the review.
Ceri E Sellers (CS): co‐ordination of the review; search and selection of studies for inclusion in the review; collection of data for the review; analysis of data; interpretation of data; and commented on written drafts of the review.
Gillian Baer (GB): conception of the review; design of the review; search and selection of studies for inclusion in the review; interpretation of data; contributed to planning and conduct of stakeholder involvement; and commented on written drafts of the review.
Pei Ling Choo (PLC): screened abstracts in Chinese; translated relevant sections of included Chinese studies; extracted data and assessed methodological quality of Chinese studies; and commented on draft versions of the written review.
Julie Cowie (JC): collection of data for the review; assessment of the risk of bias in the included studies; analysis of data; and commented on written drafts of the review.
Joshua D Cheyne (JDC): design of the review search strategy; search and selection of studies for inclusion in the review; and commented on draft versions of the written review.
Peter Langhorne (PL): conception of the review; assessment of the certainty in the body of evidence; interpretation of data; and commented on draft versions of the written review.
Julie Brown (JB): interpretation of data; contributed to planning and conduct of stakeholder involvement; and commented on written drafts of the review.
Jacqui Morris (JM): conception of the review; design of the review; search and selection of studies for inclusion in the review; interpretation of data; and commented on written drafts of the review.
Pauline Campbell (PC): conception of the review; design of the review; co‐ordination of the review; search and selection of studies for inclusion in the review; collection of data for the review; assessment of the certainty in the body of evidence; interpretation of data; and commented on written drafts of the review.

## Sources of support

## Internal sources
Nursing, Midwifery and Allied Health Professions Research Unit, Glasgow Caledonian University, Other
This review update was led by researchers based within the Nursing, Midwifery and Allied Health Professions Research Unit, Glasgow Caledonian University.

## External sources
Chief Scientist Office, UK
This review update was supported by a project grant from the Scottish Government's Chief Scientist Office (HIPS/21/03).

## Declarations of interest
Alex Todhunter‐Brown* ‐ Chief Scientist Office (Grant/Contract); former Editor of Cochrane Stroke (closed March 2023) and current Co‐lead of Cochrane Heart, Stroke & Circulation Thematic Group; not involved in editorial processing or decision‐making for this review update.
Ceri E Sellers ‐ no relevant interests; qualified physiotherapist and registered with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) in the United Kingdom; researcher at Glasgow Caledonian University; member of the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy (CSP) in the United Kingdom.
Gillian Baer ‐ no relevant interests; lecturer in physiotherapy, Queen Margaret University, Edinburgh; carried out a trial included in this review ( ) ‐ Chief Scientist Office Scotland partial funding for .
Pei Ling Choo ‐ no relevant interests; freelance physiotherapist.
Julie Cowie ‐ none known.
Joshua D Cheyne ‐ former Information Specialist of Cochrane Stroke (closed March 2023) and was not involved in the editorial process or decision‐making for this review update.
Peter Langhorne* ‐ no relevant interests; published reviews in the area of multidisciplinary rehabilitation; previously worked as a health professional in multidisciplinary rehabilitation; former Editor of Cochrane Stroke (closed in March 2023) and was not involved in the editorial processing or decision‐making for this review update.
Julie Brown ‐ no relevant interests; Specialist Physiotherapist for Simpson Physiotherapy from October 2022 to February 2023.
Jacqui Morris ‐ none known.
Pauline Campbell ‐ Chief Scientist Office (Grant/Contract); National Institute for Health Research (Grant/Contract).
* Former editorial board members of Cochrane Stroke (closed March 2023).