pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10128967PMC10128967.110128967101289673709804910.1371/journal.pone.0282849PONE-D-22-158681Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesSurgical and Invasive Medical ProceduresMedicine and Health SciencesSurgical and Invasive Medical ProceduresDigestive System ProceduresBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyPhysiological ParametersBody WeightBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyClinical PsychologyBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyClinical PsychologySocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyClinical PsychologyBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyPhysiological ParametersBody WeightObesityResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchQuestionnairesBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyPhysiological ParametersBody WeightWeight LossMedicine and Health SciencesClinical MedicineClinical TrialsRandomized Controlled TrialsMedicine and Health SciencesPharmacologyDrug Research and DevelopmentClinical TrialsRandomized Controlled TrialsResearch and Analysis MethodsClinical TrialsRandomized Controlled TrialsAddressing a critical need: A randomised controlled feasibility trial of acceptance and commitment therapy for bariatric surgery patients at 15–18 months post-surgery
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy and bariatric surgery patients, feasibility of a randomised controlled trialBarleyElizabeth A.ConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologySupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing BovellMarieData curationInvestigationProject administrationWriting – review & editing Bennett-EastleyKateData curationFormal analysisVisualizationWriting – review & editing LeeJohn TayuFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyWriting – review & editing Lee-BaggleyDaynaFormal analysisWriting – review & editing SkeneSimon S.Formal analysisWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4939-2722TaiMichael Z.VisualizationWriting – review & editing BrooksSueWriting – review & editing ScholtzSamanthaConceptualizationFunding acquisitionMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
School of Health Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom2
School of Biosciences and Medicine, University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom3
School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia4
Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada5
Department of Psychiatry, St Charles Hospital, London, United Kingdom6
Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Imperial College, London, United KingdomChenetteEmilyEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript and its files.

## Introduction
Across the world there are over a billion individuals living with obesity (13% prevalence of a BMI >30kg/m2) [ ]. This is associated with a host of negative health outcomes, including a 48% increased risk of mortality following COVID-19 infection for individuals living with obesity compared to individuals without obesity (pre-vaccination rates) [ ]. Within the UK, 28% of the population is living with obesity and obesity was a primary or secondary factor in over one million admissions to NHS hospitals in the year 2019/2020 [ ]. Bariatric surgery is highly effective in treating obesity and its associated comorbidities; in patients with a BMI of over 35 it is more effective than nonsurgical interventions in bringing about weight loss [ ]. However, a 2021 systematic review found that 17.6% of patients still experienced significant weight regain of 10% or more [ ], which may necessitate further invasive procedures (bariatric surgery costs upwards of £10,000) and a return of comorbid conditions [ , ].
The UK’s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence recommends that bariatric surgery should be supplemented by psychological support, though it does not specify a particular therapy modality [ ]. Cognitive behavioural interventions have been found to be effective for weight loss [ ] However, a recent systematic review [ ], which found only nine randomised controlled trials of the effectiveness of psychological intervention provided to bariatric surgery patients, concluded that there is a lack of evidence in this population. High-quality studies are therefore needed, not least to understand the mechanisms through which cognitive and behavioural therapies may aid bariatric surgery patients.
Analysis of the psychological profile of patients living with obesity found poor self-regulation and negative mood as the strongest predictors of variance in weight loss [ ]. Eating psychopathology was associated with a 2.2 odds ratio in the weight regain group compared to the non-weight regain group in a recent systematic analysis [ ]. A longitudinal study of over 400 bariatric surgery patients found that, among others, depression, increased hedonic salience of food cues, and distress intolerance predicted poorer weight loss [ ]. These mechanisms can be targeted by third wave cognitive behavioural therapies (3wCBT) which use principles of mindfulness and non-judgemental awareness.
Support for this comes from a recent systematic review [ ] (n = 37 studies) which found 3wCBT to be more effective for weight loss than standard behavioural treatment; the most consistent evidence was for Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT). That review excluded studies of bariatric patientsbut another review focused on this population ([ ] n = 10 studies) found evidence for acceptance-based approaches in supporting wellbeing. Only one randomised controlled trial of ACT in bariatric patients [ ] (n = 39) was identified, in which those receiving six weeks of ACT demonstrated greater improvements in disordered eating, body dissatisfaction, QoL and acceptance of weight related thoughts and feelings than those receiving treatment as usual, with effects consistent at 6 months post intervention [ , ]. However, the participants varied in their post-surgery time, ranging from 4–38 months, with a mean of 15.5 so the ideal timing of psychological intervention is unknown [ ]. As the mechanisms hypothesized to drive weight gain will take time to express as new obesogenic behaviours to target in therapy [ ], therapies targeting post bariatric surgery patients may be more beneficial if given at a later stage. Multiple studies have established that 20–30% of patients regain weight within 24 months of surgery, unfortunately this is also when patients may be discharged from secondary care [ ]. The present feasibility RCT was designed to determine whether ACT delivered in this window, 15–18 months post-bariatric surgery, is acceptable to patients, and to guide the methodology of a future trial assessing effectiveness.
In previous studies of ACT for weight management [ , ], a range of outcomes, such as disordered eating, cravings, body dissatisfaction, quality of life and weight loss have been used with alterations in psychological flexibility, a core component of ACT, was suggested to be the primary mediator of benefits in the one RCT. However other mediators for weight loss have been proposed [ ], so a wide range of treatment outcomes will be measured and tested for potential mediators and moderators of effect.
Despite guidelines recommending psychological interventions in post-operative care, routine clinical practice has not caught up [ ], and evidence to guide clinicians in the type of therapy is limited. If evidence based interventions were available, this support could reduce the costs to the patient and society associated with weight regain and its sequelae. The aim of this feasibility RCT is to determine the acceptability of ACT group therapy in post-bariatric surgery patients and to provide insight into the optimal methods for an RCT assessing the effectiveness of ACT in this patient population. Acceptability of the intervention was assessed as group attendance and through interview data.

## Methods
The full protocol for this trial has been published in the International Journal of Clinical Trials [ ]. The supporting CONSORT checklist [ ] is available as supporting information; see .

## Design
This was a feasibility study for a single-centre, parallel-group, single-blind, two-arm trial, with randomisation to either a 10 weeks ACT group therapy or Usual Care Support Group control (SGC). Favourable ethical opinion was obtained from London-Westminster REC (18/LO/1256). The trial was registered at Researchregistry.com, UIN: 3959 (date registered: 10 April 2018); ISRCTN registry ID: ISRCTN52074801.

## Participants
All participants were adults (≥18years) post bariatric-surgery (>15 to < 18 months) at a London-based weight management centre. Patients who expressed suicidal ideation (score >0 on Q9 of thePHQ-9 [ ] or at psychiatry assessment), or who were unable to communicate in English, or who were unable to commit to attendance were excluded.
Initially, potentially eligible patients were given a Participant Information Sheet (PIS) and PHQ-9 at their regular post-surgical follow up appointments, but due to reduced operating capacity in the previous year, recruitment was hampered by low numbers in follow up clinics. Therefore, all eligible patients were contacted and posted or emailed the PIS. Interested patients were approached by the RA and an appointment made to obtain consent and baseline data. Written consent was obtained for all participants. Recruitment ceased when the target was reached.

## Randomisation
This was performed by an independent researcher running R program scripts [ ]. The randomisation method uses permuted blocks of variable size, randomly varying from two to six participants. All eligibility criteria were checked prior to randomisation. Each patient was given a unique participant number which was sent to the researcher running the R program. The program generated a randomised patient study number assigning them to either the ACT or SGC. This was emailed back to SS who then informed the participant of their allocation and provided details of where and when to attend. Other team members, including the statistician, were blind to allocation, but the patients knew to which arm they had been randomised. Approximately equal numbers were allocated to each condition.

## Sample size
We aimed to recruit 58 participants. However, due to high attrition, including before the first session, we ran extra groups (i.e. 4 iterations rather than 2) and recruited 80 participants. Loss to follow up and group attrition are presented in a consort diagram ( ).
 As this was a feasibility study, we did not carry out a formal sample size calculation when planning the study. However, we provide an estimate of the precision of the primary endpoints ( )–(1a) proportion of eligible patients at screening (1b) proportion of patients agreeing to take part in the study (2) proportion of patients remaining in the study at 12 months (3) completeness of data collection at 12 months and (4) attendance at therapy sessions, based on the recruitment of 80 patients. As an indication of power, recruitment of a target of 80 participants would allow estimation of the retention rate at any period within +/- 11.5%.
 

## Intervention
This comprised ACT group therapy delivered weekly (10 x 90-minute sessions) by a psychologist trained in bariatric psychological support and ACT. The intervention was adapted from an existing manual which addressed all six core processes of ACT: acceptance, defusion, contacting the present moment, self as context, committed action, values awareness [ ]. ACT supervision was provided for the psychologist and a sample of sessions observed for fidelity.

## Control (usual care)
This comprised the support group control (SCG) (10 x 90-minute meetings), delivered weekly by a psychology graduate with no formal therapy training. The groups were unstructured to allow patients to talk freely. The groups were held at the same time and venue, but on a different day of the week to the ACT groups.

## Outcomes
Primary outcomes related to the feasibility of the trial. Measures of the success of recruitment, data collection and acceptability of trial procedures included (1) willingness of participants to be randomised, i.e. the number of participants who drop out of the study after they had been randomised, (2) number of eligible patients attending clinic i.e. the percentage of patients who met eligibility criteria at screening, (3) follow-up rates, i.e. the percentage of participants retained until 12 month follow-up and providing complete datasets, (4) adherence to the intervention or control i.e. number of sessions attended, (5) reasons for attrition, (6) time needed to collect data.
Secondary outcomes explored related to obesity, health and wellbeing. The following validated measures were used: King’s Obesity Staging Criteria [ ], ICEpop CAPability measure for Adults (ICECAP-A) [ ], International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ) [ ], Brief Mediterranean Diet Questionnaire [ ], Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) [ ], Dutch Eating Behaviour Questionnaire (DEBQ) [ ], Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) [ ], Weight in kilograms and ACT processes using: Distress Tolerance Scale (DTS) [ ], Philadelphia Mindfulness Scale (PHLMS) [ ], Drexel Defusion Scale (DDS) [ ], Physical Activity Acceptance Questionnaire (PAAQ) [ ], and Food Craving Acceptance and Awareness Questionnaire (FAAQ) [ ].
Economic costs were calculated from the perspective of the NHS. Annual staff training budgets typically fund ACT training, which costs £450 (ranging from £350 to £550) for a healthcare professional with an existing psychology qualification. The ACT group was led by a Band 7 psychologist as part of their regular duties. A Band 4 psychology graduate with no formal therapy training led the support group. The CSRI was used to track healthcare resource use during the trial period [ ]. Using CSRI data, service utilisation costs for 2019/2020 were calculated by multiplying resource use by the appropriate unit cost. For service delivery, such as hospital stay costs, we also used national standard tariffs. Unit costs from the Unit Cost of Health and Social Care 2020 and NHS Reference Costs 2020 were used in the analysis. The EQ-5D was used to calculate quality-adjusted life years (QALY [ ]).
Outcome measures were completed at baseline, 3, 6 and 12 months follow up, except for weight and the King’s Obesity Staging Criteria [ ] which were collected at baseline and 12 months only. Demographic data were collected at baseline. Baseline data were collected face to face at routine clinic appointments; 3- and 6-month FU data were collected via telephone. We planned to collect 12-month data face to face, but due to the global pandemic this was mostly collected by phone.
Participants from both arms were invited to be interviewed after the 12 month follow up in order to understand acceptability of the trial and group processes. Recruitment stopped once equal numbers from each arm had been recruited and the team agreed that data saturation had been achieved. The ACT group participants also completed further ACT process measures at each session as part of the intervention: openness to experience (OE), behavioural awareness (BA), and valued action (VA).

## Data analysis
Descriptive statistical analyses were conducted for the feasibility and potential primary and secondary outcomes at baseline and each follow-up time point. Although this feasibility study was not powered to detect differences between groups in questionnaire-based outcomes, multi-level linear regression models were fitted to the data from each questionnaire to explore the direction and magnitude of effects. This method of analysis uses data from all time-points, and provides unbiased estimates, providing data can be assumed to be missing-at-random.
A cost-consequence analysis (CCA) was performed from a National Health Service (NHS) perspective. This analysis is commonly used in the literature to investigate the intervention’s impact on costs and health outcomes in a feasibility study [ , ]. The analysis listing the cost and outcomes associated with ACT (the treatment group) and the Usual Care Support Group (the control group) separately, allowing decision- makers to compare the relative value of the treatment options, and by calculating resources use and outcomes for each treatment. Regression analysis was used to adjust for patients’ age, gender, baseline health-related quality of life, and body mass index. The intervention costs were calculated based on the activities involved in delivering the programmes such as staff salaries, administrative and managerial costs. Total costs of the individuals in the two groups were estimated by multiplying the quantity of the resource use with the unit costs of health and social care in the NHS [ ]. We presented the incremental costs (mean and standard deviation) associated with the intervention alongside the benefits (if any) identified in the trial when compared with the usual care group.
Interview data were analysed using a directed content analysis technique [ ] with deductive coding. Transcripts were uploaded to NVivo 12 QSR [ ]. Following familiarisation with the transcripts, the “Theoretical Framework of Acceptability of Healthcare Interventions” (TFA) [ ] was used as the coding scheme. The TFA includes seven constructs of acceptability: affective attitude (i.e. how individuals feel about participating), perceived effectiveness (i.e. the extent to which the intervention is perceived to be likely to achieve its purpose), intervention coherence (i.e. participants’ understanding of the intervention and how it works), ethicality (i.e. the fit of trial and intervention with an individual’s values), burden (i.e. the perceived amount of effort required to participate), self-efficacy (i.e. participants’ confidence that they can perform required behaviours) and opportunity costs (i.e. the extent to which benefits, profits, or values must be given up to participate). Data relating to the six ACT processes were also coded for ACT group participants and categorised under the ‘perceived effectiveness’ and ‘intervention coherence’ acceptability constructs.
Data relating to participation in the trial and SCG and in the ACT intervention were coded separately. Codes were agreed between the coding team (MB, HG, SB, EB) using one transcript before MB and EB coded all transcripts independently. Similarities and differences in views between the groups were highlighted and examples of disconfirming data were sought for each acceptability construct. The coding frequencies were presented as counts along with supporting quotes for each TFA component. Coding was discussed and agreed at multidisciplinary team meetings including the service user advisors.
This was a change from protocol where inductive thematic analysis was planned. However, given findings of successful recruitment but high attrition, it was felt that using a focused, structured approach to understand the acceptability, of both the trial processes and experience of the ACT group, would enable identification of specific areas to be addressed in future work. The TFA has been applied in this way to various interventions, including a men’s mental health promotion program [ ] a digital return to work intervention for common mental disorders [ ] and an HIV differentiated care intervention for formerly incarcerated people re-entering community settings [ ]. Its use therefore enhances the applicability of study findings by structuring findings according to recognised constructs of acceptability.

## Results
Recruitment: 264 participants were potentially eligible and screened. Of these 18 were ineligible (not fluent in English language), 166 did not participate (70 did not respond to contact, 59 unable to commit to sessions, 37 agreed but did not turn up for baseline appointment). Eighty participants were consented and randomised ( ), consecutive participants were recruited following the 12 month follow up until equal numbers from each arm had been interviewed and data saturation was agreed to have occurred.
Participant characteristics are displayed in . There appeared to be good balance between the randomised groups on all characteristics.
 

## Data collection
This information is displayed in . At 12 months, outcome data were available from 50% of those originally randomised to the SGC, and from 31% of those randomised to ACT.
Questionnaires took an average of 56 mins to complete at baseline when they were completed face to face and an average of 29 mins to complete at 12 months by phone (as at 3 and 6 months).

## Acceptability of the intervention
There were high levels of drop out from both groups ( ). Attendance was poor even at the first session, for both groups. Only 9 (29%) ACT participants completed > = half of the sessions, this was the case for 13 (35%) SGC participants. This means that it is unlikely that any participant received a ‘dose’ of ACT that would be expected to be sufficient to facilitate change. Our qualitative study explored the reasons for attrition, and findings are reported below.
 

## Process evaluation
Only six ACT participants competed the in-session measures of OE, BA, VA more than five times. Weekly changes were analysed over time. Results indicated that scores fluctuated throughout the intervention but there was no clear indication of improvement in any measure across the time points. No linear or non-linear patterns in the results could be identified.

## Exploration of primary and secondary outcome measures for a full RCT
Data from all questionnaires at each time point are included in the S1 Questionnaire data and include the levels of missing data. Changes from baseline and differences between groups: Findings from the multi-level linear regression models for the outcome measures are provided in . Given that this was a feasibility study, not powered for efficacy, and the high levels of attrition, findings should be interpreted with caution. There were no statistically significant differences between groups and similar patterns across outcomes, but there are some interesting points to note. The mean change in weight from baseline to 12 months (Kgs) where a positive value represents weight gain and a negative value represents weight loss, was 2.6 (95% CI (-4.3 to 9.5); n = 13) and -1.4 (95% CI (-11.9 to 9.1; n = 10) in the SCG and ACT groups respectively (t-test for difference in means p = 0.47). However, considering individual responses, the number of participants who lost or maintained weight to within <2% of baseline was 8/13 (62%; 95% CI (32% to 86%) in SCG and 5/10 (50%; 95% CI (19% to 81%) in ACT, suggesting that average differences between groups were affected by large intra-individual variation in response (see ).
Health service use and costs: The ACT group had fewer hospital admissions (0 percent vs 13 percent), A&E visits (7.6 percent vs 20 percent), social worker visits (0 percent vs 7 percent), district nurse or health visitor visits (0 percent vs 6 percent), and visits to ‘therapy in the community’ (0 percent vs 6 percent) (0 percent vs 7 percent). They were more likely to visit an outpatient hospital (46 percent vs 26 percent), a GP (69 percent vs 40 percent) or a practise nurse (46 percent vs 27 percent), any telephone consultation (31 percent vs 20 percent), any day centre visit (38 percent vs 7 percent), a chiropractor (7 percent vs 0 percent), or any counselling, psychiatry, or community mental health visit (8 percent vs 7 percent). Except for any day centre visit (p = 0.04), no differences between groups were statistically significant (please see ).
The cost of providing ACT services includes one hour of clinical psychologist time (£70) divided among ten patients. The training costs approximately £2.25 per patient (£450 per year for 200 patients). As a result, the total cost of providing ACT services is £72.25 per patient. SGC service delivery costs include one hour of assistant psychologist time (£34) divided among ten patients. This equates to £3.4 per patient or £34 for ten sessions. Last year, the ACT group spent £560 on medical expenses, while the usual care group spent £441. The intervention cost £633 for the ACT group and £475 for the usual/standard care group.
QALYs (Quality-adjusted Life Years): The unadjusted mean QALYs from baseline to 12 month follow-up were: ACT group = 0.61 (SD = 0.26); SGC = 0.59 SD = 0.37. The study only included 32 patients with baseline and 12-month EQ-5D measurements (19 in the usual care group and 13 in the ACT group). We then used a regression analysis to estimate the differences in QALY between two groups, adjusting for patients’ age, gender, baseline health-related quality of life, and body mass index. The ACT group was associated with a 0.07 point reduction in QALY (P>0.05) in the adjusted analysis. The regression results were summarised in .
 summarised the results of the cost-consequences analysis. The cost of ACT intervention is £72.25 versus £34 in the usual care group. The estimated health-care cost in the 12 months following the intervention was £560, compared to £441 in the usual-care group over the previous 12 years. When compared to the control group, the ACT group was associated with a non-statistically significant reduction in QALY (-0.07, P>0.05).
 

## Acceptability: Qualitative findings
Eighteen participants were interviewed: nine from each arm (female n = 11). Three interviews were face to face and the subsequent 15 were by telephone; interview duration ranged from 35 to 65 minutes. Three of those interviewed did not attend any session (ACT n = 2, SGC n = 1), this was due to health reasons and being unable to attend due to other commitments. The 15 remaining participants interviewed attended from 1 to 9 sessions (ACT median = 5, SGC median = 8), though the ACT participants were able to ‘catch up’ on course content with the psychologist prior to the subsequent session.

## Coding results
All acceptability constructs were coded, except ‘self efficacy’ was not coded for the trial or SGC attendance, and though ‘opportunity costs’ was coded in relation to attending sessions it was not coded specifically in relation to participating in either group. Most codes related to ‘perceived effectiveness’ (50 in 7 interviews SGC, 46 in 6 interviews ACT). Findings are presented as themes within each acceptability construct, supported by illustrative quotes (quotes are linked to a participant via participant number (1–80), gender (m/F) and the number of sessions attended out of 10).

## Affective attitude
All participants, except one, reported feeling positive at the time of enrolment about participating in the trial. The exception was someone who suggested that they felt obliged by their clinician to attend (9FA1); this person dropped out after the first session. The possibility that dissatisfaction with group allocation could explain the observed high attrition rates, particularly for the first session, was explored directly. Two participants declared a prior preference for the ACT group (19FA9, 20FC8). This worked out for one (19FA9), while the other was randomised to the SGC (20FC8). Nevertheless, this person participated in the trial and attended 8 out of 10 sessions. In addition, the groups were held on different days, and some participants (35FA0) stated being unavailable to attend their allocated group but would have attended on the other day. Group or timing preferences may therefore have been a factor contributing to low attendance for the first session.
“I was a bit disappointed because I did want the other group…, mainly because it was on a more convenient night…… and the other reason was because it sounded more interesting” [20FC8]
In terms of satisfaction with the groups, overall comments from participants of both arms were generally positive. However, participants from both the ACT group and the SGC reported disappointment with others’ lack of attendance ( ). This was commonly cited as a reason for their own later non-attendance,
“I said unless you could get at least a few more people turning up then, unfortunately, I would probably do the same [not turn up] ‘cos it was a waste of my time.”[2MC3]
though others persevered despite sometimes being the only person there (e.g.39FC9). When participants received peer support, however, it was clearly valued, independent of allocation:
“It was really nice to just um….be in a roomful of people and be totally open and really honest and not reserved or holding back.”[20FC8]
“It was actually quite nice to sometimes meet other people, because on the sessions I meet up with other people…and we talked and shared stories and um er found out we were all in the same sort of boat really”.[48MA6]

## Perceived effectiveness and intervention coherence
ACT group: More data were coded for the ACT group as participants were probed about ACT processes. All of the ACT processes were mentioned in some way by at least one participant. As might be expected, those who attended more sessions appeared to have a greater understanding of the therapy, as more of their data could be coded to the ACT processes. No participant demonstrated full comprehension of every process, but increased awareness of thoughts and feelings and their impact on eating behaviour and the importance of choices being driven by values rather than internal experiences appeared to be understood:
“It made me aware that, by being aware of what you’re doing and what was happening around you, it was very helpful [in showing you] what you enjoy then what you didn’t enjoy.”[59MA8]
“I’m reaching for a biscuit tin, but I’m thinking to myself do I really need it? Then you think, actually I’m not hungry”.[19FA9]
All participants, except one who left after the first session (9FA1), reported benefits, including greater self-acceptance and behaviour changes:

“I came away with quite a few bits and pieces and er felt a lot better about myself
”.[56MA9]

“I am not a great exerciser but doing small bits….I have up it to 10 to 12,000 steps a day.”[52FA9]
Support Group Control: SGC participants understood that the groups were about sharing experiences. Several reported benefits of peer support, including gaining new insights:
“what came out was the fact that it was more of my head or even habit of eating… I think it was…listening to the others and what they used to eat and things like that. I mean it definitely helped.…”.58FC8)
There were no reports of changes in behaviour however.

## Ethicality
Participants’ motivations for participating appeared in line with the intervention values. For instance, some looked forward to receiving psychological support, which they felt was both important and lacking in their treatment so far:
“I was keen to volunteer, because I think that’s what is missing from the provisions of the support, the psychological aspects. Um because frankly it’s the psychology that made me keep gaining weight”.[47MC8]
Others welcomed the chance for more information about how to maintain or lose weight (48MA6) especially in a group of people with shared experiences (7MC9):
“I haven’t lost a great deal of weight… I thought it might have been a session where there’s other people with the same the same problems and perhaps some experiences that I had had”.[56MA9]
A common motivation, which was outside the trial’s explicit values, was a desire to help others, or to ‘give back’, in return for having been given surgery for which they felt grateful:
“to be able to pass on the things that you found were helpful.”[&MC9]
“I was so grateful for having being offered the surgery …I felt, well not obliged to, but I wanted to give back something.”[39FC9]
The extent to which they were able to do this, however, was reduced due to the limited group attendance meaning that opportunities to contribute were few.

## Burden
Principally, participants discussed difficulties travelling to the sessions, for instance time consuming journeys, transport problems or bad weather. Travel difficulties were linked to not being able to attend sessions which was a source of frustration for some:
“I was quite annoyed that I didn’t make um the last session but um it was to do with the trains”.[58FC8]
No additional burden specific to the SGC was coded. Some ACT participants found the homework burdensome, but, nevertheless, in line with the ACT model, committed to doing it:
“[homework tasks were] tedious but I did all of them… I thought, if I’m committing to the sessions, then I’m going to do the homework, so I did, I did do that”.[59FA8]

## Self efficacy
This was not coded for participating in the trial or the SGC. ACT group participants referred to acquiring confidence to make their own choices, including one who felt empowered to stand up to their partner when making food choices:
“to me like he [husband] was trying to sabotage it, because he was a was a feeder…and I think it made me realise that … I needed to work on relationships and making him understand….”.[19FA9]

## Opportunity costs
Participants reported having to change their weekly schedule so that they could attend sessions and the issue of travel costs was raised as a potential barrier to attendance. No opportunity costs were coded specific to attending either the ACT group or SGC.

## Discussion
This trial tested the feasibility of delivering an RCT of ACT versus SCG. Overall, we found that the methods of the trial were feasible. All eligible participants were invited to participate, and we recruited and consented more than planned. Those who remained in the trial completed the outcome measures satisfactorily which allowed planned analyses to be conducted. However, the trial suffered from considerable attrition. This was linked to very low attendance at the groups which was similar for the ACT and SCG and was low even on the first session where only 57% attended.
It appeared that although data collection was hampered by lack of retention, other trial processes (i.e. recruitment, consent, data collection in those retained in the trial) would be feasible for a future trial but that the intervention, as delivered, may not be. We therefore decided to explore acceptability of the trial processes and intervention in detail using an established framework–The TFA [ ]. This proved to be useful for capturing aspects of the trial and intervention which could be targeted to improve future trials. For instance, the acceptability constructs of ‘burden’ and ‘opportunity costs’ featured in interviews; participants cited session timing and a range of travel difficulties as reasons for non-attendance at initial and subsequent sessions. This is supported by studies investigating bariatric patients’ attendance at routine follow up [ , ], which has also been found to be low, with ‘geographic distance’ cited as a reason, along with family, professional and health problems. This suggests that future trials should make use of telehealth care tools to decrease the costs and burden of attendance. Cognitive and behavioural telehealth interventions have been shown to increase attendance compared to in person delivery [ ] and telehealth based behavioural interventions for obesity have been found not to be inferior to in-person interventions when assessed against weight gain [ ].
Our interview data also suggested that the acceptability construct of ‘ethicality’ was important. This refers to the fit of trial and intervention with an individual’s values. The intervention fitted with what the participants said they wanted (i.e. information and psychological support), and satisfaction with this was expressed as evidenced by the positive comments coded under the ‘Affective Attitude’ acceptability construct. However, joining the trial was commonly motivated by a desire to ‘help others’ or ‘give back’. This, and another expressed desire, namely to meet other patients and share their experiences, was thwarted by the high levels of attrition in both groups This may explain why poor attendance at the first session led to reduced motivation to return, with subsequent drop out having a negative impact on future attendance.
Further, our finding that participants consented to join the study out of a motivation to help others, may suggest that they were not ‘ready’ for therapy themselves, an idea supported by our PPI advisors. The impact on weight loss of ‘readiness’ or motivation for bariatric surgery has been tested retrospectively [ ] and prospectively [ ], but no association with readiness to change scores or motivation such as changing appearance, fitness or medical concerns has been found. In other populations, the process of selecting patients suitable for therapy has also been studied with the aim of reducing attrition and improving outcomes, however the construct of readiness for therapy is complex and no established measures exist [ , ]. Nevertheless “composite psychological variables” including combinations of increased self-esteem, coping skills and ability to use support have been found to predict weight loss in post-bariatric surgery through their effects on eating behaviour [ ]. It is possible that patients approaching therapy from a purely altruistic point of view are not accepting of their own need for help and so their ability to use the support offered by therapy is reduced. Further trials of therapy for bariatric patients should include exploration of who responds best and why in order to inform future recruitment of suitable candidates.
With regard to perceived effectiveness and intervention coherence, few participants received a sufficient course of ACT for it to be meaningful. It is, therefore, unsurprising that no trends indicating a difference between the groups were identified. However, participants who attended the ACT groups reported some benefits and behaviour changes linked to ACT processes, especially regarding contacting the present moment, becoming more aware of behaviours and improved self efficacy. ACT group participants varied in their understanding of ACT processes, this appeared linked to attendance, but participants’ description of the intervention was generally simplistic, with few able to give concrete examples of the processes covered in sessions and homework.
Nevertheless, this work has demonstrated that it is possible to deliver group ACT as part of routine care post bariatric care with minimal additional cost to services. Future trials could impact on large numbers of individuals and, if successful, reduce NHS costs significantly. For instance, in 2017/18 (latest available data NHS digital) there were 6,627 hospital admissions with a primary diagnosis of obesity and a main or secondary procedure of bariatric surgery; an increase of 2% on 2016/17 (6,492). However, approximately 20% of bariatric surgery patients regain lost weight with cost implications of £10,000 per re-operation as well as return of co-morbidities such as type-2 diabetes. If ACT is found, in future trials, to be effective at preventing weight regain, significant saving could be made. This study also highlights that the decision regarding the best primary and secondary outcome measures for a full RCT of ACT would require the careful consideration of many aspects of the proposed trial, including consensus in the most relevant patient-centred outcome to demonstrate efficacy. The data collected during this feasibility study for a range of outcomes would be sufficient to inform the necessary sample size calculations for a future trial through estimates of standard deviation of the chosen outcome, but the final decision on the choice of primary endpoint should be taken by the research team following extensive consultation with patient representatives.
A strength of this feasibility trial is that, to reduce selection bias, we invited all eligible patients to participate. We noted early on that there was low attendance, so we ran additional iterations of the groups which confirmed that retention to the group rather than recruitment to the trial was an issue. We then explored acceptability of the trial and group processes with both high and low attenders using an established framework. This allowed us to pinpoint areas to address in a future trial to increase acceptability and retention. Nevertheless, due to the lack of attendance, few people received a meaningful level of the ACT intervention, so we are unable to recommend a definitive primary outcome for a future trial or suggest the processes by which ACT may work.
In conclusion, this study has demonstrated that an RCT of group ACT is feasible to deliver in bariatric patients post-surgery, but that the intervention is not feasible or acceptable as delivered. Low attendance at groups, due mainly to travel and scheduling difficulties, reduced acceptability as participants were unable to gain the peer support or to provide the help to others that had motivated them to join the trial. This suggests that acceptability, and hence retention, could be improved in a future full trial of effectiveness by using online intervention delivery whilst taking care to maximise participant satisfaction by providing opportunity for interaction with peers. The data from this trial also suggest the need for future research to explore the factors which influence when and which bariatric patients are most likely to benefit from psychological therapy and why in order to inform recruitment of suitable candidates to trials.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## CONSORT checklist.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Individual weight changes.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Results from mixed models–unadjusted.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Dataset

## FAB_fulldata_26SEP2022.
(CSV)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Questionnaire data.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Questionnaire results.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Results from multi-level linear regression models.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 File

## Service use and costs.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 File

## Feasibility of acceptance and commitment therapy for post-bariatric surgery patients: the FAB study protocol.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

The authors would like to thank the study’s PPI representatives, Georgina Hayman and Roy Ebbs, for bringing a service user perspective to every aspect of the study, including during regular Project Advisory Group meetings. We thank Ms Hayman for chairing this group.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0282849.r001Decision Letter 0
TaheriShahradAcademic Editor© 2023 Shahrad Taheri2023Shahrad Taherihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
17 Aug 2022

PONE-D-22-15868Addressing a critical need: A randomised controlled feasibility trial of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy for bariatric surgery patients at 15-18 months post-surgeryPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Barley,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 01 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Shahrad Taheri
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf  and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. We note that the original protocol that you have uploaded as a Supporting Information file contains an institutional logo. As this logo is likely copyrighted, we ask that you please remove it from this file and upload an updated version upon resubmission.
3. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
4. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors reported about the results of a randomized controlled feasibility trial to test the feasibility and acceptability of ACT following bariatric surgery a randomized controlled trial of 10 sessions of group ACT or Usual Care Support Group control (SGC) was delivered 15- 18 months post bariatric surgery they concluded, that the trial
processes were feasible, but that the ACT intervention was not acceptable as delivered. Our data suggest changes to recruitment and intervention delivery that would address this.
First of all I would like to congratulate the authors for providing and consistently reporting this feasibility study. I do have some minor comments to the presentation, which could be easily addressed in a review.
The appropriate guideline is the "CONSORT statement on Pilot and Feasibility Trials (see BMJ 2016; 355:i5239 http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj. i5239)". Please use this checklist, although the difference appears to be minor. The extra statement on page 6 might not be necessary.
p5: Is it possible to give a variable, by which "Acceptability of the ACT group therapy" is assessed.
p7 Randomization. Please give more details, e.g. the randomization procedure, software (R software package) and how the random allocation was implemented. Please give more details with respect to blinding. Single blinding is not very specific. How is blinding implemented.
P7 I fully understand, that a strong sample size argument could not be given here. But when the primary endpoint is specified, a precision argument for estimation could be given - even post hoc - to illustrate the argument.
p8. Please include a table with the descriptive measures of the secondary outcome scores.
P10 or elsewhere: Could you derive some recommendation about the trails primary endpoint variable. Could you derive some ideas about the minimal detectable difference, i.e. the minimal difference to be detected resulting in a change of patient care?
p11: Please skip the p-values You may argue from the estimates of the difference and CI'S from the multilevel models
Rosenberger WF, Lachin JM. (2015) Randomization in Clinical Trials, Second Edition. Wiley, New York. DOI:10.1002/9781118742112
1. In general, p-values should be given with at least 3 decimal digits to avoid misinterpretation.
Reviewer #2: As the manuscript title states, this study addresses a critical need. Namely, the provision of psychological care to support weight management post-bariatric surgery. This is a well designed feasibility study that evaluates ACT group therapy delivered by a clinical psychologist in comparison to an unstructured support group delivered by a psychology graduate with no training in XX, in people who are 15-18 months post-bariatric surgery. There are some significant challenges in feasibility discovered in terms of intervention uptake and retention and the authors are transparent about this. However, there are some issues with the analysis and reporting of the study that should be improved prior to publication.
Introduction
The introduction needs revision – specifically in terms of the review of previous research on ACT for weight management. For example, the authors introduce ACT by stating that “Third wave cognitive behavioural therapies ….. are evidenced in the general population.14 , 15. What do the authors mean by “evidenced in the general population”? The two papers they cite are a (now out of date) review of mindfulness-based interventions by O'Reilly et al and a small trial of people with overweight and obesity from 2009 by Forman et al. The authors should more fully describe the literature to date in people with overweight and obesity. More recent and comprehensive systematic reviews have been conducted (e.g. Lawlor et al 2020), as have larger trials with longer term follow up. (eg Formal et al 2019 doi: 10.1002/oby.22412.)
The authors then cite a very small Iranian study in people with obesity. Is the point that the authors are trying to make that this is the only study in people with obesity? I suggest that this is not correct and that the authors should describe all relevant literature in people with obesity.
A more comprehensive review of literature to date for post bariatric surgery should then be reported. How does this study differ from the previous literature and what gap does it seek to fill?
The discussion should end with the aims of the study, rather than a summary of the rest of the paper.
The authors should also be careful to avoid self-plagiarism of their protocol paper http://dx.doi.org/10.18203/2349-3259.ijct20194655
Minor point - Person first language would mean not using overweight as something people “are”. I appreciate that some people find “people with obesity” to be grammatically difficult. Given that the real focus here is on obesity, I would simply remove the stats on overweight.
Methods
The methods are largely well described, and deviations from the protocol are highlighted.
I did not understand the justification for the intervention costings. It states that : There were no extra hours or treatment costs because the ACT group was led by a Band 7 psychologist as part of their regular duties. However, the control group did not receive care from a Band 7 psychologist whereas the support group was led by A Band 4 psychology graduate with no formal therapy training. The cost difference here would be substantial. It appears later in the results that these different costs are taken into account, so perhaps this section just needs rephrasing to be much clearer.
Minor – It states that Loss to follow up and group attrition were recorded in a consort diagram (Figure 1). I suspect that they were recorded somewhere else. They are presenting in the diagram.
Results
Large number of patients were screened as eligible but chose not to take part (with a substantial number unable to commit to the treatment sessions.
While I appreciate the granularity of Table 2, this makes it very difficult to follow. It would be more meaningful to present the number of all ACT and all SGT participants attending each session.
The authors include the following paragraph in the results “The decision regarding the best primary and secondary outcome measures for a full RCT would require the careful consideration of many aspects of the proposed trial, including consensus in the most relevant patient-centred outcome to demonstrate efficacy. The data collected during this feasibility study for a range of outcomes would be sufficient to inform the necessary sample size calculations for a future trial through estimates of standard deviation of the chosen outcome.” This should be moved to the discussion and the authors should be specific about HOW the current study is informative – what decisions does it help make? Can the authors design a trial based on this data? If so, what does this trial look like. If not, what further studies are needed to inform a trial?
The original intention in the protocol was to use inductive thematic analysis. The authors say that they used the Theoretical Framework of Acceptability (TFA) instead. They describe this as an “evidence-based” method. However, the TFA is not a method for qualitative data analysis. It is a framework for defining acceptability. How was the analysis conducted?
Tables 3 and 4 appear to be trying to quantify qualitative data and do not ad value to the paper. The way coding is described also suggests a very un-qualitative approach. It appears that they just “coded” each time something was said that was relevant to pre-determined codes and the results simply repeats “one person said this, two people said Y” with little to no attempt to interpret or synthesise the data. Phrases like “X was coded most frequently” suggest that this was not a qualitative analysis, but rather a labelling exercise. The qualitative analysis should be revisited and an appropriate method used and described.
Discussion
I suspect that the discussion will change following reanalysis of the qualitative data using appropriate qualitative methods. The discussion should be edited to be clearer where there are findings from this study and where the authors are referring to findings from the general literature. Ideally, we should be able to discern the novel contribution of this study.
The strengths and limitations of the study should be clearly discussed
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0282849.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
4 Oct 2022

PLOS One – FAB paper: Response to Reviewers
Journal Requirements: When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements:
• 1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

Author response: we apologise for this error and trust that this is now satisfactory.
• 2. We note that the original protocol that you have uploaded as a Supporting Information file contains an institutional logo. As this logo is likely copyrighted, we ask that you please remove it from this file and upload an updated version upon resubmission. 
Author response: logo removed as requested
• 3. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability. Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Author response: uploaded as requested
• Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access. 
Author response: N/A
• We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
Author response: we note in our cover letter that the minimal dataset is uploaded as a supplementary file.
• 4. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
Author response: now added (p34)
Reviewer comments: 
Reviewer #1: The authors reported about the results of a randomized controlled feasibility trial to test the feasibility and acceptability of ACT following bariatric surgery a randomized controlled trial of 10 sessions of group ACT or Usual Care Support Group control (SGC) was delivered 15- 18 months post bariatric surgery they concluded, that the trial processes were feasible, but that the ACT intervention was not acceptable as delivered. Our data suggest changes to recruitment and intervention delivery that would address this.
First of all I would like to congratulate the authors for providing and consistently reporting this feasibility study. I do have some minor comments to the presentation, which could be easily addressed in a review.
Author Response: We thank this reviewer for their thoughtful comments. 
Reviewer #1: The appropriate guideline is the "CONSORT statement on Pilot and Feasibility Trials (see BMJ 2016; 355:i5239 http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj. i5239)". Please use this checklist, although the difference appears to be minor. The extra statement on page 6 might not be necessary.
Author Response: Thank you this version has now been used (S1)
p5: Is it possible to give a variable, by which "Acceptability of the ACT group therapy" is assessed.
Author Response: we have now added “Acceptability of the intervention was assessed as group attendance and through interview data.”
Reviewer #1: p7 Randomization. Please give more details, e.g. the randomization procedure, software (R software package) and how the random allocation was implemented. Please give more details with respect to blinding. Single blinding is not very specific. How is blinding implemented.
Author Response: Thank you, we have now added details to P7 under ‘randomization’
Reviewer #1: P7 I fully understand, that a strong sample size argument could not be given here. But when the primary endpoint is specified, a precision argument for estimation could be given - even post hoc - to illustrate the argument.
Author Response: Thank you we have now noted the precision using confidence intervals of the main feasibility outcomes and added an illustrative post-hoc argument to justify the sample size.
Reviewer #1: p8. Please include a table with the descriptive measures of the secondary outcome scores.
Author Response: Thank you for this, all this information can be found in the Supplementary materials.
Reviewer #1: P10 or elsewhere: Could you derive some recommendation about the trails primary endpoint variable. Could you derive some ideas about the minimal detectable difference, i.e. the minimal difference to be detected resulting in a change of patient care?
Author Response: We have moved the comments about the primary endpoint from the results section to the discussion section (as requested by reviewer 2), and added some additional comments. The study was not designed to detect minimal detectable differences for validated outcomes, but sufficient data exists to support a sample size calculation.
Reviewer #1: p11: Please skip the p-values You may argue from the estimates of the difference and CI'S from the multilevel models. Rosenberger WF, Lachin JM. (2015) Randomization in Clinical Trials, Second Edition. Wiley, New York. DOI:10.1002/9781118742112
Author Response: Within the manuscript, the p-values have now been removed and replaced by estimated differences and confidence intervals as suggested.
Reviewer #1: In general, p-values should be given with at least 3 decimal digits to avoid misinterpretation.
Author Response: please see above response
Reviewer #2: As the manuscript title states, this study addresses a critical need. Namely, the provision of psychological care to support weight management post-bariatric surgery. This is a well designed feasibility study that evaluates ACT group therapy delivered by a clinical psychologist in comparison to an unstructured support group delivered by a psychology graduate with no training in XX, in people who are 15-18 months post-bariatric surgery. There are some significant challenges in feasibility discovered in terms of intervention uptake and retention and the authors are transparent about this. However, there are some issues with the analysis and reporting of the study that should be improved prior to publication.
Reviewer #2: Introduction
The introduction needs revision – specifically in terms of the review of previous research on ACT for weight management. For example, the authors introduce ACT by stating that “Third wave cognitive behavioural therapies ….. are evidenced in the general population.14 , 15. What do the authors mean by “evidenced in the general population”? The two papers they cite are a (now out of date) review of mindfulness-based interventions by O'Reilly et al and a small trial of people with overweight and obesity from 2009 by Forman et al. The authors should more fully describe the literature to date in people with overweight and obesity. More recent and comprehensive systematic reviews have been conducted (e.g. Lawlor et al 2020), as have larger trials with longer term follow up. (eg Formal et al 2019 doi: 10.1002/oby.22412.)
The authors then cite a very small Iranian study in people with obesity. Is the point that the authors are trying to make that this is the only study in people with obesity? I suggest that this is not correct and that the authors should describe all relevant literature in people with obesity.
A more comprehensive review of literature to date for post bariatric surgery should then be reported. How does this study differ from the previous literature and what gap does it seek to fill?
Author Response: We have now removed those references, updated the background section and made clearer what this study adds. 
Reviewer #2: The discussion should end with the aims of the study, rather than a summary of the rest of the paper.
Author Response: thank you, we have now changed this.
Reviewer #2: The authors should also be careful to avoid self-plagiarism of their protocol paper http://dx.doi.org/10.18203/2349-3259.ijct20194655
Author Response: thank you, we have reviewed the paper for self-plagarism
Reviewer #2: Minor point - Person first language would mean not using overweight as something people “are”. I appreciate that some people find “people with obesity” to be grammatically difficult. Given that the real focus here is on obesity, I would simply remove the stats on overweight.
Author Response: we have removed the stats on overweight and used the term people living with obesity throughout. 
Reviewer #2: Methods
The methods are largely well described, and deviations from the protocol are highlighted.
I did not understand the justification for the intervention costings. It states that : There were no extra hours or treatment costs because the ACT group was led by a Band 7 psychologist as part of their regular duties. However, the control group did not receive care from a Band 7 psychologist whereas the support group was led by A Band 4 psychology graduate with no formal therapy training. The cost difference here would be substantial. It appears later in the results that these different costs are taken into account, so perhaps this section just needs rephrasing to be much clearer.
Author Response: thank you, we have removed reference to no extra hours/treatment costs as we agree this was confusing.
Reviewer #2: Minor – It states that Loss to follow up and group attrition were recorded in a consort diagram (Figure 1). I suspect that they were recorded somewhere else. They are presenting in the diagram.
Author Response: thank you, we have corrected our language accordingly.
Reviewer #2: Results
Large number of patients were screened as eligible but chose not to take part (with a substantial number unable to commit to the treatment sessions.
While I appreciate the granularity of Table 2, this makes it very difficult to follow. It would be more meaningful to present the number of all ACT and all SGT participants attending each session.
Author Response: we have now changed Table 2 accordingly and agree that it is clearer.
Reviewer #2: The authors include the following paragraph in the results “The decision regarding the best primary and secondary outcome measures for a full RCT would require the careful consideration of many aspects of the proposed trial, including consensus in the most relevant patient-centred outcome to demonstrate efficacy. The data collected during this feasibility study for a range of outcomes would be sufficient to inform the necessary sample size calculations for a future trial through estimates of standard deviation of the chosen outcome.” This should be moved to the discussion and the authors should be specific about HOW the current study is informative – what decisions does it help make? Can the authors design a trial based on this data? If so, what does this trial look like. If not, what further studies are needed to inform a trial?
Author Response: We have moved the comments about the primary endpoint from the results section to the discussion section as requested and improved the discussion. The study was not designed to detect minimal detectable differences for validated outcomes, but sufficient data exists to support a sample size calculation.
Reviewer #2: The original intention in the protocol was to use inductive thematic analysis. The authors say that they used the Theoretical Framework of Acceptability (TFA) instead. They describe this as an “evidence-based” method. However, the TFA is not a method for qualitative data analysis. It is a framework for defining acceptability. How was the analysis conducted?
Tables 3 and 4 appear to be trying to quantify qualitative data and do not ad value to the paper. The way coding is described also suggests a very un-qualitative approach. It appears that they just “coded” each time something was said that was relevant to pre-determined codes and the results simply repeats “one person said this, two people said Y” with little to no attempt to interpret or synthesise the data. Phrases like “X was coded most frequently” suggest that this was not a qualitative analysis, but rather a labelling exercise. The qualitative analysis should be revisited and an appropriate method used and described.
Author Response: thank you for this. it appears that in trying to be concise we left out important information. We have now explained and referenced our methods in more detail, cut tables 3&4 and incorporated quotes into the text.
Reviewer #2: 
Discussion
I suspect that the discussion will change following reanalysis of the qualitative data using appropriate qualitative methods. The discussion should be edited to be clearer where there are findings from this study and where the authors are referring to findings from the general literature. Ideally, we should be able to discern the novel contribution of this study.
The strengths and limitations of the study should be clearly discussed
Author Response: We have now changed the discussion and addressed these issues and hope that it is now clearer.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0282849.r003Decision Letter 1
JaninKatrienStaff Editor© 2023 Katrien Janin2023Katrien Janinhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
27 Jan 2023

PONE-D-22-15868R1Addressing a critical need: A randomised controlled feasibility trial of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy for bariatric surgery patients at 15-18 months post-surgeryPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Barley,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
The manuscript has been evaluated by two reviewers, and their comments are available below.
The reviewers have raised a number of concerns that need attention. They request additional information on methodological aspects of the study (e.g they find that the cost consequence method is not well described), and question why less than 50% of data was completed (trail retention issues?). Could you please revise the manuscript to carefully address the concerns raised?
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 12 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Katrien Janin
Staff Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: I Don't Know
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: The authors have done a reasonable job of responding to my earlier comments.
The qualitative analysis is still a little thin, but I think that is the nature of the data collected and is unlikely to improve.
Some further minor edits are suggested prior to publication
The following sentence does not make sense: Patients who expressed suicidal ideation (score >0 on 125 Q9, PHQ-9) or at psychiatry assessment [26], were unable to communicate in English or to commit to 126 attendance were excluded.
the cost consequence method is not well described. What was included in the analysis? How was this done?.
It is not clear how the ACT group was associated with a 0.07 QALY reduction in mean incremental QALY if mean QALYs accrued from baseline to 12 month 346 follow-up were: ACT (n=13) = 0.61 SD 0.26; SGC (n=19) = 0.59 SD 0.37.
The authors comment that data collection was feasible and acceptable, but less than 50% completed 12 month data collection. Tis suggests problems with data collection and trial retention.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0282849.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
14 Feb 2023

Katrien Janin
Staff Editor
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr Janin
Thank you for your email. We have now revised the manuscript in accordance with the new minor points that Reviewer 2 has made in their second review. The changes are listed below. 
We hope that the manuscript is now acceptable for publication. 
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Author response: we thank Reviewer 1 for their positive review.
Reviewer #2: The authors have done a reasonable job of responding to my earlier comments.
The qualitative analysis is still a little thin, but I think that is the nature of the data collected and is unlikely to improve.
Author response: we thank Reviewer 2 for their very detailed reviews. We agree with the above comment. 
Reviewer 2: Some further minor edits are suggested prior to publication
The following sentence does not make sense: Patients who expressed suicidal ideation (score >0 on 125 Q9, PHQ-9) or at psychiatry assessment [26], were unable to communicate in English or to commit to 126 attendance were excluded.
Author Response: Thank you, we have restructured the sentence accordingly: “Patients who expressed suicidal ideation (score >0 on Q9 of the PHQ-9 [26] or at psychiatry assessment), or who were unable to communicate in English, or who were unable to commit to attendance were excluded.”
Reviewer 2: the cost consequence method is not well described. What was included in the analysis? How was this done?
Author Response: The requested detail has now been added with references (p11)
Reviewer 2: It is not clear how the ACT group was associated with a 0.07 QALY reduction in mean incremental QALY if mean QALYs accrued from baseline to 12 month 346 follow-up were: ACT (n=13) = 0.61 SD 0.26; SGC (n=19) = 0.59 SD 0.37.
Author Response: this as now been clarified (p18-19)
Reviewer 2: The authors comment that data collection was feasible and acceptable, but less than 50% completed 12 month data collection. Tis suggests problems with data collection and trial retention.
Author Response: it is unclear to where in the manuscript the reviewer is referring, we have been clear about trial retention issues throughout, we have now adapted the following existing sentence (p25) to emphasise the point: “It appeared that although data collection was hampered by lack of retention, other trial processes (i.e. recruitment, consent, data collection in those retained in the trial) would be feasible for a future trial but that the intervention, as delivered, may not be.”
Editor comment: Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Author Response: 3 references have now been added to support the additional information requested about the cost-consequence analysis:
44. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Medical technologies evaluation programme methods guide 2017. Available at: https://www.nice.org.uk/process/pmg33/chapter/evidence-synthesis-and-cost-consequence-analysis. Accessed 9 Feb 2023. 
45. Drummond M. Methods for the economic evaluation of Health Care Programmes. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press; 2015. 
46. Curtis LA, Burns A. Unit Costs of Health and Social Care 2018 [Internet]. University of Kent; 2018. Available from: https://kar.kent.ac.uk/id/eprint/70995
Thank you for your consideration, we look forward to your response. 
kind regards
Elizabeth Barley PhD CPsychol AFBPsS RGN PGCAP FHEA
Professor of Mental Health Sciences and Nursing
School of Health Sciences 
University of Surrey
30 Priestley Road
Surrey Research Park
Guildford
Surrey
GU2 7YH
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0282849.r005Decision Letter 2
ChenetteEmilyStaff Editor© 2023 Emily Chenette2023Emily Chenettehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
24 Feb 2023

Addressing a critical need: A randomised controlled feasibility trial of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy for bariatric surgery patients at 15-18 months post-surgery
PONE-D-22-15868R2
Dear Dr. Barley,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE; I sincerely apologise for the unusually delayed review timeframe. We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Emily Chenette
Editor in Chief
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0282849.r006Acceptance letter
ChenetteEmilyStaff Editor© 2023 Emily Chenette2023Emily Chenettehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
28 Feb 2023

PONE-D-22-15868R2 
Addressing a critical need: A randomised controlled feasibility trial of Acceptance and Commitment Therapy for bariatric surgery patients at 15-18 months post-surgery 
Dear Dr. Barley:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr Emily Chenette 
Staff Editor
PLOS ONE