Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1519043PMC1519043.115190431519043762842310.1289/ehp.95103361Research ArticleFinding a home for environmental health.
ThigpenK G1199510311331253639010119952807200604092018pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
Spchesrescw rof Inrefiluernce 
 
Finding a I-Icrnue 
 
_ ~~~for Environmental Health 
 
When the EPA and OSHA were created in 
1970, environmentalists and workers alike 
heralded a new age of federal responsibility 
and responsiveness to the need for a clean 
environment and safe workplaces, and to a 
great extent they have been justified. 
Almost 25 years later, however, the federal 
government is attempting to find a home 
for the unanticipated victim of the mostly 
amicable divorce of environment and occu- 
pation from the direct purview of the 
Public Health Service. Left with no natural 
organizational parent, environmental and 
occupational health research has been dis- 
seminated throughout various agencies of 
the federal government including both 
EPA and OSHA, but also DHHS, DOD, 
and others. Though a strong movement 
exists to create a National Institute of the 
Environment, the Clinton administration 
is looking instead to the National Science 
and Technology Council (NSTC) to bring 
coordination of federal health research 
under one roof again. Though the effort is 
still in preliminary stages, it is already 
becoming clear that unless the various fed- 
eral agencies involved take the concept of 
coordination truly to heart, environmental 
 
and occupational human health research 
may be left out in the cold. 
 
The NSTC is chaired by President 
Clinton and its members include the vice 
president, the assistant to the president for 
science and technology, and the secretaries 
and administrators of major governmental 
departments and agencies. To accomplish 
national goals, the NSTC established nine 
committees to develop R&D strategies and 
make budget recommendations. Currently, 
as far as environmental and occupational 
health are concerned, the structure of the 
NSTC reflects the status quo. Of the nine 
committees, two deal with issues of environ- 
mental health to some extent, and neither 
 
deals with these issues completely. 
 
The Committee on Environ- 
ment and Natural Resources 
(CENR) states as its goals im- 
proving the coordination of all 
federal environment and natural 
resource R&D activities and devel- 
oping and overseeing a federal envi- 
ronmental R&D policy and strategy. The 
Committee on Health, Safety and Food 
Research and Development (CHSF) is 
charged with improving the effectiveness of 
federal R&D efforts in the health, safety, 
food, and agricultural sciences. An even 
division of health R&D responsibilities 
between these two committees will be diffi- 
cult. And in an era of limited economic 
and human resources, overlapping of pro- 
grams defeats the purpose of a coordinated 
effort. So how should the federal govern- 
ment approach the problem of classifying 
this hybrid breed of science and assigning 
responsibility for its direction? The com- 
mittees have already set out on different 
paths to reach this goal. 
 
CENR: Surveying the Situation 
 
The CENR met soon after its formation 
and established 10 subcommittees orga- 
nized by environmental issues and by sci- 
ence discipline. The issues were chosen 
according to their socioeconomic rele- 
vance; local, regional, national, and global 
significance; scientific and technological 
importance; and level of interest to the 
public and policymakers. 
 
The committee consists of three cross- 
cutting disciplinary subcommittees and 
seven issue subcommittees, along with a sci- 
ence and policy assessment group. The dis- 
ciplinary subcommittees include social and 
economic sciences; technology and engi- 
neering; and risk assessment. The issue sub- 
committees include global change; biologi- 
cal diversity and ecosystem dynamics; 
resource use and depletion; toxic substances 
and hazardous and solid waste; air quality; 
water resources and coastal and marine 
environments; and natural disasters. 
 
During the last year, the CENR sub- 
committees have each established their 
own working group structure to develop a 
strategy and implementation plan to pre- 
sent to the NSTC. The subcommittees 
were directed by the chairs of the CENR to 
develop a balanced, comprehensive R&D 
program that covers several aspects of their 
respective issues. The aspects include struc- 
ture and function of the system; socioeco- 
nomic driving forces of, impacts of, adap- 
tation to, and the mitigation of environ- 
mental change; and assessment of the state 
of knowledge. The CENR has taken the 
approach of surveying the resources avail- 
able and the programs already in existence 
to identify gaps in knowledge that need to 
be addressed. 
 
Draft strategies were discussed at the 
National Forum on Environment and 
Natural Resources R&D held last March at 
the National Academy of Sciences. The 
drafts were reviewed by the Office of 
Science and Technology Programs as well 
as various other forum participants from 
academia, industry, nongovernmental 
organizations, and state and local govern- 
ments. Final reports are expected to be 
available around the first of the year. 
 
From the individual subcommittee 
reports, the OSTP is working to develop a 
consolidated report. "We are reading and 
looking at overarching themes to incorpo- 
rate the subcommittee plans into a cohe- 
sive national strategy," said JoAnn 
Rodman, the program policy analyst for 
the OSTP. When the subcommittees con- 
vened in March to discuss strategy plans, 
the Office of Management and Budget 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
i 1 IN IIIIE!s , I; ili III | i 
 
participated in the forum to provide guid- 
ance for the subcommittees on budget 
issues. One of the major issues, Rodman 
said, was "trying to see at a time when 
budgets are flat that we can address as 
many priorities as possible." 
 
The CENR has now developed a draft 
of its 1996 budget proposal highlighting 
its priorities. "It is necessary to assure that 
investments in environmental and natural 
resource R&D provide the information 
needed to support the Administration's 
goals and policies while recognizing the 
reality of limited fiscal resources," the draft 
proposal says. Rodman said the final over- 
all strategy would be available at the time 
Clinton submits the 1996 budget, which 
should be in early February. 
 
In the draft, the committee pinpoints 
seven areas of research that need augmen- 
tation. Of the seven priority areas, the one 
that deals most specifically with environ- 
mental health focuses on reducing human 
health effects. The CENR estimates a 
needed budget increase of $51 million to 
address these issues. The committee points 
out that risk estimates are being developed 
differently among the agencies, and actions 
to reduce risks are not well coordinated. 
This initiative would cut across environ- 
mental threats, focusing on the vulnerabili- 
ty of humans to toxic agents, accounting 
for differences among humans (e.g., in 
diet, genetics, lifestyle); characterizing 
exposure (e.g., across subpopulations, cul- 
tural and economic differences); the vul- 
nerability of humans to small particles 
through health studies; and the vulnerabili- 
ty of humans to seismic hazards. The 
CENR budget report also recognizes an 
additional $6-7 billion in funds concen- 
trated in programs in other NSTC sub- 
committees that contribute to understand- 
ing environmental and natural resources 
issues, some of which undoubtedly flows to 
health science programs. 
CENR Strategies 
 
Although the impact on human health of 
environment and natural resources would 
seem an obvious component of this com- 
mittee, and in fact, several high-ranking sci- 
entists from the NIEHS contribute to vari- 
ous subcommittees of the CENR, environ- 
mental health issues are addressed in the 
draft strategies of only 3 of 10 subcommit- 
tees. These three subcommittees include air 
quality, toxic substances and hazardous and 
solid waste, and risk assessment. Of the 
other seven, almost all would seem appro- 
priate areas for coordinating at least some 
environmental health issues, but NIEHS 
scientists attempting to work with these 
 
subcommittees are meeting with resistance. 
 
For example, the subcommittee on 
global change research fails to even men- 
 
tion the environmental health aspects of 
climate change in its draft strategy, much 
less include them as a research priority. 
Says James Fouts, senior scientific advisor 
to the director of the NIEHS and a mem- 
ber of the subcommittee, "These people 
are concerned with weather, not human 
health. The closest they come is marine 
health, and they still don't see the connec- 
tion between that and human health." 
According to Fouts, NIEHS scientists' 
attempts to incorporate human health con- 
cerns into the strategy have been virtually 
ignored. Likewise, in other subcommittees 
where the connection between environ- 
ment and health would seem obvious, 
these issues are conspicuously absent. For 
instance, the draft of the subcommittee on 
water resources and coastal and marine 
environments concentrates overwhelming- 
ly on water supply and ecosystems and 
gives mere mention to drinking water 
quality. The subcommittee on social sci- 
ences and economics states as part of its 
vision the better scientific understanding 
of the relationship between humans and 
their environment, yet focuses primarily on 
human impacts on conservation of natural 
resources and gives little acknowledgement 
of the effect of the environment on human 
health. 
 
Nevertheless, a few subcommittees 
under the CENR have attempted to factor 
human health into the environmental 
R&D strategy with varying levels of suc- 
cess. The subcommittee on air quality has 
chosen to address issues including indoor 
air, ozone, and other ambient air pollu- 
tants, and health effects of airborne parti- 
cles and other hazardous air pollutants. Of 
its two major goals, clarifying the health 
effects of airborne fine particles is one. 
 
The vision statement of the subcom- 
mittee on toxic substances and hazardous 
and solid waste includes a focus on reduc- 
ing or eliminating human exposure to 
environmental toxins and their adverse 
human health consequences. Of the sub- 
committee's three research priorities articu- 
lated in its draft strategy (risk assessment, 
site remediation, and pollution prevention) 
risk assessment is the only one to specifi- 
cally address human health issues. This pri- 
ority calls for increasing research into mod- 
els for predicting adverse public health 
effects, biological mechanisms of action of 
toxic materials, variability of susceptibility 
and effects on vulnerable populations, 
models for estimating exposure and envi- 
ronmental fate, and biological doses of 
toxic materials. These issues appear to be 
mirrored in the draft strategy of the sub- 
committee on risk assessment, and it is 
unclear how the tWO differ. 
 
The cross-cutting subcommittee on 
risk assessment states in its draft strategy 
 
and implementation plan that its overarch- 
ing goal is to use risk assessment in the 
most effective, efficient, and fair manner to 
characterize, prevent, and reduce health 
and environmental hazards. 
 
Research priorities to fill the gaps in 
information necessary for the most effec- 
tive and efficient use of risk assessments in 
the area of human health include identify- 
ing and predicting the magnitude of non- 
cancer human health effects and interme- 
diate endpoints with research on both 
human and ecological biological mecha- 
nisms to understand variations in human 
susceptibilities to hazards, research on mul- 
tiple or cumulative exposures and alterna- 
tive pathways of exposure to hazardous 
pollutants, especially regarding particularly 
susceptible populations or communities, 
and risk communication. 
 
Strategies for fulfilling the subcommit- 
tee's goals include identifying key data gaps 
and developing mechanisms for filling 
them; encouraging the exchange of health 
and environmental hazards data among 
federal agencies; increasing the involve- 
ment of academic institutions in the sci- 
ence of risk assessments; directing intra- 
mural risk assessment research and joint, 
multi-agency extramural grant programs; 
and effectively characterizing the natures 
and magnitudes of uncertainties and 
assumptions in risk assessment. 
 
Although the cross-cutting risk assess- 
ment subcommittee would seem to be the 
logical unit for tying environmental health 
into all of the subcommittees of the 
CENR, so far it hasn't been used in this 
way. The inability to have environmental 
health concerns incorporated into the pri- 
orities of many of the various subcommit- 
tees has led scientists and administrators 
alike to question whether the CENR is the 
appropriate venue for addressing environ- 
mental health R&D policies and plans. 
CHSF: Forging Ahead 
 
Under the NSTC, the CHSF has embraced 
environmental health issues far more con- 
sistently than the CENR, at least as far as 
its articulated strategy is concerned. The 
CHSF is made up of five subcommittees 
including human nutrition research, bio- 
medical and sociocultural and behavioral 
research, health promotion and disease and 
injury prevention research, food safety, 
security and production research, and 
health systems and services research. Of the 
five subcommittees, all but the last indude 
environmental health-related R&D pro- 
grams in their final strategies. 
 
In the CHSF approach, each subcom- 
mittee has developed a strategic implemen- 
 
tation plan that includes, like those of the 
CENR, a statement of goals and research 
priorities. In addition, though, the CHSF 
 
Volume 103, Number 1, January 1995 
 
37 
 
e I e i 
 
plans also include strategies for implemen- 
tation that describe ongoing efforts in vari- 
ous areas and identify new efforts focused 
on meeting the committee's goals. 
Although estimates of funding needs are 
made in some of the strategies, the CHSF 
had not, as of late November, prepared a 
budget proposal to accompany these plans. 
In November, the CHSF co-chairs invited 
approximtely 200 government health 
agency heads, academic scholars, and pri- 
vate sector leaders to a forum at the 
National Academy of Sciences to discuss 
implementation of the committee's strate- 
gic plans. 
 
CHSF Strategies 
 
The strategic plan of the human nutrition 
research subcommittee acknowledges the 
relationship between dietary factors and 
growth, development, and risk of disease. 
A priority area of the plan examines the 
interaction of nutrients with environmen- 
tal agents in processes such as oxidative 
damage to cellular components, modula- 
tion of gene expression by nutrients, and 
altered bioavailability of nutrients. 
Research areas to be explored include 
investigating the role of nutrients in regu- 
lation of gene expression, development and 
differentiation of tissues, the aberrant cel- 
lular processes that lead to disease, and the 
potential effects of neurotoxins acquired 
through the food chain. These areas will be 
targeted with a number of new efforts 
beginning in 1995, including an NIH 
request for applications on "nutrient mod- 
ulation of cell integrity and repair mecha- 
nisms" and a National Cancer Institute 
request for applications on "program pro- 
jects in nutrition and basic biology 
research for cancer prevention." 
 
The clinical research priority area of 
the subcommittee on biomedical, sociocul- 
tural, and behavioral research seeks to fos- 
ter fundamental biomedical and clinical 
research, including research in areas such 
as molecular biology and genetics through 
which discoveries of the genes for colon 
cancer, familial breast cancer, Hunting- 
ton's disease, and cystic fibrosis have been 
made. The tools of molecular biology and 
genetics have been used to uncover the link 
between environmental factors, genetic 
susceptibility and disease. In addition to 
promoting advancements in these fields, a 
priority of this subcommittee is to develop 
strategies aimed at increasing understand- 
ing of the impact of gender, race, and eth- 
nicity on the risk for disease and the likely 
success of interventions. 
 
The executive summary of the subcom- 
mittee on food safety, security, and produc- 
tion states that environmental and econom- 
 
ic constraints and paradoxes are among the 
significant obstacles to providing abundant, 
 
safe, and healthful food to the populace. 
Where food is concerned, environmental 
health means safety. In addition to a 
national food safety program to identify, 
monitor, control, and prevent hazardous 
substances and organisms in food, the sub- 
committee has identified research priorities 
in three areas of food safety. 
 
A major goal is to reduce human expo- 
sure to microbial pathogens, biotoxins, and 
chemical contaminants through the devel- 
opment of rapid, reliable methods to iso- 
late and quantify such agents in food, and 
through dermination of the interactive role 
of biological, chemical, and environmental 
factors on growth and survival of 
pathogens and the persistence and fate of 
toxins in food systems. A second priority is 
to identify significant risk factors for 
adverse effects of chemicals, pharmaceuti- 
cals, and animal drugs used in food pro- 
duction. A third priority is to identify the 
nature and extent of emerging foodborne 
diseases, the human populations at risk, 
and behaviors that increase risk. 
 
Strategies to address food safety issues 
include continued support of DHHS and 
USDA research programs and existing pro- 
grams such as the Hazard Analysis and 
Critical Control Point (HACCP) program 
and NOAA programs aimed at prevention 
and intervention of food hazards. The 
USDA will also continue research focused 
on reducing pesticides in food production. 
 
By far the most comprehensive inclu- 
sion of environmental health concerns into 
a strategic plan is evident in the goals and 
priorities of the subcommittee on health 
promotion and disease and injury preven- 
tion. The importance of these environ- 
mental health concerns and plans to 
address them are elucidated most clearly in 
two goals of the subcommittee. 
 
The first goal is to enhance the identifi- 
cation of factors such as environmental and 
occupational exposures in injury, disease, 
and disability through an enriched science 
base and improved methods of measure- 
ment. According to the subcommittee, 
research necessary to achieve this goal 
includes developing, improving, and stan- 
dardizing methods of measuring exposures 
to biological, chemical, radiological, physi- 
cal, socioeconomic and other factors that 
may cause adverse health effects; develop- 
ing methods for examining and quantify- 
ing environmental risk factors and genetic 
susceptibilities; improving the ability to 
accurately predict public health risks and 
hazardous exposures, including environ- 
mental and occupational exposures; using 
geographic information systems to corre- 
late health status with data on nutrition, 
 
occupational hazards, and environmental 
quality; and identifying environmental, 
occupational, biological, and behavioral 
 
causes of illnesses, birth defects, injuries, 
disabilities, and other effects through 
analyses of data from linked surveillance 
systems. 
 
The second goal of the subcommittee 
that deals directly with environmental 
health is to develop disease, injury, and 
disability prevention and intervention pro- 
grams. The research necessary for imple- 
mentation of this goal includes, among 
other things, using fundamental science 
information to test and evaluate new tech- 
nologies, capitalizing on research advances 
in basic sciences such as molecular biology 
and genetics to enhance adoption of sci- 
ence-based interventions in communities, 
and providing increased support for evalu- 
ation of basic research findings with poten- 
tial for morbidity and mortality from pre- 
ventable health problems (intervention at 
the molecular level to prevent the effects of 
environmental and occupational hazards). 
 
Ongoing efforts to achieve these goals, 
highlighted in the subcommittee's imple- 
mentation plan, include: 
 
* Research on the human genome; 
 
* Epidemiologic, clinical, and molecular 
 
studies to determine risk factors; 
 
* Research programs to characterize health 
 
risks resulting from environmental pollu- 
tants through test methods, mechanisti- 
cally based dose-response models, and 
chemical-specific data from laboratory 
toxicology research, environmental epi- 
demiology research, and mathematical 
modeling; 
 
* Research projects to develop new ways to 
 
detect and measure contaminants in 
drinking water and characterize their 
human health risks; 
 
* Radiation follow-up studies to analyze 
 
potential damage to DNA and the resul- 
tant disease risk; and 
 
* Research programs to detect and measure 
 
airborne contaminants and characterize 
their potential health effects. 
 
New efforts anticipated by the subcommit- 
tee include: 
 
* Epidemiological studies of chronic dis- 
 
eases expanded to investigate the particu- 
lar susceptibilities of minority and 
underserved populations including bio- 
markers to better define genetic and 
exposure risk; 
 
* Research on mechanisms of action of 
 
chemicals and pollutants in producing 
endocrine disruption; 
 
* Research to develop quantitative meth- 
 
ods of measuring dermal absorption of 
toxic substances in both workplace and 
the general environment as well as expo- 
sure to multiple contaminants in indoor 
environments; 
 
* Development of mechanistically based 
 
toxicologic research to identify environ- 
mental hazards and characterize human 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
38 
 
9.I 
 
health risk of cancer and noncancer 
effects; and 
 
* Research to improve measurement of 
 
lead and identification of sources. 
Hedging Their Bets 
 
Although clearly both the CENR and the 
CHSF have an interest in promoting envi- 
ronmental and occupational health, nei- 
ther offers a comprehensive, much less 
fully-coordinated, strategy in their draft 
plans for directing federal research and 
 
development in these areas. What is need- 
ed before these two factions go any further 
in the development or implementation of 
these plans is strong leadership at the high- 
est federal level, and a coordinated plan for 
addressing areas of research and the alloca- 
tion of resources to meet these goals. 
 
At this point, skeptics say it remains to 
be seen whether this whole exercise is an 
honest effort to revamp, reorganize, and re- 
create government in the area of federal 
health research. It is clear that the Clinton 
 
administration is promoting the NSTC as 
a serious effort to accomplish just that. 
Unless or until such coordination is 
achieved, however, environmental and 
occupational health will continue their 
nomadic existence. 
 
Kimberly G. Thigpen 
 
Volume 103, Number 1, January 1995 39