Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1519644PMC1519644.115196441519644851376010.1289/ehp.93101261Research ArticleSetting environmental agendas: the search for common ground.
MushakB224199310111331462629220419932607200604092018pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
| 11 a I 
 
Focus 
 
Setting Environmental Agendas: The Search for 
Common Ground 
 
Tensions and overt conflict among govern- 
ment, industry, environmental advocacy 
groups, and the research community over 
the form and focus of environmental agen- 
das have been around since the term "envi- 
ronment" was first used to mean more 
than heating and air conditioning. The 
differences have been expressed in every 
form from formal dialogues and debates in 
respected journals and at professional 
meetings to shouting matches in the halls 
of those same meetings as well as in court- 
room confrontations. 
 
The tenor of the interactions may be 
changing. A sampling of representatives 
from government, business and industry, 
regulatory offices, environmental advocacy 
groups, and research scientists indicates a 
readiness and a willingness to try a more 
cooperative approach. 
 
Just how the change in administrations, 
from Republican to Democrat as well as 
from World War II generation to (mostly) 
baby boomer generation, may affect overall 
federal environmental agendas is still un- 
known, though the amount of ink used to 
speculate on the possible effects is substan- 
tial. President Clinton has publicly stated 
that Vice President Gore will be the ad- 
ministration's coordinator for technology 
and science policies. How much of the 
Clinton-Gore campaign vision for the 
United States' future in science and tech- 
nology will survive federal budget realities 
is still to be determined. 
 
Problems in setting a coherent, coordi- 
nated environmental agenda for the nation 
persist, mainly because mutual questions of 
credibility and trust among the different 
sectors remain. Ellen Silbergeld, professor 
of epidemiology and toxicology at the Uni- 
versity of Maryland, Baltimore, and senior 
adjunct scientist with the Environmental 
Defense Fund, described the atmosphere 
among the spheres of interest in environ- 
mental health research as "very confronta- 
tional in the past. Environmentalists have 
seen research played off against action. 
That's given research a bad name. Re- 
search has been kind of a pawn in the con- 
frontations. Concessions by government, 
industry, and environmental groups are 
needed to get us out of the bind, off dead 
center. 
 
At the same time, scientists with differ- 
ent perspectives on the nation's environ- 
mental agenda were generally optimistic 
about prospects for cooperation, despite 
 
past history. Charles Powers of the Health 
Effects Institute (HEI) pointed to the cre- 
ation of an asbestos research entity mod- 
eled on the jointly funded HEI as a mea- 
sure of the perceived success of one cooper- 
ative venture. HEI research into automo- 
bile air emissions is supported by the EPA 
and the United States auto industry. 
Powers observed that after 12 years, HEI is 
enjoying credibility for its research. 
 
Jeanette Wlltse, deputy director of EPA's 
Office of Health and Environmental Assess- 
ment (OHEA), cited the Green Lights volun- 
tary pollution reduction program of EPA and 
industry as an example of a successful coopera- 
tive effort, where cooperation followed the 
realization that companies could save money 
while reducing pollution. Linda Greer, senior 
project scientist with the Natural Resources 
Defense Council, noted the growing use of 
mediation and negotiation in determining the 
final form of environmental regulations in 
contrast to the usual practice of litigating first. 
 
Jeanette Wiltse, deputy director, EPA Office of 
Health and Environmental Assessment 
 
Roger McClellan, president of the 
Chemical Industry Institute of Toxicology, 
has a perspective on tensions in the setting 
of environmental agendas that goes back to 
the "turmoil in the '60s and early '70s. . . 
part [of which] was reaction to what we 
learned about vinyl chloride, bis- 
chloromethyl ether [heavily used industrial 
compounds linked to cancers in workers 
exposed on the job]. Some good things 
came out of that from industry-CIIT 
came into being; industry began evaluating 
 
materials and developing appropriate con- 
trol strategies." CIIT is an independent 
toxicological research operation supported 
by its member companies, a Who's Who 
of the chemical industry. CIIT's agenda 
focuses on heavily used production chemi- 
cals that are being studied for potential 
health effects should humans be exposed. 
 
From the scientific perspective, Mc- 
Clellan believes the time is ripe to revisit 
past studies of exposure/dose-response 
relationships, using the new tools of cellu- 
lar and molecular biology. Exploring mec- 
hanisms and the process of DNA repair 
and damage at exposure levels below those 
possible with cruder tools is an approach 
whose time has come. "All of the sectors 
need to work together to go beyond what I 
call the glass floor. We need to document 
exposure and response versus the risks of 
regulatory concern. We need to get down 
to relevant human exposure levels, revise 
the megamouse studies with our new 
tools." EPA's risk reduction strategies that 
address de minimis risk versus zero risk are 
a step forward in addressing risk manage- 
ment, according to McClellan. However, 
communicating the concept of minimal 
risk to a broader public is a big problem. 
 
Returning to the scientific challenges, 
McClellan said, "The easy problems have 
been solved in individual labs. The re- 
maining problems are best tackled by mul- 
tidisciplinary teams, which I sometimes 
think seem almost beyond biological scien- 
tists. Some of our greatest opportunities 
are at the interfaces of the various disci- 
plines. We don't have good institutional 
means in the biological sciences to create 
strategies and the strategic orientation for 
interdisciplinary work. We put [dollar] 
limits on federally funded program projects 
that artificially constrain the possibilities." 
 
There are mechanisms in place for 
certain kinds of cooperative agenda-set- 
ting, even though they are not always 
used. Eula Bingham of the University of 
Cincinnati, former head of the Occu- 
pational Safety and Health Administra- 
tion, said that the Occupational Safety 
and Health Act provides for outside advi- 
sory committees composed of representa- 
tives of various interests, though the pro- 
vision has rarely been used. Bingham 
was the chair for an occasion of coopera- 
tive agenda-setting in regard to coke oven 
emissions. When standards for coke 
oven emissions were developed, she said, 
the process went more smoothly because 
of participation by industry, labor, public 
and academic interests, state, and De- 
partment of Health and Human Services 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
26 
 
f f 
 
Roger McClellan, president, Chemical Industry 
Institute of Toxicology 
 
officials. This broad participation identi- 
fied major sticking points early in the 
process and helped resolve the conflicts. 
 
"In the occupational health arena, the 
key word is feasibility. We know we set 
standards that allow disease. The stan- 
dards are based on feasibility-technical 
and economic," Bingham said. "Some- 
how, people high in government say they 
don't want to pay for committees. I 
think they're worth their weight in gold." 
By having all of the different perspectives 
presented, the important questions get 
asked and considered early in the rule- 
making process, Bingham noted. The 
Occupational Safety and Health Act is 
"an obvious place for industry and labor 
to work together," she said. "It has to be 
more thoroughly used." 
 
At the most visible environmental reg- 
ulatory operation, the EPA, the sense of 
long siege from competing sectors lingers. 
Wiltse pointed out that a persisting issue 
for EPA has been keeping apprised of what 
industry is doing. For example, CIIT is 
making progress in molecular mechanisms, 
yet industry appears to be minimizing its 
contributions there. Wiltse said, "They 
don't look at the big picture. With more 
basic [scientific] understanding, we can do 
a better job. We have to sell that idea." 
The companies OHEA deals with are 
"frustrated with risk assessment," Wiltse 
continued. "If it's not successful in getting 
their chemicals off the list, they want to 
know, 'What's in it for us?' The people 
with money have been very short-sighted. 
Business is not sure it can trust toxicology, 
and then there's the business of knowing 
[whether a chemical causes adverse effects] 
versus not knowing." 
 
Often, epidemiology is the first re- 
search tool available, and any potential lack 
of power to detect effects with this 
 
approach is such that "they might as well 
not bother," Wiltse continued. On the 
other hand, "If we can do epidemiology 
with biomarkers, that's a path where the 
investment will pay off." Cooperative 
research, peer-reviewed, is fine, but mixed 
funding "can be a problem unless every- 
body buys in. Too often, where studies are 
co-funded, the results get painted as favor- 
ing one or the other position." 
 
There are substantive signs that more 
proactive approaches to getting all interest- 
ed parties to work on issues of mutual con- 
cern are in place today. The United States 
Congress has provided recent, explicit 
directions for cooperation among federal 
departments and agencies in the form of 
legislation. For example, the Energy Policy 
Act of 1992 sets ground rules for coopera- 
tion between the Department of Energy 
and the Department of Health and Hu- 
man Services for research on the biological 
effects of electromagnetic fields. The law 
includes a five-year, coordinated effort in 
research and communication on electric 
and magnetic fields. Nine federal agencies 
will be part of an Interagency Committee 
coordinating government-wide efforts on 
the topic. That law was one result of what 
a congressional aide who has worked on 
environmental legislation for a number of 
years described as a "very contentious 
atmosphere in Washington for the last 12 
years" because of divided government. 
Presidents Reagan and Bush and Congress 
have held different views. "Congress 
passed laws that were very prescriptive to 
avoid foot-dragging. Some of these pres- 
sures are easing .... There's some real opti- 
mism that there will be more progress on 
these issues," continued the aide, who 
asked not to be identified. "We're hoping 
for a cooperative relationship with the 
administration on environmental health 
research." 
 
Congressman Henry Waxman, one of 
the forces involved in setting past environ- 
mental agendas at the federal level, knows 
where he plans to lead from his post as 
chairman of the Subcommittee on Health 
and the Environment of the House Com- 
mittee on Energy and Commerce. "Over 
the past decade, the nation has failed to 
address many of the environmental prob- 
lems that scientists say cause the greatest 
threat to public health-drinking water 
contamination, radon exposure, indoor air 
pollution, pesticide exposure," Waxman 
said. "This Congress, our biggest payoff 
will be in addressing these high-risk threats. 
A simple measure, like requiring the disclo- 
sure of radon risks before real estate trans- 
actions, can save thousands of lives." 
 
The issue of risk is receiving increased 
attention. Relative risk was the topic of a 
bill introduced in the 102nd Congress by 
 
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan. The 
bill did not pass, but it covered ranking of 
risks, the need for sound science and sound 
scientific advice, and the need for high- 
quality information to manage resources 
for protecting human health, welfare, and 
ecological resources. The bill is likely to be 
considered again. 
 
Another proposal that surfaced and 
faded in the 102nd Congress specifically 
included the concept of "environmental 
high-impact areas," which asks whether 
certain neighborhoods, communities, the 
poor, and minorities bear a disproportion- 
ate share of adverse impacts from environ- 
mental pollution in the United States. 
That measure was introduced by then- 
Senator Gore. It mandated cooperative 
and coordinated efforts by federal offices to 
address environmental quality and an 
inventory of where the pollution occurs. 
 
Broadening input for agenda setting, 
including addressing the role of risk assess- 
ment, has become an interest for a number 
of different agencies involved in research. 
NIEHS Director Kenneth Olden called a 
meeting in mid-March focused on bring- 
ing better science into the process. "In- 
vestment in good science is good business 
in that it is a cost effective way to improve 
public health," Olden wrote in his invita- 
tion to a spectrum of leaders from govern- 
ment, industry, academia, and other inter- 
est groups. 
 
NIEHS Deputy Director Richard 
Griesemer noted some possible outcomes 
of the meeting. Options could range from 
doing all the work of testing chemicals, 
picking chemicals to test, and communi- 
cating results from within the National 
Toxicology Program, the federal govern- 
ment's interagency testing program for 
health effects of chemicals, to involving the 
whole country, Griesemer pointed out. 
The more likely outcome is a focused 
approach as the various groups espousing 
different views look for common, produc- 
tive ground in identifying an achievable 
agenda. 
 
Scientists should be involved in making 
the public policy decisions as well as pro- 
viding sound science to advance the na- 
tion's environmental agenda, according to 
one scientist involved. William Cooper, 
professor of zoology at Michigan State 
University, recently served as chair of the 
Ecological and Human Welfare Risks 
Subcommittee of the EPA Science Ad- 
visory Board's Relative Risk Reductions 
Strategies Committee. Cooper's subcom- 
mittee developed methods for prioritizing 
anthropogenic risks to ecological systems 
and human welfare, as distinct from risks 
to human health. The subcommittee 
 
looked at potential injuries to the ecosys- 
tem and human welfare from environmen- 
 
Volume 101, Number 1, April 22, 1993 
 
27 
 
I li I e 
 
tal threats and the time required to repair 
such injuries, should they occur. The 
threats ranked highest (highest relative 
risk) were those posing the greatest poten- 
tial injury and requiring the longest time to 
correct. Global warming was at the top of 
the list. 
 
Cooper noted that the push behind 
looking at the concept of relative risk for 
environmental problems is economic, and 
he concluded, ". . . risk assessment . . . [is] 
the only game in town. It's an imprecise 
science but it's the best we've got." 
 
Scientists generally take a broad view of 
the possibilities and challenges of drawing 
the nation's environmental agendas to- 
gether. Powers said, "I read the environ- 
ment as very conducive to expansion of 
efforts like HEI. When we're interpreting 
facts on health and the environment, the 
public needs confidence in the competence 
and credibility of the source of the infor- 
mation." HEI's research is peer-reviewed 
under a process "largely borrowed from the 
National Institutes of Health," according 
to Powers. 
 
When HEI was created to explore 
questions about the nature and effects of 
auto emissions, "there was a clear adversar- 
ial atmosphere surrounding auto emissions. 
There was nothing to provide data for a 
large number of compounds, and some- 
thing new was required." Now, Powers 
says, there are three avenues where cooper- 
ative programs may focus: first, "Industry 
is aware of public concerns and wants to 
get ahead of the regulatory process, to take 
the lead in persuading government to join 
in getting ahead, in doing more preventive 
research instead of waiting for public ter- 
ror/concern to drive the process." Second, 
Powers said, "EMF [electromagnetic fields] 
is going to need a large spade. It's a matter 
of public worry, and scientists know. . 
.very little. Public/private mechanisms can 
work there. The science is very difficult 
and if we throw politics in, we'll never get 
it." Powers concluded, "Public and private 
interests may recognize that the early regu- 
lations and early science on which the reg- 
ulations were based should be reviewed. 
The worst case projection may no longer 
obtain. To do this, an outside group with 
considerable credibility will be needed. 
Often, the regulators are not interested in 
the resources, and an industry has been 
built on the regulations. There are groups 
that don't want to admit they were 
wrong. 
 
The idea that the existing science on 
some chemicals that are already regulated 
may need to be revisited struck a respon- 
sive chord, though from a somewhat differ- 
ent perspective, with Greer and Silbergeld, 
 
scientists from environmental advocacy 
groups. 
 
.0 
 
0 
 
oL I 
 
(a 
 
L-0 
 
0. 
0 
 
c , 
, i 
c], 
 
Linda Greer, senior project scientist, Natural 
Resources Defense Council 
 
Greer said that the goal of NRDC's 
participation in quasi-judicial rule making 
with EPA is "to craft a program that regu- 
lates the most dangerous materials in the 
best way we can. Where is the science [for 
underground contamination]? It's in the 
Dark Ages, with little basic information on 
what's in the contamination or what's hap- 
pening to it." 
 
Silbergeld, of EDF, used dioxin as an 
example of the science gap. "Government 
and industry have to come to accept that 
there are times when there's reason to act 
in the face of uncertainty. Environmen- 
talists must accept the thought that re- 
search might change the way you will react 
and regulate." 
 
Greer recalled "12 years of entrench- 
ment, a time of suits against EPA for not 
doing its job," as a prelude to a changed 
perspective for industry. "It was just not 
enough to have the White House and the 
Office of Management and Budget. 
Attitudes toward the environment 
changed. Now, I do a lot of mediation 
instead of litigation," she said. 
 
For NRDC, the perspective is narrow 
and deep, Greer said. "The challenge lies in 
prescriptive requirements on certain 
wastes. A lot of stuff isn't covered. We 
may be less stringent overall but get as 
many [substances] as possible covered. It's 
an outright trade: maximum materials in 
versus maximum control." She posed a 
common question, "How do you craft wise 
public policy in the absence of good infor- 
mation, never mind good science?" 
According to Greer, the place of the envi- 
ronmental advocacy group at the negotiat- 
ing table is "based on what you learn in 
fifth grade about why wars are fought: so 
somebody can sit at the head of the negoti- 
ating table. Suits are filed, the parties 
establish their strengths, and then work 
 
some things out. Where that hasn't hap- 
pened, there's not a productive interaction. 
Where the issue has matured, the parties 
are ready to negotiate." 
 
Greer echoed Silbergeld's view on the 
place of research in many past confronta- 
tions between industry and environmental 
advocacy groups. "For a time, the call for 
good science was becoming synonymous 
with the call for deregulation. That's 
unfair to science." But she continued, 
"We need good science to more accurately 
craft what we do. We tend to join indus- 
try in the position that until there is im- 
proved science we may not want a risk- 
based approach. Scientists are quick to 
blame regulators for regulating without 
information, but we're looking at a 10- to 
15-year lag time." 
 
Greer agreed with Wiltse on the impor- 
tance of participation early in the policy 
debate. "What we're facing in the renewal 
of the Superfund law is a dialogue that 
may work around the science. Cleaning 
what can be cleaned is not a fix. We need 
to prevent what we can't fix, and we need 
to err on the side of safety," she concluded. 
 
Silbergeld espoused a particular area for 
collaboration and cooperation among the 
interested parties: research into noncancer 
diseases associated with environmental 
exposures. Neurogenerative diseases, one 
of her special areas of interest, are "extraor- 
dinarily pervasive," she said. "We know 
genetics are a small factor. Dementias and 
Parkinson's have long payouts and are in- 
credibly expensive. We just got a cost esti- 
mate from NIH for Alzheimer's disease- 
$80 billion. When we look at the invest- 
ment in identifying the causes versus the 
cost, it's pathetic." She suggested there 
should be a cooperative war on neurologic 
diseases, collecting the data that is not col- 
lected now. "We should institute a surveil- 
lance program with industry, and we need 
to do chemical testing for noncancer end- 
points. We need a coordinated, integrated 
campaign to address the questions." 
 
Wiltse pointed out that trying to work 
with all of the interested parties is a daily 
fact of life at EPA. Environmental advoca- 
cy groups have been watchful of the 
process but "don't have the resources for 
the day-to-day level investment. Where 
EPA has been able to enlist them, they see 
the process through." For testing chemi- 
cals and the TOSCA program, there is a 
"rather well worked out negotiating 
process with, mostly, the Chemical 
Manufacturers' Association. Everybody is 
covered under the rule; instead of blockad- 
ing all of it, something gets done", she said. 
 
When EPA first presented the Green 
Lights program, most chief executives 
 
looked at it suspiciously, and program 
acceptance came down to the same ques- 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
c 
 
28 
 
9- 9 - i - 
 
tion most EPA efforts evoke: Will it cost 
me or save me dollars? Green Lights saves 
money and has had good participation. 
The Agency has a number of voluntary 
programs with industry. 
 
Wiltse concluded, "It's important to 
get all the players around the table from 
the beginning. Confrontation is tiresome. 
You can always litigate to a standstill. 
Once industry makes up its mind that it 
will play in a given matter, I've never seen 
them back out. They settle in and cooper- 
ate and work hard once they're committed. 
Industry research is very credible as a 
whole. The trick is getting it out." 
 
At the Chemical Manufacturers As- 
sociation, a coordinated program to meet 
and get ahead of environmental regulatory 
requirements and communicate the results 
to a broad public has been under way since 
1988. The program, named "Responsible 
Care," is a broad-spectrum attack on real 
and perceived problems within the indus- 
try. The program is mandatory for CMA 
members. Sandra L. Tirey, associate direc- 
tor of health programs for CMA, said that 
the voluntary program has had good 
response from the industry in addressing 
concerns for health, safety, and the envi- 
ronment. And, she pointed out, the pro- 
gram goes well beyond regulatory require- 
ments. "The purpose of Responsible Care is 
responsible performance," she said. 
 
The six elements of the Responsible 
Care program start with a documented 
commitment by the chief executive officers 
of member companies, assuring that the 
program gets attention at the top of the 
company. The program requires codes of 
management practices, a public advisory 
panel, detailed company self-evaluations, 
executive leadership reviews and informa- 
tion exchanges, and the requirement that 
members have made a measurable differ- 
ence in industry approaches to environ- 
mental health and safety questions. The 
program builds on existing cooperation 
with EPA and the Organization for Ec- 
onomic Cooperation and Development, 
Tirey added. 
 
Laboratory and clinical scientists who 
focus on environmental research tend to 
look more intently at specific collaborative 
opportunities and benefits that increased 
cooperation and collaboration could bring. 
Lawrence Fischer, director of the Institute 
for Environmental Toxicology at Michigan 
State University in East Lansing, said the 
opportunities for more cost-effective and 
cooperative approaches to environmental 
protection are many, and some are quite 
obvious. Permits, in general, are a major 
area where coordination could be very cost 
effective, he said. In the past, permit 
 
applications at the local, state, and federal 
 
levels have been the venue for confronta- 
tion, with environmental advocacy or 
other citizen groups and industry and gov- 
ernment on different sides of the table. 
 
"I think it's possible for industry and 
government to include noninvolved peo- 
ple-university, consultants-people with- 
out an axe to grind, to work out agree- 
ments based on the science," Fischer said. 
"We're seeing this more and more, usually 
at the request of governments but some- 
times industry. Some states have made 
more progress than others. I think it will 
occur more frequently." 
 
Bernard Goldstein, director of the 
Environmental and Occupational Health 
Sciences Institute at the Robert Wood 
Johnson Medical School, University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in 
Piscataway, and former Assistant Admin- 
istrator of Research and Development at 
EPA, says there are several aspects to 
enhancing cooperative efforts in research 
among the sectors. Goldstein gave exam- 
ples of research that draw on several disci- 
plines to ask and begin to answer complex 
environmental health questions. In one 
example, researchers at the University of 
New Mexico and at the National Cancer 
Institute finally were able, because of the 
new molecular tools, to ask the right ques- 
tions about the differences in lung cancers 
for uranium miners and smokers. What 
the scientists found was a different pattern 
of mutations in different codons of the 
p53 gene in the lung cancers of uranium 
miners and in the lung cancers of tobacco 
smokers. "We haven't done badly in start- 
ing with chemicals and working our way to 
an associated disease," Goldstein said. 
"But, how about going from disease back 
to chemical?" 
 
Another example of cooperative envi- 
ronmental health research is a project 
investigating lead with multiple sources of 
financial support at the University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. 
Instead of a neighborhood-to-neighbor- 
hood epidemiological comparison, the sci- 
entists are conducting a trial using preg- 
nant women. One-third of a group of 
pregnant women is being trained to clean 
their houses to keep down potentially lead- 
laden dust that could affect their babies, 
and the carpets in their homes are being 
replaced. The other two-thirds of the 
group are getting training and attention 
from public health nurses on avoiding 
childhood accidents. This trial may offer 
useful insights in cases where there is regu- 
lation for lead at low levels of environmen- 
tal exposure, Goldstein said. The project is 
 
supported by the National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development, 
NIEHS, EPA, and the Robert Wood 
Johnson Foundation. 
 
An emerging opportunity for scientists 
may lie in the recent interest expressed by 
EPA in briiging more science and exper- 
tise into the regulatory realm. "They're 
considering new and larger questions," 
Fischer said. "A year ago EPA released the 
results of their relative risk project on eco- 
logical concerns, and it was not just chem- 
ical by chemical or medium by medium. 
It was a more holistic approach instead of 
each group in its own closet. It's an exam- 
ple of a federal agency thinking more 
broadly about the problems." 
 
A fundamental benefit of the broader 
approach to environmental agendas 
"would hopefully be realized by the public. 
We'd get a better environment with no real 
serious cost to any single segment of soci- 
ety instead of each working to improve 
from its own standpoint. The whole thing 
has to be more cooperative, more collabo- 
rative," Fischer continued. "That sort of 
atmosphere can create great benefits. I 
believe when industry changes processes to 
save the environment, they'll find they save 
costs and improve the bottom line as well. 
There are companies out there already see- 
ing it," he added. 
 
Cooper reiterated the challenges facing 
most if not all attempts to move to coordi- 
nated, coherent environmental agendas for 
the nation: "We've been barraged by Alar, 
nuclear waste, groundwater contamination. 
The environmental groups want to do all 
of them; there are not enough bucks." The 
economics of any proposals for a national 
environmental agenda are likely to be con- 
sidered a lot more on the cost side than the 
pure environmentalists think appropriate, 
and a lot more on the benefit side than 
short-time planners among business and 
antiregulatory interests think proper. 
 
How much of a role scientists will have 
in the process or its outcome is still un- 
known. The players will need to know 
their own and their challengers' histories 
and goals if they want their topics on a 
future national environmental agenda. It 
seems almost certain, however, that those 
who are invited to the game will be those 
prepared to play at a round table-willing 
to give and take. 
 
Betty Mushak 
 
Betty Mushak is a freelance writer in Durham, 
North Carolina. 
 
Volume 10 1, Number 1, April 22, 1993