pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10994327PMC10994327.110994327109943273857408910.1371/journal.pone.0300886PONE-D-23-245131Research ArticlePhysical SciencesMathematicsApplied MathematicsGame TheoryBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitionDecision MakingPhysical SciencesMathematicsApplied MathematicsGame TheoryUltimatum GameBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyLearningBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLearningBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceLearning and MemoryLearningBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorProsocial BehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorProsocial BehaviorBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorBiology and Life SciencesPsychologySocial PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologySocial PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorMotivationSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorMotivationBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyMotivationBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyMotivationSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyMotivationSocial SciencesEconomicsFinanceReciprocity in ambiguous situations: Default psychological strategies underlying ambiguity resolution in moral decision-making
Reciprocity in ambiguous situationshttps://orcid.org/0009-0006-4549-8860GalvanElijahConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing SanfeyAlanConceptualizationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University, Nijmegen, GE, Netherlands2
Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University, Nijmegen, GE, NetherlandsZuckermanInonEditor ] comprise much of our working knowledge of these two behaviors and the underlying psychological motives that drive trust and reciprocity decisions.
Experimental studies of reciprocity using the Berg, Dickhaut, and McCabe’s Trust Game have broadly shown that people differ in their tendencies to exploit others’ trust, though most people do reciprocate at the expense of maximizing their own payout. Further, the degree to which one’s partner has bestowed trust strongly determines the degree to which one will forgo maximizing one’s own payout at the expense of reciprocating that bestowed trust [ – ]. However, the experimental studies which have focused on reciprocity have largely overlooked a vitally important aspect of human social interactions which strongly determines the tendency to reciprocate trust–ambiguity. Ambiguity, also referred to as second-order risk, is characterized by uncertainty about the outcome for a given choice option. Real-world reciprocity decisions are riddled with such ambiguity: we rarely have clear and certain information about the extent to which trust has been bestowed or what the trustor’s motives in doing so are.
For instance, if our boss has asked us to stay late at work to complete an urgent presentation for the next day, we typically do not have a guarantee that this person has actually bestowed trust in us, or if they might instead be making the same request of others so that they have multiple options to choose from. Since no previous studies have investigated how people reciprocate ambiguous trust, we do not yet have an empirical answer to this question. In fact, it is possible that people never reciprocate ambiguous trust–the mere possibility of reciprocating distrust could make people averse to reciprocating; if this is true, it would undermine the conclusions of previous laboratory studies which studied reciprocity under conditions of certainty, since these studies often show that the vast majority of people reciprocate trust. Consequently, in this study we will determine if people reciprocate trust when it is ambiguous. More specifically, since reciprocity is determined by the trust which has been bestowed, we will identify how this unknown bestowed trust is imputed in order to make reciprocation decisions.
Though there is no clear answer to this question currently available in the literature, previous work has made some intriguing suggestions. Perhaps the best indication as to how people will reciprocate ambiguous trust comes from the Offer Game [ ]. The Offer Game is an amended version of the Ultimatum Game in which the endowment received by the Proposer is hidden from the Responder. The term Endowment refers to the money provided for use in the game. In the standard Ultimatum Game, the Proposer receives an endowment which is known to both parties, and then makes an ultimatum to the Responder. This ultimatum is to either accept the proposed division of assets or to reject it, in which case the Proposer and Responder receive nothing [ ]. In this standard version, a Responder’s decision to either accept or reject the ultimatum is typically determined by how fair–or equal—the offer is [ ]. In the Offer Game, Responders therefore had first to resolve the ambiguity about the fairness of an ultimatum in order to make a decision about whether or not to accept or reject it. Unsurprisingly, Proposers made ultimatums in the ambiguous condition which Responders would have rejected in the standard Ultimatum Game, and indeed Responders were very accurate at guessing how much the Proposer was actually keeping for themselves. However, despite stating a belief that these ultimatums were unfair, Responders accepted these offers in the Offer Game at a much higher rate than they did in the standard Ultimatum Game. This raises the possibility that people might use these ambiguous situations to make strategic decisions that maximize their self-interest while preserving their self-image. Responders may be taking advantage of the ambiguity, pretending that offers are fair even when they think they are actually unfair. Since unfair offers might compel the responder to reject these offers, pretending that offers are fair can circumvent this compulsion and thereby maximize the responder’s payout.
The extent to which ambiguity resolution in bargaining behavior generalizes to ambiguity resolution in reciprocity behavior is very much unclear. This is because, in contrast to the Offer Game, reciprocating bestowed trust comes at the expense of maximizing payout. Additionally, one’s partner has no recourse against being exploited when reciprocating that person’s trust. In this sense, when bestowed trust is ambiguous–which is characteristic of real-world scenarios–the lack of certainty about what constitutes exploitation of one’s partner may serve to provide justifiable cover for people to maximize their payout. Hence, to answer this question we must assess reciprocity as a function of bestowed trust, where this bestowed trust is ambiguous.

## Current study
To explore how people make reciprocation decisions when bestowed trust is ambiguous, we propose the novel Hidden Endowment Trust Game (HETG). The HETG amends the design of the standard Trust Game by making the endowment provided to the Investor hidden from the trustee, as illustrated in . Since the Trustee does not know how much the Investor was originally given, they do not know how much trust has been bestowed upon them: the only information they have is the amount that the Investor transferred. This makes the reciprocation decision difficult, since bestowed trust is an important consideration when making reciprocation decisions. While our behavioral measure is reciprocity, the proportion of the transferred amount that the Trustee returns, the psychological outcome variable of interest is ambiguity resolution. Ambiguity resolution is defined as how Trustees assess the ambiguous bestowed trust of their partner in order to either reciprocate or exploit the Investor’s trust. By making the endowment ambiguous, we can infer how people resolve the resulting ambiguity about the trust their partner has bestowed upon them.
 By making the endowment ambiguous, we can learn about how people resolve the resulting ambiguity: specifically, the ambiguity about how much trust their partner has bestowed upon them. Here, we propose a specific mathematical representation for how the endowment, as a manipulated variable, affects reciprocity, as an outcome variable. A recent study by van Baar, Chang, and Sanfey [ ] investigated individual differences in reciprocity motives using a modified version of the Trust Game [ ]. They found that people are motivated to reciprocate trust in the context of the Trust Game from a desire to either maintain overall equity or to meet the expectations of their game partner. Crucially, irrespective of the differences in underlying reciprocity motives, the results demonstrated that trust shapes reciprocation behavior. For equity-seeking people, trust implies fairness, such that the less an Investor places trust in the Trustee, the less the Trustee should return in order to maintain equity [ – ]. However, for expectation-following people, trust is thought to convey motivations of reciprocity [ ], with the prospect of violating these expectations associated with a sense of prospective guilt [ ] with this aversion to guilt driving positive reciprocation behavior [ ]. Consequently, reciprocation behavior can best be modeled in the Trust Game using an Inequity-Aversion Model [ ]. We have directly adapted the inequity-aversion utility model proposed by van Baar, Chang, and Sanfey [ ] to be a behavioral model, which was itself adapted for the Trust Game based on earlier inequality-aversion utility models [ , ].
Informed by previous studies which have formally modeled moral preferences in utility equations [ ], the current study has formalized a behavioral model which captures inequality-aversion without a utility term, as shown in . Here, a given Trustee’s reciprocation behavior, or R2, is the proportion of the money in the game (E—I is what the Investor has and I × M is what the Trustee has) that the Trustee thinks is fair for the Investor to have, minus what the Investor already has. The max argument is to enforce the game rules: namely, that the least a Trustee can return is 0: there is no ‘stealing’ or ‘repossessing’ possible. Here Δ is a free parameter that ranges from 0 to 1 and describes a specific Trustee’s fairness norm–what they think a fair division of money is. Specifically, a Δ of 0 would predict that the participant never returns anything, a Δ of 0.5 would predict that the participant always returns enough so that their payout and the investor’s payout are equal, and a Δ of 1 would predict that the participant always returns everything to the investor.
This approach enables us to determine how participants resolved ambiguity, since we can solve for the unknown endowment when we know their division norm. Specifically, given that M (the multiplier) is always 4 in this experiment, we can rearrange this equation to solve for E when it is ambiguous; this is shown in . Thus, explains how we propose to measure ambiguity resolution in the current study. We will next focus on predicting this ambiguity resolution.

 R2=max(0,((E‐I+I×M)×Δ)‐(E‐I)
(1)

 Einferred=min((R2‐(3×I×Δ))÷(Δ‐1),Emax)
(2)
Given no previous experience with, or information about, their specific game partner, we expect participants to adopt one of several ambiguity resolution strategies (ARS) to impute how much trust has been placed in them. We predict that participants will adopt one of four ARS: 1) they can give their partner the ‘benefit of the doubt’, and assume that the highest possible trust has been placed in them–the Highest Assumed Trust (HAT) strategy; 2) they can assume the worst, that the lowest possible amount of trust has been placed–the Lowest Assumed Trust (LAT) strategy; 3) they can assume that the particular partner plays the same strategy as the typical player they interacted with in the unambiguous version of the task–the Modal Trust (MT) strategy; 4) they could infer trust based on absolute investment amount, such that small investments imply little trust and large investments imply greater trust–the Heuristic (HR) strategy. We termed the fourth strategy as a heuristic strategy, as those that use it report employing a straightforward rule that is basically ‘lower investments equal lower trust’; thus, a simple heuristic is applied to the amount that has invested to resolve ambiguity.
To assess how people actually resolve ambiguity in these situations, we will adopt a computational modeling approach. Computational models are used to capture the motives which could be used to guide decision-making, which make them a valuable tool for determining which motives guide individuals’ decision-making. Thus, a computational modeling approach will enable us to directly assess if all people follow a single strategy or if people follow different strategies instead. Use of these computational approaches then allows us to test if these hypothesized motivations accurately reflect their actual decision behavior. The ARS model, shown below in , represents the hypothesis that different people have different strategies to resolve ambiguity. Thus, the ARS model incorporates all of the potential explanations for ambiguity resolution behavior in that it captures financially advantageous choices via the LAT strategy, captures benefit of the doubt choices via the HAT strategy, captures previous experience-informed choices via the MT strategy, and captures larger-is-more choices via the HR strategy.

## Materials and methods

## Preregistration and ethical approval
The hypotheses, sampling procedure, confirmatory analyses, and exclusion criteria for this study were registered prior to data collection on the Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/akyg7/). Preregistration is important for increasing transparency in the research process, as it clarifies distinctions between confirmatory and exploratory analyses prior to the collection of data. Thus, confirmatory results reported by preregistered studies can be trusted to not be merely exploratory results, which ensures that the False Positive Rate–or Type II error–of these results is accurately reported. Therefore, any deviation from the preregistered criteria is explicitly acknowledged.
This study was eligible for the blanket ethical approval issued to the Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging (CMO 2014/288). The blanket approval was issued to the Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging by the local ethics committee (CMO Arnhem-Nijmegen, the Netherlands). Informed consent for the study was obtained in writing.

## fMRI data
fMRI data was collected for all participants, but these results will not be reported here.

## Participants
A power analysis for the current study was conducted based on the effect size estimate of acceptance rates in ambiguous compared to unambiguous situations, from Rapoport and Sundali [ ]. Thus, based on a Cohen’s d = 0.41, we required at least thirty-six participants to reach 80% power with a confidence level of 0.95. Accounting for a 10% exclusion rate, we aimed to collect a sample of forty participants. Left-handed participants were excluded, as were participants with any non-removable metal objects implanted in their body. In the preregistration, we indicated that we would exclude participants who ever studied psychology, economics, or neuroscience, though prior to data collection we decided to only exclude students of the local Behavioral Science Research Master.
The sample for the present study was collected based on convenience and consisted primarily of students from the Nijmegen area. A total of forty participants participated in the study–data collection began on 16 February 2022 and ended on 5 May 2022. Of these, four were excluded for expressing disbelief in the task and two were excluded as they did not complete the task. Participants who expressed disbelief in the task were excluded since these participants’ decisions were unlikely to reflect their actual social preferences, undermining the validity of the conclusions which can be drawn from their data. Therefore, our final sample for analysis consisted of thirty-four participants, of whom twenty were female (59%). Twenty-eight were aged 18–30 (82%), four were aged 31–45 (12%), and two were aged 46–60 (6%).

## Procedure
The experiment consisted of a single session. Participants were brought into the MRI lab control room and asked to complete a screening form and an informed consent form. Informed consent was obtained in writing. After subjects consented to participate in the study, passed the screening, had removed all metal from their body, and used the restroom, participants were brought into the scanning room by the experimenter. The participant was then instructed that he/she would play the ‘Investment Game’ exclusively as Player B (the trustee) with other Players A (the investor) who had previously completed the experiment. Our rationale for this choice was that by framing the decisions as ‘investments’ we might avoid the possibility that reciprocity was a consequence of a social desirability effect. Participants were given clear instructions for the Trust Game, and then played a handful of practice trials to ensure that they understood how payouts were determined for both players based on the 1) Investment amount and 2) the Returned amount. Participants were informed that one randomly selected trial would determine their additional payment, as well as their partner’s: participants were informed that they would be paid at least €20 for their participation and could earn up an additional €16 based on their decision and the decision made by Player A, though no specific information was given as to how this bonus would be calculated. Bonuses were calculated based on the reciprocation decision on one randomly selected trial based on the following equation: ((Participant’s Payout) ÷ (Total Money in Game)) × €16. The Investor’s choice behavior was programmed by the experimenters for the purpose of the present study. After receiving the instructions, participants were instructed to place earplugs into their ear and were then placed into the MRI scanner with the response boxes, as well as a panic button that they could press to end the experiment immediately. Participants played 40 rounds of the Trust Game after which they had a short break. Then, participants were given instructions presented via the stimulus program about the HETG. Following this, they then played 80 trials of the HETG.

## Task
Participants played a total of 120 trials of the Trust Game: 40 in the unambiguous condition (i.e. the standard Trust Game) and 80 in the ambiguous condition (i.e. the HETG). The task design is shown below in . First, the participant saw the Partner Screen which contained a blurred image of their partner’s face. They then saw the Investment Screen which differed between conditions: in the unambiguous condition, the Investment was shown as a proportion of the Endowment and the amount that the participant receives was shown below as the Investment multiplied by 4. Here, the trials were designed to provide participants with a distribution of Investor trust behavior (namely that most Investors transfer half of the Endowment) and also distribution of Endowment probabilities (namely that the most common Endowment in the Trust Game is 10). See for the full condition list in the unambiguous condition. The task was programmed in PsychoPy 3 [ ].
 In the ambiguous condition, Trustees are told that the endowment could be one of three possible values, which are selected based on what a possible endowment could have been, given what the Investor invested. These endowments were selected such that Bestowed Trust (Investment/Endowment) was Low (0.05–0.25), Medium (0.35–0.50), or High (0.70–1.00). Here, 20 trials showed the Investment equal to 2 and the possible Endowments equal to 2, 5, and 10; 20 trials showed the Investment ranging from 4 to 5 and possible Endowments equal to 5, 10, and 20; and 40 trials showed the Investment ranging from 7 to 10 with the possible Endowments equal to 10, 20, or 50. Participants then saw the response screen, on which they adjusted a slider to determine how much to return to their partner. The distribution of trials across both conditions was identical for all participants and was randomized; however, participants always played the unambiguous condition before the ambiguous condition in order to ensure they had previous experience upon which to base their decision-making. We programmed Investor’s choices so that we would have a complete set of trials which was diverse enough to ensure that we could recover our free parameters. Conditions were played sequentially to remove the possibility of learning effects: if conditions were intermingled, participants would learn more about how trusting participants are on a trial-by-trial basis. Thus, this learned information has the potential to influence ambiguity resolution on a trial-by-trial basis–to avoid these contamination effects, we opted to have the Trust Game and HETG played sequentially.

## Measures

## Reciprocity
Reciprocity was measured behaviorally in the context of the Trust Game or HETG as the proportion of the money received that participants then returned to the investor.

## Ambiguity resolution
Ambiguity resolution was assessed using a computational modeling approach. First, reciprocity was modeled in the standard Trust Game in order to determine how participants typically reciprocate when the information is unambiguous. Then, this equation was rearranged to solve for an ambiguous endowment in the HETG ( above).

## Manipulation check
After completing the experiment, participants completed a survey in which they responded to a single item asking if they believed everything the experimenter told them. If participants replied “no”, a follow-up question asked them to indicate what the experimenter told them that they did not believe. Participants who indicated that they did not believe that their actions would affect the payout of their partners were excluded from the analysis.

## Model fit
Model performance was assessed via the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), as per below. The AIC is considered superior to the BIC when the true data generation process is not believed to be fully represented in the model set which is the case here [ ]. The AIC weights model fit against model complexity. Model fit is represented as the sum of squared differences between predicted and observed behavior which is SSE in the model. Model complexity is captured as the number of free parameters, represented in the equation as k. The number of trials is given as n.

 AIC=n×ln(SSE÷n)+k×2
(3)

## Model specification

## Mixed effects modeling
In order to identify group-level trends in reciprocation behavior as a function of bestowed trust while controlling for individual differences, we adopted a mixed effects modeling approach. We used R [ ] to conduct all analyses. We used the lme4 package [ ] to fit a linear mixed effects model: in this model, trust and the investment between trust and investment, were taken as fixed effects used to predict reciprocity ratio (i.e. Amount Returned/Pot). Here, trust was categorized as low (Investment/Endowment < 0.33), medium (0.33 < Investment/Endowment < .66), high (Investment/Endowment > 0.66), or ambiguous (Endowment not known) and we opted for a sum-to-zero contrast scheme. The sum-to-zero contrast scheme was chosen since it makes the condition effects uncorrelated with each other. Investment values were centered. Including intercept, trust, and trust-investment interaction terms as random effects resulted in a singularity warning, so the model was re-estimated without the trust-investment random effect which resolved the warning. In this case, it seems that the fixed-and-random effects for trust-investment were explaining the same variance: there were no individual differences in the trust-investment slope. We conducted a Type 3 ANOVA for this model: here, we computed p-values for this model using the Kenward-Rogers method via the mixed function in the afex package [ ]. We conducted post hoc analyses using the emmeans package [ ]: we compared means between trust levels using the emmeans function wrapped with the pairs function, and we compared investment slopes between trust levels using the emtrends function. The marginal R2 and conditional R2 values were calculated for this model using the MuMIn package [ ].

## ARS model
We estimated parameters for each subject using the Negative-Log Likelihood method. We simulated a 10201 (101 x 101) point parameter space for the ARS model where Tau and Psi ranged from 0 to 1. We computed both predicted-and-observed preference for each pair of coordinates in the parameter space using , likelihood using the dnorm function from the stats package [ ] in R. Deviance was then calculated as negative two times log likelihood: the free parameters selected per participant were the ones which minimized deviance in terms of expected versus observed preference.

 p2(E)=(1‐abs(I/E‐τ))×(1‐ψ)+(1‐abs(I/E‐I/10))×(ψ)
(4)
The ARS model captures individual differences via its free parameters. It captures participants who make decisions using the heuristic strategy with its ψ parameter such that high ψ values make it important that the trust implied by a given endowment agrees with the trust implied by the investment alone (i.e. 1 –abs(I/E)–(I/10)). Inversely, low ψ values make it important that the trust implied by a given endowment agrees with the participant’s default assumed trustingness–or τ. Therefore, when ψ is high, the model predicts that participants will follow the HR strategy. When ψ is low on the other hand, τ represents the strategy: values of τ close to 0 predict the LAT strategy, values of τ close to 1 predict the HAT strategy, and values of τ close to 0.5 predict the MT strategy.

## Results and discussion

## Computational modeling

## Reciprocity model
We estimated parameters for each subject using the Negative-Log Likelihood method. The behavioral Inequity-Aversion model, given in , explained 69.88% of the variance in participants’ reciprocation behavior in the unambiguous version of the task. The model predictions were plotted against observed values, revealing that, although the model provided a reasonable fit to all data points across all ranges of predicted values, for some participants this fit was substantially worse than for others, particularly at lower predicted reciprocation values ( ). Similar to previous studies, these variations in model fit reflect the notion that reciprocation behavior in the Trust Game is difficult to model for all participants in the same way. Specifically, these variations arise since divisions can be influenced by the multiplied investment, particularly when a partner is untrusting. Thus, for a small minority of participants, the model overpredicts reciprocation amounts. The model predictions for the ambiguous trials, using the inferred endowment, explained 74.06% of the variance in reciprocation decisions, which provides some confidence regarding the validity of the inference method. Given that this does not lead to a dramatic difference in variance explained in the behavioral reciprocity model, we can be confident that the reverse inference technique is not, itself, accounting for a concerning amount of variance which is not captured in the reciprocity model.
Initially, we hypothesized that participants would learn about the likelihood of a given endowment but, based on self-report measures, it appeared participants who followed this strategy were resolving ambiguity using the heuristic strategy: therefore, we altered the computational model from the pre-registered model to more accurately reflect the psychological processes underlying the adoption of the Modal Endowment/Heuristic Strategy. This alteration did not affect the model predictions in a discernable way.

## Ambiguity resolution
We tested the ARS Model against each individual strategy model using uncorrected, one-tailed paired sample t-tests. We excluded one participant whose behavior was perfectly predicted by both the MT and ARS Models. Our analyses showed that, in comparison to the best-fitting single-strategy model which was the MT model (Mean AIC = -276.100, SD AIC = 51.622), the ARS Model (Mean AIC = -284.662, SD AIC = 52.599) best captured ambiguity resolution behavior across the entire sample–however, this difference was not significant (Paired t(32) = -1.352, p = 0.093) and the effect size of this difference was small (Cohen’s d = 0.239). The ARS Model was also found to substantially outperform the HAT Model (Mean AIC = -231.488, SD AIC = 68.483; Paired t(32) = -6.541, p < 0.001), LAT model (Mean AIC = -100.957, SD AIC = 30.956; Paired t(32) = -13.956, p < 0.001), and the HR model (Mean AIC = -147.808, SD AIC = 23.614; Paired t(32) = -16.087, p < 0.001). shows the single-strategy models plotted with 95% CIs relative to the ARS Model. Our justification for not correcting for multiple tests was that one single-strategy model would fit all participants better than the other three single-strategy models so, ultimately, we would be testing the ARS model against only the best-fitting single-strategy model.
 

## Mixed effects modeling
The mixed effects model was found to explain a substantial portion of the variance in reciprocity decisions. The variance explained by the model as a whole (Marginal R2) was 72.478% while the variance explained by the fixed effects alone (Conditional R2) was 51.395%. We found that reciprocity differed significantly as a function of trust (F (3, 32.84) = 27.75, p < 0.001) and this effect differed as a function of investment (F (4, 4056) = 11.79, p < 0.001). Comparing group means, we found that all pairwise contrasts were significant apart from the middle-ambiguous contrast–a finding which is unsurprising based on the results of the computational modeling analysis. These results are shown below in and visualized in . We further found that the effect of Investment was only significantly different between the ambiguous and high trust conditions (Estimate = 0.008, SE = 0.003, t (4056) = 2.837, p = 0.027) and the medium trust and high trust conditions (Estimate = 0.009, SE = 0.003, t (4056) = 3.058, p = 0.012).
 

## Conclusions
The main hypothesis of the current study was that people would differ in the strategy that they used to resolve ambiguity in order to reciprocate trust. Our data do not support this hypothesis; instead, based on our computational modeling results we concluded that participants generally resolved ambiguity in the same way. Namely, participants spontaneously used their previous experience to guide their ambiguity-resolution. This accuracy orientation illustrates an aversion to potentially exploiting this bestowed trust to thereby maximize their financial payout. This finding is contrary to the self-interest maximizing behavior observed in the Offer Game [ ]. In the Offer Game, people were highly accurate in their estimates of the ambiguous endowment, though they did not use this information in their decisions to respond to the ultimatums. We propose that these differences are due to the nature of the respective tasks: according to utility theory, rejected offers are offers under which the utility experienced from the payout under the ultimatum, when combined with the disutility experienced from accepting the unfair offer, is less than the utility experienced from rejecting the unfair offer. Therefore, the results from the Offer Game must be attributed one or more of the following motives: 1) ambiguity resolution is biased by a desire to maximize payout, 2) the disutility experienced from accepting unfair ultimatums decreases under ambiguity, or 3) experienced utility from rejecting unfair ultimatums decreases under ambiguity. Both our computational modeling results and linear mixed effects modeling results strongly indicate that these motives are not at play when considering ambiguous trust, rather than ambiguous bargaining behavior. Our working interpretation of these results is that ambiguity resolution in the Offer Game is not different from ambiguity resolution in the HETG. Instead, the uncertainty in the Offer Game decreases the utility associated with rejecting potentially unfair offers, while the uncertainty in the HETG does not significantly impact the prospective utility of reciprocating bestowed trust. This explanation explains how behavior in the HETG reflects an accuracy orientation in resolving ambiguity while behavior in the Offer Game reflects a payout maximization motive.
In the context of the larger body of work on social decision-making under ambiguity, our results are somewhat anomalous: many researchers find that decision-making under ambiguity is less prosocial. Therefore, we must consider what specifically about the HETG distinguishes it from the tasks used in these previous studies. For example, in both the Public Goods Game (PGG) and Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD), wherein participants must make the decision to cooperate or defect without knowing their partner’s decision or past behavior, it has been consistently reported that participants cooperate less often than they defect [ – ]. In a version of the PGG wherein the group must cooperate to reach a threshold of contributions to the community pot or otherwise lose all their money, participants cooperate more; however, when ambiguity is introduced about what this threshold is, participants cooperate much less [ ]. In this regard, it is possible that the specific ambiguity which is present in the HETG has a diverging effect because behavioral distrust is incentive-incompatible. In other words, participants in the HETG know that, regardless of any beliefs that they might have about how trusting investors are in general, their partners will invest more if they trust the participant more. Indeed, previous research on the PD suggests that perceptions of morality are insensitive to outcomes [ ]. In his light the results from the HETG may therefore be attributed to a general aversion to behaving in what may be regarded as an immoral way simply because the context of the HETG does not offer sufficient cover to morally justify behaving selfishly. Concordantly, Tho Pesch and Dana [ ] find that charitable giving decreases when participants must make a choice about which charity to donate to before making the giving decision, rather than just making only the giving decision. The obfuscation of the charitable choice by simply providing attributes for comparison has been referred to as attributional responsibility [ ]. In regard to the HETG, the lack of attributional ambiguity–or the inability to, perhaps, attribute ostensibly selfish behavior to anything other than a response to distrust, which was unmerited based on their previous experience, may be responsible for this atypical pattern of behavior.
The finding that ambiguity-resolution follows an accuracy orientation is in line with many studies which suggest that social behavior–such as reciprocity–is motivated by a desire to act in a morally correct manner. While our study design was not suited to investigate the intentions underlying prosocial behavior–reciprocity in this instance–the notion that such behavior arises from a preference for behaving in a morally correct manner rather than a desire to achieve a certain outcome–namely, the moral preferences hypothesis–is a powerful lens through which to view our findings [ ]. This is because in scenarios where distribution outcomes are ambiguous–notably the case in both our task and reciprocity in the real-world–prosocial behavior must then be guided by principles used to distinguish the morally right from the morally wrong. Through such a perspective, adopting an accuracy orientation for ambiguity resolution can be regarded as evidence for trustees to reciprocate based on interpretations of this ambiguity made in good faith.
When considering how the results we reported came to be, it should be noted that participants were not informed about the rules of the HETG prior to playing the unambiguous, standard Trust Game. It is possible that some, or all, of these participants used the fact that three endowments were presented in the standard Trust Game–which we included to control the visual stimuli across conditions–to deduce that they would be playing a version of the game in which this information would be uncertain. Since we did not have a self-report item to either confirm or refute this interpretation, we cannot conclude with certainty that this is not the case. Regardless of whether this information was recalled spontaneously or if participants were intentionally tracking trustingness while playing the unambiguous trials, participants behaviorally demonstrated an orientation to accurately infer the ambiguous trust their partner placed in them and used the information they previously passively accrued to inform this inference. Thus, since these results have shown that positive reciprocity is not simply a consequence of disambiguating bestowed trust in the laboratory setting, our findings bolster the ecological validity of the standard Trust Game as a means by which to study positive reciprocity.

## Reflection on null results
Our analyses did not support the preregistered hypothesis that there are significant individual differences in default ambiguity resolution strategies, since the ARS model’s AIC was not significantly lower than the MT model’s, though this difference was somewhat close to statistical significance. Null results notwithstanding, the ARS model performed better than MT model when accounting for the decrease in parsimony, which indicates that a few participants did indeed use different strategies. At the individual level, we found that a majority of people (71%) used the MT strategy to resolve ambiguity while the next most prevalent strategy was the LAT strategy (23%). Therefore, it seems that a significant minority of our sample did indeed take advantage of ambiguity in order to make strategic decisions that maximize their self-interest while preserving their self-image. The adoption of the LAT strategy may evince some kind of motivated reasoning wherein participants adopt it because they are motivated to reach the conclusion that they should keep as much as possible [ ]. In this regard, given that participants prior experience was so strongly indicative that the average investor bestowed a ‘medium’ amount of trust, participants who we identified as being MT strategists may have adopted an accuracy-orientation because this motivated reasoning process–which would result in the adoption of the LAT strategy–could not override the more accurate one.
Given that the data show that there are individual differences in ambiguity-resolution behavior, but these differences are not significant, we believe our null findings are, in part, due to the underpowering of our study. Our power analysis, which was based off an effect size of 0.41 from [ ], indicated that 36 participants would be sufficient to reach 80% power. Importantly, the results from this study indicate that ambiguity resolution in the Offer Game is different from ambiguity resolution in the HETG and the achieved power computed post hoc from this study is just 36%. Thus, we believe that this study was underpowered for revealing individual differences in ambiguity resolution when making reciprocation decisions.

## Limitations
The most central limitation of the current study is how little ecological validity the experimental design used in the current study has. In order to validate our reverse inference technique, we needed participants to complete dozens of trials with new partners who they knew nothing about–with the exception of a blurred picture and an investment amount, there was no information which participants could base their decision off of. Instead, they would have to default to a strategy to resolve ambiguity: a strategy which we could very clearly identify in the data. However, this experimental control comes at the cost of generalizability: in real-world settings, people always know at least something about the person they are trying to infer the expectations, beliefs, or intentions of. Whether this is something as irrelevant as facial features or as relevant as reputation or past experience, these factors often influence social decision-making [ – ]. The current study is very limited in the sense that in an anonymized one-shot design it controls and eliminates the effect of such factors on reciprocation behavior and, by extension, ambiguity-resolution. Therefore, it is very much unclear how these ambiguity resolution strategies actually impact reciprocation decisions made under ambiguity, since it removes these other variables from consideration.
A further limitation of the current study is the population which the sample was drawn from. Since our sample was comprised nearly exclusively of university students, the conclusions we can draw from our data are inherently constrained by the fact that we have sampled a portion of the adult population which is rather young, often of a relatively high SES, and share a similar educational background. For instance, respondents’ propensity to use an accuracy-oriented approach to resolve ambiguity may not be characteristic of a broader population who may be less idealistic and who, being generally less privileged, may be more self-interested. In a similar regard, the current study was conducted on a WEIRD population: WEIRD populations–which are Westernized, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic–comprise a disproportionate majority of research on human psychology [ , ]. The current study falls into this pattern: convenience samples are often used in the first stages of research, but further research into human decision-making under ambiguity must be done with a more diverse sample than we utilize here.
Another shortcoming is the sample size–as previously mentioned in our reflection on the null results of this study, our study was likely underpowered since the best effect size available was much larger than the actual effect size of the current study. This small sample size may therefore be responsible for our inability to detect meaningful heterogeneity in our sample–heterogeneity which might actually be present. Consequently, without adequate power our results do not offer conclusive evidence that these individual differences exist or if, instead, participants actually all follow the same strategy to resolve ambiguity.
A final limitation is in the variations observed in model fit. This is a common finding when modeling reciprocity in the context of the Trust Game since division norms can be applied to all of the money in the game–as in our model–but, alternatively, to the multiplied investment alone or a combination of the two. Thus, this heterogeneity is not accounted for in the model, which explains why a minority of participants’ data was more poorly explained at reciprocation values further from the mean. Pragmatism notwithstanding, this calls into question the ability to make reliable reverse inferences for this minority of participants whose data was overpredicted at low trust values and underpredicted at high trust values.

## Strengths of this study

## Capturing individual differences
A substantial strength of this study was its use of computational modeling to capture individual differences. The conventional approach to modeling behavior is descriptive, mean-based linear modeling: such an approach captures sample-level trends and accounts for individual differences using a priori predictors. In other words, such an approach only detects individual differences which are explained by prespecified variables. The current approach differs: instead of trying to describe the data generation process, the current approach predicts it a priori. Thus, this data generation process incorporates the individual differences we expect to see without having to specify why some people behave differently than others. Our approach to classifying strategies was based on the grouping of a model predictions of an equation which was preregistered: therefore, our approach did not require us to speculate about what would predict the adoption of these strategies. Thus, our approach enabled us to get a clear and convincing account of how individuals actually resolved ambiguity in order to make reciprocation decisions.
Reverse inference technique. Another substantial strength of the current study was that it utilized a novel reverse inference technique to assess how people resolved ambiguity in the context of the HETG. The success of this technique was supported by several findings. First, we found that the strategies identified using the ARS model were consistent with those described by participants via self-report. Second, the behavioral trends observed in the medium (non-ambiguous) trust condition were not significantly different from those in the ambiguous condition. Since the model comparison indicated that accounting for strategies other than the Modal Trust strategy was not justified by the loss of parsimony, this further supports the conclusion of the model comparison, and also suggests that the computations underlying reciprocity do not necessarily change as a function of ambiguity. Third, the behavioral trends between the medium and the low/high bestowed trust conditions was also true of the ambiguous bestowed trust condition. This further supports the notion that the computations underlying reciprocity do not necessarily change as a function of ambiguity–rather, people simply impute the ambiguous value in the otherwise unchanged computation underlying reciprocity. Fourth, when bestowed trust was unambiguous, reciprocation rates significantly differed as a function of bestowed trust. This validates a fundamental assumption of the current study–that by making the bestowed trust ambiguous, we were impacting a crucial decision variable in the computation underlying reciprocity. Finally, the variance explained by the computational model of reciprocity was not substantially different between the unambiguous and ambiguous conditions. This eliminates the alternative explanation that the model is simply fitting more noise. Thus, we are confident that valid and reliable conclusions can be drawn using the reverse inference technique.
Ambiguity has been largely ignored in the study of reciprocity despite the fact that is ubiquitous in social interactions. Researchers often must choose between utilizing field studies–where there is little control over the variables determining behavior–or laboratory studies–where the control over the variables determining behavior is perhaps too rigid to be confident that one’s findings generalize to real-world behavior. We believe that bringing theoretical, a priori, computational approaches into the study of social behavior will enable researchers to answer broader, more compelling questions about the psychological mechanisms underlying social behavior than was previously possible in the laboratory setting using descriptive, post-hoc, linear modeling approaches. Here, our use of a novel approach to computationally drawing reverse inferences serves as an example of how one can answer such questions. More specifically, our approach to modeling and inferring about ambiguity resolution will enable future research to study more about how people resolve ambiguity about others’ intentions in order to make decisions that concern themselves and that other person.

## Future directions
Overall, the current study has many limitations which should be taken into account when drawing conclusions about the results. A clear future direction of the current study would be a replication with a large sample–a large enough sample to indicate if individual differences do exist in ambiguity resolution strategy adoption or if there are no meaningful individual differences after all. Beyond this, the novelty of the current study’s design and analysis approach open up new opportunities for future research. In this light, we will focus on the potential to increase the ecological validity of research on reciprocity. For example, using the reverse inference technique to measure ambiguity resolution, future research can study how ambiguity resolution changes with repeated interactions. Similarly, future studies could investigate how factors such as facial features or word of mouth influences how people resolve ambiguity. In both scenarios, this reverse inference technique can be applied to study social behaviors beyond merely reciprocity. However, as it pertains to reciprocity specifically, such research would clarify how influential these default ambiguity resolution strategies actually are for making reciprocation decisions in real world scenarios: do they serve as an anchor-and-adjust heuristic or do they instead only emerge when no other information is available.

## Supporting information
S1 File

## Video abstract.
A brief video explaining our research question, experimental design, and main finding.
(MP4)
S1 Table

## Distribution of unambiguous trials.
(XLSX)
S1 Fig

## QQ plot behavioral reciprocity model.
The behavioral reciprocity model provided a good fit to the data (R2 = 0.722), though model performance at higher and lower predicted values was worse than expected.
(TIF)

 10.1371/journal.pone.0300886.r001Decision Letter 0
ZuckermanInonAcademic Editor© 2024 Inon Zuckerman2024Inon Zuckermanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
23 Oct 2023

PONE-D-23-24513Reciprocity in Ambiguous Situations: Default Psychological Strategies Underlying Ambiguity-Resolution in Moral Decision-MakingPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Galvan,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Please address the comments made by both reviewers in the revised manuscript and clearly indicate the changes that were made while addressing them. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 07 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Inon Zuckerman
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for submitting the above manuscript to PLOS ONE. During our internal evaluation of the manuscript, we found significant text overlap between your submission and previous work in the [introduction, conclusion, etc.].
We would like to make you aware that copying extracts from previous publications, especially outside the methods section, word-for-word is unacceptable. In addition, the reproduction of text from published reports has implications for the copyright that may apply to the publications.
Please revise the manuscript to rephrase the duplicated text, cite your sources, and provide details as to how the current manuscript advances on previous work. Please note that further consideration is dependent on the submission of a manuscript that addresses these concerns about the overlap in text with published work.
[If the overlap is with the authors’ own works: Moreover, upon submission, authors must confirm that the manuscript, or any related manuscript, is not currently under consideration or accepted elsewhere. If related work has been submitted to PLOS ONE or elsewhere, authors must include a copy with the submitted article. Reviewers will be asked to comment on the overlap between related submissions (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-related-manuscripts).]
We will carefully review your manuscript upon resubmission and further consideration of the manuscript is dependent on the text overlap being addressed in full. Please ensure that your revision is thorough as failure to address the concerns to our satisfaction may result in your submission not being considered further.
3. We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
4. Please include your full ethics statement in the ‘Methods’ section of your manuscript file. In your statement, please include the full name of the IRB or ethics committee who approved or waived your study, as well as whether or not you obtained informed written or verbal consent. If consent was waived for your study, please include this information in your statement as well. 
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Review of Manuscript
The paper presents a novel exploration of ambiguity in reciprocity decisions, employing a computational modeling approach. While the study provides valuable insights into how individuals handle uncertainty, several areas can be refined. The entire paper, especially the Methods section, would benefit from more explicit explanations. It's important to delve deeper into participant selection criteria and elaborate on experimental design choices for better reader understanding. In the Results section, enhancing the systematic presentation of findings and aligning them with the study's objectives would enhance clarity. The Discussion section could be improved through more extensive comparisons with existing literature and stronger connections to the study's objectives and hypotheses. Despite these areas for improvement, this research lays a promising foundation for further investigating ambiguity in social decision-making. It underscores the importance of future studies considering individual differences in decision strategies. Below, you will find my comments for each section of the manuscript.
Introduction
1. Explicitly state the literature gap the study addresses. Identify unanswered questions regarding ambiguity in trust to set a focused research context. What unanswered questions or uncertainties about ambiguity in trust exist in the current research landscape? Highlight the study's key contributions to establish clear expectations for readers.
2. Consider relocating equations, like , to the Methods section. This streamlines the introduction, making it more accessible. Provide concise explanations of specialized terminology and equations for broader readership. Add transitional sentences to link the introduction to subsequent sections.
3. Provide a concise explanation of the ARS model and its relevance. Establish a clear link between the Offer Game discussion and the ARS model introduction.
4. Elaborate on the "veil of ambiguity" concept's relevance and implications for the research. Explain its connection to the Trust Game and study objectives.
5. Simplify complex sentences and explanations for better readability and understanding.
6. Consider using diagrams or graphs to illustrate how ambiguity is introduced in the Hidden Endowment Trust Game.
Methods
7. Briefly explain the importance of preregistration for research transparency and bias reduction.
8. Clarify the exclusion of left-handed participants and those with non-removable metal objects. Address whether these were the sole exclusion criteria for fMRI participants. Justify excluding local Behavioral Science Research Master students and discuss its impact on generalizability.
9. Provide context for the sequential Trust Game and HETG. Explain its influence on the experimental design.
10. Describe participant training or instructions for the Trust Game and HETG to shed light on decision-making processes.
11. Provide a detailed explanation of the payment structure, outlining the specific criteria and mechanisms through which participants could earn the additional €16 based on their decisions and Player A's choices.
12. Elaborate on the reasoning behind programming the Investor's choices. This additional information will enhance readers' comprehension of the programming's purpose and its importance in the study.
13. Explain how the measures address research questions and why computational modeling suits ambiguity-resolution.
14. Clarify why participants expressing disbelief in the task were excluded and its relevance to study goals and biases.
15. Provide context for variations in model fit, especially for participants with lower predicted reciprocation values.
16. Highlight practical implications of observed model differences, even if not statistically significant.
17. Discuss limitations of not correcting for multiple tests and consider reporting effect sizes and confidence intervals.
18. The last paragraph in the "Task" subsection may benefit from additional explanations or a specific diagram to visualize the trial distribution and the relationship between investments and endowments.
19. Provide a more explicit rationale for selecting trust and investment as fixed effects. Explain the significance of using a sum-to-zero contrast scheme and clarify the inclusion/exclusion of random effects like the trust-investment interaction.
20. Briefly explain why specific statistical methods were chosen for analysis to aid reader understanding.
Results
20. Use concise language to describe modeling procedures for easier comprehension.
21. Provide context for variations in model fit, especially for participants with lower predicted reciprocation values.
22. Clarify practical implications of observed model differences, even if not statistically significant.
23. Discuss limitations of not correcting for multiple tests and consider reporting effect sizes and confidence intervals.
24. Rearrange references to Appendices B and C and consider adding more detail to Appendix B.
Discussion
25. Present results thematically rather than enumerating them for improved readability.
26. Strengthen integration of existing literature by explicitly referencing relevant studies and theories.
27. Restate the study's hypotheses and summarize alignment with or deviations from them. Explore practical implications of individual differences.
28. Organize a dedicated section on future research directions, outlining key questions and how future research might address them.
29. Discuss broader findings' implications for real-world social decision-making scenarios.
Reviewer #2: The authors of this paper present an experiment aimed at understanding how individuals reciprocate trust in ambiguous situations within the trust game. Through computational modeling, the study reveals that individuals frequently rely on social heuristics grounded in past interactions when the degree of trust is clear.
While the paper has the potential to significantly contribute to the existing literature, there are several areas where it could be improved:
- "This raises the possibility that people might use these ambiguous situations to make strategic decisions that maximize both self-interest and self-image"; I think it is more precise to say "...while preserving their self-image."
- "we can about how people resolve": I think there is a typo here.
- In discussing motivations for reciprocating trust, the authors might benefit from mentioning also the recent "moral preferences hypothesis." This theory suggests that many prosocial behaviors, including trustworthiness, emanate from an inherent moral desire to act rightly, sometimes beyond mere distributional preferences. As a review article, the authors could consult: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rsif.2020.0880. This may necessitate considerable revisions, especially given the paper's reliance on modeling reciprocation using inequity-aversion.
- The fairness norm model employed by the authors bears resemblance to the model by Kessler and Leider: https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/abs/10.1287/mnsc.1110.1341. For a more comprehensive overview and to draw clearer distinctions from prior work, I recommend consulting this review article on utility functions focused on formalizing moral preferences: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jel.20221613
- "Here, given that M (the multiplier) is usually fixed at 4 in these games": Typically, the multiplier is set at 3, and this seems to be the case in the provided formula as well. So, perhaps this is just a typo.
- It is not clear why the authors name the fourth strategy as "heuristic". I have the feeling that also the third strategy is a heuristics. It seems similar to what Rand and colleagues call "social heuristic" (e.g., https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms4677).
- Referring to the trust game as the "Investment Game" to prevent behavioral bias could be counterproductive, as the term "investment" might introduce its own set of biases.
- The clarity and quality of the figures should be enhanced, as they currently appear blurry.
- A "Limitations" subsection would be a valuable addition. It is important to acknowledge inherent limitations in experimental research. For instance, while the number of trials might offer high power, the relatively small sample size hinders in-depth exploration of participant heterogeneity.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0300886.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
8 Jan 2024

Manuscript PONE-D-23-24513
Response to Reviewers
Dear Ms. Recto,
Thank you for giving us the opportunity to submit a revised draft of the manuscript “Reciprocity in Ambiguous Situations: Default Psychological Strategies Underlying Ambiguity-Resolution in Moral Decision-Making” for publication in PLOS One. We are appreciative of the thought and effort which both you and the reviewers have put into providing us with suggestions to improve the quality of our manuscript. In this document, you will find point-by-point responses to these suggestions, most of which have been incorporated into the revised draft of the manuscript. All page numbers refer to the revised manuscript file without tracked changes. 
Editor’s Comments to the Authors:
1. Ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

Author Response: The current manuscript has been adapted to meet PLOS ONE’s style requirements.
2. Thank you for submitting the above manuscript to PLOS ONE. During our internal evaluation of the manuscript, we found significant text overlap between your submission and previous work in the [introduction, conclusion, etc.].
We would like to make you aware that copying extracts from previous publications, especially outside the methods section, word-for-word is unacceptable. In addition, the reproduction of text from published reports has implications for the copyright that may apply to the publications. 
Please revise the manuscript to rephrase the duplicated text, cite your sources, and provide details as to how the current manuscript advances on previous work. Please note that further consideration is dependent on the submission of a manuscript that addresses these concerns about the overlap in text with published work.
[If the overlap is with the authors’ own works: Moreover, upon submission, authors must confirm that the manuscript, or any related manuscript, is not currently under consideration or accepted elsewhere. If related work has been submitted to PLOS ONE or elsewhere, authors must include a copy with the submitted article. Reviewers will be asked to comment on the overlap between related submissions (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-related-manuscripts).]
We will carefully review your manuscript upon resubmission and further consideration of the manuscript is dependent on the text overlap being addressed in full. Please ensure that your revision is thorough as failure to address the concerns to our satisfaction may result in your submission not being considered further.
Author Response: The similarities noted are between the submitted article and the first authors Masters thesis, from which the current submission has been developed. This submission has not been published elsewhere, nor is it currently under review at any venue. 
3. We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
Author Response: These accession numbers are now provided in the Methods section.
4. Please include your full ethics statement in the ‘Methods’ section of your manuscript file. In your statement, please include the full name of the IRB or ethics committee who approved or waived your study, as well as whether or not you obtained informed written or verbal consent. If consent was waived for your study, please include this information in your statement as well. 
Author Response: These changes have been made.
Reviewers' Responses to Questions:
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
Reviewer #2: Yes
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Review of Manuscript
The paper presents a novel exploration of ambiguity in reciprocity decisions, employing a computational modeling approach. While the study provides valuable insights into how individuals handle uncertainty, several areas can be refined. The entire paper, especially the Methods section, would benefit from more explicit explanations. It's important to delve deeper into participant selection criteria and elaborate on experimental design choices for better reader understanding. In the Results section, enhancing the systematic presentation of findings and aligning them with the study's objectives would enhance clarity. The Discussion section could be improved through more extensive comparisons with existing literature and stronger connections to the study's objectives and hypotheses. Despite these areas for improvement, this research lays a promising foundation for further investigating ambiguity in social decision-making. It underscores the importance of future studies considering individual differences in decision strategies. Below, you will find my comments for each section of the manuscript.
Author Response: Thank you! Please see our responses to your helpful suggestions below. 
Introduction
1. Explicitly state the literature gap the study addresses. Identify unanswered questions regarding ambiguity in trust to set a focused research context. What unanswered questions or uncertainties about ambiguity in trust exist in the current research landscape? Highlight the study's key contributions to establish clear expectations for readers.
Author Response: We thank the reviewer for this helpful suggestion, and have now reformulated several sentences to make more explicit the key unanswered questions this study addresses:
‘Since no previous studies have investigated how people reciprocate ambiguous trust, we do not yet have an empirical answer to this question. In fact, it is possible that people never reciprocate ambiguous trust; if this is true, it would undermine the conclusions of previous laboratory studies which studied reciprocity under conditions of certainty, since these studies often show that the vast majority of people reciprocate trust. Consequently, in this study we will determine if people reciprocate trust when it is ambiguous. More specifically, since reciprocity is determined by the trust which has been bestowed, we will identify how this unknown bestowed trust is imputed in order to make reciprocation decisions.’ (page 3, paragraph 3).
In order to make this section flow better, we have separated this paragraph into two paragraphs.
2. Consider relocating equations, like Equation 3, to the Methods section. This streamlines the introduction, making it more accessible. Provide concise explanations of specialized terminology and equations for broader readership. Add transitional sentences to link the introduction to subsequent sections.
Author Response: We agree with this suggestion and have now relocated Equation 3 to the Methods section. We also now provide an additional detail to clarify Equation 1:
‘Specifically, a Δ of 0 would predict that the participant never returns anything, a Δ of 0.5 would predict that the participant always returns enough so that their payout and the investor’s payout are equal, and a Δ of 1 would predict that the participant always returns everything to the investor.’ (page 7, paragraph 2). 
Further, we now provide a definition of endowment as indeed this term was not explicitly defined: 
‘The term Endowment refers to the money provided for use in the game.’ (page 4, paragraph 2). 
Additionally, we have included several transition sentences to the ‘Current Study’ section: 
‘By making the endowment ambiguous, we can infer how people resolve the resulting ambiguity about the trust their partner has bestowed upon them.’ (page 5, paragraph 3)
’Equation 2 explains how we propose to measure ambiguity-resolution in the current study, and we will next focus on predicting this ambiguity-resolution.’ (page 7, paragraph 3).
3. Provide a concise explanation of the ARS model and its relevance. Establish a clear link between the Offer Game discussion and the ARS model introduction.
Author Response: We now include additional information to help define the ARS model and its relevance, as suggested. Specifically, we now state: 
‘Thus, the ARS model incorporates all of the potential explanations for ambiguity-resolution behavior in that it captures financially advantageous choices via the LAT strategy, captures benefit of the doubt choices via the HAT strategy, captures previous experience-informed choices via the MT strategy, and captures larger-is-more choices via the HR strategy.’ (page 8, paragraph 2).
4. Elaborate on the "veil of ambiguity" concept's relevance and implications for the research. Explain its connection to the Trust Game and study objectives.
Author Response: While we do see the value in expounding upon the relevance and implications, we do not think that elaborating on the implications of the ‘veil of ambiguity’ (we did call this the ‘veil of ignorance’ but it has been changed since it different to Rawls’ veil of ignorance, and we want to avoid any misunderstanding) is necessary, particularly since the results suggest that it does not describe the ambiguity-resolution process. In fact, we believe that including a specific term to refer to this tendency may be counterproductive since it may lead to a focus on this proposed pattern of behavior which was not ultimately supported by the data. As such, we have reformulated this sentence: 
‘Responders may be taking advantage of the ambiguity, pretending that offers are fair even when they think they are actually unfair. Since unfair offers might compel the responder to reject these offers, pretending that offers are fair can circumvent this compulsion and thereby maximize the responder’s payout.’ (page 4, paragraph 2).
5. Simplify complex sentences and explanations for better readability and understanding.
Author Response: We thank the reviewer for calling attention to the somewhat densely formulated text. To improve the readability and facilitate easier understanding, we have extensively edited the manuscript to better accomplish these goals.
6. Consider using diagrams or graphs to illustrate how ambiguity is introduced in the Hidden Endowment Trust Game.
Author Response: This is a very helpful suggestion to aid in the comprehension of our task. We have created a new figure – Figure 1 (page 6) – which shows the implications of the potential endowments in both the unambiguous and ambiguous conditions. Thus, the reader should now be able to more easily grasp how ambiguity was induced in the HETG and why reciprocity requires resolving this ambiguity.
Methods
7. Briefly explain the importance of preregistration for research transparency and bias reduction.
Author Response: We thank the reviewer for drawing attention to this important point. We have included a few sentences which speak to the importance of preregistration: 
‘Preregistration is important for increasing transparency in the research process, as it clarifies distinctions between confirmatory and exploratory analyses prior to the collection of data. Thus, confirmatory results reported by preregistered studies can be trusted to not be merely exploratory results, which ensures that the False Positive Rate – or Type II error – of these results is accurately reported.’ (page 9, paragraph 3).
8. Clarify the exclusion of left-handed participants and those with non-removable metal objects. Address whether these were the sole exclusion criteria for fMRI participants. Justify excluding local Behavioral Science Research Master students and discuss its impact on generalizability.
Author Response: We excluded left-handed participants and those with non-removable metal objects as part of this study was conducted using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). These are very common exclusion criteria for fMRI studies. Left-handed participants – who constitute 11% of the population – are excluded in order to reduce variability in neuroimaging results which arise from differences in functional organization related to handedness. The presence of non-removable metal objects produces a hazard for participants’ safety, since these objects can be moved by the strong magnetic fields in the fMRI scanner. Behavioral Science Research Master students from Radboud University were excluded since this group had foreknowledge about the study’s procedure and aims which could have led to clear demand effects. Of note, the latter were a very small and specific group of potential participants (~40 in total), hence we do not believe that excluding these potential participants had an effect in terms of generalizability.
9. Provide context for the sequential Trust Game and HETG. Explain its influence on the experimental design.
Author Response: We currently state that:
‘participants always played the unambiguous condition before the ambiguous condition in order to ensure they had previous experience upon which to base their decision-making.’ 
We will augment this explanation to further clarify this motivation by adding the text: 
‘Conditions were played sequentially to remove the possibility of learning effects: if conditions were intermingled, participants would learn more about how trusting participants are on a trial-by-trial basis. Thus, this learned information has the potential to influence ambiguity resolution on a trial-by-trial basis – to avoid these contamination effects, we opted to have the Trust Game and HETG played sequentially.’ (page 13, paragraph 1).
10. Describe participant training or instructions for the Trust Game and HETG to shed light on decision-making processes.
Author Response: We have now included the following text:
‘Participants were given clear instructions for the Trust Game, and then played a handful of practice trials to ensure that they understood how payouts were determined for both players based on the 1) Investment amount and 2) the Returned amount.’ (page 11, paragraph 1).
11. Provide a detailed explanation of the payment structure, outlining the specific criteria and mechanisms through which participants could earn the additional €16 based on their decisions and Player A's choices.
Author Response: The specific mechanism of bonus payment calculation was not provided to participants directly, and hence did not impact their decision process. However, for full clarification, we have added the procedure for determining final payment to the appendix. 
12. Elaborate on the reasoning behind programming the Investor's choices. This additional information will enhance readers' comprehension of the programming's purpose and its importance in the study.
Author Response: We have now included the following text: 
‘We programmed Investor’s choices so that we would have a complete set of trials which was diverse enough to ensure that we could recover our free parameters.’ (page 13 paragraph 1).
13. Explain how the measures address research questions and why computational modeling suits ambiguity-resolution.
Author Response: We have clarified this important point by adding the following text: 
“Computational models are used to capture the motives which could be used to guide decision-making, which make them a valuable tool for determining if people differ in which motives guide their decision-making. Use of these computational approaches then allows us to test if these hypothesized motivations accurately reflect their actual decision behavior.” (page 8, paragraph 2).
14. Clarify why participants expressing disbelief in the task were excluded and its relevance to study goals and biases.
Author Response: We have now included the following text: 
‘Participants who expressed disbelief in the task were excluded since these participants’ decisions were unlikely to reflect their actual social preferences, undermining the validity of the conclusions which can be drawn from their data.’ (page 10, paragraph 3). 
15. Provide context for variations in model fit, especially for participants with lower predicted reciprocation values.
Author Response: We have now included the following sentences in the results section:
‘Similar to previous studies, these variations in model fit reflect the notion that reciprocation behavior in the Trust Game is difficult to model for all participants in the same way. Specifically, these variations arise since divisions can be influenced by the multiplied investment, particularly when a partner is untrusting. Thus, for a small minority of participants, the model overpredicts reciprocation amounts.’ (page 16, paragraph 2).
16. Highlight practical implications of observed model differences, even if not statistically significant.
Author Response: We now highlight this in the discussion section, under the ‘Reflection on Null Findings’ subsection.
17. Discuss limitations of not correcting for multiple tests and consider reporting effect sizes and confidence intervals.
Author Response: While we of course agree with the reviewer’s point about the general inadvisability of not correcting for multiple tests, we respectfully disagree that this is a limitation given the current study design and approach. We currently state that: 
‘Our justification for not correcting for multiple tests was that one single-strategy model would fit all participants better than the other three single-strategy models so, ultimately, we would be testing the ARS model against only the best-fitting single-strategy model.’ 
Therefore, we argue here that our goal was specifically to test for the presence of individual differences in strategy adoption - if the model which captures multiple strategies performs better than the best model which only captures a single strategy, then there are by definition individual differences in strategies. 
18. The last paragraph in the "Task" subsection may benefit from additional explanations or a specific diagram to visualize the trial distribution and the relationship between investments and endowments.
Author Response: We agree, and believe that the newly added Figure 1 helps illustrate the relationship between Investments and Endowments.
19. Provide a more explicit rationale for selecting trust and investment as fixed effects. Explain the significance of using a sum-to-zero contrast scheme and clarify the inclusion/exclusion of random effects like the trust-investment interaction.
Author Response: We chose trust, investment, and trust-investment as fixed effects because they are the independent variables in our experiment. We chose a sum-to-zero contrast scheme (and centered continuous predictors) because sum-to-zero contrasts make the condition effects uncorrelated with each other – this explanation is now provided alongside our indication of our chosen contrast. Finally, we indicate that we specified all fixed effects as random effects, but this led to a singularity warning so we re-estimated the model without the random effect for trust-investment. Singularity warnings imply that multiple terms in the model explain the same variance – in this case, it seems that the fixed-and-random effects for trust-investment were explaining the same variance, when accounting for random effects of trust and investment separately. In other words, there were no individual differences in the trust-investment slope. This too, is now clarified.
20. Briefly explain why specific statistical methods were chosen for analysis to aid reader understanding.
Author Response: We have now added text to more clearly explain our motivation in using computational modeling to measure ambiguity resolution, and we explain our motivation for using computational modeling to study ambiguity-resolution strategies in both the introduction, results, and Conclusion. We have added the following sentence to the end of the Mixed Effects Modeling subsection: 
“In order to identify group-level trends in reciprocation behavior as a function of bestowed trust while controlling for individual differences, we adopted a mixed effects modeling approach” (page 15, paragraph 1).
Results
21. Use concise language to describe modeling procedures for easier comprehension.
Author Response: While we do recognize that the modeling procedures are described in complex terms which may be difficult for some readers without sufficient computational modelling experience to understand, we do deem it necessary to describe the modeling procedures as unambiguously as possible to enable other researchers to potentially replicate the entire analysis pathway. As indicated in our responses to previous points of the reviewer, we have endeavored to simplify the language throughout, in particular in the conceptual sections of the paper, and we believe this should suffice for general readers to broadly understand the methods applied, while readers with greater computational backgrounds are provided with the detailed formulations as currently described in the results section.
22. Provide context for variations in model fit, especially for participants with lower predicted reciprocation values.
Author Response: We have now added clarification for this variability under the ‘Limitations’ section of the Conclusion: 
‘This is a common finding when modeling reciprocity in the context of the Trust Game since division norms can be applied to all of the money in the game – as in our model – but, alternatively, to the multiplied investment alone or a combination of the two. Thus, this heterogeneity is not accounted for in the model, which explains why a minority of participants’ data was not explained at lower reciprocation values. Pragmatism notwithstanding, this calls into question the ability to make reliable reverse inferences for this minority of participants whose data was overpredicted at low trust values and underpredicted at high trust values.’ (page 19, paragraph 2). 
23. Clarify practical implications of observed model differences, even if not statistically significant.
Author Response: We discuss this in the Conclusion section, under the ‘Reflection on Null Findings’ subsection (page 23, paragraph 3).
24. Discuss limitations of not correcting for multiple tests and consider reporting effect sizes and confidence intervals.
Author Response: See point 17 above for our response regarding multiple-test corrections. We report the effect size of model differences between computational models, in order to provide future studies with the necessary information for power analyses (i.e. to find significant individual differences). We do not report the effect size from the mixed effects modeling analysis because a correlation would be the ideal way to characterize the effect of trust on reciprocity, rather than the raw effect of the condition-over-condition differences. We thank the reviewer for calling attention to this, as well as the confidence intervals which we will also omit since this would be redundant information given that we report the Regression Coefficients as well as the Standard Error.
25. Rearrange references to Appendices B and C and consider adding more detail to Appendix B.
Author Response: Thank you for pointing this out, the appendices are now in the correct order. We have removed what was formerly Appendix B: since the grouping of the correct parameter space was not used in our results, we see no reason to have included the a priori specified one.
Conclusion
26. Present results thematically rather than enumerating them for improved readability.
Author Response: These results are now presented `Conclusions > Reflection on Null Results > Limitations > Strengths of this Study > Future Directions`, and we agree that this provides greater readability. 
27. Strengthen integration of existing literature by explicitly referencing relevant studies and theories.
Author Response: This is a helpful suggestion, and the section on the Reflection on Null Results now explicitly connects the LAT, HAT, and HR strategies – which did not characterize the ambiguity-resolution strategies that people actually adopted – to relevant psychological theories which would have predicted these respective patterns of behavior.
28. Restate the study's hypotheses and summarize alignment with or deviations from them. Explore practical implications of individual differences.
Author Response: These are now included under the Conclusions and Reflection on Null Results sections. 
29. Organize a dedicated section on future research directions, outlining key questions and how future research might address them.
Author Response: We have now added this useful section, which focuses on the potential to study decision-making under ambiguity in more realistic scenarios – namely, repeated interactions and scenarios with additional information which might be relevant to trust assessments.
30. Discuss broader findings' implications for real-world social decision-making scenarios.
Author Response: We discuss these implications in the section outlined above (point 28), as well as in the Limitations section, in which we reflect on the fact that – in real-world situations where people usually have at least some information about the person they are interacting with – it is unlikely that default strategies to resolve ambiguity strongly influence reciprocity decisions in a self-interested direction. 
Reviewer #2: The authors of this paper present an experiment aimed at understanding how individuals reciprocate trust in ambiguous situations within the trust game. Through computational modeling, the study reveals that individuals frequently rely on social heuristics grounded in past interactions when the degree of trust is clear.
While the paper has the potential to significantly contribute to the existing literature, there are several areas where it could be improved:
Author Response: Thank you! Please see our responses to your helpful suggestions below. 
1. "This raises the possibility that people might use these ambiguous situations to make strategic decisions that maximize both self-interest and self-image"; I think it is more precise to say "...while preserving their self-image."
Author Response: We agree with this helpful point, and the manuscript has now been changed to reflect this.
2. "we can about how people resolve": I think there is a typo here.
Author Response: We thank the reviewer for their attention to detail, and have now corrected this typo. 
3. In discussing motivations for reciprocating trust, the authors might benefit from mentioning also the recent "moral preferences hypothesis." This theory suggests that many prosocial behaviors, including trustworthiness, emanate from an inherent moral desire to act rightly, sometimes beyond mere distributional preferences. As a review article, the authors could consult: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rsif.2020.0880. This may necessitate considerable revisions, especially given the paper's reliance on modeling reciprocation using inequity-aversion.
Author Response: Our belief about the implications of Capraro and Perc’s argument (2021) is that it does not necessarily contradict our reliance on modeling reciprocation using inequity-aversion. As you indicate, the moral preferences hypothesis pertains to a moral desire to act correctly – reflecting intentions underlying distributional preferences. Our hypothesis is that inequity-aversion (or guilt-aversion which, as we state, is behaviorally captured in this paradigm with the inequity-aversion model) is a norm which people reference in order to assess if they have indeed acted in a morally correct manner. In fact, the studies by van Baar and colleagues (2019, 2020; which indicate that different norms guide reciprocity for different people) overtly argue for the same conclusion; however, our design does not treat reciprocity as anything more than a behavioral distribution from which we can infer how people resolve ambiguity. Nonetheless, the reviewer’s suggestion represents a powerful frame through which to interpret our finding that most people use their previous experience to resolve ambiguity. Namely, using this framework our results indicate that – just like reciprocity – ambiguity-resolution is motivated by a desire to act in a morally correct manner (page 18, paragraph 2).
4. The fairness norm model employed by the authors bears resemblance to the model by Kessler and Leider: https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/abs/10.1287/mnsc.1110.1341. For a more comprehensive overview and to draw clearer distinctions from prior work, I recommend consulting this review article on utility functions focused on formalizing moral preferences: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jel.20221613
Author Response: The review article helpfully suggested by the reviewer directly mentions both of the inequality-aversion models papers that our model is based on (Bolton & Ockenfels, 2000 and Schmidt & Fehr, 1999). The first paper was already cited, and we now cite both in the Introduction when speaking about inequality-aversion; additionally, we make mention of this review paper in the following sentence: 
‘Informed by previous studies which have formally modeled moral preferences in utility equations (for a review of this research, see Capraro, Halpern, & Perc, 2022), the current study has formalized a behavioral model which captures inequality-aversion without a utility term. This approach enables us to determine how participants resolved ambiguity, since we can solve for the unknown endowment when we know their division norm.’ (page 7, paragraph 2).
We should note that we do not discuss these papers in great detail as, strictly speaking, we do not employ a utility model in Equation 1.
5. "Here, given that M (the multiplier) is usually fixed at 4 in these games": Typically, the multiplier is set at 3, and this seems to be the case in the provided formula as well. So, perhaps this is just a typo.
Author Response: To clarify, this is not a typo – the algebraic expression is rearranged. The generic equation to encapsulate all of the money in the game is M*I + (E – I). Here, we see that it is possible to rearrange this equation to M*I – I + E which enables us to factor I out of M*I and - I which means we can simplify this expression to (M – 1)*I + E. Thus, since the multiplier, M, is equal to 4 in our experiment, we express this term as 3I + E. 
6. It is not clear why the authors name the fourth strategy as "heuristic". I have the feeling that also the third strategy is a heuristics. It seems similar to what Rand and colleagues call "social heuristic" (e.g., https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms4677).
Author Response: We thank the reviewer for calling attention to this point of uncertainty. We have now amended the manuscript to include the following statement when discussing the fourth strategy: 
‘We termed the fourth strategy as a heuristic strategy, as those that use it report employing a straightforward rule that is basically ‘lower investments equal lower trust’; thus, a simple heuristic is applied to the amount that has invested to resolve ambiguity.’ (page 8, paragraph 1). 
For the third strategy, we felt that ‘heuristic’ was not the best descriptor as those that use it report actively trying to remember what their previous knowledge about this partner was. Thus, these people were attempting to resolve ambiguity via direct previous experience. While we understand that the term ‘heuristic’ itself is somewhat ill-defined, we believe the essence of this third strategy distinguishes it from the fourth outlined above.
7. Referring to the trust game as the "Investment Game" to prevent behavioral bias could be counterproductive, as the term "investment" might introduce its own set of biases.
Author Response: This is a fair point, and we have now amended the manuscript to acknowledge these potential implications: ‘Our rationale for this choice was that by framing the decisions as ‘investments’ we might avoid the possibility that reciprocity was a consequence of a social desirability effect.’ (page 11 paragraph 1).
8. The clarity and quality of the figures should be enhanced, as they currently appear blurry.
Author Response: When downloading the files uploaded in the original submission, we could not identify any figures which appeared blurry nor did we see any way in which the quality could be enhanced. As such, no changes have been made.
9. A "Limitations" subsection would be a valuable addition. It is important to acknowledge inherent limitations in experimental research. For instance, while the number of trials might offer high power, the relatively small sample size hinders in-depth exploration of participant heterogeneity.
Author Response: We agree, and have now added a section to the Conclusion outlining more clearly the study limitations (page 22, paragraphs 2-3).
AttachmentSubmitted filename: RAS_Reviews_Final.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0300886.r003Decision Letter 1
ZuckermanInonAcademic Editor© 2024 Inon Zuckerman2024Inon Zuckermanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
2 Feb 2024

PONE-D-23-24513R1Reciprocity in Ambiguous Situations: Default Psychological Strategies Underlying Ambiguity-Resolution in Moral Decision-MakingPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Galvan,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
There are still several comments by one of the reviewers that should be addressed and would improve the manuscript. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 18 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Inon Zuckerman
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Following the review of the first revision there are several comments that needs to be addressed.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Although the authors have made an effort to address most of my concerns, further refinement could enhance the manuscript's comprehensiveness and robustness. Specifically:
1. The manuscript would benefit from deeper discussions on behavioral trends and decision-making in ambiguous situations, with a stronger connection to psychological or moral theories. These sections, notably around pages 20 and 21, could be strengthened with additional literature citations.
For example, the papers "Attributional Ambiguity Reduces Charitable Giving by Relaxing Social Norms" and "Social Game Theory: Preferences, Perceptions, and Choices" are examples of relevant literature that can enrich these discussions. While the cited papers may provide a starting point, authors should consider a broader range of literature for a richer theoretical foundation.
2. Figures 1 and 2 should be improved for better legibility. This includes enhancing font size and image clarity. Additionally, the description of Figure 1 and the table in Appendix B requires more detailed explanation to ensure that readers can understand the experimental design and results without ambiguity. The manuscript currently has two appendices labeled "Appendix B" which could lead to confusion and should be rectified.
3. The limitations section should reflect the use of a student population and suggest the need for a more diverse sample in future studies.
4. For enhanced clarity it is advised that the figure currently labeled as "Appendix B," which depicts different strategies, should be more comprehensively explained within the text. Specifically, this explanation should clearly connect to the detailed description of the parameter space provided on page 15. Such integration will help readers understand the significance of the strategies in the context of the study's outcomes and the computational modeling approach the authors have employed.
5. Ensure the accuracy of the reference list, particularly for citations like Capraro et al., to maintain consistency and correctness.
Reviewer #2: The authors have addressed all my comments. I have only noticed that many references are missing from the new reference list. I suggest the authors to make sure that there is a matching between in-text references and bibliography.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0300886.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
26 Feb 2024

Rebuttal Letter
We would like to take the opportunity to thank both reviewers for their constructive suggestions to improve our manuscript. We deeply appreciate the opportunity to submit another revision of our paper for your consideration. Below, we respond to the comments made by the reviewers and list the subsequent changes made in the paper. The page and paragraph numbers refer to those in the manuscript with track changes.
Reviewer concerns
Reviewer 1
Although the authors have made an effort to address most of my concerns, further refinement could enhance the manuscript's comprehensiveness and robustness. Specifically:
1. The manuscript would benefit from deeper discussions on behavioral trends and decision-making in ambiguous situations, with a stronger connection to psychological or moral theories. These sections, notably around pages 20 and 21, could be strengthened with additional literature citations. For example, the papers "Attributional Ambiguity Reduces Charitable Giving by Relaxing Social Norms" and "Social Game Theory: Preferences, Perceptions, and Choices" are examples of relevant literature that can enrich these discussions. While the cited papers may provide a starting point, authors should consider a broader range of literature for a richer theoretical foundation.
Our response: 
We would like to thank the reviewer for bringing attention to this opportunity to improve our paper and, in particular, the helpful direction provided with the two recommended papers. We have now added the following paragraph to the Discussion.
“In the context of the larger body of work on social decision-making under ambiguity, our results are somewhat anomalous: many researchers find that decision-making under ambiguity is less prosocial. Therefore, we must consider what specifically about the HETG distinguishes it from the tasks used in these previous studies. For example, in both the Public Goods Game (PGG) and Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD), wherein participants must make the decision to cooperate or defect without knowing their partner’s decision or past behavior, it has been consistently reported that participants cooperate less often than they defect (Gächter et al., 2017; Flood & Drescher, 1950; Zelmer, 2003). In a version of the PGG wherein the group must cooperate to reach a threshold of contributions to the community pot or otherwise lose all their money, participants cooperate more; however when ambiguity is introduced about what this threshold is, participants cooperate much less (Dannenberg, Lange, & Sturm, 2014). In this regard, it is possible that the specific ambiguity which is present in the HETG has a diverging effect because behavioral distrust is incentive-incompatible. In other words, participants in the HETG know that, regardless of any beliefs that they might have about how trusting investors are in general, their partners will invest more if they trust the participant more. Indeed, previous research on the PD suggests that perceptions of morality are insensitive to outcomes (Krueger et al., 2020). In his light the results from the HETG may therefore be attributed to a general aversion to behaving in what may be regarded as an immoral way simply because the context of the HETG does not offer sufficient cover to morally justify behaving selfishly. Concordantly, Tho Pesch and Dana (2024) find that charitable giving decreases when participants must make a choice about which charity to donate to before making the giving decision, rather than just making only the giving decision. The obfuscation of the charitable choice by simply providing attributes for comparison has been referred to as attributional responsibility (Snyder et al., 1979). In regard to the HETG, the lack of attributional ambiguity – or the inability to, perhaps, attribute ostensibly selfish behavior to anything other than a response to distrust, which was unmerited based on their previous experience, may be responsible for this atypical pattern of behavior.” (page 21, paragraph 1)
2. Figures 1 and 2 should be improved for better legibility. This includes enhancing font size and image clarity. Additionally, the description of Figure 1 and the table in Appendix B requires more detailed explanation to ensure that readers can understand the experimental design and results without ambiguity. The manuscript currently has two appendices labeled "Appendix B" which could lead to confusion and should be rectified.
Our response:
We thank the reviewer for bringing attention these discrepancies. With regard to the image quality of Figures 1 and 2, we would like to reiterate that the pdf printout of the files does indeed make these images appear pixelated, since it significantly magnifies these images in order to present them at the size of the a page. However, when downloading the images one can see that the images are of substantially better quality when viewed at their original size. With regard to the text size of Figure 1, we believe that it is large enough for most to read while being small enough to keep this already large image from taking up more space on a page. Concerning the text size of Figure 2, we agree with the reviewer and have therefore made a new version of this image which is larger so as to improve legibility while preserving the proportions of each screen. 
Concerning the ordering of the Appendices, we would like to express our appreciation for the reviewer’s attention to detail. During the submission of our revision, we included the previously uploaded Figures so that the reviewers could more easily reference which Appendices were being removed – however, this has clearly led to some confusion which is our fault. The only Appendix which remains and contains an image is Appendix C – showing the Q-Q plot of the behavioral reciprocity model. The former Appendix B was removed in the previous revision, which we acknowledged in point 25 of our response to your previous review: ‘We have removed what was formerly Appendix B: since the grouping of the correct parameter space was not used in our results, we see no reason to have included the a priori specified one.’ We further address this point below in our response to point 4.
3. The limitations section should reflect the use of a student population and suggest the need for a more diverse sample in future studies.
Our response: 
We agree, and have now added a new paragraph outlining the limitations of using a student population, as well as the limitations associated with our use of a WEIRD population more generally. 
“A further limitation of the current study is the population which the sample was drawn from. Since our sample was comprised nearly exclusively of University students, the conclusions we can draw from our data are inherently constrained by the fact that we have sampled a portion of the adult population which is rather young, often of a relatively high SES, and share a similar educational background. For instance, respondents’ propensity to use an accuracy-oriented approach to resolve ambiguity may not be characteristic of a broader population who may be less idealistic and who, being generally less privileged, may be more self-interested. In a similar regard, the current study was conducted on a WEIRD population: WEIRD populations – which are Westernized, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic – comprise a disproportionate majority of research on human psychology (Arnett, 2008; Rad, Martingano, & Ginges, 2018). The current study falls into this pattern: convenience samples are often used in the first stages of research, but further research into human decision-making under ambiguity must be done with a more diverse sample than we utilize here.“ (page 25, paragraph 2)
4. For enhanced clarity it is advised that the figure currently labeled as "Appendix B," which depicts different strategies, should be more comprehensively explained within the text. Specifically, this explanation should clearly connect to the detailed description of the parameter space provided on page 15. Such integration will help readers understand the significance of the strategies in the context of the study's outcomes and the computational modeling approach the authors have employed.
Our response: 
We agree with the reviewer that it would help to explain what the meaning of the free parameters in our computational model. However, as we have noted previously, including the plotting of the parameter space is not merited given that we do not use the computational model to group participants because the computational model is not significant. Therefore, we believe that the most appropriate place for this discussion is in the Methods section, where we introduce the ARS model (Equation 4). Therefore, we have now added the following short paragraph after Equation 4:
“The ARS model captures individual differences via its free parameters. It captures participants who make decisions using the heuristic strategy with its ψ parameter such that high ψ values make it important that the trust implied by a given endowment agrees with the trust implied by the investment alone (i.e. 1 – abs(I/E) – (I/10)). Inversely, low ψ values make it important that the trust implied by a given endowment agrees with the participant’s default assumed trustingness – or τ. Therefore, when ψ is high, the model predicts that participants will follow the HR strategy. When ψ is low on the other hand, τ represents the strategy: values of τ close to 0 predict the LAT strategy, values of τ close to 1 predict the HAT strategy, and values of τ close to 0.5 predict the MT strategy.“ (page 16, paragraph 2)
5. Ensure the accuracy of the reference list, particularly for citations like Capraro et al., to maintain consistency and correctness.
Our response:
Thank you for pointing out these missing references. It seems that when performing the final step of proof-reading, we neglected to ensure that the new references had been included in the Reference List. We apologize profusely for allowing this oversight to happen. The missing references and new references are now included in the new submission.
Reviewer 2
The authors have addressed all my comments. I have only noticed that many references are missing from the new reference list. I suggest the authors to make sure that there is a matching between in-text references and bibliography.
Our response:
We would like to thank the reviewer for pointing out these missing references. As mentioned above, we simply neglected to ensure that the new references had been included in the reference list. We would like to express our apologies for allowing this oversight to occur. The missing and new references are now included in the new submission.
Editor concerns
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Our response:
We thank the editor for bringing attention to accuracy of our reference list. Using our reference manager, Zotero, we have ensured that no references are made to retracted articles. Our reference article is now updated to include all citations of works in the manuscript and any further changes to our reference list are explicitly mentioned above. We apologize for this oversight and would like to express our gratitude for the opportunity to submit a further revision of our manuscript.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: RAS_Rebuttal_Final.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0300886.r005Decision Letter 2
ZuckermanInonAcademic Editor© 2024 Inon Zuckerman2024Inon Zuckermanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
7 Mar 2024

Reciprocity in Ambiguous Situations: Default Psychological Strategies Underlying Ambiguity-Resolution in Moral Decision-Making
PONE-D-23-24513R2
Dear Dr. Galvan,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Inon Zuckerman
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0300886.r006Acceptance letter
ZuckermanInonAcademic Editor© 2024 Inon Zuckerman2024Inon Zuckermanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
27 Mar 2024

PONE-D-23-24513R2 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Galvan, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Inon Zuckerman 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE