pmcBiol Rev Camb Philos SocBiol Rev Camb Philos Soc379blackwellopenBRVBiological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society1464-79311469-185Xpmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleWiley Open Access CollectionPMC12783429PMC12783429.112783429127834294104482610.1111/brv.70088BRV700881Original ArticleOriginal ArticleAn integrated social–ecological–evolutionary–phenotypic (SEEP) approach to understanding animal responses to urbanization
An urban social–ecological–evolutionary–phenotypic frameworkKevin E. McCluney and othersMcCluneyKevin E.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3574-0354 kmcclun@bgsu.eduDevichePierre SweazeaKaren L. CarlenElizabeth J. ClarkJeffrey A. G. GradeAaron M. HaightJeffrey D. NiesnerChase TregoShaylynn WeissKatherine C.B. 

1

Department of Biological Sciences, 217 Life Sciences Building, Bowling Green State University
Bowling Green
OH
43403‐0208
USA

2

School of Life Sciences, 427 E Tyler Mall, Arizona State University
Tempe
AZ
85287‐4501
USA

3

Center for Evolution and Medicine, School of Life Sciences
427 E Tyler Mall, Arizona State University
Tempe
AZ
85281
USA

4

College of Health Solutions
550 N 3rd St Suite 501, Arizona State University
Phoenix
AZ
85004
USA

5

Living Earth Collaborative, 1 Brookings Drive, Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis
MO
63130
USA

6

Natural Areas Conservancy
1234 5th Ave
New York City
NY
USA

7

ICF
1902 Reston Metro Plaza
Reston
VA
20190
USA

8

Global Institute of Sustainability and Innovation
777 E University Drive, Arizona State University
Tempe
AZ
85282
USA

9

Department of Environmental Science, Policy, & Management
130 Mulford Hall, UC Berkeley
Berkeley
CA
94720
USA

10

School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning
975 S Myrtle Ave, Arizona State University
Tempe
AZ
85287‐4501
USA

11

Department of Environmental Science & Policy
School of Science, 3399 North Road, Marist University
Poughkeepsie
NY
12601
USA

*
Author for correspondence (Tel.: +1 419 372 2634; E‐mail: kmcclun@bgsu.edu).
0310202522026101150467410.1002/brv.v101.1419436
2392025
21102024
2592025
090120261001202610012026© 2025 The Author(s). Biological Reviews published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Cambridge Philosophical Society.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## ABSTRACT
Humans play key roles in shaping the structure and processes of ecosystems globally, especially in cities. This recognition has prompted a recent focus on understanding urban systems via interactions between human social systems and ecological and evolutionary processes. Most research has focused on interactions between two of these three domains. Here we present a framework for linking all three – social, ecological, and evolutionary – by focusing on phenotypic response and effect traits, illustrating the framework's utility in understanding wildlife dynamics in urban systems. We first present a generalized model for the social–ecological–evolutionary–phenotypic (SEEP) framework, then use urban climate as a specific example, provide guidance on how to implement this approach, and finally discuss emerging questions motivated by the framework and challenges in utilizing the approach.

urban ecologyurban ecosystemsurban evolutionsocial‐ecological systemsanimal ecologyurban warmingurban heat islandurban wildlife
National Science Foundation10.13039/100000001
DBI‐2109587DEB‐1637590DEB‐2224662 We suggest that the SEEP framework provides a practical approach for studying urban SEEP dynamics. It suggests that researchers can predict species distributions by measuring differences in environmentally relevant response traits, along with non‐plastic, plastic, and evolutionary variation in those traits, between populations and species. Researchers can then predict the effects of these species distributions on human services and disservices through effect traits. This builds on previous frameworks that focus on using phenotypic traits to predict species distributions, but do not tend to incorporate adaptive evolution, leave out feedbacks with social systems, focus on plants, or have more of a management focus (Aronson et al.,  ; Lerman et al.,  ; Grilo et al.,  ). Some of these frameworks also focus primarily on urban evolution (Donihue & Lambert,  ; Lambert et al.,  ) or are review articles that discuss urban social–ecological–evolutionary systems but do not present a concrete framework that can clearly be applied (Ouyang et al.,  ; Des Roches et al.,  ). Thus, our framework represents an innovative synthetic combination of previous ideas into a practical approach that can be applied to understand coupled human–natural systems in cities.
In urban ecosystems, the interactions and fates of human social–infrastructural and ecological–evolutionary systems are tightly intertwined. For example, poor refuse disposal practices may increase the prevalence of rats and other rodents, which could lead to changes in human behaviour, like increased application of rodenticides, leading to the evolution of greater resistance to these pesticides (Desvars‐Larrive et al.,  ; Des Roches et al.,  ). These dynamics in urban environments can also be further exacerbated by broader ecological conditions, such as global climate change (Richardson et al.,  ). In general, urbanization is a human‐driven, environmentally mediated process that results in physical and environmental changes that can have both short‐ and long‐term effects. These changes expose organisms to novel landscapes, altered local and microclimates, and a variety of stressors, leading to physiological, behavioural, evolutionary, and ecological changes that can affect human social processes and the built environment over short and long timescales (McDonnell & Pickett,  ; McKinney,  ; Grimm et al.,  ; Ramalho & Hobbs,  ; Johnson & Munshi‐South,  ; Schell et al.,  ). Accordingly, identifying feedbacks between human social systems, ecology, evolution, and phenotypes is critical to understanding the dynamics of urban systems, including wildlife.
Contemporary and historical social processes result in differences in infrastructure and human ecosystem management across metropolitan areas. For example, urban development history, formal and informal governance and power structures, social stratification, as well as current and legacy racist and classist policies and actions (Schell et al.,  ; Hoffman, Shandas & Pendleton,  ) create complex heterogeneous landscapes that influence wildlife traits and distributions (Carlen, Li & Winchell,  ; Schmidt & Garroway,  ) as well as human well‐being, values, norms, and behaviours (Nardone, Chiang & Corburn,  ). Thus, urban landscapes provide insight into the iterative feedbacks between people and wildlife, and how these may change over time.
A recent flurry of interdisciplinary research has strived to build more accurate models of urban ecosystems in a social–ecological context, as well as to understand evolutionary dynamics in urban settings (Donihue & Lambert,  ; Aronson et al.,  ; Ouyang et al.,  ; Schell et al.,  ; Lerman et al.,  ; Des Roches et al.,  ; Lambert et al.,  ; McPhearson et al.,  ; Grilo et al.,  ). Despite existing innovative research, we suggest that the importance of animal physiology, behaviour, and morphology (i.e. phenotype) in understanding social–ecological–evolutionary processes has been insufficiently recognized. Animal responses to urban ecosystems often reflect differences in phenotypic traits among individuals and taxa. For instance, differences in body size across taxa might influence their movement ability (e.g. Winchell et al.,  ; Jung & Threlfall,  ; Kendall et al.,  ), as well as their metabolic rates (Brown et al.,  ; Agutter & Wheatley,  ; Nagy,  ; Glazier,  ; Mortola,  ) and evaporative water loss (Woods & Smith,  ; Van Sant et al.,  ; Gavrilov & Gavrilov,  ), leading to differential abilities to access and persist in parts of cities with different barriers to movement, heat exposure, and/or food and water availability (e.g. Merckx et al.,  ; Chick, Waters & Diamond,  ).
Traits are sometimes viewed as static, but behavioural and physiological traits can change rapidly (Fig.  ) in response to environmental differences, both within individuals over time and between individuals that share genes for specific traits, but have differential gene expression [i.e. phenotypic plasticity or epigenetics (Alberti, Marzluff & Hunt,  ; Liker,  ; Caspi et al.,  )]. For example, some organisms may be able to persist in hotter parts of a city in warm climates because of greater ability to access moist and/or cool refuges, shifts in peak periods of activity and energy intake, evaporative thermoregulation, convective thermoregulation through cutaneous vasodilation, and/or adjustment of their body temperature (Terrien, Perret & Aujard,  ; McKechnie & Wolf,  ; Johnson & Stahlschmidt,  ; Mota‐Rojas et al.,  ). Thus, it is important to consider traits as dynamic, with underlying genes influencing a range of possible phenotypes (Fig.  ). Shifts in gene frequencies in populations may occur with neutral and adaptive evolutionary change, altering ranges of morphological, physiological, and behavioural traits. For instance, urban warming may be expected to lead to the evolution of higher thermal limits (Brans et al.,  ) and/or smaller body sizes (Merckx et al.,  ). However other factors, like dispersal ability and food availability, may interact with warming to influence the evolution of these traits. For example, in mammals, body size tends to increase intraspecifically in urban areas, counter to warming‐based predictions, likely due to increased food availability (Hantak et al.,  ). Thus, understanding changes in trait distributions in cities is complex, but evolutionary biologists, physiologists, ecologists, and social scientists are all accustomed to determining causality in systems with multiple drivers. Combining approaches and expertise across disciplines could rapidly advance our understanding of these complex systems.
 Here we propose that the ecological filtering of individuals and taxa with different phenotypic traits, from regional pools into urban landscapes, along with dynamic changes in physiology, behaviour, and morphology in response to urbanization, alters species interactions, community composition, and biodiversity (Figs  and ). These alterations in turn influence human–wildlife interactions and human social systems, changing urban landscapes. Thus, organismal physiology, behaviour, and morphology are likely key to mediating the dynamics of urban social–ecological–evolutionary systems. Studies that integrate feedbacks and connections between these domains will allow for an understanding of urban systems that transcends current paradigms of social and biological sciences and leads to a better understanding of urban ecological patterns and processes. Response and effect traits can help translate broad conceptual frameworks that have been described by others (Ouyang et al.,  ; Des Roches et al.,  ) into practical applications. Here, we illustrate this integrative SEEP approach with a climate‐focused example that combines findings from multiple studies from different localities (Fig.  ). We then provide guidance on implementation of this approach and discuss emerging questions and challenges for cross‐scale, cross‐temporal, cross‐discipline, and cross‐boundary urban SEEP research. Although the SEEP framework could be applied to a wide array of traits (e.g. urban squirrel coloration; Cosentino, Vanek & Gibbs,  ), not all traits have explicit impacts on the function of organisms or ecosystems (i.e. functional traits). As such, we focus on response and effect traits herein to illustrate best the applicability of our approach.
 
II.

## SEEP EXAMPLE: ALTERED URBAN CLIMATE
(1)

## Overview
Climatic alterations associated with urbanization can be used to illustrate the power of the SEEP framework to understand the impacts of human‐induced environmental changes (Fig.  ). Moreover, urban warming may simulate future climate change outside cities (Youngsteadt et al.,  ; Lahr, Dunn & Frank,  ). Urbanization alters many biologically relevant conditions including climate at multiple scales (see Table  for definitions). Locations in cities with a high density of impervious surfaces can have daytime air and ground surface temperatures that are as much as 7 or 8 °C hotter, respectively, than locations with low density of impervious surfaces (Imhoff et al.,  ; Yan et al.,  ; Hibbard et al.,  ). However, the influence of impervious surfaces on ambient temperature can differ regionally. For instance, residential areas of xeric cities may have lower maximum temperatures, likely due to the cooling effects of increased evapotranspiration associated with irrigation (Brazel et al.,  ). Nighttime temperatures can also be higher in cities compared to surrounding rural environments (Hibbard et al.,  ). These effects are referred to as the Urban Heat Island (UHI) (Oke,  ).
Soil moisture and surface water may also be influenced by human activities in cities. Warming can reduce soil moisture by increasing evapotranspiration, whereas irrigation increases soil moisture. The combination of these processes can lead to lower soil moisture in highly urbanized (high impervious surface) parts of cities in mesic regions, but higher soil moisture in residential (intermediate impervious surface) parts of cities in xeric regions, leading to convergence in soil moisture in certain locations across both cities (Groffman et al.,  ; Mazrooei et al.,  ). Additionally, cities in mesic regions often have decreased amounts of surface water due to drainage and water control, whereas the opposite is observed in cities in xeric regions as water may be captured and stored in reservoirs and canals (Steele et al.,  ). Thus, certain environmental conditions within cities in different climatic regions may converge, demonstrating the overriding influence of urbanization on these conditions (Groffman et al.,  ). Physiological parameters that influence organismal health may also converge in response to different environmental conditions. For example, terrestrial arthropod body water content can increase with urbanization in cities in xeric regions and decrease in cities in mesic regions, converging to similar water content in certain locations across cities (McCluney, Burdine & Frank,  ), with potential implications for their health (Benoit et al.,  ). These examples illustrate the extent to which human social systems can influence the biophysical characteristics of cities.
Here we suggest that the heterogeneous changes in temperature and water associated with urbanization filter a regional and global urban species pool into local communities that have a subset of response traits (e.g. thermal limits, desiccation resistance; Table  ) that allow them to persist in these locations (Fig.  ). Some species will possess sufficient phenotypic plasticity to occupy a wide range of environmental conditions rapidly, others may adapt to these conditions on longer timescales, and some may be completely excluded (Fig.  ). The local community will then have effect traits (e.g. boldness, venom, pollination; Table  ) that influence negative or positive human–wildlife interactions (Fig.  ). These interactions may in turn alter zoning, parks, financial incentives, or individual behaviour in ways that feed back to influence local climate (Fig.  ). Although here we present a logical path through the complexity of studying social, ecological, and evolutionary processes in cities, we note that other approaches are possible and thus our discussion sometimes departs from the main path in order to illustrate important considerations.
 
(2)

## Social systems and urban climate
Humans alter the local climate of cities primarily through (i) addition of concrete and other impervious surfaces, (ii) manipulation of plant communities, (iii) changes in the spatial and temporal distribution of water and irrigation (Ojima, Galvin & Turner,  ; McDonald et al.,  ), and (iv) addition of technological systems that modify local temperatures (e.g. air conditioners, fans, and subway vents) (Jin et al.,  ; Ortiz et al.,  ). Humans influence these activities through land‐use changes, urban development, and property management, which are the result of formal and informal governance systems as well as values, beliefs, and social norms of residents and decision makers (Younger et al.,  ; Harlan & Ruddell,  ). For instance, in most cities, industrial and commercial areas tend to have more impervious surfaces and less vegetation coverage than residential areas (Van de Voorde, Jacquet & Canters,  ). Additionally, the distribution of vegetation, water bodies, and cover type differ spatially throughout urban areas based on urban planning and development histories. The shifts in environmental conditions associated with urbanization can in turn alter the characteristics of local biological communities by selecting for particular phenotypic response traits, such as thermal and water content limits, desiccation resistance, and body size (e.g. Hamblin et al.,  ).
Across the globe, historical and contemporary practices of racism and classism influence the distribution of green spaces and the presence of shade trees and other environmental amenities, resulting in environmental justice issues such as differences between neighbourhoods in degree of impervious surface cover, exposure to pollutants, and other environmental hazards (Morello‐Frosch, Pastor & Sadd,  ; Bolin, Grineski & Collins,  ). North American cities are increasingly attempting to improve environmental equity by providing green spaces to low‐income and predominantly Black, Indigenous, and People of Colour (BIPOC) neighbourhoods, which tend to have less access to green spaces than their higher‐income or predominantly White counterparts (Byrne & Wolch,  ; Declet‐Barreto et al.,  ). However, some attempts at increasing green spaces in lower income communities have led to eco‐gentrification, i.e. the implementation of environmental or sustainability initiatives that lead to the exclusion, marginalization, and displacement of economically marginalized residents (Pearsall & Anguelovski,  ; Maantay & Maroko,  ) or even disamenities (e.g. if there is improper care of new green space infrastructure).
In general, underlying social processes impact the structure and function of green spaces within a city, altering local climates, and these dynamics occur at varying spatial scales (Chang et al.,  ). At the residential parcel level, socioeconomic differences between landowners may influence the type of landscaping employed (van Heezik et al.,  ; Locke et al.,  ), corresponding irrigation practices (Savelli et al.,  ), and the presence of water bodies (Thornhill et al.,  ). Neighbourhood demographics, Homeowners Associations (HOAs), and various regulations can also alter the management of individual parcels and differences between neighbourhoods (Groffman et al.,  ). Residential neighbourhoods are only one component of a broader system of land cover, built environment, hydrology, and vegetation structure within the urban landscape. They are all influenced by human management and mediated by land use zoning, local, state, and federal ordinances, individuals' socioeconomic and demographic traits, norms, beliefs and values, and historical legacies (Roy Chowdhury et al.,  ). Thus, regional, neighbourhood, and individual‐level social systems all interact to influence local climatic conditions (Schell et al.,  ; McPhearson et al.,  ). These climatic conditions, and their effects on ecosystems, may lead to feedbacks (e.g. change in land‐use planning, ground‐level management of habitat, or local ordinances) that in turn alter climate‐related social systems (Fig.  ). More research is needed to determine to what extent these alterations to ecological communities can lead to changes in policies and management (e.g. whether a shift in bird communities can lead to increased tree planting; Larson et al.,  ). We postulate that feedbacks between ecological and social systems may partly depend on public awareness of linkages between urban climate change and ecological shifts (e.g. understanding the climatic sensitivity of pollinators could promote addition of certain flowers or shade), but integrating theories of social change and adaptive governance should advance our understanding of these feedbacks (Anderies, Janssen & Ostrom,  ; Olsson, Folke & Berkes,  ; Cote & Nightingale,  ).

(3)

## Climate‐related drivers of local species and trait assemblages
Local climate is likely an important ecological filter of regional species pools, thereby influencing local urban species assemblages (Fig.  ). Investigating local urban climate, interactions of climatic with non‐climatic filters, and how these influence urban animal communities and their evolution, is critical to our understanding of the functioning of urban ecosystems. A focus on phenotypic response traits can help guide this research. For instance, studying thermal tolerance traits may help us understand the losses or additions of certain taxa from or to warmer, more urbanized parts of cities (Fig.  ). For example, bee taxa with relatively low maximum thermal tolerance (a physiological phenotypic trait) were found to be less abundant or missing from the hotter parts of Raleigh, NC, USA (Hamblin et al.,  ). Inversely, taxa with relatively high minimum thermal tolerance might benefit from urban warming (Youngsteadt et al.,  ). Several potential physiological mechanisms underlie differences in thermal tolerance, including cell membrane fluidity (Bowler,  ) and protein folding (González‐Tokman et al.,  ), which may influence neural (Vornanen,  ), liver (Connors, Malenke & Dearing,  ), and cardiovascular function (Vornanen,  ). Differences in how ectotherms and endotherms handle heat stress are still debated (Boyles et al.,  ). Although endotherms maintain a more narrow range of body temperatures than ectotherms, endotherm body temperatures can vary (e.g. Tieleman & Williams,  ), and responses of ectotherms and endotherms to changes in ambient temperature may follow similar patterns (i.e. thermal performance curves may have similar shapes) (Boyles et al.,  ). Moreover, evaporative cooling is known to be important for both endotherm and ectotherm thermoregulation (DeNardo,  ; Boyles et al.,  ; Loughran & Wolf,  ; Lahondère,  ), but comparative studies between the two groups are lacking. Both ectotherms and endotherms may show substantial variation in thermoregulatory rigidity and mechanisms among taxa.
Our ability to use thermal tolerance traits to predict species assemblages in different parts of cities is complicated by the plasticity of these traits and even their potential for rapid adaptation (Figs  and ), which must be understood for adequate prediction (Stillman,  ; Magozzi & Calosi,  ). For instance, some heat‐exposed endotherms are able to shift their thermoneutral zone to higher temperatures, resulting in greater tolerance of heatwaves than might be predicted (Cooper et al.,  ). Other animals may rapidly evolve higher thermal tolerance: acorn ants (Temnothorax curvispinosus), which form colonies in single acorns, have evolved more plastic and higher thermal tolerance within the hotter parts of Cleveland, Ohio, USA, an adaptation that may allow them to persist in these areas (Diamond et al.,  , ; Martin et al.,  ). This ability may, however, not be widespread–phenotypic thermal tolerance plasticity and potential for rapid evolution in ectotherms is likely limited (Gunderson & Stillman,  ). Additionally, the evolution of thermal tolerance, when it occurs, is often slower than the rate of urban warming (Diamond, Kolaske & Martin,  ).
The use of thermal tolerance traits to predict responses to urban warming is further complicated by behavioural plasticity, which can alter heat exposure (Fey et al.,  ; Youngsteadt et al.,  ). For instance, during periods of intense heat in Phoenix, Arizona, USA, rosy‐faced lovebirds, Agapornis roseicollis, appear to decrease their exposure to heat when they perch next to air‐conditioned building exhaust vents (Mills & McGraw,  ). Similarly, eastern water dragons (Intellagama lesueurii) in Brisbane, Australia, which have temperature‐dependent sex determination, are able to avoid the potential problems of unbalanced sex ratios among offspring in hot parts of cities by digging deeper nests or travelling outside their home range to nest in cooler conditions (Jackson et al.,  ). But the behavioural approaches that animals employ to deal with urban warming may not be fully effective at preventing heat stress (Youngsteadt et al.,  ) and may be costly. For instance, taxa that are able to persist in hot conditions through changes in behaviour, rather than thermal limits, may spend less time foraging or doing so in less‐optimal locations (Mason et al.,  ; van de Ven, McKechnie & Cunningham,  ; Valle et al.,  ) and thus eventually experience reduced health (van de Ven et al.,  ), fecundity (Valle et al.,  ), and population declines, despite successfully avoiding being exposed to lethal temperatures. Thus, thermal tolerance traits may be effective predictors of responses to urban heat, even when behavioural plasticity allows avoidance of lethal temperatures. Additionally, the behaviours that allow animals to avoid heat stress, such as those described above, may themselves be quantifiable response traits that could be used within the SEEP framework.
Mobility (e.g. flight) and body size traits may underlie some of the variation in exposure to potentially physiologically stressful conditions or plasticity in traits. On the one hand, more mobile organisms (which are often larger within a particular locomotory category) might be better able to take advantage of cooler microenvironments (e.g. shade of a tree or a cooler neighbourhood) and, therefore, avoid the harshest microclimatic conditions. On the other hand, smaller organisms (which are often less mobile within a particular locomotory category) might be better able to utilize benign microenvironments (e.g. soil pores, undersides of leaves, and tree cavities), thereby reducing their exposure to conditions that might be physiologically stressful. Mobility may also influence gene flow and thus the potential for local adaptation. Highly mobile taxa with high gene flow and reduced exposure to stressful conditions may be the least likely to exhibit local adaptation, but also the least at risk from urban warming. By contrast, poorly mobile animals might be the most exposed to harsh climatic conditions, and thus most at risk of being lost from these environments, but also the most likely to experience local adaptation that facilitates persistence under these conditions. Although more work is needed, body size and mobility traits are likely crucial to understanding evolutionary, physiological, and ecological dynamics of animals in cities.
Our framework generally focuses on using response traits to predict how species distributions will respond to environmental change. Integral to our approach is recognizing that these traits may shift either plastically, or evolutionarily, in response to environmental factors. Predicting these shifts is not always simple. For instance, because smaller organisms tend to have higher surface area to volume ratios, increasing heat dissipation (Bergmann,  ), some have predicted that animals will become smaller with urban warming (Merckx et al.,  ). However, although some examples exist, body mass has not been found to decline consistently with increasing urban heat across taxa (Beasley et al.,  ; Merckx et al.,  ; Santini et al.,  ; Magura, Ferrante & Lövei,  ; Hantak et al.,  ; Martin & Sheridan,  ; Rega‐Brodsky et al.,  ). Many factors may account for this apparent discrepancy. First, body size is not the only trait that affects thermoregulation–morphological (e.g. body shape, insulation), physiological (e.g. metabolic rate), and behavioural (e.g. mobility, boldness) traits may also contribute to adjustments to heat. For instance, animals may use shape‐shifting, i.e. a change in the size of appendages such as ears and bills, instead of overall body size, to alter their body surface‐to‐volume ratio (Miller, Latimer & Zuckerberg,  ; Allen's rule; Ryding et al.,  ). Additionally, effects of urban heat on body size may in some cases be counteracted by other factors. For example, in urban mammals that are commensal with humans, increased access to anthropogenic foods may cause increases in body size (Yom‐Tov,  ). However, this increase would not be expected in taxa that do not exploit anthropogenic food resources. Another factor that could prevent body size reductions with urban warming is desiccation. Increased surface‐to‐volume ratios resulting, in particular, from smaller body sizes, enhance the risk of desiccation (Hadley,  ; McCluney,  ; Benoit et al.,  ), and so would be less expected in drier urban environments. Although the drivers of differences in body size are complex, body size is likely an important trait for understanding social–ecological–evolutionary dynamics in cities. Given the paucity of studies that isolate the effects of warming on body size from those of other urban factors, further research on this subject is warranted (Merckx et al.,  ; Prokosch et al.,  ; Hantak et al.,  ; Baldwin, Garcia‐Porta & Botero,  ).
Most research on the effects of urban climate has focused on warming, because of clear relationships with urbanization (i.e. urban heat island) and effects on organisms. But urbanization also affects animal water availability and desiccation risk, which may present a greater danger than overheating for some species in some cities (Burdine & McCluney,  ). For example, honey bees (Apis mellifera) can become closer to their desiccation limits with increasing urbanization, suggesting a potential risk of loss of this species in highly urbanized parts of some cities (Burdine & McCluney,  ). Other animals may be able to tolerate this increased desiccation risk behaviourally or physiologically. For example, Becker & McCluney ( ) found that some urban arthropods in hotter parts of Toledo, OH, USA, increased their consumption of lipids compared to proteins, and this dietary shift was reduced with water supplementation. The authors predicted this outcome because lipids are generally better than proteins for water balance due to their increased water production during metabolism combined with the lack of water loss from the excretion of nitrogenous waste associated with protein metabolism. Similarly, urban zebra finches consumed food and drank early in the day and limited their activity when temperatures were high, which helped protect these birds from desiccation during heat waves (Cooper et al.,  ). To our knowledge, evolutionary responses of traits to changes in desiccation and dehydration risk have not yet been documented (but see an investigation that found a lack of evolution in isopods; Yilmaz, Diamond & Martin,  ). Similar to thermal tolerance, plasticity in desiccation‐related traits, and factors influencing exposure to desiccating conditions, likely govern the predictive ability of desiccation traits for understanding shifts in species assemblages in response to urbanization.
Although many taxa may be negatively affected by urban warming, some may benefit. For example, scale insects (superfamily Coccoidea) have increased fecundity and abundance with urban warming (Meineke et al.,  ; Dale & Frank,  ). Pigeons (Columba livia) and brown rats (Rattus norvegicus) may also benefit – outside of urban centres in temperate climates, these organisms generally cease to breed in the winter due to colder temperatures and reduced resources; warmer urban temperatures year‐round and ample access to resources can allow urban counterparts to increase their fecundity (Johnston & Janiga,  ; Richardson et al.,  ). In addition, urban warming may allow certain taxa with low cold tolerance to spread into regions with harsh winter climates (Latimer & Zuckerberg,  ; Polidori et al.,  ). For instance, Anna's hummingbirds (Calypte anna) have shown a rapid and extensive (700 km) northward extension of their range over a 40‐year period in the northwest USA, likely due to the use of urban areas (Greig, Wood & Bonter,  ). Similar examples exist for species with potential for negative interactions with humans, like wasps (Polidori et al.,  ). Urban ecosystems may also allow individuals of some taxa to tolerate warming better than non‐urban individuals: nestling great tits (Parus major) living in urban environments experienced lower rates of mortality during hot weather than those living in forested areas (Pipoly et al.,  ). Some migratory birds may arrive, and thus breed, earlier in the spring in urban areas compared to rural areas (Tryjanowski et al.,  ). Thus, local urban species assemblages likely include a combination of taxa that show trait plasticity in response to warming, evolve in response to local warming, or already have traits that allow them to benefit from warming, with loss of taxa that are unable to tolerate these conditions.
How variation in traits influences species co‐occurrence across climatically heterogeneous urban landscapes could alter the types of interspecific interactions that are possible (e.g. Dale & Frank,  ; Pintanel et al.,  ), and these interactions may themselves be influenced by climatic conditions (e.g. Barton & Schmitz,  ; McCluney & Sabo,  ). Ultimately, climatic filtering of ecological communities results in particular taxon assemblages (Fig.  ), with some taxa having large effects on ecosystem services and disservices as well as people's perceptions thereof (Dale & Frank,  ). Moreover, differences in climatic filtering of species assemblages between cities may underlie the increased strength of diversity–income (‘luxury effect’) relationships in arid cities (Chamberlain et al.,  ).

(4)

## Human–wildlife interactions, social systems, and climate feedbacks
The successful establishment, proliferation, or exclusion of many urban species is a direct result of human–wildlife interactions (Sinclair, Brown & Lockwood,  ; Carter & Linnell,  ). These interactions, in turn, generate social system feedbacks that further alter local environmental conditions, such as vegetative structure and local climate (Avolio et al.,  ; Frank, Glikman & Marchini,  ; Sharmin et al.,  ) (Fig.  ). Thus, human–wildlife interactions can have positive, negative, and neutral outcomes for humans and wildlife species (Harris et al.,  ; Carter & Linnell,  ). These outcomes may be predictable from effect traits that directly affect humans (e.g. venom production, pollination generalism; Table  ).
Climate influences human–wildlife interactions in multiple ways, with global climate change often intensifying conflicts (Abrahms et al.,  ). For example, climate‐related range shifts altered human–wildlife interactions in 69% of the 49 studies examined by Abrahms et al. ( ). Explicit examination of the impacts of climate on human–wildlife interactions in cities is rare, but animals often seek resources in urban environments when resources outside cities are diminished by droughts, other weather events, or climate shifts (Lewis et al.,  ; Abrahms et al.,  ). For instance, droughts may cause Baird's tapirs (Tapirus bairdii) in Mexico (Pérez‐Flores et al.,  ) and African elephants (Loxodonta africana) in Tanzania (Mariki, Svarstad & Benjaminsen,  ) to seek resources in populated areas, and melting ice may drive polar bears (Ursus maritimus) to seek food near human settlements (Towns et al.,  ). Urban warming itself may also cause changes in human–wildlife interactions. For example, residents and foresters may increase their use of pesticides to combat pest species that increase in abundance with urban warming (Dhang,  ). The extent to which climate may mediate beneficial human–wildlife interactions is less well‐studied, but possibilities exist. For instance, pollinators likely harmed by urbanization and heat islands (Hamblin et al.,  ; Burdine & McCluney,  ) may benefit from management efforts of urban gardeners, like planting more flowers (e.g. Burdine & McCluney,  ). Such interactions may vary substantially across different urban systems, where distinct characteristics of human populations (e.g. attitudes toward wildlife, demographics, and land management practices) and of the environment (e.g. regional climate, resource availability, and wildlife species pools) generate unique social–ecological dynamics (Wilkinson et al.,  ).
The impacts of climate on human–wildlife interactions in cities has rarely been studied, but human interactions with coyotes provides one example (e.g. Wilkinson et al.,  ; Larson et al.,  ). Possibly due to a combination of reduced human threat and supplemental feeding, today urban coyotes in many North American cities appear more bold and exploratory than their rural counterparts, increasing interactions with humans and their pets, which are sometimes consumed (Breck et al.,  ). In Los Angeles, California, USA, climate change‐induced drought is hypothesized to increase the likelihood of urban pet predation by coyotes, especially on free‐roaming domestic cats (Weaver et al.,  ). This seasonal variation in consumption of domestic cats, in combination with the occurrence of rare but high‐profile attacks on humans (Siemer et al.,  ), has increased the fear experienced by some urban residents, who view the coyotes as a nuisance or pest species, resulting in calls to trap or kill them (e.g. the ‘Evict Coyotes’ movement in southern California). In the Los Angeles metropolitan area, these ecological–evolutionary processes are further complicated by intentional coyote feeding by urban residents. Social media sites, like Facebook or Nextdoor, provide a venue to discuss the need further to control urban spaces in ways that insulate humans from urban wildlife; these conversations lead to changes to the landscape at both the single parcel and neighbourhood scale, in ways intended to deter coyotes (Niesner, Kelty & Robins,  ) (Fig.  ). Although the population‐level impact of conflict‐mitigation strategies like Coyote Management Plans (CMPs) remains to be studied, the social–ecological–evolutionary loop is closed when trapping and killing becomes enacted as municipal policy for dealing with human–coyote conflicts, wherein lethal removal becomes a selective force on the landscape (Schell et al.,  ). Thus, drought‐induced increases in domestic pet predation by coyotes (Weaver et al.,  ) can change human behaviour in ways that increase selective pressures on coyotes that could alter their distribution and subsequent interactions with humans (Fig.  ) (Schell et al.,  ; Wilkinson et al.,  ; Niesner et al.,  ). Thus, the study of coyote behavioural traits, including their variation over time with seasonal climate patterns, may allow a better understanding of the SEEP dynamics in this system. However, these dynamics may differ regionally. For example, in urbanized areas of the Phoenix, Arizona, USA metropolitan area, domestic cat predation by coyotes may be more related to macronutrient regulation, although further investigation is needed to disentangle these relationships properly (Weiss,  ). Climate‐related changes in human–wildlife interactions may occur also in other systems [e.g. rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) in Central and South Asia (Ciani,  )].
Climate may mediate human–wildlife interactions in other ways. For instance, the need to improve water‐use efficiency in Southern California and other regions with dry climates has resulted in policies that are causing residents to plant native vegetation and adopt drought‐tolerant xeric landscaping (Myjer,  ). Native and xeric vegetation can increase the diversity of native birds (Lerman & Warren,  ; Warren et al.,  ) and possibly other wildlife species (Lerman et al.,  ) in arid regions, and thus could alter interactions with humans. Each yard's environmental conditions result from management (or lack thereof) by residents, which is often driven by their own values, beliefs, norms, and sociodemographics (Locke et al.,  ) acting within the context of neighbourhood regulations (e.g. homeowner associations) and city‐wide initiatives (Larson et al.,  ). Although some of these social factors may be independent of environmental factors, others may be dynamic, shifting in response to short‐term weather (e.g. droughts and heatwaves) or long‐term climate change or perceptions of this change (Chui,  ). The ability to shift management in response to weather events can be related to social factors; for example, predominantly Black and Hispanic, historically red‐lined neighbourhoods in Los Angeles experienced greater vegetation declines during a drought than did predominantly White neighbourhoods (Dong et al.,  ), with unexplored consequences for human–wildlife interactions. Other landscape structures such as golf courses, city green spaces, or other urban infrastructural units, which are often publicly owned, can have differing management drivers, and these spaces are increasingly seen as offering habitat to urban wildlife species (Gallo et al.,  ; Niesner et al.,  ). Understanding how human forces operating at various spatial and temporal scales interact with urban climate and wildlife to influence urban ecology is crucial for understanding and managing these complex systems (Fig.  ).

III.

## IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SEEP APPROACH
As illustrated in previous sections, social–ecological–evolutionary coupled human–natural systems are complex and challenging to study holistically. However, viewing these systems through a phenotypic‐trait lens (Table  ), can simplify their study. Specifically, we suggest that researchers (i) identify and then quantify important and relevant environmental variables, (ii) identify and then measure related response traits, including their variation within and among individuals, populations, and species, (iii) determine the relative explanatory power of each trait for species distribution, developing an understanding of factors that most influence the distribution and abundance of each species, (iv) identify or quantify human‐relevant effect traits, likely integrated with surveys or other approaches for identifying and quantifying services and disservices, (v) gauge human responses to changes in the services and disservices associated with these traits through surveys or other observational research, and (vi) examine how trait distributions, species distributions, and human beliefs and actions change across time. Although these steps will require substantial effort by multi‐disciplinary teams, they present a concrete plan for SEEP urban wildlife research.
Efforts are needed to reduce some of the challenges in conducting this kind of research. First, funding multidisciplinary SEEP research either requires simultaneous funding of multiple grants to multiple principal investigators or integrated funding opportunities (e.g. US National Science Foundation, Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems). Although a carefully planned short‐term study could produce important results, long‐term funding would greatly improve the ability to study the dynamics of these systems. Second, working in multidisciplinary teams that use different terminology and methods requires extra effort that might initially subtract from productivity, but could eventually increase it. Efforts are needed to facilitate these collaborations, including through workshops (such as the one that stimulated this review), localized research centres (e.g. Central Arizona Phoenix, Long‐term Ecological Research program), as well as national or international research centres (e.g. National Socio‐Environmental Synthesis Center).
We note that our suggested implementation does not emphasize detailed mechanistic studies that allow disentangling phenotypic plasticity from genetic evolutionary change, such as common garden experiments, reciprocal translocation experiments, and genomic analyses that link specific traits to genes that differ between populations (Donihue & Lambert,  ; Lambert et al.,  ). These studies are highly worthwhile, but it is typically easier to assess and utilize phenotypic measurements than it is to assess underlying genotypic mechanisms. Thus, a first step in the SEEP approach may be to assess variation in phenotypic traits, with studies of genotypic change added when possible.

IV.

## FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The SEEP framework suggests that a focus on animal phenotypic traits can help us understand social–ecological–evolutionary processes in urban systems. Although we focus on urban climate change to illustrate components of the SEEP framework, the framework may also be applied to other urban factors such as habitat connectivity, resource availability and quality, species interactions, toxin exposure, as well as light and noise levels (Table  ). For example, animals that require low‐frequency sound for communication or hearing for prey detection may be absent from locations in cities with higher levels of anthropogenic noise (Francis,  ).
 Studies that focus on individual components of SEEP dynamics are increasingly available, but some topics are understudied, and rarely have multiple linkages been examined simultaneously. We offer several future promising lines of research prompted by considering a SEEP framework (Table  ).
 Much of the research relevant to the SEEP framework has occurred in the USA, but more work is needed globally. A SEEP perspective emphasizes that differences in cultures and governance between regions and countries may lead to substantially different ecological patterns or relationships. Thus, efforts are needed to study the dynamics of these complex systems across cultures and governance in order to obtain a more holistic perspective, testing any potential generalities. Broad, many‐city and international comparisons are challenging logistically and financially. However, such studies are increasingly possible due to the increase in publicly available global environmental data through remote sensing and citizen science efforts (e.g. iNaturalist, eBird) if attention and contextualization are given to potential biases (Grade et al.,  ; Carlen et al.,  ), and social data such as the International Social Survey Programme, the Intergovernmental Science‐Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES), or the forthcoming city‐focused special report of The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
As urbanization continues to alter the biophysical characteristics of and relationships between and among people, animals, and the environment, understanding how social, ecological, and evolutionary systems interplay with phenotypes is critical for forming salient policies and practices surrounding the management of wildlife in cities. By applying this approach, we can, therefore, begin to diagnose why some taxa or populations of animals persist or succeed in cities whereas others do not, and under what conditions those characteristics might change. For instance, this approach may allow us to understand better why certain taxa of bees are less prevalent in hot parts of warm cities, while other taxa are less affected (Hamblin et al.,  ), and the potential for reducing declines through human actions, or why coyote conflicts with humans vary among cities and over time (Weaver et al.,  ). The SEEP framework, therefore, has significant implications for wildlife management and conservation in the age of the Anthropocene.

V.

## CONCLUSIONS

(1)Recent papers have emphasized the linkages between social, ecological, and evolutionary processes in urban landscapes. However, they have not always explored linkages between all three simultaneously or did not provide a cohesive method for exploring these connections.
(2)Here we argue that a focus on phenotypic response and effect traits allows us to examine linkages between social, ecological, and evolutionary processes.
(3)We provide examples of how phenotypic traits may evolve in response to or influence ecological responses to urban climate alteration. We also illustrate how these traits can help us understand how climate influences human–wildlife interactions in cities and subsequent effects on human social systems that can lead to changes in regulations and management.
(4)We provide guidance on how researchers can implement the SEEP framework, with an emphasis on response and effect traits.
(5)We suggest a number of important questions that arise from focusing on traits when considering interacting social, ecological, and evolutionary processes in cities.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors contributed to the ideas and editing of this review. K. E. M. led the writing with substantial leadership support from P. D. and K. S.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Riley Andrade, Chris Schell, and Heather Bateman for early contributions to this work and Reese Jackson, Everett Turner‐McCool, Josh Hivner, Trevor DeGroote, Salim Muhammed, Lakshan Beligala, and Lauren Brown for feedback. This manuscript is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant numbers DEB‐1637590 and DEB‐2224662, Central Arizona‐Phoenix Long‐Term Ecological Research Program (CAP LTER). E. J. C. was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DBI‐2109587 and the Living Earth Collaborative at Washington University in St. Louis.