pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11213355PMC11213355.111213355112133553894130110.1371/journal.pone.0306041PONE-D-23-358681Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesAgricultureAnimal ProductsMeatPorkBiology and Life SciencesNutritionDietFoodMeatPorkMedicine and Health SciencesNutritionDietFoodMeatPorkBiology and Life SciencesNutritionDietFoodMedicine and Health SciencesNutritionDietFoodBiology and Life SciencesAgricultureAnimal ProductsMeatBiology and Life SciencesNutritionDietFoodMeatMedicine and Health SciencesNutritionDietFoodMeatSocial SciencesSociologyHuman FamiliesPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsAge GroupsAdultsElderlyMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchSurveysThe influence of traceability label trust on consumers’ traceability pork purchasing behavior: Based on the moderating effect of food safety identification
The Influence of Traceability Label Trust on Consumers’ Traceability Pork Purchasing Behaviorhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-5871-0086LiuZengjinData curationFormal analysisSupervisionValidationWriting – original draft YuZhuoData curationFormal analysisWriting – original draft ZhaoJingData curationFormal analysisWriting – original draft HanXibingWriting – review & editing LiCaixiaWriting – review & editing GengNingSupervisionValidation YuMeilianConceptualizationFunding acquisitionWriting – review & editing 1
Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai, China2
School of Management, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, Shandong, China3
College of Public Administration, Shandong Normal University, Jinan, China4
Faculty of Environmental Science, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, JapanSoaresSandro VieiraEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript and its files.

## 1. Introduction
In recent years, the increase in population has put enormous pressure on food production and food safety [ ], and food safety has been a global issue affecting public health with far-reaching political implications [ ]. Since 2006, China has paid more attention to food safety during the 11th and 12th Five-Year Plan periods, issuing documents such as the Food Safety Law and the National Plan for Food Safety Supervision System to strengthen food safety protection [ , ]. As the main meat product consumed by Chinese residents daily, whether the food quality and safety of pork can be effectively guaranteed is an important issue related to the national economy and people’s livelihood. Food safety is a major public concern in China with far-reaching political implications [ ]. Food quality and safety is also a worldwide problem, mainly caused by environmental pollution, enterprise production and operation, and government supervision failure [ ] and the root cause is a market failure caused by information asymmetry [ , ]. The longer the food supply chain, the higher the degree of information asymmetry [ , ]. To eliminate information asymmetry and reduce food safety risks, governments and scholars have explored a variety of food safety risk management tools. Food traceability systems are a powerful solution to food safety issues [ , ], and have become the main tool and prerequisite for ensuring meat quality and preventing food safety risks. Food traceability aims to reduce the risk of foodborne illness by facilitating recalls of food and feed products and providing consumers with targeted information [ ]. Long-term unsafe food problems and short-term animal disease outbreaks can positively affect the willingness to consume traceable food [ ]. Due to the negative impact of food scandals in China and the growing awareness of food safety, consumers and governments are constantly seeking healthier and safer food [ ] Amid high-profile food scares, health concerns, and the threat of imperfect and asymmetric information, the Chinese pork industry faces growing consumer demand for assurance of quality and production methods in domestic and export markets [ ].
The subsequent structure of this paper is as follows: Section 2 covers the Literature Review, Section 3 describes the Methodology, Section 4 presents the Survey and Data, Section 5 deals with the Statistical Analysis, Section 6 discusses the Model Estimation Results and Analysis, Section 7 concludes with the Conclusions.

## 2. Literature review
A review of the relevant literature reveals that food safety itself carries reputational attributes [ ], and consumers are more inclined to purchase certified (with traceability) by reputational attributes, with more detailed traceability information [ – ], and more safe foods [ , ]. Food labeling is in the interests of food producers and consumers, furthermore, it is seen as a policy tool to aid in the transition to a healthier and more sustainable food system [ ]. The concepts of origin identification, certificate of conformity, traceability, and green organic certification involved in food safety information labels are important tools to eliminate information asymmetry in the food market. Since the mid-to-late 1990s, China has begun to explore the construction of a traceability system for pork and other foods, mainly involving the animal identification and disease traceability system of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, the national agricultural product quality and safety traceability management information platform, and five batches of support from the commercial department to establish a city-level meat and vegetable circulation traceability platform in 58 cities. The pork traceability system in China mainly includes two ways: One is the mode of ordinary pork used in the system in government encouragement, and the other is the mode of high-grade pork integrated production in the participation of live pig slaughtering or processing enterprises. Consumers, as the last link in the production chain, study what factors influence their behavioral patterns that will allow the meat industry to better meet consumer expectations, needs and wants [ ]. Consumers’ preference, willingness to pay, and purchase behavior for traceable products are research areas with certain practical significance, which are helpful for the promotion and construction of traceability systems and the realization of long-term goals of food safety management.
There are barriers to e-applications in the Indian agri-food supply chain that are highly driven and lowly dependent [ ]. In addition, questionnaires from 30 sugar mills in Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand, India, showed that the problems identified by the e-application are developing positive relationships and providing them with suggested IT solutions that will contribute to the overall development of farmers involved in sugarcane production [ ]. There is also a study reviewing different individual and integrated approaches such as Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA), multivariate, etc. to measure the problems at various stages of the supply chain of the olive oil industry in different countries [ ]. Actually, Problems in the supply chain of other industries, such as the apparel industry export order fulfillment difficulties the most sensitive factor and in turn affects operating costs, changes in marketing strategies, changes in consumer purchasing patterns, and other factors, thus affecting profitability and employment cutoffs [ ].
At present, the research in the field of the traceable system in the academic circle mainly focuses on the micro level, which is divided from the perspective of relevant stakeholders, involving consumers, enterprises and pig farmers [ , ]. On the one hand, based on the traceable commodity attributes and the investigator’s stated preferences, the research on the additional willingness to pay of consumers is generally carried out using the hypothetical value method, the BDM experimental auction, the real choice experiment and other methods to measure the willingness to pay [ , ]. Furthermore, they use econometric model to analyze its influencing factors. Consumers are willing to pay a significant positive price premium for food traceability [ ], and despite heterogeneity, all consumers have some positive willingness to pay for the labeling attributes of traceable pork [ ]. Consumers are willing to pay a higher average premium for traceability with detailed information than just having information [ – ]. On the other hand, it is to study consumers’ preference for traceable pork. It has been shown that there is preference heterogeneity among consumers for different attributes of food information, and the higher the education and income, the more likely they are to purchase food with safety information attributes [ ]. Consumers’ preference for traceable pork information attributes has obvious hierarchy and heterogeneity. Food safety has the largest premium of all attributes, and combined with risk perception results in a generally higher premium paid [ ]. Consumers’ preferences and willingness to pay for traceability information and quality certification are significantly affected by age, household monthly income and education level [ ]. Furthermore, there is a study about consumers’ purchase intention. The information quality, perceived reliability and product diagnostics of food traceability systems affect consumers’ perceived value. Perceived value is positively correlated with purchase intention [ ]. Consumers purchase Pork willingness and pork consumption were primarily influenced by attitudes and habit intensity, while social norms and perceptions played a secondary role [ ]. Finally, around the establishment and promotion of the traceability system, there is research on the behavior of slaughtering enterprises, pig farmers and other actors [ – ].
It can be seen that the research results on traceable pork have been relatively fruitful in the research fields of consumer preference, purchase intention, willingness to pay, and the willingness and behavior of relevant actors of farmers and slaughterhouses. However, there are relatively few studies on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. Relevant studies mainly take pork purchasing behavior as an example, combined with the bait effect, it is believed that the bait effect of diet clean label is the strongest, followed by price, breeding mode and breeding time [ ]; Both appearance and traceability produce stronger decoy effects than price, while traceability produces stronger decoy effects than appearance[ ].
In terms of pork consumption, there is an inconsistency between consumers’ purchase intention and actual purchase behavior [ ]. The purchasing drivers of Chinese meat consumers include meat safety certification and meat perception of health [ ]. This provides a good reference and reference for the study, but there is still room for further research. With the deepening of the construction of agricultural product traceability systems such as the pilot construction of the pork traceability system, the feasibility of empirical research on consumers’ purchases of traceable pork has been continuously enhanced. Since consumers’ self-reported preferences are different from their real decisions [ ], it may be more meaningful to distinguish the previous studies in hypothetical situations and based on the conclusions obtained in real situations. Therefore, starting from the moderating effect of food safety identification, this paper studies the influence of traceability label trust on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. This can enrich the theoretical understanding of this research field to a certain extent and has certain research value.

## 3. Methodology

## 3.1 Theoretical analysis
In order to analyze the influence of traceability label trust on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior, the theoretical model of this paper is constructed based on the relevant theories of information source trust, income consumption theory, consumer behavior theory, etc., and related research results ( ). Based on trust theory, this study argues that consumers’ trust in traceability labeling plays a crucial role in their purchasing decisions [ ]. When consumers believe that traceability systems are reliable and effective in ensuring food safety, they are more likely to purchase traceable pork products This study examines how food safety identification moderates the effect of trust in traceability labeling on purchasing behavior. The study also draws on consumer behavior theory, which emphasizes the role of perceptions, attitudes, and decision-making processes in influencing how consumers respond to marketing stimuli [ ]. Social cognitive theory suggests that consumer behavior is influenced by their observations of others, their sense of self-efficacy, and their perception of the consequences of their actions [ ]. In the context of purchasing traceable pork, researchers examined how consumers’ perceptions of others’ purchasing behaviors and self-efficacy related to food safety influenced their own purchasing decisions. This paper incorporates consumers’ venue preference, price preference, household pork consumption proportion, pork purchase volume, income level, and the situation of children and the elderly in the family into the theoretical system that influences traceable pork purchase behavior. Further, we mainly analyze the influence of traceability label trust on this behavior, and try to interpret the role of food safety identification in this process.
 In general, pork is not only involved in the field of personal consumption, but also a household consumer product to a large extent. Consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior is affected to a certain extent by consumers’ personal preferences. When other factors remain unchanged, the correlation between consumption scenarios and corresponding commodities is strong. At this time, consumers’ purchasing behavior is more susceptible to the influence of long-standing habits or cognition, and their preferences for attributes such as venue and price will have a certain impact on them. Of course, considering that family members go about their daily lives together and pork is a household consumer product, consumers play the role of buyers under the family division of labor. The factors involved in their decision-making are not limited to themselves, but are more affected by family needs or abilities’ influences. Under the condition that other factors remain unchanged, the level of household income affects its consumption behavior and plays a fundamental role in the process of needing effectuation. Furthermore, as a special group in the family life cycle, the elderly or children’s potential needs for the special attributes of some consumer goods have to be comprehensively considered. In addition to other influencing factors in the above theoretical system, consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior is mainly affected by the trust of traceability labels. Combined with theoretical analysis, the following research hypotheses are proposed.
Research hypothesis 1: Traceability label trust has a significant impact on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. The more trust in the traceability label, the greater the possibility of purchase behavior. For most countries, the rank order of food (pork) driving attributes that consumers care most about are health and nature, sensory quality, price, and animal welfare [ ]. The role of food labels is to inform potential consumers about the quality of goods and to alleviate trust issues between consumers and other stakeholders [ ]. Credit features play an important role in modern food marketing systems. Consumers’ food choices are increasingly influenced by trust cues [ ]. Traceability information is a solution for communicating safety practices, increasing consumer trust [ ], and is used as a tool to help ensure food safety and quality and gain consumer confidence[ , ]. By providing quality and safety information throughout the food process from farm to fork, traceability systems can reduce consumer uncertainty stemming from the food purchasing process, enhancing price premiums and facilitating purchasing behavior [ ]. As an information source, traceable labels have two characteristics trust and attractiveness. In today’s context of a serious lack of social integrity, high trust is an attraction in itself. As an information source, traceable labels have two characteristics trust and attractiveness. In today’s context of a serious lack of social integrity, high trust is an attraction in itself. The food traceability system can restore consumer confidence by improving consumer trust, thereby increasing the possibility of consumers buying traceable food.
Research hypothesis 2: Food safety identification can significantly affect the effect of traceability label trust on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. Research Hypothesis 2–1: Food safety recognition plays a positive regulatory effect in this process. Research hypothesis 2–2: Food safety identification has a significant impact on consumers’ traceable purchase behavior. Despite the limited ability to identify safe food, Chinese consumers generally have positive attitudes towards it, especially in terms of safety, quality, nutrition and taste, and they are willing to pay more for safe food [ ]. At the consumer level, food safety identification is based on risk perception and the ability to identify food safety issues. In the actual purchase process, it is embodied in the final manifestation of the current consumer concern and judgment for the food safety situation. Food incident information leads to a decrease in trust, and negative information about food safety increases perceived risk to common foods and hazards, and indirectly increases overall perception of food safety risk [ ], and food safety concerns also contribute to its Generating more positive buying attitudes. Therefore, in the process that traceable labels are used as a medium to transmit product quality information to influence consumers’ decision-making on traceable pork purchase behavior, consumers’ attention to the current product safety status may change their stated preferences for traceable label attributes and the actual demand, which there will be a certain adjustment effect.

## 3.2 The empirical model
Since the behavior of consumers to purchase traceable pork includes two choices, "purchased" and "not purchased", this is a typical categorical variable and is suitable for the Logit model. Therefore, the binary logit model is selected and the ML estimation method is used. In order to comprehensively and systematically study the influencing factors of consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior, and make the influence of traceability label trust on purchase behavior more credible. This paper will consider the influence of other explanatory variables and control variables such as income level and age, and combine the data characteristics to control the regional and time effects.

 Lnp(Y=1)1−P(Y=1)=α0+βi(XZMCOIK)+e
(1)
In formula (1), the explained variable Y represents the traceable pork purchase behavior of consumers, 1 represents the purchase, 0 represents the non-purchase, and β represents the parameter to be estimated of the model variable. As the core explanatory variable, X represents consumer traceability label trust, and M is introduced into the model as a moderating variable in the form of M and XM. In terms of pork consumption characteristics of consumers, variable Z includes four aspects: the proportion of pork consumption, the amount of pork purchased, price preference, and purchase place preference. In terms of family characteristics, variables C and O represent the number of resident elderly (elders over 60 years old) and resident children (under 15 years old) in the family, respectively, and I represents family income. K represents the control variables in the model, including the respondents’ gender, age, education, and household registration. e represents the residual term, which, according to the model assumptions, obeys an asymptotically normal distribution. The meaning, assignment and descriptive statistical characteristics of model variables are shown in . The estimation of each model involved in this paper is realized by the software stata16.
 

## 4. Survey and data
With the continuous advancement of the construction of traceable pork pilot cities, the number of survivable samples of consumers in relevant areas involving traceable pork purchases is increasing, which also provides a certain basis for this paper. The data in this paper comes from the research team’s research on Bao shan, Feng xian, Hong kou, Huang pu, Jia ding, Jin shan, Jing’an, Min hang, Pu dong, Pu tuo, Qing pu, Song jiang, Xu hui in Shanghai during May-June 2017 and July-October 2020. As the economic center of China, Shanghai has a large pork consumption market and high consumer demand for pork quality and safety. Moreover, Shanghai’s pork market has a strong industrial scale and influence, and its pig slaughtering, processing enterprises and sales links are relatively mature and representative. Therefore, the study of the construction of Shanghai pork traceability system can help to understand the safeguard measures of pork quality and safety in regions with higher economic development level, and can also provide reference for other cities and regions. A questionnaire survey was conducted by consumers in 15 urban areas of, Yang Pu and Chang Ning. After strict screening such as logical verification, 908 valid questionnaires were finally obtained. There were 240 valid questionnaires for 2017 and 668 valid questionnaires for 2020. In order to ensure the usability of the questionnaire data, this research was conducted in the form of face-to-face interviews in the field. The investigators were professors and students from the Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences and the School of Economics and Management of Shanghai Ocean University. Moreover, we conducted special training and pre-survey of the questionnaire for the investigators before the formal survey. The respondents were all permanent residents of Shanghai and consumers who had purchased pork. Before the formal questionnaire survey, the respondents were asked whether they had purchased pork, and the questionnaire survey was conducted only when they received an affirmative answer. Respondents who completed the questionnaire were given a towel gift with a market price of about 10 yuan to mobilize the respondents to participate in the survey. At the same time, this also helps to ensure the quality of questionnaire completion. The survey locations were mainly chosen in supermarkets, farmers’ markets and their neighborhoods. We considered the sample size of the questionnaire survey in each urban area according to the distribution of permanent residents in each urban area.

## 4.1 Sample basic characteristics
The basic characteristics of the research samples in this paper are shown in . From the perspective of gender distribution, the ratio of males and females is relatively balanced, indicating that the gender division of labor in purchasing pork and other foods in the households of the survey respondents is not obvious. In terms of age distribution, the proportion of young and middle-aged people under the age of 30 and 30–39 years old among the survey respondents is relatively large, accounting for 39.65% and 29.3% respectively. In terms of educational background, more than 60% of the survey respondents have undergraduate and postgraduate degrees, and the remaining educational levels account for a relatively balanced proportion of about 10%. This phenomenon may be related to the siphoning effect of megacities on high-quality labor.
 The distribution of household registration can also effectively confirm this phenomenon, and the proportion of local and non-local permanent residents is relatively balanced. In terms of the composition of the family members of the respondents, the elders and children accounted for 26.33% and 37.11% respectively, and the respondents’ family population was relatively small. In terms of household income distribution, the household income of the respondents in the previous year was 100,000–490,000 and 500,000 or more, accounting for 49.45% and 23.90%, respectively, which is more in line with the income status of residents in the surveyed cities. From the perspective of consumer household pork consumption characteristics, the proportion of pork consumption in household livestock and poultry meat consumption accounted for 30–49% of the respondents accounted for 26.76%, and the proportion of consumption accounted for 10–29% accounted for 30.95% %, the proportion of consumption is 70% and above, which is 8.81%. In terms of the unit price of pork that is often purchased, 38.44% of the respondents spend 20–30 yuan, and 30% of the respondents are in less than 20-yuan and more than 30-yuan level, indicating that the actual payment level of pork by the respondents is relatively high.

## 5. Statistical analysis

## 5.1 Traceable label trust, food safety identification, consumer traceability of pork purchases
Through the questionnaire, do you believe that "the quality and safety of agricultural products with information traceability labels are more guaranteed than those without information traceability codes"? This item allows consumers to answer whether they trust the traceability labels based on their purchasing experience or subjective judgment. Through the question "Do you pay attention to the quality and safety of pork when you usually buy pork?" to measure consumers’ food safety identification. Investigators defined traceable pork purchases based on consumers’ subjective responses by carrying examples of commonly used information traceability label. In the sample, 46.25% of the respondents purchased traceable pork, 92.73% of the trust information traceability label, and 91.19% of consumers are more concerned about the quality and safety of pork. Under the premise of purchasing traceable pork, the proportion of trusting the traceability information code and paying attention to food safety is 90.95%, which is 81.90% higher than other cases. Comparing and analyzing the samples in 2017 and 2020, the proportion of respondents who trust the information traceability code and the proportion concerned about pork quality and safety have fluctuated and increased, while the proportion purchasing traceable pork has increased from 38.75% to 48.95%.

## 5.2 The relationship between traceability label trust and consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior
In order to have a more intuitive understanding of the relationship between traceability label trust and consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior, a cross-analysis of the two was conducted, and the results are shown in . Under the premise of not trusting traceability labels, consumers who did not purchase traceable pork accounted for 81.82%. Under the premise that consumers purchase traceable pork, the proportion of consumers who trust the traceable label is about 30% higher than the proportion that they do not trust. Therefore, there is a certain correlation between traceable label trust and consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. We undertake a chi-square test and also test the Cramers V. The results show a very significant difference between traceability label trust and consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. Consumers who trust the label are more likely to have traceable pork purchase behavior. The Cramers V is used to determine whether there was a significant association between traceability label trust and consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. [ ].
 

## 5.3 The relationship between food safety identification and traceability label trust
In order to have a more intuitive understanding of the relationship between food safety identification and follow-label trust, a cross-analysis of the two was conducted, and the results are shown in . Among the survey respondents, the number of samples who trust the traceability label and pay attention to pork quality and safety is far greater than that of those who do not trust the label and do not pay attention to pork quality and safety. When consumers are concerned about pork quality and safety, their trust in traceability labels is 87.2% higher than their distrust. Therefore, there is a certain correlation between concerns about pork quality and safety and trust in traceability labels. The results of chi-square test and Cramers V test both indicate a significant difference between food safety identification and follow-label trust. Combined with the previous analysis, traceability label trust, food safety identification and traceable pork purchase behavior show a certain positive correlation, but whether there is a clear causal relationship still needs to be tested by an econometric model.
 

## 6. Model estimation results and analysis

## 6.1 Model selection, estimation results and analysis
Although the previous article has carried out statistical analysis on the relationship between traceability label trust and consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior, it has not comprehensively considered or controlled for the influence of other factors. Therefore, it is not scientifically reasonable to explain that traceability label trust has a significant impact on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior, and it is also necessary to quantitatively analyze the impact of traceability label trust on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior.
This article uses the Shanghai consumer survey data in 2017 and 2020, and fails to track the individual respondents. There are certain differences in individual characteristics in the data, which belong to pseudo-panel data. Therefore, it is necessary to test and verify the model setting. Model (1) is a panel logit model with random effects, and model (2) is a mixed panel logit model. According to the LR test results of model (1) in , the null hypothesis of rho = 0 should be accepted. Because the panel-level variance component is unimportant when rho is zero, the panel estimator can be considered indistinguishable from the mixed cross-section estimator. At this time, it is no longer necessary to perform the Hausman test to compare the fixed effect and the random effect, and the mixed Logit model should be selected as the main model.
 

## 6.2 Main effect and significant variable impact analysis
After adopting the mixed logit model, considering the integrity of the model construction, the influence of variables that do not change with individual changes cannot be ignored. Therefore, the time effect and the regional effect are introduced respectively, and model (3) and model (4) are constructed, and the estimated results are shown in . Judging from the estimation results of model (2), model (3) and model (4), the overall goodness of fit and significance of the model are better. Combined with the significance level of variables, the analysis is as follows. Consistent with the conclusion of the previous statistical analysis, traceability label trust has a significant positive impact on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior, which further validates the previous theoretical analysis. After pork is traceable, whether it is pre-quality assurance or post-responsibility traceability, the stakeholders in each link of the industry chain can be quickly identified, which is convenient for consumers to protect their own rights and interests, and builds consumers’ trust in traceability labels, which further stimulates the possibility of traceability. Trace pork purchases.
 In terms of venue preference and price preference, large supermarkets and online platforms have a significant positive impact on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior, while purchasing pork with a relatively low relative price level has a significant negative impact. This may be related to the current model of Chinese enterprises participating in the construction of the traceability system. Enterprises expect to create brand differences through traceability, and then achieve product premium or high-priced sales. At the same time, some consumers’ understanding of traceable pork mainly comes from corporate propaganda, which makes the current scene of traceable pork purchases more in large supermarkets and online platforms. Consumers in consumption scenarios such as convenience stores, small supermarkets, and farmers’ markets are more inclined to purchase pork with low-end price levels to a certain extent, and are more sensitive to the additional price paid for ordinary pork participating in the traceability system.
In terms of family members, the elderly who live in the family have a significant negative impact on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. We believe that a possible explanation for this phenomenon is that in the division of labor among urban families, the resident elderly will help to buy daily food and take care of housework, so as to reduce the burden of life and work for their children. Affected by living habits such as diligence and thrift, they will pay more attention to whether the price is affordable when purchasing pork and other meat, so they are relatively less likely to purchase traceable pork.

## 6.3 Analysis of moderating effects based on food safety identification
According to the estimation results of model (2), model (3), and model (4), it can be seen that food safety identification as a moderating variable has a significant impact on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. Now the influence between food safety identification and traceability label trust is introduced, which further demonstrates the direction and extent of its influence on traceability label trust on consumers’ traceable purchase behavior. As shown in , model (5), model (6), and model (7) under the premise of considering time and regional effects, the moderating effect of food safety identification is very significant and credible. Specifically, food safety identification plays a strengthening and promoting moderating role in the process of traceability label trust positively affecting consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. To a certain extent, this proves the theoretical analysis of the previous article.
 

## 6.4 Robustness test of empirical results
To ensure the robustness of the model estimation results, robustness checks are required. The purpose of a robustness test is to ensure that the results of the empirical analysis (sign, significance) do not change with changing parameter settings. Generally, the estimation is re-estimated by changing the measurement method of the core variables, changing the model setting, etc. If the results of the empirical analysis remain unchanged, it is considered to have passed the robustness test. Therefore, on the one hand, we changed the measurement method of food safety identification variables, and selected consumers’ confidence in the quality and safety of the currently purchased pork to measure (Food Safety Identification 2), and used the logit model to re-estimate. On the other hand, combined with the original variables, use the OLS mixed regression or probit model to re-estimate the model. The results of the robustness test in this paper are shown in . Combined with the changes in the signs and significance levels of key explanatory variables, it can be seen that the above empirical analysis results on the influence of traceability label trust on consumers’ traceable pork and the moderating effect of food safety identification are relatively robust.
 

## 7. Conclusions
Combined with a questionnaire survey on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior in Shanghai, this study constructs a theoretical framework based on the influence of traceability label trust on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior under the moderating effect of food safety identification. Through statistical analysis, quantitative analysis, etc. Empirical research, draws the following conclusions with certain robustness. First, there is a certain correlation between traceability label trust and traceable pork purchase behavior. With the increase in consumers’ trust in traceability labels, the proportion of consumers who purchase traceable pork will increase. Similar results were found by Liang et al. [ ] Second, traceability label trust has a significant positive impact on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. Food safety identification can significantly strengthen, promote and other regulating effects on this influence process. The specific performance is that when consumers buy pork, the more attention they pay to the quality and safety of pork, the more they can strengthen the functions of traceability labels by providing information reference and determining after-the-fact responsibilities, building trust and further stimulating potential consumers to buy process of behavior. After changing the measurement method of the variable of food safety identification, that is, consumers are more assured of the quality and safety of the pork currently purchased, which also strengthens the positive impact of traceability label trust on consumers’ traceable pork purchase behavior. This is in line with the findings of Matzembacher’ s research that food traceability systems can increase the level of consumer utility and further enhance consumer trust in food quality [ ]. Third, the current consumers’ purchase behavior of traceable pork is significantly positively affected by consumption scenario preferences and price preferences. Consumers are more inclined to buy traceable pork in supermarkets or online platforms, and when the price level of household pork is lower, it is significantly less likely to purchase traceable pork. In addition, the resident elderly in the composition of family members will have a significant negative impact on it, which is also largely in line with the findings of existing studies on traceable foods [ ].

## Policy recommendations
Based on the above research conclusions, the starting point is to accelerate the construction of the pork traceability system and improve the marketization level of traceable pork, and put forward the following policy implications: (1) Give full play to the role of traceability label trust, combined with the experience of traceable pork city pilot work, strengthen the popularization and publicity work based on the traceable pork advantage commodity attributes. (2) Relying on community and grass-roots service organizations, carry out food safety knowledge popularization education, enhance consumers’ risk perception and food safety identification capabilities, give full play to the regulatory role of food safety identification, and lay a foundation for expanding the traceable pork market space. (3) Appropriately increase government investment, continue to promote the construction of pork traceability system and quality certification, and focus on promoting the information richness, coverage area, publicity and promotion of ordinary pork in agricultural product traceability information management, so as to make traceability system reduce food quality and safety risks can benefit all sectors of society. (4) Relying on the advantages of enterprises under the traceable pork system, the demonstration drives the whole industry to realize the large-scale and standardized breeding of live pigs, steadily expand the scale of traceable pork supply, effectively control and improve the quality and safety of pork, and gradually realize the comprehensive and effective traceability of pork in my country.

## Limitations and future work
In this study, the impact of traceability labeling trust on consumers’ traceable pork purchasing behavior was verified through a questionnaire survey of 908 consumers in Shanghai. A Logit model was applied to analyze the impact of traceability labeling trust on consumers’ traceable pork purchasing behavior. Through existing studies, more studies have focused on the study of consumers’ willingness to pay for traceable pork, and fewer studies have examined the impact of traceability labeling trust on consumers’ traceable pork purchasing behavior, and this study also focuses on the time effect and regional effect, as well as the moderating effect of food safety identification, which is the innovation of this study. This study also focuses on the time and regional effects of this influence and the moderating effect of food safety identification, which is the innovation of this study. However, we also recognize that at this particular historical stage of the construction of China’s pork traceability system, constrained by the fact that the level of the construction of China’s pork traceability system is not yet high, in addition to investigating the effect of traceability label trust on consumers’ traceable pork purchasing behaviors, we would like to validate the effect of traceability label querying behaviors and the content of the information of traceability label querying on consumers’ continuous purchasing behaviors of traceable pork, which is also our next investigation and research plan.

## Supporting information
S1 File(XLSX)

 10.1371/journal.pone.0306041.r001Decision Letter 0
OnonoJoshua OrungoAcademic Editor© 2024 Joshua Orungo Onono2024Joshua Orungo Ononohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
29 Nov 2023

PONE-D-23-35868The Influence of Traceability Label Trust on Consumers' Traceability Pork Purchasing Behavior: Based on the Moderating Effect of Food Safety IdentificationPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Liu,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 13 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Joshua Orungo Onono, Ph.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
1. When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf.
2. Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse.
3. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: 
 [This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under the project “Study on the quality and safety effects of pork traceability system based on coupled incentive of regulation and reputation: theory and empirical evidence” (71603169)].  
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: ""The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."" 
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. In your Data Availability statement, you have not specified where the minimal data set underlying the results described in your manuscript can be found. PLOS defines a study's minimal data set as the underlying data used to reach the conclusions drawn in the manuscript and any additional data required to replicate the reported study findings in their entirety. All PLOS journals require that the minimal data set be made fully available. For more information about our data policy, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability.
""Upon re-submitting your revised manuscript, please upload your study’s minimal underlying data set as either Supporting Information files or to a stable, public repository and include the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers within your revised cover letter. For a list of acceptable repositories, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-recommended-repositories. Any potentially identifying patient information must be fully anonymized.
Important: If there are ethical or legal restrictions to sharing your data publicly, please explain these restrictions in detail. Please see our guidelines for more information on what we consider unacceptable restrictions to publicly sharing data: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions. Note that it is not acceptable for the authors to be the sole named individuals responsible for ensuring data access.
We will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide in your cover letter.
5. PLOS requires an ORCID iD for the corresponding author in Editorial Manager on papers submitted after December 6th, 2016. Please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field. This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager. Please see the following video for instructions on linking an ORCID iD to your Editorial Manager account: " ext-link-type="uri" xlink:type="simple">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_xcclfuvtxQ".
6. We note that Figure 2 in your submission contain [map/satellite] images which may be copyrighted. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For these reasons, we cannot publish previously copyrighted maps or satellite images created using proprietary data, such as Google software (Google Maps, Street View, and Earth). For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright.
We require you to either (1) present written permission from the copyright holder to publish these figures specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license, or (2) remove the figures from your submission:
a. You may seek permission from the original copyright holder of Figure 2 to publish the content specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license.  
We recommend that you contact the original copyright holder with the Content Permission Form (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=7c09/content-permission-form.pdf) and the following text:
“I request permission for the open-access journal PLOS ONE to publish XXX under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CCAL) CC BY 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Please be aware that this license allows unrestricted use and distribution, even commercially, by third parties. Please reply and provide explicit written permission to publish XXX under a CC BY license and complete the attached form.”
Please upload the completed Content Permission Form or other proof of granted permissions as an ""Other"" file with your submission.
In the figure caption of the copyrighted figure, please include the following text: “Reprinted from [ref] under a CC BY license, with permission from [name of publisher], original copyright [original copyright year].”
b. If you are unable to obtain permission from the original copyright holder to publish these figures under the CC BY 4.0 license or if the copyright holder’s requirements are incompatible with the CC BY 4.0 license, please either i) remove the figure or ii) supply a replacement figure that complies with the CC BY 4.0 license. Please check copyright information on all replacement figures and update the figure caption with source information. If applicable, please specify in the figure caption text when a figure is similar but not identical to the original image and is therefore for illustrative purposes only.
The following resources for replacing copyrighted map figures may be helpful:
USGS National Map Viewer (public domain): http://viewer.nationalmap.gov/viewer/
The Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth (public domain): http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov/sseop/clickmap/
Maps at the CIA (public domain): https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html and https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/cia-maps-publications/index.html
NASA Earth Observatory (public domain): http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/
Landsat: http://landsat.visibleearth.nasa.gov/
USGS EROS (Earth Resources Observatory and Science (EROS) Center) (public domain): http://eros.usgs.gov/#
Natural Earth (public domain): http://www.naturalearthdata.com/
Additional Editor Comments:
Thank you for submitting the paper for consideration for publications, reviewers have recommended that you do major revision before it can be reconsidered for publication.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Author have done a good job but only essential corrections needed before publications. I will be happy to revise it and check all these.
1.Introduction: There should be section wise representation of all headings included in a single para at the end.
2.LR: I unable to see the research gaps and objectives. Please include latest references which will give you an idea of work in different sectors. Few important papers needs to be added: DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-5202-6.ch022 ; https://doi.org/10.1504/IJBPSCM.2015.073770 ; Green supply chain management: A case of sugar industry in India. In: Proceedings of national conference on emerging challenges for sustainable business ; https://doi.org/10.3390/w15081498 ; https://doi.org/10.1504/IJLSM.2020.103862 ; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.133311 ; https://doi.org/10.1504/IJVCM.2017.086838 ; DOI: 10.4018/IJISSCM.287133 ; https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04371-y ; https://doi.org/10.1007/s12063-022-00270-y ; https://doi.org/10.1177/09722629221107238 ; https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPPM-02-2022-0080 ; https://doi.org/10.1504/IJLEG.2023.130236 ; https://doi.org/10.1504/IJMP.2018.090829 ; https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-022-02456-7 ; Supply chain performance of sugar industry using Regression analysis. International Journal of Engineering Technology Management and Applied Sciences.
3.Methodology: Please check for proper citation of figures and tables in the text. In addition, there is no source given for figure and tables. If it is self then author should cite as “Source: Author Composition” or similar. Few of the latest papers should be cited in the text like: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05431-1 ; https://doi.org/10.1111/opec.12287 ; https://doi.org/10.3390/horticulturae8111018 ; https://doi.org/10.1504/IJVCM.2022.122164 ; https://doi.org/10.1177/097226292211432 ; https://doi.org/10.3390/w15122274
4.Results and Discussion should be seperate heading and must showcase the outputs and compare with other studies also.
5.Implications should be added in this (Political, Practical and Social if any).
6.Conclusion part is written in very short. Compare your study with other authors and write in conclusion and extend a bit more.
7.Limitations and future work should be included as a seperate heading or may be a part of conclusion also in the last para.
8.Please make a proper structure of your manuscript like aligning with Introduction, LR, Gaps, Objectives, Methods and Materials, Analysis, Results and Discussion, Implications, Conclusion, Limitations and Future Scope and References.
Reviewer #2: Comments
Introduction
1.On page 3, lines 71-77, you are to give citations to the various studies listed.
2. From lines 117-140, the theoretical basis for this study is not strong and based mainly on comments and hypotheses by the authors and not literature. The authors should answer the question of what is the theory grounding this study. What theory is expected to be validated or otherwise at this study's end and how it fits well into its objectives?
3.The conceptual framework for the figure 1 should be relooked into. First, the food safety identification is to play a moderating role between traceability lable trust and purchase behaviour. However what is presented does not depict that. Again, the other variables included in the framework have not been explained in the text and hence need to be explained.
Methodology
1.Explain why the logit model and not the probit model were used in the methodology. What makes Logit fit the probit model better for this study? Given the moderating effect, why didn’t you use Structural Equation modelling but Logit?
2.Under the study area, the authors should justify why the study area is the best-fit place for this study compared to other potential areas in China.
3.The sampling procedure here too is not clear. Was it convenient sampling? If yes, how did you get the people who have had pork purchase experience vis a vis ow many did you come across that had not pork purchase experience? Be clear on the sampling of respondents and the interviews.
Results and Discussions
1.Table 2 is clumsy, and following through with the figures is challenging. The authors should redo it for clarity.
2.Lines 270-272's argument is far-fetched. You just did cross-tabulation. For you to make that statement, undertake a chi-square test of the two crosstabulated variables and also test the Cramers V to know the level of relationship in percentage terms.
3.The same should be done for Table 4.
4.The relevance of Table 6 and its difference from Table 5 is not explained. The authors should do well to explain.
5.The authors are unclear; the differences among models 1-5 and the moderating effect that was analysed are unclear from the results of Table 7. I suggest structural equation modelling is used to moderate the effect to a more precise picture since the data is not a complete panel data.
Conclusions and Recommendations
1.Conclusions and recommendations could be better after the suggested corrections have been done.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0306041.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
27 Feb 2024

Thanks for reviewers and editor comments. We have responded all of your advice one by one. Thanks again!
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0306041.r003Decision Letter 1
SoaresSandro VieiraAcademic Editor© 2024 Sandro Vieira Soares2024Sandro Vieira Soareshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
10 Jun 2024

The Influence of Traceability Label Trust on Consumers' Traceability Pork Purchasing Behavior: Based on the Moderating Effect of Food Safety Identification
PONE-D-23-35868R1
Dear Dr.,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Sandro Vieira Soares, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Comments from PLOS Editorial Office:
We note that one or more reviewers has recommended that you cite specific previously published works. As always, we recommend that you please review and evaluate the requested works to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. It is not a requirement to cite these works. We appreciate your attention to this request.
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #4: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
Reviewer #4: This study investigates the impact of trust in traceability labels on the purchasing behavior of traceable pork in Shanghai, utilizing survey data and binary logistic analysis. It is observed that trust in labels has a significant positive impact on purchasing behavior, with this effect being moderated by food safety identification. The methodological analyses are solid, employing robust statistical models for hypothesis validation. The article is well-structured, including a comprehensive literature review and a detailed discussion of the results. The manuscript is recommended for acceptance, as the quality of the writing is suitable for a high-impact publication. This work significantly contributes to the literature on purchasing behavior and food safety.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0306041.r004Acceptance letter
SoaresSandro VieiraAcademic Editor© 2024 Sandro Vieira Soares2024Sandro Vieira Soareshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
21 Jun 2024

PONE-D-23-35868R1 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Liu, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Sandro Vieira Soares 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE