pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10703325PMC10703325.110703325107033253806049110.1371/journal.pone.0289465PONE-D-23-024201Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyBehaviorProsocial BehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologyBehaviorProsocial BehaviorBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorBiology and Life SciencesPsychologySocial PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorSocial SciencesPsychologySocial PsychologySocial CognitionProsocial BehaviorBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyEmotionsSocial SciencesPsychologyEmotionsResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchQuestionnairesBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesSocial SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyPsychometricsSocial SciencesPsychologyPsychometricsSocial SciencesSociologyCultureBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyPersonalitySocial SciencesPsychologyPersonalityPhysical SciencesMathematicsProbability TheoryProbability DistributionNormal DistributionSituational assessment of empathy and compassion: Predicting prosociality using a video-based task
Predicting prosociality using a video-based empathy taskhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4340-5425GórskaGabrielaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing Berkovich-OhanaAvivaConceptualizationData curationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing KlimeckiOlgaMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing TrautweinFynn-MathisConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
National Information Processing Institute, Warsaw, Poland2
The Robert Zajonc Institute for Social Studies, Warsaw University3
Edmond J. Safra Brain Research Center for the Study of Learning Disabilities, Faculty of Education, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel4
The Integrated Brain and Behavior Research Center (IBBRC), University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel5
Department of Learning and Instructional Sciences, Faculty of Education, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel6
Department of Counseling and Human Development, Faculty of Education, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel7
Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland8
Clinical Psychology and Behavioral Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany9
Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, GermanyZengXianglongEditor – ]. These enable humans to share emotions, and to identify with and adopt others’ perspectives [ ]—thereby supporting prosocial behavior. Much effort has been exerted in social psychology to develop valid means of measuring these capacities and mapping their relationships. This work highlights empathy, compassion, self–other connectedness, and group identity as key factors that determine prosocial behavior [ – ]. In this study, we compare how empathy and compassion, as measured in a video-based task, predict unrelated prosocial behavior against questionnaire measures. We also validate the task and situate the measured constructs with respect to related concepts, including prosocial behavior, conflict attitudes and intergroup bias.
Empathy, in a broad sense, can encompass various phenomena related to intersubjective understanding and prosociality [ , , ]. In the present study we endorse a more narrow and specific definition of empathy as sharing others’ emotions [ ]. Moreover, we follow a prominent distinction that differentiates empathy from sympathy [ ], or empathy from compassion, where compassion refers to affectionate feelings of care and concern, as well as motivation to alleviate others’ suffering [ ]. In earlier conceptualizations (e.g. [ ]), the feelings of concern and care are occasionally subsumed as a facet of empathy (“empathic concern”). In this study, we adhere to the aforementioned differentiation and understand compassion as distinctive from empathy; as a feeling of warmth and care toward the suffering of others [ , ].
Many self-report-based studies suggest a strong link between empathy and/or compassion, and prosocial behavior. A seminal meta-analysis that evaluated the connections of empathy and/or sympathy (i.e. compassion) with prosocial behavior revealed positive correlations that varied from low to medium (.10 to .36) [ ]. However, as noted by the authors, the differentiation between empathy and compassion in empirical research is often not clear cut, and thus these social emotions were not evaluated separately in the meta-analysis. Similarly, more recent studies often report evidence for the general effect of empathy/compassion on prosociality [ , ]. In contrast, some studies have reported evidence for specific prosocial effects of either empathy (as shared affect) [ , , ] or empathic concern/compassion [ , , ]. Thus, empirically, it is not clear if empathy or compassion is a better predictor of prosociality. Theoretical models, however, emphasize compassion as the direct precursor [ , , ], whereas empathy as shared affect is considered one route to compassion, and thus would only be an indirect precursor. Therefore the present study focused on compassion when it comes to predict prosociality, but also explored potential effects of empathy.
Another prominent precursor of prosocial behavior is self–other connectedness—either with specific others (e.g. a sense of oneness [ ]) or a sense of identity with specific social groups [ ] or with wider humanity [ ]. Accordingly, it has been demonstrated that self–other identification can sometimes account fully for the effect of empathy and compassion on prosocial behavior [ ]. Vice versa, in intergroup situations, self-other separation (through ingroup identification) can limit the effect of empathy and compassion [ , ].
Regarding prosociality, the present study focuses on two domains: On the one hand, we assessed prosocial behavior as the (hypothetical) willingness to help a stranger in need, assessed with a questionnaire. As an additional measure with higher ecological validity, we created a mock scenario involving a call for voluntary support of a children’s charity. Assessing the readiness to help an unknown person is an approach that is adopted in many of the studies discussed above [ , , , ]. On the other hand, we measured prosociality in the context of prosocial preferences in intergroup relations, since previous research indicates that compassion can also foster preferences for intergroup peace and equality [ , , , ]. Here we employed a measure of ingroup favoritism, the Vladimir’s Choice task (which asks participants to split symbolic wealth between their ingroup (Jewish Israelis) and outgroup (Palestinians)) [ ]. We also introduced a measure of feelings and thoughts toward national intergroup conflicts, which again served to enhance ecological validity. The questions we employed were based on the Ethos of Conflict scale and more context-specific conflict-related questions [ – ] (see: ). Thus, these outcomes would allow us to verify the prediction of prosociality on the level of intergroup relations. Most of the studies discussed above utilize trait questionnaires to measure empathy and compassion. Recently, an alternative approach to assessing these constructs has emerged, which is exemplified by the Socio-affective Video Task (SoVT). The task, developed by Klimecki et al. [ , ], measures empathic and compassionate responses to suffering. It presents a sequence of twenty-four naturalistic video clips of people in ordinary (Low Emotion (LE)) or distressing situations (High Emotion (HE)). Participants then rate their emotional responses (in the original version: empathy, negative affect, and positive affect; as explained below, this was changed in the current version) to each video.
Other recently developed tools similarly assess socio-cognitive and socio-affective processes by presenting naturalistic video stimuli, followed by various response items [ , ]. In contrast to commonly used questionnaires, such as the Interpersonal Reactivity Index [ ] and the Compassionate Love Scale [ ], which rely on abstract trans-situational self-assessment of participants’ usual behavior, the approach of these tools is to measure momentary situational responses to specific stimuli. The questions are asked immediately after the stimuli are delivered. Unlike traditional self-report questionnaires, this does not require long-term memory nor abstract knowledge to obtain judgements on participants’ general experience and behavior.
The external validity assessment of the SoVT empathy ratings after emotional videos highlighted significant correlations with the total empathy score of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (r = .23) [ ] and the Compassionate Love Scale (r = .29) [ ]. Moreover, two meditation-based interventions that focused on fostering empathy and compassion, respectively, contrasted with active control intervention (memory training), led to specific patterns of increase in positive affect (after compassion training) and empathy (after empathy training) [ , , ]. Using a similar task for the assessment of empathy and theory of mind (EmpaToM), Kanske et al. observed differential neural activation patterns for these social capacities [ , ], sensitivity to training effects [ ], and generalizability across different item and participant samples [ ]. Yet another video-based task (Movie for Assessment of Social Cognition) differentiated participants with autism spectrum disorder from a control group [ , ] and activated the cortical regions commonly associated with mentalizing [ ]. Taken together, these studies indicate that naturalistic video-based tasks can, to some extent, engage lifelike social processing. Thus, it might provide a more direct, and potentially more powerful, approach to assessing individual differences in social affect than standard questionnaires do. To our knowledge, the incremental predictive power of this lifelike approach—particularly in the domain of prosociality—has not previously been tested.
In the current study, the SoVT was slightly adapted from the original to enhance the ratings’ conceptual specificity: one of the rating scales presented after each video assesses negative affect. Another rating directly measures the degree of experienced compassion, defined explicitly as feelings of warmth and care (cf. ]). This approach avoids use of the multi-faceted term “empathy” in the self-rating, and allows measuring the core empathy component of sharing another’s affective state [ ]. In line with other studies [ , , ], this was done by calculating the difference between negative affect ratings for HE and LE videos. The rationale is that higher negative affect ratings after HE than after LE videos indicate that a participant resonates with the emotional state presented in the video. The validity of this difference score is indicated by correlations with empathy questionnaire scores and neural empathy-related activation patterns [ , ] as well as socio-affective experience and behavior in every-day life [ , ]. Moreover, we did not assess compassion indirectly via experience of positive affect (as in the original version) due to the ambivalent nature of compassion, which can involve both negative and positive affective components (cf. [ ]). We obtained these ratings immediately after each of the twenty-four videos (twelve with low emotion (LE) and twelve with highly negative emotion (HE)). An example trial of the task is presented in .
 Our first aim was to replicate the convergent validity of the SoVT by testing its association with classical questionnaires of empathy and compassion (the Interpersonal Reactivity Index and the Compassionate Love Scale). For the empathy score of the SoVT, we targeted the Personal Distress subscale of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index—which measures “anxiety and discomfort in emotional social settings” ([10], p. 116)—as the most closely related construct. For the SoVT compassion measure, we used the Empathic Concern subscale—which assesses feelings of “sympathy and concern” to a person in need ([ ], p. 115)—and the Compassionate Love Scale as convergent measures. As a second goal, we aimed to establish the external validity of the SoVT compassion measure by testing its relationship with prosociality. As described above, prosociality was assessed on two levels: On the one hand, we correlated the SoVT compassion measure with two measures of prosocial behavior, hypothetical helping questions, and a mock real-life charity scenario (see: ). On the other hand, we assessed the relationship between SoVT compassion and two measures of preferences for intergroup peace and equality: Vladimir’s Choice [ ] and conflict attitude questions (see: ). Finally, we aimed to test the incremental validity of the SoVT by evaluating its ability to predict prosociality over and above the aforementioned questionnaires. As a result, we directly addressed whether the SoVT measure would assess socio-affective antecedents of prosociality in a way that is not captured by typical questionnaires. The preregistered hypotheses are summarized in .
 In accordance with these aims, we tested the following preregistered hypotheses:
Manipulation check of the task: The responses to HE videos will, on average, be higher for both compassion and negative affect than the responses to LE videos.
Validation of the SoVT empathy measure: The empathy measure of the SoVT (the mean difference between HE and LE videos) will correlate positively with the Personal Distress subscale of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI)
Validation of the SoVT compassion measure:
The compassion ratings of the SoVT in the emotional video condition will correlate positively with the Compassionate Love Scale and the Empathic Concern subscale of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index.
The compassion ratings of the SoVT in the emotional video condition will correlate positively with participants’ readiness to behave prosocially.

Prediction of prosocial group orientation: The compassion ratings of the SoVT in the emotional video condition will correlate positively with less ingroup bias and more peace-oriented intergroup conflict attitudes.
Testing incremental validity: The empathy and compassion measures of the SoVT will demonstrate more predictive power than the corresponding questionnaire scales (the Interpersonal Reactivity Index and the Compassionate Love Scale) with respect to prosocial behavior.
Beyond the above preregistered hypotheses, we conducted several exploratory analyses to further describe associations of the SoVT (specifically, the empathy measure) and to contrast its predictive power over prosociality using a potentially powerful alternative predictor. These analyses are summarized in . While our a priori candidate for predicting prosocial behavior was compassion—as a direct motivational factor that fuels prosociality—theoretical frameworks and empirical evidence also make a case for a potential role of affect sharing in prosociality (discussed above). For this reason, we were also interested in how the SoVT empathy measure, which captures affect sharing, would relate to our measures of prosociality. Group identity, defined as a sense of belonging to a social group [ ], is another important predictor of prosociality [ – ]. Group identity entails defining one’s “ingroup” and separating it from “outgroups’’. It may include or exclude people in need and, consequently, influence empathic and prosocial responses [ , , ]. We assessed group identity using the Identification With All Humanity scale [ ]. The questionnaire evaluates participants’ degree of identification with three distinct social groups: humanity as a whole, nationality, and their closest social circles. The questionnaire enabled us to explore how these degrees of group identification related to prosociality.and how these relationships contrasted to those discovered for empathy and compassion.

## Methods
This study was preregistered on OSF (DOI: 10.17605/OSF.IO/GRHVD).

## Participants
The participants were students of the Education Faculty at the University of Haifa, Israel. Eighty participants completed the full study (10 male, 70 female; mean age = 33; range = 20 to 65; median = 30). Sixty-two participants identified themselves as Jewish Israeli and eighteen as Arab/Muslim Israeli. Study points were accredited for participation. The inclusion criteria were fluency in the Hebrew language and being over eighteen years of age. One outlier exceeding three standard deviations from the mean on both, compassion and negative affect ratings in the HE condition was detected and excluded from all further analyses. Hence, for the analyses involving the overall sample there were n = 79 participants. Additionally, two outliers on the Identity With all Humanity community subscale, one outlier on the hypothetical helping measure and one on the Compassionate Love Scale were detected and excluded from all the calculations involving the respective measure. Some of the other measures had missing values due to incomplete responses. In such cases, the number of analyzed participants is provided when reporting corresponding results. For each measure, the mean, standard deviations and number of participants are provided in .
 The sample size was calculated based on previous correlations between the SoVT and subscales of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index and Compassionate Love Scale which ranged between .23 and .42 [ ]. In addition, effect sizes on the association between compassion/empathic concern and costly altruistic behavior range between .17 [ ] and .53 [ ], for example studies revealed effect sizes of .37 [ ] or .35 [ ] between altruistic behavior and empathic concern. Therefore we expected correlation effects of moderate size (.30). For one-sided tests, power analysis yielded a required sample size of n = 67 (power .80 and alpha .05), which we increased to 80 for potential dropout and exclusion.
The study was approved by the institutional ethics committee of the Education Faculty at the University of Haifa and was performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations, especially with the Declaration of Helsinki. An informed and written consent was obtained from all the participants.

## Measures

## Socio-affective Video Task (SoVT)
A measure developed to study the empathy and positive/negative affect of participants watching short real-life videos [ , ]. The original task contained three sets of twenty-four twelve-second videos taken from televised news coverage, which were grouped in two conditions: those that presented highly negative emotions (HE) and those that presented more neutral, low-emotion situations (LE). We selected the twenty-four videos (twelve HE and twelve LE) and confirmed their emotionality in a pilot study (see: Supplement B in ). The participants viewed the videos in a randomized order before rating the degree of compassion and negative affect for each video (on a scale from 0 to 10). This study uses only a single set of twenty-four videos, which excludes scenes that depict the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. The procedure is presented in .

## Interpersonal Reactivity Index [10]
This self-report empathy scale measures four subscales (Perspective Taking, Personal Distress, Fantasy, and Empathic Concern) on twenty-eight five-point Likert items. The subscales incorporate statements such as “I often have tender, concerned feelings for people less fortunate than me,” [ , p. 117] for the Empathic Concern subscale. Answers range from 1 (“Does not describe me well”) to 5 (“Describes me very well”). The main subscales of interest in the current study (Empathic Concern and Personal Distress) showed satisfactory reliability (Cronbach’s Alphas = .65 and .66), comparable to the original version (internal reliabilities between the subscales ranged between .71 to .77 [ ]).

## Compassionate Love Scale [34]
A questionnaire that measures feelings of compassion. It contains twenty-one seven-point Likert items. Answers range from 1 (“Not at all true for me”) to 7 (“Very true of me”). The statements include, for example, “When I hear about someone going through a difficult time, I feel a great deal of compassion for him or her,” [34, p. 651]. Our study indicated a high reliability (Cronbach’s Alpha = .89), similar to the original version (Cronbach’s Alpha = .95) [ ].

## Hypothetical helping situations [53]
Participants read six hypothetical scenarios that offer opportunities to help strangers; this might involve giving money or food to a homeless person, donating money to a charity for children with terminal illnesses, offering a ride to an unfamiliar classmate whose car has broken down, giving directions to a lost stranger, and allowing a classmate to use the viewer’s cellphone. Participants then indicated their likelihood of helping based on stating how they would behave in each situation on a scale of 1 (not at all likely) to 9 (very likely). We obtained a satisfactory reliability (Cronbach’s Alpha = .58).

## Real-life willingness to help
A self-prepared question. At the beginning of the experimental session, participants were informed of a (mock) social project (see: Supplement C in ). They were briefly introduced to a charity initiative (for children with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder) that they could support in various ways, presented from the least to the most engaging. Four options were presented to the participants: a) promote the initiative by sharing it on Facebook; b) support the initiative by committing a short amount of time to administrative work (correcting ten to fifteen pages of material written in Hebrew); c) participate in a one-day charity event, the time and venue of which was to be confirmed; and d) deliver a private class to a beneficiary of the initiative once a week for two months, the time and venue of which was to be confirmed.

## Conflict-related questions
A self-prepared questionnaire based on the common intergroup conflict scales [ , ]. To measure peace-oriented attitudes in intergroup conflict, free from the influence of current political conditions, we devised several questions related to emotions (hostility, anger, hate) and perceptions of outgroups (see: Supplement D in ). The responses formed two subscales: attitudes toward neighboring countries and attitudes toward Israelis who support opposing policies; higher scores corresponded to more negative attitudes toward the respective groups. We also computed overall scores for participants who identified as Jewish Israeli. Both subscales presented high reliability: for attitudes toward neighboring countries (eight items and sixty-two participants), Cronbach’s α = .863, and for attitudes toward Israelis: (also eight items and sixty-two participants) Cronbach’s α = .845.

## Identity With All Humanity scale [34]
A scale that measures participants’ degrees of identification with humanity in general. As Paluck and Green (2009) summarize, decategorization diminishes the influence of ingroup bias by creating a common group identity. The scale comprises nine questions related to the degree to which participants identify with three distinct groups: their communities, their nationalities, and all of humanity (rated on a five-point Likert scale). The Nation subscale could be calculated only for those who identified as Jewish Israeli. The reliabilities showed usability of the subscales(for identification with closest community, Cronbach’s Alpha = .90; for identification with nationality, Cronbach’s Alpha = .834; for identification with all humanity, Cronbach’s Alpha = .88)

## Vladimir’s Choice [27]
The theory behind Vladimir’s Choice assumes that individuals seek to maximize the difference between ingroup and outgroup reward, and not only their own benefit [ ]. During the task, participants were asked to allocate scholarships to Israeli and Palestinian children, with different options altering the overall outcome in addition to differential group benefit (see: Supplement E in ). Due to the nature of the question, we calculated scores only for those who identified as Jewish Israeli. The task presented all students in comparison to outgroup students—in this case, Palestinian children.

## Procedure
On arrival, participants were informed of the length, aims, demands, and voluntariness of the study. Their anonymity was ensured and they submitted written informed consent. The participants then received written information on a charity event organized by a laboratory of the university that requested participants’ involvement (see: Measures). Afterward, the participants were seated at computers and asked to complete a questionnaire on demographic data before viewing and rating the SoVT videos. They then completed trait questionnaires. Lastly, they were debriefed on the purpose of the study.

## Analyses
We evaluated Hypothesis 1 by comparing the mean scores in the HE and LE conditions with a paired t-test.
For Hypothesis 2, we computed an empathy score (empathy (SoVT)) as the difference between the mean negative affect ratings in the HE and LE condition before subjecting it to correlation analyses.
For Hypothesis 3, we correlated the average score of compassion ratings in the HE video condition (compassion (SoVT)) with indices of real-life willingness to help and hypothetical helping. Unlike for the empathy index, we employed no difference score for the following reasons: a) compassion is a more narrowly defined emotional response to a social stimulus, while affective state can have a persisting component (as in a negative mood state); thus, the difference score aimed to subtract the general affective state from the more specific socio-affective (empathic) response; b) compassion or closely related social emotions (e.g. warmth, friendliness, or sympathy) might also be experienced in the LE condition—particularly in more compassionate individuals; this is a component that we wished not to remove. We derived the real-life willingness to help index by treating the responses as ordinal categories, ordered from the least to the most engaging option. When multiple options were selected, we used the upper (the most engaging) option as the outcome. As the ranking of the options was defined ad-hoc, we also explored binary outcome variables for each option individually. For the hypothetical helping measure, we calculated a mean score.
For Hypothesis 4, we calculated Spearman’s correlations between compassion (SoVT) and the prosociality measures.
For Hypothesis 5, we employed a stepwise multiple regression to assess the incremental validity of compassion (SoVT). Due to the lack of significant correlations in Hypothesis 3, we did not run any logistic regression on the data, as had been planned at the preregistration stage.
As indicated in the preregistered analysis protocol, for all measures, we considered any data point exceeding three standard deviations from the mean to be an outlier and removed it from subsequent analyses. When multiple measures were evaluated to test a specific hypothesis, we employed false discovery rate correction [ ] to correct for multiple comparisons and additionally reported the uncorrected values. We performed all calculations and produced data figures using R version 4.0.2. Schematic figures were designed using Google Drawings version 1.1. As effect size measures, we provide Cohen’s d for mean comparisons and standardized regression coefficients (β) for regression analysis. For qualitative evaluation of effect sizes, we follow classical recommendations [ , ] and classify r < = 0.1 as small, r < = 0.3 as medium, r < = 0.5 as large, and d < = 0.2 as small, d < = 0.5 as medium, d < = 0.8 as large.

## Results

## Preregistered analyses
To verify the basic validity of the SoVT, we evaluated its capacity to elicit vicarious negative affect and compassion in viewers by comparing the negative emotional video condition (HE) with the low emotional condition (LE) condition (Hypothesis 1). We observed a significant effect on both negative affect (t = 21.71(78); p < .001; d = 3.11 indicating a medium effect) and compassion (t = 25.31(78); p < .001; d = 3.39, indicating a medium effect) ratings (cf. ). This confirmed the HE videos’ emotionality. Responses on both ratings are presented in .
 Hypothesis 2 targeted the convergent validity of the SoVT empathy measure (the difference score of negative affect ratings in HE and LE videos) with a corresponding questionnaire measure, the Personal Distress subscale of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index. We observed no significant correlation between these measures (r = -0.11; p = 0.34, 95% CI [-0.32, 0.11], cf. ). Our results failed to confirm this hypothesis; interestingly, however, as will be shown below, exploratory analyses of the SoVT empathy index demonstrated robust correlations with several measures of prosociality.
 Hypothesis 3 aimed to test the convergent validity of the SoVT compassion rating (Hypothesis 3a) and its external validity in predicting prosociality (Hypothesis 3b). Due to deviation from normality (W = .94; p = .001) we employed Spearman’s correlation for the compassion measure. For consistency with the preregistration, we also report the Pearson correlations (see: Supplement A in ). As hypothesized (3a), we observed significant weak to moderate correlations with conceptually related measures—that is, between compassion (SoVT) and the Compassionate Love Scale (rs = .37; pFDR < .001; puncor. < .001, 95% CI [0.15, 0.57]—see: ), and between compassion (SoVT) and the Empathic Concern subscale of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index, (rs = 0.23; pFDR = .0457; puncor. = .0457, 95% CI [-0.01, 0.39]—see: ). Regarding external validity (H3b), we observed a positive medium correlation between compassion (SoVT) and the hypothetical helping questions; these, however, did not survive correction for multiple comparisons (rs = 0.23; pFDR = .0842; puncor = .0421 95% CI [-0.03, 0.45], see: ). Moreover, the compassion (SoVT) measure did not correlate significantly with the real-life helping measure defined as the most energy- and time-consuming helping option chosen by a participant (rs = -.03; pFDR = .8184; puncor. = .8184, 95% CI [-0.24, 0.17]). As the ordinal sequence of the options in this measure were defined ad hoc, we also explored relationships with binarized versions of this outcome (help vs. no help). Here, compassion (SoVT) correlated neither with the individual helping options (r < .11; p > .34), nor with the binarized outcome of joining any of the helping options or not (r = .01; pFDR = .9397; puncor. = .9397). In summary, compassion (SoVT) correlated significantly with questionnaire measures of compassion,demonstrating cross-method validity. We also observed a minor correlation with hypothetical helping; this, however, did not survive correction for multiple testing. Moreover, no correlation with a real-life helping measure was present, which indicates overall low levels of external validity in predicting prosocial behavior. We observed the same pattern of results when using Pearson correlations (see: Supplement A in ).
Hypothesis 4 attempted to corroborate the external validity of compassion (SoVT) by correlating it with group-oriented preferences close to prosociality. Subsequent correlations were calculated only for participants who identified themselves as Jewish Israeli (n = 61), due to the relation of the questions to national and ethnic identity. We observed no significant correlations for the Vladimir’s Choice question (rs = .03; pFDR = .99; puncor. = .8407, 95% CI [-0.25, 0.28]), the mean scores for attitudes to neighboring countries (rs = -.12; pFDR = .8407; puncor. = .3289, 95% CI [-0.31, 0.25]), nor attitudes toward Israelis who hold opposing political views (rs = .05; pFDR = .8407; puncor. = .6767, 95% CI [-0.07, 0.44]). In summary, compassion (SoVT) did not correlate significantly with neither the conflict questions nor Vladimir’s Choice, hence it failed to correlate with ingroup favoritism and peace-oriented group preferences.
Hypothesis 5 attempted to test the incremental validity of compassion (SoVT) over the corresponding questionnaires (the Interpersonal Reactivity Index and the Compassionate Love Scale) in terms of its additional predictive power for prosociality. As the previous results demonstrated a significant correlation (uncorrected) between SoVT compassion ratings and hypothetical helping, but not between compassion (SoVT) and real-life helping, we evaluated this hypothesis only with respect to hypothetical helping. The results of the stepwise linear regression are presented in . We observed a significant regression (F(2,74) = 4.81; p = .001) for the baseline model containing the Empathic Concern subscale (β = .27; t(76) = 2.30; p = .02) and the Compassionate Love Scale (β = .12; t(74) = .99; p = .32) as predictors of hypothetical helping. The model that contained compassion (SoVT) as an additional predictor (β = .15; t(73) = 1.26; p = .21) was also significant (F(3,73) = 3.76; p = .014), but failed to improve prediction of prosociality compared to the baseline model (F(1,73) = 1.58; p = .21). These results did not confirm the hypothesis: the compassion measure of the SoVT failed to predict hypothetical help more accurately than the corresponding questionnaires.
 

## Exploratory analyses
Unexpectedly, the SoVT empathy measure, operationalized by the difference in the negative affect rating between the HE and LE videos, did not correlate with the questionnaire measures of empathy (the Personal Distress subscale of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index). To better understand the nature of this measure in terms of its relationships with other constructs, we performed further exploratory analyses. First, we calculated the correlations between empathy (SoVT) and the other socio-affective and socio-cognitive measures (see: ). Second, we correlated empathy (SoVT) with our measures of prosociality (see: ).
 Interestingly, empathy (SoVT) correlated strongly with several measures related to compassion and prosociality, including hypothetical helping, the Compassionate Love Scale, the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (Empathic Concern), and compassion (SoVT).
Since empathy (SoVT) strongly and significantly correlated with hypothetical helping, we tested whether the measure acted as a significant predictor of helping beyond the questionnaire predictors of hypothetical helping: Empathic Concern and the Compassionate Love Scale. Adding empathy (SoVT) to the baseline model (see: Hypothesis 5) led to a significant overall prediction of hypothetical helping (ΔR2 = .18; F(3, 74) = 5.35; p = .002). The model that included empathy (SoVT) offered more accurate predictions than the base model (F(1, 73) = 5.80; p = .0186), and empathy (SoVT) acted as a significant predictor (β = .28; t(73) = 2.41; p = .01866). Thus, empathy (SoVT) predicted hypothetical helping more accurately than the empathy and compassion-related questionnaires.
Finally, we were interested in the effect of group identity as an alternative predictor of prosociality. We correlated the Identity With All Humanity subscales with measures of prosociality (see: ). The results indicate a significant relationship between prosociality and group identity—particularly between the Identity With All Humanity (Nationality) subscale and hypothetical helping (a moderate correlation), and between the Identity With All Humanity (Humanity) subscale and real-life helping (weak to moderate correlations). Moreover, the Nationality and Humanity subscales correlated significantly on a moderate level with attitudes toward neighboring countries. The correlation with the Nationality subscale was positive (higher national identification predicted more negative attitudes toward conflicting nations) and negative with the Humanity subscale (higher degrees of common humanity were related to more positive attitudes).
 With consideration for the diverse origins of the participants (sixty-two identified as Jewish Israeli and eighteen as Arab or Muslim), we compared the differences between the groups on the SoVT measures. Comparing the participants’ responses to suffering using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for empathy (SoVT) (D = 0.19; p = .82; d = 0.22), and for compassion (SoVT), (D = 0.15; p = .97; d = -0.10) revealed no significant group differences.
Additionally, we compared our data with the negative affect rating in the original SoVT validation study obtained from a Swiss sample [31]. For HE (t = 1.03; p = .31; d = 0.16) and LE videos (t = 0.98; p = .33; d = 0.15 indicating a negligible difference), we observed no significant difference between the two samples. The differences between the distributions were also nonsignificant (D = .18; p = .12 and D = .17; p = .16). These results indicate some cultural invariance in the negative affect rating.

## Discussion
A growing body of literature suggests that video-based tools designed to measure social emotions, such as empathy or compassion, offer a promising alternative to the classical questionnaires [ , – ]. In contrast to generalized evaluations of questionnaires, these tasks measure momentary affect in response to sequences of stimuli. While they are used with increasing frequency in various research contexts [ , , ], the network that embeds the socio-affective constructs measured in relation to other relevant concepts remains poorly characterized; this is particularly true with respect to their relationship with prosociality—a behavior often related to empathy and compassion. In this study, we employed a video-based measure of empathy and compassion (the SoVT [ , ]), and assessed convergence with classical questionnaires and (incremental) predictive validity in the prediction of prosociality.
Summing up the confirmatory (preregistered) analyses addressing these questions we found that: 1) Videos that depicted others’ suffering elicited more negative affect and compassion compared to a low emotion baseline condition, confirming the task’s ability to elicit the relevant social emotions. 2) Unexpectedly, the SoVT empathy measure—defined as the difference in negative affect between the HE and LE conditions—was unrelated to Personal Distress (Interpersonal Reactivity Index) (see below, for interesting exploratory results for this measure). 3) Compassion (SoVT) correlated significantly with corresponding questionnaires (the Compassionate Love Scale and Empathic Concern (Interpersonal Reactivity Index)), which provides evidence for cross-method validity and confirms the a priori hypothesis. 4) Compassion correlated only weakly with prosociality (hypothetical helping), and this correlation did not survive correction for multiple comparisons. Moreover, compassion (SoVT) did not correlate significantly with helping in real-life scenarios. 5) Analyses addressing the ability of the SoVT compassion measure to predict preferences for peace and equality in intergroup relations did not show significant effects for ingroup bias or conflict questions. In sum, these results provided only partial evidence for the cross-method and external validity of the SoVT.
The SoVT directly assessed compassion through a rating item, where compassion was defined as a desire to ease the suffering of a person in pain—(akin to a mother’s feelings of warmth and sympathy for a child). This measure demonstrated significant weak to moderate correlations with the corresponding questionnaire scales of Empathic Concern (Interpersonal Reactivity Index) and compassion (Compassionate Love Scale); however, correlations with (hypothetical) prosocial behavior were weak and did not survive multiple comparison corrections. Various factors might account for compassion’s relatively low correlations with external measures and its low predictive power over prosociality. First, participants’ understanding of the compassion rating might have remained relatively abstract and vague, which would cause difficulty relating it to the momentary feelings elicited by the videos. Such an interpretation would align with the finding that conceptualizations and experiences of compassion often diverge [ ]. Future studies might reconceptualize the compassion rating and request ratings of more concrete and basic feelings of warmth, care, and concern.
Another potential explanation might be found in the tendency of considerable parts of both clinical and nonclinical samples in Western countries to encounter difficulty in experiencing and expressing compassion [ , ]. Moreover, the specific cultural and societal setting in Israel might influence the results—particularly when ongoing violent conflict and tense intergroup relations are considered [ ]. Surveys show that a considerable part of the Israeli population has been exposed to terrorist attacks [ , ], with the majority experiencing traumatic stress symptoms and, assumedly, demonstrating habituation as a coping mechanism that prevents the development of more severe symptomatology [ ]. Future studies might build on the results of this study and employ the same measures in cross-cultural comparative designs.
While our confirmatory analyses regarding the external predictive power over prosociality focused on the compassion measure of the SoVT, some evidence does also exist for the prosocial role of empathy, understood as a basic process of shared affect (as operationalized in the SoVT empathy measure) [ , , ]. Therefore, exploratory analyses also evaluated the role of the SoVT empathy measure and revealed this measure to be a strong predictor of prosocial behavior that outperformed the questionnaire measures of empathy and compassion. Empathy (SoVT) also correlated strongly with compassion-related measures, such as the Compassionate Love Scale, Empathic Concern and compassion (SoVT), as well as Perspective Taking (Interpersonal Reactivity Index) The above suggests that the SoVT empathy measure is closely related to measures that index prosocial emotions and (hypothetical) prosocial behavior. These findings align with the view that affect sharing lies at the core of various “faces of empathy”: any empathic process requires at least an initial representation and tracking of the state of the other [ , , ]. This might explain why affect sharing assumed such a central role in the results of this study, correlating with Perspective Taking and Empathic Concern (Interpersonal Reactivity Index), the Compassionate Love Scale, and prosociality. Note that here the empathy index was formed by computing the difference in negative affect ratings between negative and positive videos, which deviates from the original study [ ]. While the advantage of this approach is that it avoids the self-report of the multi-faceted phenomenon of „empathy”in a single rating, instead targeting specifically the sharing of affective states, the disadvantage is that it is not clear to which degree the observed and the experienced emotion are isomorphic (beyond affective valence). Yet the validity of the approach has received support from another empathy task [ , , , ], and our results provide further evidence for convergent and external validity. Nevertheless, future studies should further scrutinize the nature of this measure (e.g. by assessing the degree to which it captures isomorphic emotions).
Interestingly, there were no significant differences in negative affect ratings between our sample and the Swiss sample from the original study [ , , , ], providing some evidence for the cultural invariance of this measure. Note, however, that apart from negative affect, the employed ratings did not match in the two studies (and thus could not be compared), and cultural influences should thus be explored more systematically in future studies.
In summary, the SoVT empathy measure seems to capture an immediate affective resonance to the suffering of others that is distinct from the more intense self-focused (and maladaptive) emotions of “anxiety and discomfort in emotional social settings” ([10], p. 116) indexed by the Personal Distress subscale (Interpersonal Reactivity Index). Rather, higher scores in empathy (SoVT) seem to reflect a tendency to be sensitive to others’ suffering, which can spur motivations to act prosocially. This idea could be evaluated in future studies using measures that differentiate between mere empathic resonance and full-blown personal distress.
In contrast to the impaired effects of empathy and compassion, exploratory analyses suggested that identification with all humanity and with participants’ nationalities (Identification With All Humanity scale [ ]) correlated significantly with real-life helping. Additionally, identification with humanity correlated with more positive attitudes and identification with participants’ nationalities with negative attitudes toward Israel’s neighbors. These correlations were robust (multiple comparison corrected) and of medium size (cf. ). In a practical context, these findings have implications for interventions that target intergroup conflict and for approaches to the cultivation of prosocial human orientations more widely. While various programs focusing on affective antecedents of prosociality have been developed and tested recently [ , , , ], our results suggest complementing these with interventions that support reflection, deconstruction, and widening of the scope of group identification.
Several caveats apply to this study. First, the potential cultural specificity of the findings must be considered. Future studies should employ similar operationalizations of empathy and compassion in comparative study designs. Second, one limitation in the results of this study is that some of the effects did not survive correction for multiple testing, in particular the relationship between compassion (SoVT) and prosociality. The real-life helping measure, however, served the additional purpose of extending validity, meaning that the correction for the two measures employed can be regarded conservative. Moreover, typical correlations between empathy and prosocial behaviors are weak to moderate [ ]. For this reason, we are optimistic that the relationship between trait-level compassion and prosociality can be confirmed in higher powered future studies. Such studies might also explore the ability of SoVT and similar video-based measures [ , ] to predict prosocial orientations and behaviors in ecological settings. Last but not least, the real-life helping measure, might be biased by social desirability effects which may block or boost actual helping [ – ]. Participants may thus lack motivation to the future voluntary commitment or suspect that the scenario was not real. Even though we took care to provide a detailed realistic scenario (cf. Supplement C in ) that was presented in a separate context (before the beginning of the actual study). Nevertheless, these results should be interpreted carefully and mainly serve to extend findings in terms of ecological validity.
Considered together, our results support the validity of the SoVT and of video-based assessment of empathy-related capacities more broadly. While convergent validity was evidenced for the SoVT measure of compassion, its external validity was only partially confirmed and we observed no incremental validity beyond the questionnaire tools. Modification and scrutiny of the employed compassion rating, as well as cross-cultural comparisons, are necessary to optimize and clarify these outcomes. Moreover, the operationalization of empathy in terms of shared negative affect emerged as a reliable predictor of prosociality, which supports the role of this fundamental empathic process in the shaping of prosocial personalities. Participants’ identification with communal, national, and overall human belonging complemented (and surpassed) the correlations of empathy and compassion with prosocial behavior and preferences for intergroup peace and equality. Our findings thus highlight empathic sensitivity and an inclusive sense of identity as two important and potentially synergistic ingredients of prosocial personalities.

## Supporting information
S1 File(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

We wish to express our gratitude to Dr. Eran Halpering, who helped us to devise the conflict-related questions.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0289465.r001Decision Letter 0
ZengXianglongAcademic Editor© 2023 Xianglong Zeng2023Xianglong Zenghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
2 May 2023

PONE-D-23-02420Situational assessment of empathy and compassion: Predicting prosociality using a video-based taskPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Górska,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jun 16 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Xianglong Zeng
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Thanks for the submission and sorry for the late decision, as it is very difficult to find enough reviewers. Now I have received the comments from two authors and both of them agreed that this work is valuable for future research on compassion and recommended Accept with Minor Revision. At the same time, they also provided some suggestions to improve the quality of the article. Please response to each comment from reviewers.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Overall:
This project is more difficult to carry out, so the Social Emotional Video Task (SoVT) is used as an alternative approach to study. Although psychological questionnaires and love scales for empathy are helpful for the investigation of prosocial attitudes, SoVT ratings are not more accurate. Overall, they are generally consistent with the reliability of supporting results and empathic processes, and the situational assessment is more accurate, which has reference significance.
Topic Content:
Empathy and compassion are often hard to tell apart, and this study focused on compassion, which was difficult to identify during the study period. In addition, since theoretical models and experience cannot agree on the prediction of empathy for prosociety, it is important to test the validity of both. Abstract questionnaire items may lead to defects in the completeness and transmissibility of questions and expressions.
participant
The participants were concentrated in Israeli education students, and the test sample had certain limitations and chance. The sample of 79 participants is not convincing enough and should be increased appropriately. Certain cultural backgrounds and circumstances may lead to unexpected results, as well as social tensions arising from Israel's complex and volatile environment.
Measurement method:
Video-based measures of instantaneous responses to a range of stimuli may not be accurate for specific emotional expression; Participants' understanding of compassion ratings may still be relatively abstract and vague, which makes it difficult to relate to the momentary feelings evoked by the video. Conceptualization and experiential compassion often diverge. The habitual cultural memory and expression make the research of cross-cultural scholars have certain obstacles.
Hypothesis and experimental process:
In addition, hypothetical possibilities may tilt the outcome toward positive feedback, since the helping situation is more likely to be weakened in the real world due to various factors. Of course, the willingness to help is just an idea, and has not yet been translated into action.
There are many models, data and hypotheses involved in the experiment, and it is also difficult to analyze and process the data. The reliability of the theory should be repeatedly verified and reasonably verified. Whether the calculated index is consistent with actual emotional expression and psychological status needs further consideration.
Increasing predictive power fidelity methods have not been tested before, so the potential for error and inaccuracy is large. They did not rate compassion due to ambivalence, indirectly through the experience of positive emotions (as in the original version)
The nature of compassion, including negative and positive emotional components, is also uncertain in the description and expression of emotions.
Experimental results and future research:
The empathy index deviates from the original study by calculating the difference in negative impact scores between negative and positive videos. It is not clear to what extent observed and experienced emotions are isomorphic and the nature of this measure should be further examined.
Since the ratings used in the two studies do not match, the comparison cannot be made. Therefore, more attention should be paid to cultural ratings and unified rating standards to make the comparison more accurate. The rating methods of each scale are different, so it is difficult to compare them horizontally.
Typical differences between relevant empathy and prosocial behavior range from weak to moderate, and it is important and essential to explore the ability of SoVT and similar video-based measures to predict prosocial orientation and behavioral ecology.
In short, the significance of this experiment is relatively important and has certain reference value. The research on prosociety is relatively innovative, and I believe that the revised version will be better and better.
Reviewer #2: This is a well-written manuscript on a study exploring correlations between a video-based empathy task, and self-report measures of empathy, as well as hypothetical and mock helping behaviour.
I was unable to access the supplementary data (the provided link led to a single page with a data availability statement only). As such, I’m unable to comment on some important aspects of the methods, such as which questions / emotions participants were asked in response to the videos, what type of content was depicted in the videos, etc..
As far as described in the main text, the methods employed are sound, and the conclusions drawn from them valid. On key limitation is that while participants were asked to indicate willingness to help a charity, in essence this was still a hypothetical measure. Firstly, it is not clear in how participants believed the request was real. Even if they did, they might still have expected to be able to withdraw from the request once it was put to them. As such, an actual, direct measure of helping behaviour is missing (e.g. measuring in how far participants voluntarily assist with an unrelated task during the session). This limits some of the conclusions that can be drawn from this data.
In terms of the observed effects, the authors report their analyses as they were pre-registered, which is good. However, the lack of their predicted correlation between video empathy measure & personal distress scale is not surprising: the PD scale generally is considered to include more maladaptive dysregulated emotional responses, and can be negatively related to prosociality. As such, their findings of correlations between their video empathy measure and empathic concern / perspective taking are to be expected.
Data is not publicly available.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: chao liu
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0289465.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
18 Jul 2023

Dear Prof. Xianglong Zeng,
Based on the reviewers’ comments, we have now made several updates to the manuscript and to the project itself. First of all, we published our data which can now be accessed here: https://osf.io/qa9xs. Regarding the manuscript, we present the sample size rationale with more details (p. 10). Furthermore, we added a new comment to the discussion which discusses potential limitations of the employed real-life helping measure. 
Reviewer 1
1) Overall:
This project is more difficult to carry out, so the Social Emotional Video Task (SoVT) is used as an alternative approach to study. Although psychological questionnaires and love scales for empathy are helpful for the investigation of prosocial attitudes, SoVT ratings are not more accurate. Overall, they are generally consistent with the reliability of supporting results and empathic processes, and the situational assessment is more accurate, which has reference significance.
Thank you for your overall positive evaluation of our manuscript.
2) Topic Content:
Empathy and compassion are often hard to tell apart, and this study focused on compassion, which was difficult to identify during the study period. In addition, since theoretical models and experience cannot agree on the prediction of empathy for prosociety, it is important to test the validity of both. Abstract questionnaire items may lead to defects in the completeness and transmissibility of questions and expressions.
Thank you for supporting our approach and research question. As we outline in the introduction, empathy and compassion are indeed not differentiated clearly in a large part of existing research. This is a limitation that the employed measure (the SoVT) aims to overcome. Moreover, in line with the comment, this task aims to go beyond abstract questionnaire items. 
3) The participants were concentrated in Israeli education students, and the test sample had certain limitations and chance. The sample of 79 participants is not convincing enough and should be increased appropriately. 
The sample size was based on a-priori power analyses that we had reported in the preregistration. We do now also report the power analysis in the manuscript (p. 10):
“The sample size was calculated based on previous correlations between the SoVT and subscales of the IRI and CLS which ranged between .23 and .42 (Klimecki, Leiberg & Singer, 2013). In addition, effect sizes on the association between compassion/empathic concern and costly altruistic behavior range between .17 (Eisenberg et al., 1987) and .53 (FeldmanHall et al, 2015), for example studies revealed effect sizes of .37 (Paciello, et al., 2013) or .35 (Edele, Dziobek, & Keller, 2013) between altruistic behavior and empathic concern. Therefore we expected correlation effects of moderate size (.30). For one-sided tests, power analysis yielded a required sample size of n = 67 (power .80 and alpha .05), which we increased to 80 for potential dropout and exclusion.”
Nevertheless we agree with the reviewer that some of the effects found in our study call for replication in (larger) follow-up studies. This applies especially to the correlation between compassion and prosocial behavior, which did not survive correction for multiple testing, as well as to the effect of SoVT empathy, which was highly significant (p < .001), yet based on exploratory analyses. 
Literature:
Eisenberg, N. & Miller, P. A. The relation of empathy to prosocial and related behaviors. Psychol. Bull. 101, 91–119 (1987)
Klimecki, O. M., Leiberg, S., Ricard, M. & Singer, T. Differential pattern of functional brain plasticity after compassion and empathy training. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 9, 873–879 (2014)
FeldmanHall, O., Dalgleish, T., Evans, D. & Mobbs, D. Empathic concern drives costly altruism. Neuroimage 105, 347–356 (2015)
Paciello, M., Fida, R., Cerniglia, L., Tramontano, C. & Cole, E. High cost helping scenario: The role of empathy, prosocial reasoning and moral disengagement on helping behavior. Pers. Individ. Dif. 55, 3–7 (2013)
Edele, A., Dziobek, I. & Keller, M. Explaining altruistic sharing in the dictator game: The role of affective empathy, cognitive empathy, and justice sensitivity. Learn. Individ. Differ. 24, 96–102 (2013)
4) Certain cultural backgrounds and circumstances may lead to unexpected results, as well as social tensions arising from Israel's complex and volatile environment.
We agree with this point which we have mentioned in the discussion (see first paragraph of page 26). 
5) Measurement method:
Video-based measures of instantaneous responses to a range of stimuli may not be accurate for specific emotional expression; Participants' understanding of compassion ratings may still be relatively abstract and vague, which makes it difficult to relate to the momentary feelings evoked by the video. Conceptualization and experiential compassion often diverge. The habitual cultural memory and expression make the research of cross-cultural scholars have certain obstacles.
Thank you for your valuable comment. We agree with the possibility of variations in the understanding of the word “compassion”, not only between different cultures, but even within one country. Therefore, we emphasize that issue in the discussion (paragraph 2, p.25) and hope it will be followed by studies focusing on the conceptualization of the word. For example, a recent study compared the understanding of compassion between collectivist and individualistic cultures showing significant differences (Steindl et al. 2020). Please note that from the methodological point of view, the cited study used the term “compassion” in various forms while measuring the cross-cultural differences and similarities (Gilbert et al. 2011). Another study showed that the term was similarly understood by 60% of nurses from 15 different countries (Papadopoulos et al. 2016) and its definition was very close to what we presented to our participants (both definitions shared awareness of other people's suffering and a need to alleviate their well-being). A meta-analysis of studies on how compassion is perceived by caregivers and patients showed that in order to unify the multifaceted term while measuring it, the most popular way on a global level was to simply deliver a definition to the participants (Singh et al. 2018). In addition, the authors claim their study showed that the definition itself is similarly comprehended across nations while, according to them, it is the expression of compassion that shows differences. 
Literature:
Steindl, S. R., Yiu, R. X. Q., Baumann, T. & Matos, M. Comparing compassion across cultures: Similarities and differences among Australians and Singaporeans. Aust. Psychol. 55, 208–219 (2020)
Gilbert, P., McEwan, K., Matos, M. & Rivis, A. Fears of compassion: development of three self-report measures. Psychol. Psychother. 84, 239–255 (2011)
Papadopoulos, I. et al. International study on nurses’ views and experiences of compassion. Int. Nurs. Rev. 63, 395–405 (2016)
Singh, P., King-Shier, K. & Sinclair, S. The colours and contours of compassion: A systematic review of the perspectives of compassion among ethnically diverse patients and healthcare providers. PLoS One 13, e0197261 (2018)
6) Hypothesis and experimental process:
In addition, hypothetical possibilities may tilt the outcome toward positive feedback, since the helping situation is more likely to be weakened in the real world due to various factors. Of course, the willingness to help is just an idea, and has not yet been translated into action.
Obtaining a single ecologically valid measure of prosociality that does not violate ethical standards and at the same time rules out effects of social desirability is difficult, if not impossible. However, our approach is in line with how this issue is typically approached in the field, which is to use a multi-method approach relying on hypothetical and real-life helping scenarios. The real-life helping scenario employed here does indeed involve a commitment to help in a future situation (and not yet the full action). However, the first step towards helping in the future event is to indicate one's willingness during the experiment, which we thus consider a prosocial act. Note that similar future helping scenarios have been employed in the literature (Cialdini et al. 1997; Peng et al. 2010; Welp and Brown 2014; Batson et al. 1997; Lehmann et al. 2022). Nevertheless the reviewer is correct that the measure could be biased, for example because of participants not taking their commitment very seriously. Empirically, the relatively low response rate for more committed helping options (only eight people agreed for the most engaging option, and eight for the one but least most engaging option; meanwhile 52% did not agree to be involved in any option at all) speaks against this interpretation. Nevertheless, the alternatives mentioned by the reviewer cannot be ruled out entirely since we did not explicitly register during debriefing if participants had believed the scenario and indeed intended to fulfill their commitment. We do now acknowledge this limitation in the discussion section (p. 28): 
“Last but not least, the real-life helping measure might be biased by social desirability effects which may block or boost actual helping [68, 69, 70]. Participants may thus lack motivation to fulfill the future voluntary commitment or suspect that the scenario was not real. For this reason we took care to provide a detailed realistic scenario (cf. Supplement C) that was presented in a separate context (before the beginning of the actual study). Nevertheless, these results should be interpreted carefully and mainly serve to extend findings in terms of ecological validity.”
Literature:
Cialdini, R. B., Brown, S. L., Lewis, B. P., Luce, C. & Neuberg, S. L. Reinterpreting the empathy–altruism relationship: When one into one equals oneness. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 73, 481–494 (1997)
Peng, W., Lee, M. & Heeter, C. The Effects of a Serious Game on Role-Taking and Willingness to Help. J. Commun. 60, 723–742 (2010)
Welp, L. R. & Brown, C. M. Self-compassion, empathy, and helping intentions. J. Posit. Psychol. 9, 54–65 (2014)
Batson, C. D. et al. Is empathy-induced helping due to self–other merging? J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 73, 495–509 (1997)
Lehmann, K., Böckler, A., Klimecki, O., Müller-Liebmann, C. & Kanske, P. Empathy and correct mental state inferences both promote prosociality. Sci. Rep. 12, 16979 (2022)
7) There are many models, data and hypotheses involved in the experiment, and it is also difficult to analyze and process the data. The reliability of the theory should be repeatedly verified and reasonably verified. Whether the calculated index is consistent with actual emotional expression and psychological status needs further consideration.
Indeed the paper presents a number of tests to corroborate our results and we aimed to strike the right balance between scientific acuity and readability. We assume that by “calculated index” the reviewer is referring to the empathy index. In the discussion we point out the background and support for this index (p. 27), while also acknowledging that it should be scrutinized in future studies (especially the degree of emotional isomorphism). 
8) Increasing predictive power fidelity methods have not been tested before, so the potential for error and inaccuracy is large. 
We are not sure what exactly the reviewer is referring to here. Throughout the results section we provide confidence intervals and p-value, which is a widely accepted way of indexing fidelity of the employed regression approaches. 
9) They did not rate compassion due to ambivalence, indirectly through the experience of positive emotions (as in the original version). The nature of compassion, including negative and positive emotional components, is also uncertain in the description and expression of emotions.
Indeed we adapted the original version of the SoVT and did not assess compassion indirectly as a positive affect, but through a specific item (“How much compassion have you experienced?”), where compassion was defined beforehand as “feeling a desire to ease the suffering of the people in the movie, or sympathetic concern to their wellbeing (e.g. the sort of feeling a mother would feel towards her child who is in pain)”. This acknowledges the fact that compassion can include both pleasant and unpleasant affective components (Gu et al. 2017; Strauss et al. 2016; Condon and Feldman Barrett 2013) and adheres to current conceptualizations of compassion in the field (Goetz et al. 2010; cf. also p. 6 in the introduction).
Literature:
Gu, J., Cavanagh, K., Baer, R. & Strauss, C. An empirical examination of the factor structure of compassion. PLoS One 12, e0172471 (2017)
Strauss, C. et al. What is compassion and how can we measure it? A review of definitions and measures. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 47, 15–27 (2016)
Condon, P. & Feldman Barrett, L. Conceptualizing and experiencing compassion. Emotion 13, 817–821 (2013)
Goetz, J. L., Keltner, D. & Simon-Thomas, E. Compassion: an evolutionary analysis and empirical review. Psychol. Bull. 136, 351–374 (2010)
10) Experimental results and future research:
The empathy index deviates from the original study by calculating the difference in negative impact scores between negative and positive videos. It is not clear to what extent observed and experienced emotions are isomorphic and the nature of this measure should be further examined.
The operationalization of empathy in the SoVT was indeed an update to the previous version of the SoVT. Thus empathy was assessed indirectly as the difference of affect in the negative minus the neutral condition. The reasoning is that a larger difference indicates a larger sensitivity to and resonance with the affective state of others. This approach is based on recent work in the field, including by one of the authors of the current manuscript (F.-M. Trautwein). Specifically, in a similar video-based task (the EmpaToM, which measures empathy and theory of mind), Kanske, Böckler, Trautwein et al. (2015, 2016) showed that the difference of affect experienced for emotional vs. neutral others correlated with empathy questionnaire scores as well as with neural activation patterns typically observed in empathy eliciting situations (cf. Schurz et a., 2020). Moreover, this measure has been applied in a variety of settings, showing that it predicts empathic experiences in everyday life situations (Hildebrandt et al., 2021), differentiates aggressive offenders from controls (Winter et al., 2017) and is modulated over the lifespan (Reiter et al., 2017; Breil et al., 2021).
On a theoretical level, the advantage of this approach is that it doesn’t rely on the participant’s implicit understanding of what empathy means. Given that empathy is a multi-faceted construct (cf. Batson, 2009), it might be challenging to introspectively access empathy in a single item. On the other hand, the disadvantage is that the affect difference measure leaves some uncertainty to which degree the negative emotion experienced by the participant is indeed “isomorphic” to the observed emotion (and thus entirely a “shared affect”). While, assumably, two emotional states will never be 100% isomorphic, the used approach evidences isomorphism in terms of the valence of the experienced emotion. Nevertheless, future research could investigate the degree of isomorphism elicited by the videos (e.g. using categories of basic emotions). We have acknowledged these considerations in the discussion (p. 27).
Literature:
Kanske, P., Böckler, A., Trautwein, F.-M. & Singer, T. Dissecting the social brain: Introducing the EmpaToM to reveal distinct neural networks and brain–behavior relations for empathy and Theory of Mind. Neuroimage 122, 6–19 (2015)
Kanske, P., Böckler, A., Trautwein, F.-M., Parianen Lesemann, F. H. & Singer, T. Are strong empathizers better mentalizers? Evidence for independence and interaction between the routes of social cognition. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 11, 1383–1392 (2016)
Schurz, M., Maliske, L. & Kanske, P. Cross-network interactions in social cognition: A review of findings on task related brain activation and connectivity. Cortex 130, 142–157 (2020)
Hildebrandt, M. K., Jauk, E., Lehmann, K., Maliske, L. & Kanske, P. Brain activation during social cognition predicts everyday perspective-taking: A combined fMRI and ecological momentary assessment study of the social brain. Neuroimage 227, 117624 (2021)
Winter, K., Spengler, S., Bermpohl, F., Singer, T. & Kanske, P. Social cognition in aggressive offenders: Impaired empathy, but intact theory of mind. Sci. Rep. 7, 670 (2017)
Reiter, A. M. F., Kanske, P., Eppinger, B. & Li, S.-C. The Aging of the Social Mind - Differential Effects on Components of Social Understanding. Sci. Rep. 7, 11046 (2017)
Breil, C., Kanske, P., Pittig, R. & Böckler, A. A revised instrument for the assessment of empathy and Theory of Mind in adolescents: Introducing the EmpaToM-Y. Behav. Res. Methods 53, 2487–2501 (2021)
11) Since the ratings used in the two studies do not match, the comparison cannot be made. Therefore, more attention should be paid to cultural ratings and unified rating standards to make the comparison more accurate. The rating methods of each scale are different, so it is difficult to compare them horizontally.
The reviewer is correct that the ratings in the two studies diverged. Note that this study did not aim at a cultural comparison. Nevertheless, to contextualize the results, we made use of the fact that both of the studies used “negative affect” as one of the ratings (which was used in the present study to compute the effect of emotional vs. neutral videos as an indicator of empathy). Thus, we only used the raw scores from these ratings for the comparison of the samples. Even if this does not allow to infer cultural invariance of the full scope of the SoVT (in either of the versions), it provides some evidence for cultural invariance in terms of how the two samples responded affectively to the videos. We have summarized the limitations and implications of these findings in the discussion (p. 27).
12) Typical differences between relevant empathy and prosocial behavior range from weak to moderate, and it is important and essential to explore the ability of SoVT and similar video-based measures to predict prosocial orientation and behavioral ecology.
In short, the significance of this experiment is relatively important and has certain reference value. The research on prosociety is relatively innovative, and I believe that the revised version will be better and better.
Thank you for your comments and for the positive overall evaluation of our manuscript. We also believe that the revision has further improved the manuscript.
Reviewer 2
This is a well-written manuscript on a study exploring correlations between a video-based empathy task, and self-report measures of empathy, as well as hypothetical and mock helping behaviour.
1) I was unable to access the supplementary data (the provided link led to a single page with a data availability statement only). As such, I’m unable to comment on some important aspects of the methods, such as which questions / emotions participants were asked in response to the videos, what type of content was depicted in the videos, etc..
Thank you very much for your positive overall evaluation. We re-attached the supplementary data to the submission, hoping that it will be accessible without further challenges.
1) As far as described in the main text, the methods employed are sound, and the conclusions drawn from them valid. One key limitation is that while participants were asked to indicate willingness to help a charity, in essence this was still a hypothetical measure. Firstly, it is not clear how participants believed the request was real. Even if they did, they might still have expected to be able to withdraw from the request once it was put to them. As such, an actual, direct measure of helping behavior is missing (e.g. measuring how far participants voluntarily assist with an unrelated task during the session). This limits some of the conclusions that can be drawn from this data.
Indeed, the real-life helping scenario employed here involves a commitment to help in a future situation (and not yet the full action). However, the first step towards helping in the future event is to indicate one's willingness during the experiment, which we take to be more than a hypothetical action. Note also that similar future helping scenarios have been employed in the literature (Cialdini et al. 1997; Peng et al. 2010; Welp and Brown 2014; Batson et al. 1997; Lehmann et al. 2022). Also we took great care to ensure the credibility of the scenario by providing a detailed description of the event (see Supplement C). Empirically, the relatively low response rate for more committed helping options (only eight people agreed for the most engaging option and eight for the one but least most engaging option; meanwhile 52% did not agree to be involved in any option at all) does also indicate that participants took their commitment seriously. Nevertheless, the alternatives mentioned by the reviewer cannot be ruled out entirely since we did not explicitly register during debriefing if participants had believed the scenario and indeed intended to fulfill their commitment. We do now acknowledge this limitation in the discussion section (p. 28): 
“Last but not least, the real-life helping measure might be biased by social desirability effects which may block or boost actual helping [68, 69, 70]. Participants may thus lack motivation to fulfill the future voluntary commitment or suspect that the scenario was not real. For this reason we took care to provide a detailed realistic scenario (cf. Supplement C) that was presented in a separate context (before the beginning of the actual study). Nevertheless, these results should be interpreted carefully and mainly serve to extend findings in terms of ecological validity.”
Literature:
Cialdini, R. B., Brown, S. L., Lewis, B. P., Luce, C. & Neuberg, S. L. Reinterpreting the empathy–altruism relationship: When one into one equals oneness. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 73, 481–494 (1997)
Peng, W., Lee, M. & Heeter, C. The Effects of a Serious Game on Role-Taking and Willingness to Help. J. Commun. 60, 723–742 (2010)
Welp, L. R. & Brown, C. M. Self-compassion, empathy, and helping intentions. J. Posit. Psychol. 9, 54–65 (2014)
Batson, C. D. et al. Is empathy-induced helping due to self–other merging? J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 73, 495–509 (1997)
Lehmann, K., Böckler, A., Klimecki, O., Müller-Liebmann, C. & Kanske, P. Empathy and correct mental state inferences both promote prosociality. Sci. Rep. 12, 16979 (2022)
2) In terms of the observed effects, the authors report their analyses as they were pre-registered, which is good. However, the lack of their predicted correlation between video empathy measure & personal distress scale is not surprising: the PD scale generally is considered to include more maladaptive dysregulated emotional responses, and can be negatively related to prosociality. As such, their findings of correlations between their video empathy measure and empathic concern / perspective taking are to be expected.
We appreciate your comment on the Personal Distress (PD) subscale and the SoVT empathy measure. The PD subscale specifically focuses on an individual's tendency to experience distress in response to the distress of others. While this is structurally similar to the SoVT empathy measure (also capturing negative affect in response to suffering) there is indeed a difference in that the IRI scale focuses on rather intense self-oriented feelings of discomfort, anxiety, or unease that might develop when witnessing the suffering of others (e.g. “I feel helpless when I am in the middle of a very emotional situation”). In contrast, the SoVT empathy index seems to capture the more immediate process of being affected by the negative emotion of others in terms of simple resonance with or sharing of their emotions. Current models of empathy often see this as a precursor process that can result in different empathic outcomes (depending on individual or situational factors), including PD and empathic concern (Decety & Jackson, 2006; Singer and Klimecki 2014). Thus, precisely speaking, the Interpersonal Reactivity Index does not isolate this process. While our assumption was that the SoVT empathy measure would still be more closely related to the PD subscale due to the overlap in terms of negative affectivity, there would have been good reasons to target the empathic concern subscale or use a more specific measurement tool. For example, Doherty (1997) found that a scale measuring resonance with others' emotions was indeed quite strongly correlated with empathic concern. 
 Based on your comment, we have now updated the paragraph discussing this finding (p.27):
“In summary, the SoVT empathy measure seems to capture an immediate affective resonance to the suffering of others that is distinct from the more intense self-focused (and maladaptive) emotions of “anxiety and discomfort in emotional social settings” ([10], p. 116) indexed by the Personal Distress subscale of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index. Rather, higher scores in empathy (SoVT) seem to reflect a tendency to be sensitive to others’ suffering, which can spur motivations to act prosocially. This idea could be evaluated in future studies using measures that differentiate between mere empathic resonance and full-blown personal distress.” 
Literature:
Decety, J. & Jackson, P. L. A Social-Neuroscience Perspective on Empathy. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 15, 54–58 (2006)
Singer, T. & Klimecki, O. M. Empathy and compassion. Curr. Biol. 24, R875–R878 (2014)
Doherty, R. W. The emotional contagion scale: A measure of individual differences. J. Nonverbal Behav. 21, 131–154 (1997)
Data is not publicly available.
With the study having progressed towards publication, we have now uploaded the data on the OSF webpage (https://osf.io/qa9xs).
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to the reviewers.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0289465.r003Decision Letter 1
ZengXianglongAcademic Editor© 2023 Xianglong Zeng2023Xianglong Zenghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
20 Jul 2023

Situational assessment of empathy and compassion: Predicting prosociality using a video-based task
PONE-D-23-02420R1
Dear Dr. Górska,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Xianglong Zeng
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Dear authors:
Thanks for your efforts in revision. I have red your response letter and mansucript.
Considering the both of two reviewers gave "minor revision" in the first round and you have well answered their comments. Now I recommend an "accept" and transform this manuscript to editorial office.
I think this should go in line with the journal policy, and I will pay attention to whether editorial office require further confirmation by reviewers.
Sincerely
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0289465.r004Acceptance letter
ZengXianglongAcademic Editor© 2023 Xianglong Zeng2023Xianglong Zenghttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
25 Jul 2023

PONE-D-23-02420R1 
Situational assessment of empathy and compassion: Predicting prosociality using a video-based task 
Dear Dr. Górska:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Xianglong Zeng 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE