pmcInt J Qual Stud Health Well-beingInt J Qual Stud Health Well-being1222ijqhw101256506International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-being1748-26231748-2631Taylor & FrancisPMC11816612PMC11816612.111816612118166123993096410.1080/17482631.2025.246521524652151Version of RecordResearch ArticleResearch Article“They are just as different as the rest of us” – a focus group study of primary teachers’ perceptions of children with ADHD who struggle socially
M. MUNCH ET AL.INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEINGhttps://orcid.org/0009-0009-1238-560XMunchMarie ), and characterized as one of the most pervasive and concerning impairments associated with the diagnosis (e.g., see Huang-Pollock et al., ; Mikami et al., ). Children with ADHD are often experiencing social rejection by their peers (Gardner & Gerdes, ; Hoza, ), with 52–80% being categorized as “socially rejected” in studies relying on peer nominations (Hoza, ; Hoza, Mrug, et al., ). Furthermore, children with ADHD commonly struggle to establish and maintain close, lasting friendships (Spender et al., ), with over half of the children lacking a single reciprocated friendship (Gardner & Gerdes, ; Hoza, Mrug, et al., ). The difficulties in peer interactions typically endure into adolescence (Bagwell et al., ; Sørensen et al., ) and adulthood (Friedman et al., ) and have been associated with severe long-term outcomes such as anxiety, depression, substance misuse, and academic failure (Bagwell et al., ; Greene et al., ; Humphreys et al., ; Ladd et al., )—underscoring the severity.
Within the field of ADHD, social difficulties have traditionally been explored and understood from an individual deficit approach, with studies focusing on the characteristics of the child predisposing to social difficulties (A. Y. Mikami & Normand, ). For instance, several studies have addressed how the core symptoms of ADHD, inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity, may contribute to difficulties in peer interactions, and how children with ADHD typically struggle with attuning and adjusting their behaviour interacting with peers (for reviews see McQuade & Hoza, ; Nijmeijer et al., ). Further, studies have investigated other potential contributors to the social difficulties in ADHD samples, such as cognitive impairments (see e.g., Kofler et al., ), poorer social cognition (see e.g., Parke et al., ), and difficulties regulating emotions (see e.g., Anastopoulos et al., ).
Despite more knowledge on what makes children with ADHD more prone to struggle in peer interactions, the effect of prevailing interventions is uncertain (see Storebø et al., ). These interventions typically include variations of social skill training with a cognitive behavioural fundament, either provided isolated or combined with ADHD medication (Storebø et al., ). While the intervention may reduce symptoms of ADHD, they do not appear to have the desired effect on difficulties in peer interactions, in particular not when relying on peers’ sociometric nominations (Hoza, Gerdes, et al., ; Molina et al., ; Morris et al., ; Storebø et al., ). It has been suggested that the social problems in ADHD represent inconsistent performance rather than a lack of acquired skills (Aduen et al., ; Russell A; Barkley, ). In essence, children with ADHD may have acquired the social skills but have trouble using these skills in more complex, real life, social situations (Mikami et al., ). Relatedly, it has been suggested that the traditional social skills programmes need to be adjusted to focusing more on social support or scaffolding in real life social situations (“in vivo”) (Aduen et al., ; Kofler et al., ; Mikami et al., ), for example by coaching teachers and parents to support the children in play activities, like facilitating friendships through parent supported play dates (Mikami, Normand, et al., ). Further, it has been suggested that traditional interventions too narrowly have focused on deficits within the child and failed to account for social contextual factors, and the peer group (Mikami & Normand, ; Mikami et al., ). This perspective relates to how a negative reputation of children with ADHD is established early on (Hoza, Mrug, et al., ) and is resistant to change even if the negative behaviour of the child struggling socially is reduced (Mrug et al., ; Price & Dodge, ). Subsequently, it has been suggested that interventions should address peers attitudes directly (Mikami et al., ; Price & Dodge, ), and include other social contextual elements such as facilitating an inclusive class environment (i.e., establishing a “we”/“ingroup”), highlighting the child’s strengths, and working on establishing a positive teacher-child relationship (Mikami & Normand, ; Mikami, Owens, et al., ).
The school represents an important context for children’s social development and peer interactions (García Bacete et al., ), and as such for supporting children struggling socially. Further, and in line with a social contextual perspective (Mikami & Normand, ; Mikami, Owens, et al., ) the relationship between the teacher and child is in itself known to be significant for the child’s peer relationships (Endedijk et al., ), in particular negative aspects of the teacher-child relationship (Endedijk et al., ). This may partially be due to peers using the teacher as a social referent and making inferences about another child’s social value by observing how the teachers interact with the child (Hughes et al., ) and respond to the child’s behaviour (Mikami et al., ). Further, the teacher may also be central in terms of which interventions or support are initiated to help a child who is socially rejected or otherwise struggles socially. How a teacher intervene will presumably be affected by a teachers ethological understanding of the social problems. For instance, whether a teacher perceives the social struggles of a child as “caused by” ADHD’ (that the teacher may perceive as a chronic neurobiological disorder) versus being caused by a non-inclusive class environment, will probably imply different approaches. Related to this, some have argued that a medical perception of behavioural problems may impede the teacher from intervening and increase the chance of the teacher believing other professionals (e.g., a psychologist) should be the one addressing the difficulties (te Meerman et al., ).
Given the importance of the school context and the teacher for children’s peer interactions, a genuine curiosity about how teachers perceive and address social difficulties paved the way for the current study. Within the field of ADHD, there is to our knowledge a spare amount of research emphasizing the teachers’ perspective. The aim of the current study was thus to get an insight into how teachers understand children struggling socially, how they perceive their own role and what they do to support these children. We were particularly interested in whether an ADHD diagnosis affect their perceptions and what perspectives on social difficulties and children in general were reflected trough the teachers’ responses.

## Materials and methods

## Study setting
The study was conducted within the context of public primary schools in Norway. In Norway children attend primary school from 1st to 7th grade, they normal start the year they turn 6 and finish the year they turn 13. The principle of inclusive education is strongly rooted in Norway, with less than 1% attending special schools and 2.2% attending private schools (Nes, ). Most children with special educational needs and diagnoses are thus enrolled in mainstream, public schools. This includes children diagnosed with ADHD, which has a national prevalence of 3.8% (Surén et al., ). The Norwegian Education Act states that all children are entitled to an adapted education (Education Act, ) and “a good physical and psycho-social environment that will promote health, well-being and learning” (Education Act, ). Relatedly, many schools in Norway have committed to different school wide psychosocial programmes targeting reduction of problem behaviour and increase of prosocial behaviour (e.g., Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (Center on PBIS, ) and The Incredible Years Teacher Classroom Management (Webster-Stratton et al., )).

## Design
To capture the teachers’ perceptions of their role and practice when children with ADHD are struggling socially we conducted focus group interviews (Halkier, ; Kitzinger, ) within existing teams of teacher colleagues. The use of focus group interviews was considered suited to investigate our research questions and to bring out different perspectives and experiences among teachers within the same context. Conducting interviews at different primary schools provide opportunities also to explore potential differences in perspectives and practices between schools.

## Recruitment procedure and participants
In cooperation with a representative from Bergen Municipality the first author contacted the school leaders of five primary schools from different districts of Bergen municipally. The school leaders were provided with information about the study (See Appendix 1: Information sheet), and subsequently confirmed their interest to contribute and to assemble a group of 3–5 teachers willing to participate. To increase the convenience of participating, we strived to schedule the focus group interviews at already established meeting times for each school. Each of the five focus group interviews included 3–5 participants, encompassing 19 teachers in total (14 female). 17 of the participants were educated as teachers, while one was a teacher assistant with extensive experience, and one was a special education teacher. The work experience of the participants ranged from 3 to 30 years.

## Data collection and material
The focus group interviews were carried out by the first and second author during April and May 2024. All five interviews took place at the participants respective schools, each with a duration of about 60 minutes. We applied a semi-structured interview guide developed for the purpose of the current study consisting of core inquiries and supplementary questions concerning the teachers’ perceptions of social difficulties, how a diagnosis of ADHD affected these, and what teachers typically do to support children struggling socially (see also Appendix 2 Interview Guide). In each interview the first author had the main responsibility for leading the interviews, while the second author participated as a group moderator (Billups, ). The group moderator aimed to ensure that all participants were given the opportunity to contribute and to avoid that one or two voices overruled the others. The moderator also contributed with summaries and reflections on how we perceived the participants responses, both to ensure that our perceptions resonated with what they tried to convey and to validate emotional content. The entire focus group interviews were audio recorded, using two separate recorders. The recordings were subsequently transferred to a safe platform and transcribed into written text, supported by the transcription software Whisper (OpenAI, ). The texts from each interview ranged in length from 11,178 words to 16,844 words and was the subject of further analyses.

## Data analysis and reflexive processes
The data were analysed using reflexive thematic analysis, relying on the interpretation and conceptualization of this approach developed by Braun and Clarke (Braun & Clarke, , ). A reflexive thematic analysis is normally conceptualized as consisting of six different phases, though an essential part involves moving back and forth between the phases. In the first phase the first author listened and relistened to the audio-recordings of the interviews and read the transcriptions several times, making notes and discussing elements that came across as important to pursue with the second author. All authors then met to decide on analytic focus, deciding on the following: How do the teachers perceive their own role when a child is struggling socially, and what do they do to alleviate such difficulties? In the second phase the first author coded the data material, in close cooperation with the second author. This involved re-reading and coding each interview thoroughly using the software NVivo (QRS International, ) to organize the material. We were particularly attentive to make the codes fine-grained enough to capture nuances in the responses and had to redo the coding of first interview to achieve this. In the third phase the first and second author met to work meticulously with the codes, reflecting on which codes belonged together in terms of constituting meaningful units. This was done in a systematic manner by going through a printed list of all codes, and subsequently chunk, colour-code and label meaningful units. Through this process we discerned and named two overarching themes, each with several subthemes. In the fourth phase the first author revisited the full data material several times to assess coherence between themes and data. Some codes have been moved to different subthemes after further re-reflecting on the content of subtheme. Similarly, the initial number of subthemes was reduced because of overlap and/or subthemes not fitting the analytic scope. In the fifth phase the first author wrote the initial draft of the findings. This was sent to all authors who met to discuss the thematic structure. The first author then renamed some of the themes and rewrote the text to condense and clarify each theme. The first and second author then finalized the presentation of the themes.

## Reflexivity statement
All authors are clinical psychologists with broad experience working with children both in psychiatric health care service and from school psychology service. The second author is a professor in psychology with extensive experience investigating psychological phenomena from a qualitative approach, while the three last authors are more experienced in quantitative, neuropsychological research. The first author is a female psychologist and research fellow doing on a Ph.D. on Social problems among children with ADHD. She has prior experience working in school psychology services, leading to the impression that teachers experience challenges in supporting children struggling socially, and often tend to explain these problems from an individual deficit perspective—in particular when the child is diagnosed with ADHD. Further, working on the other articles of her Ph.D. project, that are investigating the matter from a quantitative, neuropsychological perspective, she has had some inner struggles being embedded within a field where the main focus is to investigate individual deficits. The work of Mikami (e.g., see Mikami & Normand, ) has been of great inspiration and is in accordance with her pre-conception of the significance of including a social contextual perspective when working with social problems in ADHD. It also made her interested in exploring from what perspective teachers, who may be vital to a child’s social development, perceive and intervene when a child struggles in interactions with peers. The different perspectives represented by the authors, is believed to be a strength, hindering the interpretation of the results from a single pre-conceived perspective.

## Ethics
The study was assessed by the Norwegian Regional Ethical Committee as not required for submission (Application Number: 708680). It was also assessed by the Data Protection Officers affiliated with the University of Bergen (RETTE ID: R3299) and Bergen Municipality. We did not receive any fundings to conduct this study and have no conflicting interests to disclose. Participation in the study was voluntary and no sensitive information about the participants was gathered. All participants were provided with detailed written information about the study and what participation involved (See Appendix 1: Information sheet) and gave their written consent to participate in advance of the interviews. Participation required busy professionals to devote time to attend the focus groups and was not awarded in any way. Given the recruitment through the school leader, one cannot rule out that the participants experienced some informal pressure. However, across all interviews participants described participation as a positive experience, which they related to the opportunity reflect on a topic that engaged them. The participants were instructed to avoid giving sensitive or identifying information about the children they were discussing to avoid identifying information being provided about third parties.

## Results
Engagement and careful considerations characterized the interaction during interviews. Although supporting children struggling socially clearly represented one of many roles the teachers hold, it stood out as a highly prioritized one, causing considerable concern among the teachers:
It’s painful to see children struggling socially. Maybe the most painful thing. If a child is struggling with Maths or with English. I can relax and think we can work that out. We have a lot of time. The whole life. That’s going to work out fine. But with friendship. You know it is so devastating. For their mental health. For such a long time. Maybe for life. (Informant 2, FG1)

Navigating different roles, including attending to academic progress and the needs of all children, the teachers conveyed experiences of cross-pressure and of being overstretched, e.g., evident in cooperation with external services:
I have been frustrated after such meetings, because there are many things that are beneficial to do, but do I actually have the opportunity to implement this here in this classroom? I have only been in one meeting where the person from CAP (Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Services) said that he did not know the total load in this class. (Informant 3, FG5)

Analysing the coded data material resulted in a thematic structure with two overarching themes, each with several subthemes. The first theme, Monitoring and Attending to Individual Needs in a Context, represents the teachers’ perceptions of their role and responsibilities when a child struggles socially. The second theme, Tailoring Interventions Through Continuous Assessments, represents how the teachers strived to fulfil this role in their everyday practice. The two themes are thus closely related, with the second theme building on the first theme.

## Theme 1: monitoring and attending to individual needs in a context
This theme represents the teachers’ perceived responsibility for facilitating friendships and social coping for children struggling socially, but also for the well-being of the whole child group. This came across as comprehensive responsibility and embedded having an overview of the specific needs of the children struggling socially, while keeping a broad contextual perspective and balancing different needs. We discerned three subthemes, each capturing important aspects of this role: To Get to Know Each Child; To Facilitate Coping; and To Monitor Interactions and Facilitate Friendships.

## To get to know each child
This subtheme represents how establishing a secure teacher-child relationship and knowing each child was perceived as fundamental to support children socially, and as an integral part of the teacher’s role. The subtheme was founded on a shared perception of children as unique, with a context-dependent functioning.
A diagnosis of ADHD was by some conveyed to provide general guidance on how to intervene, e.g., to facilitate predictability and structure. However, teachers throughout interviews emphasized how children with ADHD are widely diverse and “just as different as the rest of us” (Informant 2, FG1). Teachers therefore tended not to focus on the ADHD diagnosis:
If there is a suspicion of ADHD we tell the parents that if the diagnosis is confirmed this will not change much. We will work with the kid, like the kid is, if it says ADHD or not. The kid is who it is, in a way. “Oh, really?” some parents respond. It is like they believe that if they get a diagnosis everything will change. No, it does not. We work quietly in the same way, really. (Informant 1, FG2)

Rather, the perception of each child as unique was dominant, illustrated by responses such as “It’s a bit like asking how tall a tree is” (Informant 5, FG5) when asked what may cause social difficulties. Subsequently the teachers persistently conveyed how getting to know all children, with their specific characteristics, challenges and strengths, was perceived as an integral and fundamental part of their responsibility.
Getting to know the children also involved looking beyond the observable, with teachers in FG1, 3, and 4 conveying how they interpreted disturbing behaviours and children seeking adults as an expression of social insecurity. The teachers further emphasized how their role implied being constantly aware of any context-related changes in the children’s functioning, expressed through numerous quotes e.g.: “And then their level of tolerance varies greatly. From day to day, minute to minute. Based on what has happened really. You do not know what kind of child you meet at 08:30” (Informant 4, FG1). Knowing the child thus involved to acknowledge and notice such fluctuations, and to acquire an expertise in interpreting subtle cues as indicators of functioning: “After you get to know them well … it does not take more than a gaze than you know something about what kind of day it will be” (Respondent 2, FG1).
Importantly, establishing and maintaining a secure teacher-child relationship was emphasized as fundamental to support children socially and as part of the teacher’s role. This was most explicitly addressed in FG1, 3, and 5, and the teachers stressed how allocating enough time and patience was part of their responsibility, and particularly important interacting with children struggling socially and children with ADHD:
They have been rejected so many times. So, they will test you and see what it takes before you too turn your back on them […] and must be sure that you will be there and tolerate me. That you will tolerate the whole of me. (Informant 2, FG1)

It was conveyed how the importance of the specific teacher-child relationship became particularly evident in situations where the teacher knowing the child was absent. “Yes, we have some children with whom we know that if that teacher is absent everything will fall apart” (Informant 3, FG5). Supporting a child socially was thus not perceived as a generalized competence but depended on the specific teacher-child relationship.

## To facilitate coping
This subtheme represents the teachers sense of responsibility to facilitate social coping for children struggling socially. Providing the child with the needed scaffolding and support to achieve positive experiences with peers was thus perceived as an important part of the teacher’s role.
Initially, some of the teachers reflected on how their own attitudes towards children may affect the child’s coping. “It is about feeling useful and capable. And then they do not always bother or feel like it or manage. But you need to keep up the expectation. One must never stop believing in a child” (Informant 3, FG2). Such reflections implied that part of the teacher’s role was to maintain a belief in the child, even though the child itself may have lost this belief.
Overall teachers throughout interviews both conveyed a responsibility to facilitate social coping, but importantly also a sense of mattering in how the children succeed socially. Although fulfilling this responsibility came across as demanding, the responses thus reflected a belief in that their presence, and intertwined support, was important to the outcome of social interactions e.g.:” And you know that if you leave the football field for half a minute, things might explode. Because you did not see the situation that was about to occur. You were not there to take charge” (Informant 3, FG1). Relatedly, it was emphasized how part of the teacher’s responsibility was to obtain knowledge about particular situations that might be challenging for the child as a foundation for how to intervene. This gaze or “trained eye” for the child’s need in different situations was particularly evident in FG1 and FG4:
It is a “precautionary principle” that is really what the teacher’s gaze is about. Because after getting to know each child – and that is the key. You need to know all the children in your class and what is difficult for each one. And then it is the precautionary principle. All the time you are like, what might happen here? And what may happen there? And then you will get to learn, “ok, this will work out” or ‘here I will need to intervene a bit or distract a bit. (Informant 2, FG4)

## To monitor interactions and facilitate friendships
This subtheme represents the teachers sense of responsibility for ensuring that everyone has at least one friend. This embedded having an overview of the social dynamics in the day-to-day interactions unfolding between the children.
Importantly, teachers throughout the interviews expressed a great concern for children lacking a close friend. They described how these children recurrently occupied their thoughts and how striving towards ensuring friendships for all was perceived as an important part of their role: “You might not have 30, but to have at least one or two friends is something that is worked really hard at to achieve. Because we know how important this is” (Informant 3, FG2). Relatedly, the teachers provided numerous examples illustrating how monitoring the social interactions between the children was an integral part of their role, with a specific focus on children perceived as socially rejected or lacking close friends: “When you walk around [at recess] you have an eye for anyone who are alone” (Informant 1, FG4).
The teachers further expressed a responsibility and natural awareness of monitoring how the children affected each other, including the influence of peers on children struggling socially. e.g., informant 2 (FG3) reflected on how social difficulties in children with ADHD may depend on “who the child is surrounded by, and if they are willing to accept the child and what it has to offer.” Subsequently their role embedded being sensitive to dynamics and any changes in the dynamics, often related to incidents within or outside the school setting, which was conveyed as a demanding and complex task: “And then you have to check: Are you two able to be seated next to each other after arguing this weekend, or do you need a break? And then I need to reorganize the whole classroom” (Informant 5, FG1).
Monitoring interactions, several responses relatedly illustrated how part of the teacher’s role was to balance the attentiveness to the children struggling socially versus the other children, and experiences of being pulled in different directions. “Because there we are again. Ok, you have 20 children in the classroom and one in the hallway. Where are you supposed to be? That is a dilemma we face all the time” (Informant 3, FG1). Some teachers also reflected on how much to expect from peers regarding accommodating the needs of individuals struggling socially with this balancing being another part of their responsibility, e.g.: “How long should you ask someone to include somebody, and to what degree are they supposed to set themselves aside to include the last one” (Informant 3, FG5).

## Theme 2: tailoring interventions through continuous assessments
This theme represents the teachers’ descriptions of what they do to support children who struggle socially, both in order to get to know the child and to facilitate social coping and friendships. The theme reflects how the teachers are engaged in a continuous process of tailoring interventions to accommodate the specific needs of the individual child in the context of the overall child group. This embedded the teachers actively participating in the children’s social lives, and making ongoing adjustments accommodating changing needs, dynamics and context. Four subthemes were constructed through our analyses: Participating in Play and Activities; Structuring Groups and Activities; Initiating Activities and Dialogues to Strengthen Inclusion and Involving Parents

## Participating in play and activities
This subtheme represents the teachers’ manner of participating in children’s play and activities in a school context. This was conveyed as important to build a secure teacher-child relationship, and importantly as an opportunity to provide tailored “in vivo” support to increase the child’s chance of coping socially.
Particularly in FG1 and FG3 teachers emphasized how participating in play and activities, showing interest in the child and sharing positive experiences, was important to establish a secure bond between the child and the teacher. “The relationship building that you were asking about. You achieve that through participating in activities with these children, right. You need to play boardgames with just those children, and you need to play football with just that child” (Informant 3, FG1). Relatedly, teachers across interviews described how the mere presence of a teacher who knows the child and whom the child has a secure bond with contributed to a sense of safety for children struggling socially and thereby increased their chance of social coping:
The relation is alfa and omega for these things. If it is going to work. Because some may only need a person taking their hand, saying “Let us walk together and figure this out”. And then we’ll try and see. And it’s like it might work. But, if it is a new and unfamiliar person, it is not certain that it will work out. And they might not notice [the needs] either, because they do not know the child. They do not see it. They might think it is always like that. (Informant 3, FG5).

Importantly, responses across all interviews reflected how engaging in play and activities was used as gateway to give the children adapted “in vivo” support, both during ongoing child-initiated activities and teacher-initiated activities. This support typically involved the teacher taking the lead and structuring play and activities, including reminding the children of the current rules and help children engage in play with others. “If a pupil approach me and wants to talk, because she doesn’t have anyone else to talk to, I typically initiate a play: ‘Hey, you two. Let’s play Ninja’, and then I sneak out” (Informant 5, FG5). This example illustrates how specific knowledge about the child’s interests (e.g., Ninja) and the child’s specific needs in the current situation (e.g., to find someone to play with) guided the teacher’s intervention.
Further, some of the teachers described how they provided “in vivo” support by modelling social behaviours, redirecting negative behaviour and contributing with alternative strategies and perspectives. e.g., Informant 1 (FG3) explained: “We play a lot, and I participate in the play. Because if they get angry, I can ask ‘Ok, but what does that really mean?’” Relatedly teachers in FG1 and FG2 reflected on how supporting a child also involved challenging the child, at just the right level:
If you know that if a child loses it will be a major situation. Then it is very comfortable to blow the whistle 2 minutes before the end of game, while he is in the lead [everyone is laughing] But at the same time, playing against that child I will be thinking “No, I will not let him score one goal on me!” You know to challenge him, so that he can feel it, but with a grownup. (Informant 3, FG1)

## Structuring groups and activities
This subtheme represents how the teachers paired or assembled children assumed to be a good match and strived to facilitate activities wherein children struggling socially got to show their strengths. This subtheme thus reflects how the teachers continuously worked on adapting and adjusting the context to fulfil their role of facilitating friendships and social coping.
One of the most persistently reported interventions, was to arrange smaller play groups, typically in recess, with the teachers tailoring the activities and level of support, according to the child’s specific needs: “adult-directed groups of children that might not always have chosen each other, but that we choose, and then we try to assemble these children and observe if it might work” (Informant 3, FG2). Overall, the teachers conveyed positive experiences with such playgroups, but also instances of relationships that did not endure outside the playgroup setting and the recurrent needs to make adjustments.
In assembling or pairing children for playgroups, but also for other purposes, teachers across interviews described to “match” children based on perceived similarities and interests in order to facilitate friendships. e.g., informant 5 (FG5) expressed: “when we assemble groups we think,’ oh, this strange kid here is probably a good fit with this other strange kid here, maybe, possibly. So, we place them in the same group or next to each other.’ So, we do think about it and try to be a ”matchmaker.” Another measure, particularly emphasized in FG1, 2, and 5, was to facilitate equality by providing children with the opportunity to interact with peers across classes and across age-groups, implying a deliberate expansion of the child’s regular context. Importantly, improvising and making changes in group assembling based on knowledge about the particular child and observations of dynamics—was also conveyed as an important part of their practice.
Then you are thinking that “ok, yesterday they played well together, and he or she needs some extra support. I pair them on the excursion tomorrow.” Then an incident occurs in the period between sending them home and the excursion, resulting in the need to make a quick change the arrangement. It’s not always unproblematic, but it’s kind of part of our job. (Respondent 1, FG1)

In addition to attentiveness to group assembling, teachers across all interviews conveyed how they deliberately facilitated activities or contexts providing children struggling socially with the opportunity to show their strengths. It was reflected on how this could change the peers’ perceptions and in turn facilitate friendships:
Pick something they are good at [e.g. music], and then include others who may have the same interest, and use recess or part of the classes, and just “Ok, you can play together now” and then the person who is feeling lonely becomes a valuable resource. And maybe someone the others admire a bit. Like “Oh. He knows how to play the piano, or he can sing that song, or he can teach me how to play the drums. He knows all those instruments. See what he can teach me!” And it’s a bit like ‘He was actually a bit cool to hang out with. Maybe we can do other stuff together as well. ‘.(Informant 3, FG5)

Relatedly, one of the teachers in FG3 emphasized how using nature as a context for interactions that was done deliberately to facilitate coping and friendships for children with difficulties regulating, such as children with ADHD:
And I am a lot outdoors with the children, right? And it works. I don’t know, but it must be researched I believe. What is happening … But it is easier to be a child outside or have ADHD outside. I don’t know. But at least there is something happening. (Respondent 1, FG3)

## Initiating activities and dialogues to strengthen inclusion
This subtheme represents the teachers attempt to build an inclusive environment, through dialogues and activities. This was done to increase peers’ acceptance of children struggling socially and decrease the risk of rejection.
Across interviews (though not explicitly addressed in FG5) teachers expressed how facilitating openness about the ADHD diagnosis was perceived to increase acceptance among peers. This was done in close cooperation with the child and typically involved dialogues with the class.
I have a student in my class who got an ADHD diagnosis, and he wanted to tell the class, wanted the others to know. And he told about it, and it was very difficult for him. So, he started to cry. And the feedback from the rest of the class… It made me cry. Because they are so sweet. (Informant 2, FG2)

Relatedly, it was expressed by several how transparency in general on the specific challenges of children was facilitated and perceived to expand the peers understanding and acceptance: “If they know the reason, they might be more reluctant to reject someone” (Informant 2, FG3). While the use of cooperative plays to strengthen inclusion and class environment was illustrated in FG5, teachers in FG1 and FG4 exemplified the use of dialogues to strengthen inclusive attitudes and build a “team spirit”.
Further, teachers across three of the interviews (FG1, 2, 3) described how they worked on enhancing inclusion though specific school wide interventions implying children supporting children; either through buddy/peer-mentor arrangements or trough child-led activities during recess. It was exemplified how child-lead activities enabled children struggling socially to “dare to join” (Informant 3, FG3), but also how being given the responsibility of leading activities could be particularly beneficial for children struggling socially.
Throughout interviews, the teachers also described using elements from broader school wide programmes, aimed at strengthening inclusion and socio-emotional competence. Such programmes were by some of the teachers perceived positively by representing a shared platform and language. However, it was also exemplified how they needed to adjust or even abandon interventions from such programmes to accommodate the specific needs of the children, implying how their practice built on specific, contextual knowledge.
In my experience it has been like “ok, now we are working on xx [name of the program], and then we are working on something else to strengthen the class environment”. That [the program] in a way has not been affiliated with the work on the class environment. (Informant 4, FG5)

## Involving parents
This subtheme represents the teachers practice of involving parents to facilitate friendships. The purpose of this was to provide coherence in the support of children struggling socially, and to facilitate friendships by extending the child’s opportunities to interact with peers in an alternative context where they were more likely to succeed socially.
The importance of involving parents was emphasized across all interviews, implying the teachers dependency on parent cooperation to succeed in their efforts to support children socially. Cooperating with parents typically involved the teacher sharing their perspectives and experiences of the child’s social life in the school context and efforts to involve parents in their work. Teachers in FG3 and FG4 specifically described how they reached out to the parents and encouraged interactions outside the school setting. e.g., informant 1 (FG4) exemplified how she typically phoned parents saying: “I have seen them together now and then. Maybe it would be a good idea to let them be together at home and get to play”, and further how she amplified the significance of playdates in the aftermath by “talking to the children together, knowing that she was at home with her, to hype it a bit, and then you can ask: “Oh, are you going doing it again some time?”. Several responses reflected how interactions outside the school setting and involving parents were perceived to give the children a better opportunity to develop friendships, illustrated through this quote by Informant 3 (FG3):
The parents can be more closely involved, and the children get to play one-on-one, or fewer, for an extended period of time, engaging in a shared activity outside the school setting […] so that a closer relationship can develop than through playing Ludo at school.

However, in FG3 and FG5 the teachers reflected on how cooperating with the parents is more difficult than it used to be, because of privacy laws such as General Data Protection Regulations (GDPRs) hindering the teachers in sharing contact information of peers with the other parents. As such, legislations indented to protect the children, was perceived as a barrier to involve the parents in supporting children struggling.

## Discussion
We conducted focus group interviews to explore how teachers perceived their role when children with ADHD are struggling socially and how they support these children. Overarching, the teachers conveyed how knowing each child, beyond diagnostic status, and facilitating children’s social well-being was perceived as an integral part of their role. Importantly, they described a practice characterized by a continuous tailoring of interventions based on the individual child’s needs, context, and the peer group. The findings represent a tendency towards a more complex and contextual understanding of social difficulties, expanding beyond a more narrow focus on individual behavioural difficulties. The latter has been prevailing within the field of ADHD (e.g., see Mikami & Normand, ), with what appears to be an unsuccessful focus on training of social skills (Morris et al., ; Storebø et al., ). We believe the teachers’ perspective represents an important contribution in the understanding of how to support children with ADHD, and children in general, struggling socially.
Of initial importance, the teachers in our interviews were not focused on the ADHD diagnosis and did not tend to differentiate their perceived responsibility for supporting children with or without a diagnosis. Rather the teachers conveyed a responsibility to facilitate friendships and social coping for all children. The current findings will thus include but are not limited to children with ADHD. Relatedly, a prevailing perception among the teachers was how children, regardless of diagnoses, are widely different and how a fundamental part of the teacher’s role is to get to know each child with its specific characteristics, strengths and needs. Further, the importance of establishing a close teacher-child relationship was frequently highlighted and perceived as essential to get in the position to support the children socially. Although several studies have demonstrated the importance of a close teacher-child relationship to a child’s relations with peers (Endedijk et al., ), it has been underemphasized in the field of ADHD (Ewe, ). The teachers’ emphasis on the teacher-child relationship may thus reflect a gap between the focus of research and the teachers’ actual practice, with the teacher’s practice reflecting a more contextual approach (see Mikami & Normand, ).
Following the perception of each child as unique, an ongoing tailoring of interventions adapted to the specific child, characterized the teachers’ descriptions of their daily practice. In addition to a sensitivity to the child’s needs, this tailoring also required detecting changes in peer dynamics and balancing the needs of the individual with the needs of the whole group. We believe the teachers conveyed reflections and practices that can be interpreted as what Manen ( ) calls pedagogical thoughtfulness and tact. Manen ( ) describes how pedagogical thoughtfulness is something different than generalized knowledge and embeds the ability to sense what a child needs, based on experience and careful reflections. Pedagogical thoughtfulness is “sustained by a certain kind of seeing, of listening, of responding to a particular child or children in this or that situation” (p.10), and “tactful educators have developed a caring attentiveness to the unique: the uniqueness of children, the uniqueness of every situation, and the uniqueness of individual lives” (p.8). Echoing this description, the teachers in our interviews appeared to rely on acquired, specific knowledge of the child in a context, rather than generalized knowledge, such as information embedded in a diagnosis or a programme.
Facilitating social coping and friendships were conveyed as integral parts of the teachers’ role and responsibility and reflected through various descriptions of their practice. One of the most frequently described interventions was arranging smaller playgroups consisting of peers carefully selected by the teacher. This structured form of social interactions may be particularly beneficial for children with ADHD by reducing the complexity and elements they need to attend to and process (e.g., see Kofler et al., ). Further mere proximity and engaging in a common activity may increase the chance of social acceptance and friendships (Mikami et al., ; Rohrer et al., ). Moreover, the teachers consistently described providing the children with individually and contextually adapted support, both in structured settings such as the playgroups, but also in naturally occurring social settings such as in recess. This kind of “in vivo” scaffolding at the point of performance has been emphasized as important by several researchers within the field of ADHD (Kofler et al., ; Mikami et al., ) and has been contrasted to decontextualized social skills training (e.g., in the context of a clinic) that fails to account for social difficulties representing difficulties with social performance rather than social skills (Aduen et al., ; Barkley, ). Accordingly, the teachers practice of supporting children in real life social interactions represent a broadening of the traditional venue of interventions.
Coupling children based on similarities and interests was described as a measure to facilitate friendships across interviews, with teachers conveying stories of children finding true friendships through this kind of matchmaking. These more experience-based interventions, reflecting the conceptualizations of Manen ( ), are supported by early research demonstrating how shared characteristics and interests—and knowledge of such similarities—are indeed important to friendship formation in childhood (Ladd & Emerson, ). Further the teachers described how they typically included parents in their work by suggesting for parents to invite peers, the teachers perceived as “good matches”, home or to other activities outside a school setting. Interestingly, in the limited amount of research on interventions targeting friendships, the involvement of parents through parent supported play-dates appears to positively affect reciprocated friendships for children with ADHD (Gardner et al., ; Hoza et al., ; Mikami, Normand, et al., ), with the number of playdates arranged and the degree of parental dedication being important contributors (Hoza et al., ). Of notice Mikami, Normand, et al. ( ) emphasized how putting more thought and effort into selecting peers with similar characteristics in the parent supported friendships interventions (i.e., matching) might be a venue for making such interventions more effective. Respondents in our interviews describe how they contribute to this by suggesting matches based on observations and specific knowledge about the child and peers from the school setting—thus intuitively working in line with recommendations from the research community.
Aiming towards greater peer inclusion and hindering rejection, the teachers further described how they addressed the peers surrounding the children struggling socially more directly. This was conveyed as a continuous effort involving dialogues and activities facilitating room for differences, creating a larger sense of a “we” or a team spirit and to increase the peers understanding of other children’s struggles. This work also embedded facilitating interactions wherein children struggling socially got to show their strengths, based on specific knowledge about the child. This way of including peers has been emphasized as lacking in traditional interventions for children with ADHD struggling socially (Hoza et al., ; Mikami & Normand, ), but is part of the Making Socially Accepting Inclusive Classrooms (MOSAIC) programme (Mikami et al., ). However, while the MOSAIC program, compared to a more conventional social skills intervention programme, improved peers sociometric ratings of children struggling socially in one study (Mikami et al., ), it was found to be associated with poorer sociometric ratings in another study (Mikami et al., ) Mikami et al. ( ) point to a potential limitation being peers not perceiving the teachers highlighting of the strengths of a child struggling socially embedded in the programme as trustworthy. As such, we may resonate that facilitating for children to show their strengths through activities and highlighting strengths without being obliged to do so through a program, may be perceived differently/more trustworthy by peers and eventually more helpful.
In conclusion, our findings reflect how supporting children socially permeates the teachers’ everyday practice and is a continuous work both “behind the scenes” and in the children’s everyday social interactions. Interestingly, the findings reflect an existing breadth in perspectives and practices among the teachers that have been called for within the field of ADHD, including their emphasis on “in vivo” scaffolding and addressing peers and parents in their work. We believe that “outside professionals” (such as psychologist like us) should be humble towards the complexity of the teachers’ role in supporting children socially and acknowledge the teachers’ unique contextual knowledge about the specific child and child group e.g., when communicating results from psychological testing or evaluations. Similarly, the school leadership and school policy makers should acknowledge the importance of providing teachers with the opportunity to spend time with and get to know each child, to prioritize a close teacher-child relationship, to support and interact with children in their daily social activities and collaborate with parents. Despite the great concern and effort the teachers expressed to devote to children’s social development, this kind of work may easily go unnoticed as other more standardized parts of their practice is easier to “count”.

## Supplementary Material

## Appendices.docx

## Biographical note authors.docx

Marie Munch is a clinical psychologist, specializing in community psychology, and a PhD candidate at the Department of Clinical Psychology, University of Bergen, Norway. She has extensive experience working with children both from mental health care and from the school psychology services. Her main research interest are inclusion, exclusion and social interaction challenges among children.
Signe Hjelen Stige is a clinical psychologist, PhD, and professor of clinical psychology at the Department of Clinical Psychology, University of Bergen, Norway. She has published widely on qualitative psychotherapy research, clinical decision-making, psychological trauma, and clinical training.
Steinunn Adólfsdóttir is a clinical psychologist, PhD, and associated professor of clinical neuropsychology at the Department of Biological and Medical Psychology, University of Bergen, Norway. Her main research interests focus on cognitive processes, particularly attention, emotion recognition, social functioning, and language in children and adolescents with ADHD, as well as cognitive functioning in children with cerebral visual impairment.
Lin Sørensen is a clinical psychologist, PhD, and professor of clinical neuropsychology at the Department of Biological and Medical Psychology, University of Bergen, Norway. Her main research interests are children and adolescents with ADHD and using neuropsychological and neuroscience methods to enhance the understanding of attention and emotion regulation functions.
Berge Osnes is a clinical psychologist, PhD, and associate professor of clinical psychology at the Department of Clinical Psychology, University of Bergen, Norway. His main research interests are factors that influence emotion regulation, and psychological treatment of emotion regulation difficulties.

## Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

## Supplementary material
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/17482631.2025.2465215