pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10836701PMC10836701.110836701108367013830637210.1371/journal.pone.0296858PONE-D-23-285991Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesCloningResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesCloningComputer and Information SciencesSoftware EngineeringProgramming LanguagesEngineering and TechnologySoftware EngineeringProgramming LanguagesComputer and Information SciencesSoftware EngineeringComputer SoftwareOpen Source SoftwareEngineering and TechnologySoftware EngineeringComputer SoftwareOpen Source SoftwareScience PolicyOpen ScienceOpen Source SoftwareComputer and Information SciencesSoftware EngineeringSource CodeEngineering and TechnologySoftware EngineeringSource CodeResearch and Analysis MethodsDatabase and Informatics MethodsDatabase SearchingComputer and Information SciencesSoftware EngineeringComputer SoftwareEngineering and TechnologySoftware EngineeringComputer SoftwareComputer and Information SciencesNeural NetworksRecurrent Neural NetworksBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeural NetworksRecurrent Neural NetworksSocial SciencesLinguisticsGrammarSyntaxA systematic literature review on the applications of recurrent neural networks in code clone research
Recurrent neural networks applications in code clone detectionhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7872-1877QuradaaFahmi H.ConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing ShahzadSaraConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologyProject administrationValidation AlmoqbilyRashad S.InvestigationValidationWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Computer Science, University of Peshawar, Peshawar, Pakistan2
Department of Computer Science, Aden Community College, Aden, YemenSoldaniJacopoEditor file.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its file.

## 1. Introduction
Software bad smells point to potential issues within systems and have a detrimental impact on software quality [ ]. Among these issues, code clones, similar or identical fragments resulting from copying and pasting existing code, stands out as a significant concern [ ]. While code cloning may accelerate the development process, it ultimately hampers software quality and maintainability [ , ]. This phenomenon leads to bug propagation, update irregularities, inflated codebases, and compromised software architecture [ ]. Consequently, the detection of clones has emerged as a vibrant research field with encompassing a variety of techniques and tools [ – ].
Recent breakthroughs in machine learning (ML), particularly within the domains of language modeling [ ], machine translation [ ], speech recognition [ ], and online handwritten [ ], have sparked interest of researcher in leveraging ML algorithms for the detection of both syntactic and semantic clones. A diverse array of techniques have been applied to learn distinct patterns that distinguish clones from non-clones, even across different clone categories [ , ]. Deep learning (DL) techniques, like recurrent neural networks (RNNs), graph neural networks (GNN), and others have proven effective in capturing both syntactic and semantic clones [ ]. The advancement of RNNs, as highlighted by Alex Graves [ ], demonstrates their proficiency as sequential learners capable of capturing features and long-term dependencies.
Several systematic literature reviews (SLRs) have been carried out in the field of code clones. Roy and Cordy [ ] conducted a comprehensive survey of software clone detection techniques up until 2006, covering definitions, types, benefits, drawbacks, and applications of code clone detection. They categorized techniques into the following categories: text-based, token-based, tree-based, graph-based, metrics-based, and hybrid. Notably, it excluded modern ML approaches. Rattan et al. [ ] explored various categories of clone types and emphasized the significance of identifying semantic and model clones. However, they did not cover ML clone detection techniques. Al-Shaaby et al. [ ], Azeem et al. [ ], and Al-Azba et al. [ ] surveyed ML and DL algorithms for code smells detection, but their primary focus was not on clone detection or RNN techniques. Qurat et al. [ ] reviewed clone detection techniques/tools spanning from 2013 to 2018, mentioning ML techniques used in clone detection but without in-depth coverage of specific techniques. Likewise, Shobha et al. [ ] discussed detection techniques and emphasized the need for innovative methods capable of simultaneously identifying all four types of clones. However, they did not explore the utilization of ML techniques for detecting code clones. Maggie et al. [ ] performed a systematic review of DL techniques for detecting code clones. They reviewed recent DL techniques, analyzing their effectiveness, complexity, and scalability, and addressing associated challenges and limitations. Kaur and Rattan [ ] presented a systematic review of ML techniques in code clone detection up to 2020, providing insights into clone types, metrics, datasets, code representation, and tools. Morteza et al. [ ] conducted a systematic review on code similarity measurement and clone detection, offering insights into the current techniques, applications, and challenges. However, their review did not specifically emphasize advancement in RNN in the field of code clone research.
This study aims to comprehensively review recent scientific research between 2015 and 2022 on detecting code clones using RNN techniques. We followed the established guidelines outlined by Kitchenham and Charters [ ], we extensively searched seven digital databases with a predefined search string. Then, we applied a set of inclusion/exclusion criteria, along with quality assessment criteria. Moreover, we utilized a snowballing process to identify any relevant studies that might have been missed. The data extracted from the selected studies were analyzed and compared based on several factors, including the types of RNN applications, the accuracy of techniques, the type of detected clones, techniques used for code representation, and the datasets used.
We believe that the review’s findings are highly valuable for software developers, practitioners, and researchers in software clone analysis. They will acquire essential insights into prevalent RNN applications for clone detection, aiding developers in selecting optimal RNN applications for their goals. The findings also shed light on the accuracy metrics used to evaluate the models. Additionally, researchers can use these results as a valuable reference and identify new research challenges in clone detection using RNN applications. Moreover, The study offers a detailed analysis of RNN applications in code clone detection.
The contributions of our systematic literature review (SLR) can be summarized as follows: Firstly, it identifies and categorizes studies between 2015 and 2022 that use RNN techniques in code clone detection. Secondly, it analyzes the selected studies to provide valuable information to the research community regarding (1) the applied RNN techniques in clone detection research, (2) the types of clones detected, (3) the evaluation metrics used to assess the performance of these techniques, (4) the code representation techniques used, (5) the datasets used in the experiments to train and test RNN models, and (6) the most frequently used tools to building RNN models. Lastly, it offers recommendations and identifies significant gaps for future research in this field.
The study is structured as follows: Section 2 provides a background on code clones and recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Section 3 outlined the research methodology. Results are presented in Section 4, and the research question are discussed in Section 5. Potential threats to the validity of the study are noted in Section 6, and Section 7 concludes and suggests future work.

## 2. Background
In this section, we present a brief background on code cloning and recurrent neural network (RNN) techniques.

## 2.1 Code clones
Code clone detection techniques generally involve three key steps: (1) Code pre-processing, which eliminates uninteresting items like header files, and comments; (2) Code representation, where source code is transformed into an intermediate representation (e.g., AST, token sequence, or PDG); and (3) Code similarity comparison: where code fragments similarity is computed, leading to identification of code clones when this similarity exceeds a predefined threshold.
Researchers often categorize code clones into four distinct types [ , ]. The first three types (Type-I, Type-II, and Type-III) primarily revolve around textual similarities, while the fourth type (Type-IV) places a greater emphasis on functional or semantic resemblances. Type-I clones encompass code fragments that are essentially identical, differing only in minor aspects such as comments, formatting, and whitespaces. Type-II clones involve code fragments that are syntactically identical, except for minor disparities in identifier names, variables, formatting, data types, and literals. In the case of Type-III clones, beyond the variations encountered in Type-II, the code fragments are syntactically equivalent with additional adjustments, such as inclusion or omissions of statements. Contrastingly, Type-IV clones exhibit substantial dissimilarities both in text and syntax while performing equivalent functionalities. Between Type-III and Type-IV, there exists a range of clones that, despite retaining certain syntactic resemblances, present significant challenges in their detection. These are often referred to as clones in the Twilight zone [ ]. Clones in Twilight zone are further classified into the following subtypes: Very Strongly Type-III (syntactic similarity between 90% and less than 100%), Strongly Type-III (syntactic similarity between 70% and less than 90%), Moderately Type-III (syntactic similarity between 50% and less than 70%), and Weakly Type-III/Type-IV (syntactic similarity of clone less than 50%).

## 2.2 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
RNNs techniques are used in a wide array of fields, including research in software code cloning [ ]. In this study, we classify RNN techniques for clone detection into three distinct categories: traditional recurrent neural networks (TRNN), Long Short Term Memory (LSTM), and gated recurrent units (GRU). Traditional RNNs are composed of two main types: original recurrent neural networks (ORNNs) and bidirectional recurrent neural network (Bi-RNNs). ORNN adapts the structure of feed-forward neural networks to handle variable-length sequences, utilizing self-connections to retain memory [ ]. However, they encounter challenges like vanishing and exploding gradient problems [ ]. Bi-RNNs, introduced by Schuster and Paliwal [ ], overcomes these ORNNs limitations by incorporating two independently hidden layers that process input sequences in both forward and backward directions. The LSTM category, known for its effectiveness in mitigating vanishing gradients problems, incorporates memory cells and gates to regulate data flow. Specific techniques within the LSTM category include original LSTM (OLSTM) [ ], Bidirectional LSTM (Bi-LSTM) [ ], and Tree-LSTM [ ]. OLSTM employs input, output, and forget gates [ ]. Bi-LSTM combines forward and backward LSTM layers for enhanced performance [ , , ]. Tree-LSTM processes structured input through tree-based units, with Child-Sum Tree-LSTM designed for high branching factor trees, and Binary Tree-LSTM suited for binary trees. Graph-LSTM [ ] adapts the Tree-LSTM architecture for processing graph data, incorporating syntax and semantics while preserving the original structures. Nevertheless, LSTM architectures are significantly more complex in the hidden layer, resulting in approximately four times more parameters than a simple RNN architecture [ ]. In contrast, the GRU category offers a simpler alternative to LSTM. It includes only two gating units to address vanishing/exploding gradient problems in handling long-term dependencies. Unlike LSTM’s three gating units, GRU uses reset and update gates. The GRU category offers two variations [ , ]: original GRU (OGRU), which manages new inputs and state retention, while Bidirectional GRU (Bi-GRU) employing two layers for forward-backward processing. This results in faster training and improved information integration.

## 3. Review methodology
This systematic review aims to analyze the existing studies on the usage of RNNs in code clone detection, in accordance with established guidelines and protocols defined by Kitchenham and Charters [ , – ]. A systematic literature review (SLR) is a rigorous method for assessing and interpreting relevant research [ – ], providing a strong foundation for making claims. Unlike ad hoc reviews, SLRs require more effort [ ]. The SLR process involves creating a review protocol, conducting the review, reporting findings, and discussing results. Our review protocol includes research questions, search strategies, criteria for inclusion/exclusion, quality assessment, and data synthesis. Please refer to for an overview of PRISMA flow chart for the selection process and for an overview of SLR steps.
 

## 3.1 Research questions
Defining essential research questions is vital for the review process. We have formulated specific questions aligned with our objective. Listed in with their motivations.
 

## 3.2 Search strategy and study resources
We developed a search strategy to collect essential studies that address the review’s research questions. This process involves identifying search terms, defining a global search string, and selecting digital study resources to search through.

## 3.2.1 Identifying search terms and defining global search string
In this step, we generated search terms for our research questions and created a search string. This string is used to query online databases and collect relevant articles that address the research questions of the review. The process comprises the following steps: Firstly, we identified the major terms from the research questions. Then, we created a list of synonyms and alternative spellings for each major term. To ensure accuracy, we cross-referenced this list with keywords in relevant papers. Next, we linked each major term with its synonyms and alternative spellings using the Boolean OR operator. Lastly, we refined the search by combining the major terms with the Boolean AND operator. Applying these steps resulted in the following search string:

((("Recurrent neural network" OR "Bi- Recurrent neural network" OR "Long short term memory" OR *LSTM OR "Gated Recurrent Units" OR GRU) AND (code OR application OR software) AND (copy OR clone OR cloning OR duplicat* OR similar*)).

Because of constraints in search terms and Boolean operators within specific digital libraries (Science direct), we defined a shorter search string as follows:

("Recurrent neural network" OR LSTM OR GRU) AND (code OR application OR software) AND (clone OR duplicate OR similar))

## 3.2.2 Study resources
In order to increase the chances of finding highly relevant journal and conference articles using our search string, we opted to use seven reputable online scientific databases. These databases are renowned for publishing research on deep learning applications and code clone detection techniques. Additionally, Kitchenham et al. and Brereton et al [ – ] endorse electronic database searches. Refer to for the selected databases.
 Furthermore, we conducted a snowballing process [ ] to identify additional sources by reviewing the references and citations of relevant studies. This approach expanded our selection and minimized the risk of overlooking any relevant articles.

## 3.3 Selection process
The SLR search initiates with separate searches in the digital libraries specified in , employing the predefined search string as detailed in Section 3.2.1. Our database search was performed using the advanced search functionality, which allowed us to refine our search using different options, as shown in . Furthermore, we restricted publication date of the included studies to fall between 2015 and 2022. The search process continued without date restrictions until March 2023.
 The Results of this search are presented in and , revealing a total of 2099 candidate/initial studies. However, a significant portion of these studies lacks pertinent information needed to address the research questions. Consequently, the process of filtering out unqualified studies becomes essential to identify the studies that are relevant to our objectives.
 Before initiating the filtering process, we removed duplicate studies from the initial list of potential candidate studies. During the sorting step, a total of 303 duplicate studies were detected within the digital libraries and subsequently removed.
Two filtering rounds are performed to assess the relevance of candidate/initial studies on the utilization of RNN techniques for code clones detection [ ]. In the first round, two authors independently evaluate the titles, abstracts, and keywords of each study, applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria outlined in Section 3.3.1. Any disagreements among the authors were addressed through discussions in meetings and subsequently resolved.

## 3.3.1 Inclusion and exclusion criteria
To be included in the SLR, studies must satisfy the following inclusion criteria.
All studies that have used any RNN technique and belong to the code clone detection research area.
Studies published in journals, conference proceedings, and workshops.
Studies should be published in 2015 to 2022.
Studies should be at least 6 pages long.
Conversely, the following exclusion criteria are applied to exclude unqualified studies from the SLR:
Any study within the code clone research area that does not use RNN techniques.
Non-per-reviewed studies (e.g., those available on platforms like arXiv.org).
Studies that are not written in English language.
If a study is published in conference and journal then, the expanded version is chosen.
Following the first round of filtering, a total of 1747 studies were excluded, resulting in the selection of only 49 studies, as shown in . Subsequently, a snowballing process [ ] was conducted by examining the reference lists of these 49 relevant studies. These process led to the discovery of 4 additional studies: 3 from IEEE and 1 from ACM, resulting in a total of 53 relevant studies. During the second filtering round, we examined the 53 relevant studies identified in the first round to identify those studies addressing our SLR research questions. We comprehensively reviewed the full texts and applied the quality assessment criteria outlined in Section 3.3.2.

## 3.3.2 Quality assessment criteria
In the second round, we establish a set of quality assessment criteria that are aligned with our SLR objectives, which we used to evaluate the quality of the selected studies. The specific criteria are detailed in , with some of them being adapted from Dyba et al. [ ] and Singh et al. [ ].
 We assess the quality of the selected studies through the approach detailed in references [ , , ]. Quality is evaluated with Yes, No, or Partially (inferred from text) responses, scored as follows: Yes = 1, No = 0, and Partly = 0.5. The study’s overall quality is determined by the sum of the scores from 12 questions. Studies scoring ≥ 6 are selected, as outlined in reference [ ]. shows the final selected studies and their corresponding scores. During this step, two authors conducted independent assessment of the selected studies. In case where disagreements arose, they were addressed and resolved through discussions involving the third author.
 Both filtering rounds resulted in the selection of 20 studies. The details of these 20 studies can be found in . Scores for quality assessment of the relevant studies are listed in .
 For easy tracking, we assigned an ID to each study and marked it accordingly. The detailed selection process is shown in . Furthermore, we used Endnote software to manage and gather studies throughout the search process.

## 3.4 Data extraction and synthesis
After identifying the appropriate studies, we proceeded to extract and document essential data that relevant to our research questions. To facilitate this process, we developed a dedicated data extraction template for capturing the study details. The data extraction template employed for recording this information is outlined in .
 The data extraction process involved the following steps: collecting bibliographic details of studies, capturing key findings and techniques, and conducting a comprehensive analysis to address research questions. All authors participated in this process. One author reviewed each study, extracting and recording relevant data using a predefined template. Other authors independently reviewed a random sample of studies and cross-verified the results. In the case of any disagreements among the authors regarding results, consensus meetings were held to resolve the issues. This process is similar to the methods used in prior studies [ , – ].
After completing the data extraction, the extracted data is stored in a file for the next step. reveals that the final selected studies can address most of the research questions in this review, with the exception of eight studies (S1, S6, S7, S8, S10, S13, S14, and S17). Among these studies, S1, S13, S14, and S17 lack information regarding RQ5 due to the absence of details about the tools used for developing RNN models. Moreover, studies S6, S7, S8, and S10 do not cover RQ7 due to the lack of a comparative evaluation.
 After extracting data from the selected studies, our primary aim during the data synthesis step was to combine the collected information effectively to address our research questions. Given the limited number of studies (only 20), and heterogeneous nature of the majority, the application of meta-analysis is infeasible. Instead, we have opted for a descriptive synthesis analysis approach, as outlined in reference [ ], which was also utilized in other relevant studies [ , , , , ].

## 4. Results
Prior to discussing the main results in line with our research questions, as outlined in Section 3.1, we will begin by summarizing the selected studies that fulfill the exclusion/inclusion criteria and have passed the quality assessment.

## 4.1 Overview of the selected studies
This review have carefully selected 20 studies (displayed in ) concentrating on code clones detection through RNN techniques, spanning from 2015 to 2022. shows the distribution of these 20 studies and their publication venues. Out of the 20 research studies, seven were published in journals, while the remaining thirteen were published at international conferences.
 We obtained valuable insights from prestigious academic journals like IEEE Transactions on Reliability, International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics, and Expert Systems with Applications. Additionally, we considered significant international conferences, including the international conference on automated software engineering (ASE), Conference on Pattern Recognition, and international conference on software analysis, evolution, and reengineering. shows the distribution of studies spanning from 2015 to 2022. Notably, over 65% of these studies were published in 2020 and beyond, indicating a growing research focus on utilizing RNNs for code clone detection in recent years.
 Furthermore, we observed that around 65% of the selected studies were published in international conference proceedings, while the remaining 35% appearing in academic journals, as depicted in .
 

## 4.2 RQ1: What RNN techniques have been employed for code clone detection?
Over the last decade, there has been a significant surge in DL applications within software engineering [ , , ]. The advancement of RNNs, as highlighted by Alex Graves [ ], demonstrates their proficiency as sequential learners capable of capturing features and long-term dependencies. RNNs techniques are used in a wide array of fields, including research in software cloning. Our review identified the use of nine RNN techniques for detecting code clones. Among the selected studies, twelve utilized a single RNN technique, while the rest combined RNN with other DL techniques like CNN, RvNN, or GCNN. Study S9 used two RNN techniques alongside GCNN. With the exception of Bi-RNN, Graph-LSTM, Original GRU, and Bi-GRU techniques, most RNN techniques were appeared in multiple studies. For example studies S1, S6, and S16 utilized the same RNN techniques, Bi-LSTM, while studies S12 and S14 used identical techniques, specifically Child-Sum Tree-LSTM. shows the RNN technique used in the selected studies, and shows the frequency of their usage across the selected studies.
 Among the RNN techniques used in the 20 studies, the LSTM category was the most frequently used, appearing in 14 of them (70%). It was followed by the TRNN category, which was used in 4 studies (20%). In contrast, the GRU category was used less frequently, appearing in only 2 of the 20 studies (10%). summarizes the RNN categories used across the selected studies.
 As observed, indicates a recent trend toward the adoption of RNN techniques in code clone research. The application of RNN in this context emerged in 2016. From 2017 to 2022, researchers predominantly focused on LSTM techniques, reaching their peak usage in 2020 and 2021, being used in 8 out of 11 studies. On the other hand, GRU techniques were used in only two studies, one in 2019 and another in 2020.
 

## 4.3 RQ 2: What types of clones are most frequently detected using RNN techniques?
To address this research question, we conducted an analysis of the clone types identified in the selected studies, as well as the corresponding performance scores obtained for each clone type. presents a comprehensive summary of performance scores obtained from the selected studies concerning the detection of different clone types (encompassing Type-I through Type-IV clones), along with the programming language they are associated with.
 Based on our analysis presented in , the majority of the selected studies (16 out of 20, or 80%) concentrated on the detection of code clones within a single programming language. In contrast, Only four studies (S3, S4, S5, and S6) (20%) delved into the detection of functional clones and semantic clones, across diverse programming languages and platforms. This observation indicates a potential direction for future research. Additionally, it is worth noting that only a small fraction of these studies (10%) of investigated the detection of Type-I to Type-III clones. For instance, White et al. [ ], S7, demonstrated the capability of DL in clone detection and study S16 (Zhang et al. [ ]), which detected similarities in Scratch code fragments. This suggests that researchers in the remaining studies primarily concentrated on employing RNN techniques to identify the most complex code clones, Type-I and Type-IV.
 This underscore the effectiveness of RNNs in detecting the most challenging clones.
Moreover, exclusively displays performance scores for detected Type-III and Type-IV clones, known for their inherent identification complexity, as extracted from these studies. Earlier studies (S6 and S8) exhibited comparatively lower performance in detecting Type-III and Type-IV clones, as evidenced by lower F1-score, recall, and precision. In contrast, some studies chose a more abstract reporting style, such as those observed in studies S3, S7, S13, S14, and S16, where they presented only the final results without specifying the types of detected clones, as listed in . Conversely, recent research endeavors (S2, S4, S9, S15, S16, S19, and S20) have shown enhanced performance in identifying Type-III and Type-IV clones, including strong Type-III, moderate Type-III, and weak Type-III/Type-IV clones. These improvements were particularly evident in terms of precision, recall, and F1-scores. Among these, S19 demonstrated the highest F1-score performance in the detection of Type-III and Type-IV clones, surpassing its peers in both the BigCloneBench and OJClone benchmarks. This underscores the efficacy of employing Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) in the domain of clone detection.
 

## 4.4 RQ3: What source code representation techniques have been used in RNN applications?
Effective code clone detection relies on code representation techniques, particularly in identifying semantic clones [ ]. Different source code representations are used to eliminate uninteresting items and enhance similarity among code fragments. These fragments can be standardized by adjusting their identifiers, layouts, or statements. Alternatively, they can be transformed into intermediate forms like token sequence, abstract syntax tree (AST), or control dependency graph (CDG) [ ].
To address this question, we analyze source code representation techniques in the selected studies. lists the techniques used in these studies. We observed that traditional techniques were predominantly used to represent the source code. These techniques include AST, token sequence, source code text, character sequence, control flow graph (CFG), and program dependency graph (PDG). AST captures the syntactic knowledge of the source code, CFG shows control flow along with its structural information, while PDG covers both control and data flow. Bytecode/assembly instructions illustrate the low-level control flow.
 Our findings indicate that the selected studies utilized either individual code representations techniques or combinations of representations techniques to improve clone detection, particularly for clones in the "twilight zone" (Type-III and Type-IV clones) [ ]. Among the twenty studies, six (S1, S8, S9, S11, S15, S19) used combined source code representations, while the remaining used individual representations, as detailed in .
Notably, in , we observed that the AST was the most commonly used representation, appearing in 13 studies (46%). Follow that, token sequences were used in 7 studies (25%) and the CFG was used in 5 studies (18%). Other representations were used less frequently.
 

## 4.5 RQ4: What datasets were used in the selected studies?
This section provides an overview and analysis of the systems and benchmarks used to train and evaluate RNN models. We have compiled a list containing 3 benchmarks, 41 open-source systems, 9 commercial systems, and one student’s work, all of which were used in the selected studies. presents specific details from this compiled list.
 Our observations indicate that in seventeen studies (85%), open-source systems and benchmarks were used for dataset creation. Exceptions include study S3, which used both open-source and commercial systems, and study S13, which incorporated open-source systems and student work. According to , Java systems were the predominant choice, being used in 44% of the studies, followed by C systems, which appeared in 32% of the studies. The remaining systems, coded in languages like C++, C#, Python, and Scratch, were used in 24% of the studies. Notably, certain studies combined systems or benchmarks in different languages to create their datasets; for example, study S2 used both the BigCloneBench (Java) and OJClone (C).
 In our findings, We observed that the selected studies used BigCloneBench [ ], OJClone [ ], and GoogleCodeJam [ ] as benchmarks, alongside datasets sourced from code repositories. BigCloneBench is derived from IJDataset 2.0, a repository housing 25,000 open-source Java systems across 43 functionalities, encompassing 8,584,153 true clone pairs and 279,032 false pairs. OJClone, a widely used benchmark, identifies C program clones through solutions submitted by student for 104 unique programming problems. GoogleCodeJam comprises programs from 12 competition problems in diverse languages, hosted by Google.
Furthermore, we observed that four studies (S2, S14, S17, S19) used BigCloneBench and OJClonefor dataset creation, while three studies (S3, S5, S6) produced cross-language datasets. The remaining studies used open-source repositories, as shown in .
 lists the publicly accessible datasets from studies, 60% of them being made available.
 

## 4.6 RQ5: What are the most commonly used tools for building RNN models for clone detection?
To address this question, we explored the tools used for implementing RNN models in the selected studies. Our findings reveal the utilization of six tools for implementing these models across these studies. presents a comprehensive list of tools, while provides an analysis of the tools used in the selected studies.
 Upon analysis, we observed that PyTorch emerged as the most frequently used tool for implementing RNN models, featured in 7 out of 20 studies (35%). TensorFlow closely followed, appearing in 6 studies (30%), while Keras was used in 4 studies (20%). Additional tools like RNNLM Toolkit, Matlab, and Weka, each found use in singular studies (S7, S8, and S11, respectively).
Notably, certain studies (S1, S13, S14, and S17) omitted the specification of tools for their implementations, while others (S4, S6, and S16) used both Keras and TensorFlow and study S11 used Pytorch alongside Weka.

## 4.7 RQ6: What evaluation metrics are used to assess the effectiveness of RNN models?
To explore this question, we investigated the evaluation metrics used in the selected studies to measure the effectiveness of RNN models in detecting code clones.
In this review, various evaluation metrics were used in the selected studies to measure RNN model performance in clone detection. presents these studies and their corresponding evaluation metrics, while illustrates the utilization of these metrics. Notably, 90% of the selected studies (18 out of 20) used precision and F-score, while 16 studies (80%) used recall. The majority of these studies used a combination of F-score, precision, and recall. Additionally, Six of these studies (S4, S5, S11, S18, S19, S20) integrated accuracy as an evaluation metric. Three studies (S3, S12, and S18) combined AUC-ROC metrics with other evaluation metrics. The remaining metrics were comparatively less commonly used.
 

## 4.8 RQ7: Which RNN technique yields superior outcomes when evaluated on the same dataset for the same problem?
Comparing and evaluating clone detection techniques presents challenges due to the diversity of subject systems, benchmarks, and the absence of standardized similarity measures [ ]. To address this question, we have reported the results of selected studies that applied multiple clone detection techniques to the same datasets or benchmarks and utilized consistent evaluation metrics. Our objective is to compare the performance of RNN techniques and determine the top-performing techniques based on precision, recall, and F1-score evaluation metrics.
 summarizes the performance summarizes the performance results from eight studies (S1, S2, S9, S12, S14, S15, S17, S19) that used similar benchmarks, such as BigCloneBench, OJClone, and/or Google Code Jam benchmarks. The table provides a details account of the code clones detection techniques evaluated across these studies, encompassing key evaluation metrics (precision, recall, and F1-Score), as well as the subject systems under investigation. Furthermore, in , we can find studies in which an RNN-based technique was compared against other clone detection techniques. Dong et al. [ ] (S1) proposed the PBCS technique, using Bi-LSTM to identify semantic similarity in students’ program assignments. When compared to SourcererCC [ ] and Deckard [ ] using the OJClone dataset, the results demonstrated PBCS’s superior performance. Jian et al. [ ] (S2) proposed AST-based neural network (ASTNN) to represent source code. This technique involves decomposing large abstract syntax trees (ASTs) of code fragments into a sequence of smaller statement trees, upon which they performed tree-based neural embeddings. In their work, they conducted a comparative analysis of this approach with CDLH [ ] and RAE+ [ ], revealing that ASTNN demonstrated superior performance when compared to other ML-based techniques for clone detection. These results were consistent across the OJClone and BigCloneBench datasets. Wei et al. [ ] (S9) introduced the FCCA technique, a functional code clone detection technique that leverages deep learning (LSTM, Tree-LSTM, and GCNN) and integrates diverse code features, encompassing unstructured elements like token sequences and structured components such as Abstract AST and CFG. The incorporation of an attention mechanism enhance detection accuracy by focusing on critical code segments and features. In a comparative study against other techniques, including Deckard [ ], DLC, SourcererCC [ ], CDLH [ ], TBCNN [ ], DEEPSIM [ ], FCCA emerged as the superior performer in terms of recall, precision, and F1-score on the BigCloneBench dataset. DEEPSIM achieved a similar F1-score to FCCA but with lower precision and higher recall. Wenhan et al. [ ] (S12) proposed a novel techniques for source code representation, referred to as the modular tree network (MTN). Unlike previous neural network models based on tree structures, the modular tree network refines the child-sum tree-LSTM’s basic structure and can effectively capture semantic distinctions among various types of AST substructures. They conducted a comprehensive comparison with existing techniques, including Deckard [ ], DLC [ ], SourcererCC [ ], CDLH [ ], CNN [ ], LSTM, Bi-LSTM, Code-RNN [ ], GGNN [ ], and Tree-LSTM [ ]. The results demonstrate that the proposed technique outperforms other methods in terms of F1-score, particularly on the OJClone dataset. Wei and Ming [ ] (S14) introduced CDPU for identifying functional clones using Siamese GRU. CDPU leverages adversarial training to distinguish non-clone pairs that appear similar but behave differently. In comparisons with Deckard [ ], DLC [ ], SourcererCC [ ], CDLH [ ], and C-DH [ ] on the BigCloneBench and OJClone benchmark, CDPU CDPU outperforms in F1-score and recall on both benchmarks but exhibits lower precision on BigCloneBench and OJClone. Yueming et al. [ ] (S15) proposed SCDetector, a novel method for detecting functional code clones that combines token-based and graph-based techniques. They employed a siamese architecture neural network with GRU to create a more accurate and efficient model. SCDetector was compared to other techniques, including ASTNN [ ], Deckard [ ], DLC [ ], and SourcererCC [ ], on the Google Code Jam and BigCloneBench benchmarks. Results showed that SCDetector outperformed other methods on the BigCloneBench benchmark in F1-score, precision, and recall, and also performed well on the Google Code Jam benchmark, despite having the second-highest recall. Wei and Li [ ] (S17) presented CDLH, a clone detection approach using tree-based LSTM to identify semantic clones. CDLH was compared to Deckard [ ], DLC [ ], and SourcererCC [ ] on the BigCloneBench and OJClone benchmarks, with results indicating that CDLH’s superior performance in terms of F1-score on both benchmarks. Ullah et al. [ ] (S19) proposed a technique for source code representation using a semantic graph to capture both syntax and semantic features. Their study compared this technique to several others, including Deckard [ ], DLC [ ], SourcererCC [ ], CDLH [ ], FCCD [ ], ASTNN [ ], CodeBert [ ], and GraphCodeBert [ ]. The results indicate that their technique outperforms other methods on the BigcloneBench and OJClone datasets in terms of F1-score and recall.
 Figs and present a comparative analysis of studies employing RNN applications for code clone detection on the BigCloneBench, and OJClone datasets. ASTNN [ ] (S2) exhibited exceptional precision, while SCDetector [ ] (S15) achieved higher recall and F1-score when compared to other clone detection approaches on the BigCloneBench dataset. On the other hand, Ullah et al.’s DFS technique [ ] (S19) showed strong performance on OJClone, excelling in terms of precision, recall, and F1-score, closely followed by ASTNN [ ]. Additionally, the DFS technique [ ] (S19) outperformed other techniques on both benchmarks in terms of precision, recall, and F1-score, with ASTNN [ ] as the next best performer. Conversely, CDPU [ ] (S14) and PBCS [ ] (S1) exhibited the lowest performance in precision, recall, and F1-score on both benchmarks when compared to other techniques.
 The mean F1-Score values presented in and depicted in offers valuable insights into the progress achieved in RNN techniques for clone detection.
 demonstrates a notable improvement in performance over time, indicating the effectiveness of these techniques. The relatively lower F-Score values observed in 2017 and 2018 can be attributed to the early stage of development for deep learning techniques in this domain.
Tables reveals the significance of the works by Wei and Ming [ ] (S17), White et al. [ ] (S7), and Hua et al. [ ] (S9) in clone detection, as they were frequently benchmarked against other techniques. However, four studies (S6, S7, S8, S10) did not include comparative evaluations. Furthermore, the selected studies compared their techniques with traditional methods, with Deckard and SourcererCC being the most commonly utilized traditional techniques of comparison.
We have observed that eleven studies (S1, S3, S4, S6, S9, S12, S13, S15, S16, S17, S18) employed a Siamese architecture to improve the performance of RNN model. This architecture has gained popularity in facial recognition tasks and various NLP applications, including sentence similarity assessment [ , ].
In the context of validating techniques used in the selected studies, two validation configurations were used. presents these techniques and their usage in the selected studies. The findings indicate that 13 studies (65%) applied percentage-based split validation, while 4 studies (20%) opted for K-fold cross-validation. However, in three studies (S7, S14, S17) (15%), the specific validation techniques used were not specified.
 The choice of validation techniques, whether through the application of percentage-based training and testing sets or the adoption of k-fold cross-validation, depends on various factors, including the dataset size used for training and testing machine learning models.
Deep learning techniques require large datasets for effective training and achieving optimal results [ ]. Notably, the majority of the selected studies (65%) prefer percentage-based data splitting, randomly dividing the dataset into training, validation, and testing sets, due to their substantial dataset size and the simplicity of this technique. However, it is important to recognize that the inherent randomness in creating these subsets can significantly impact the predictive model’s performance [ ].
In the K-fold cross-validation, the dataset is randomly partitioned into k equally sized subsets or folds. From these k subsets, one is designated as a test set, while the remaining k-1 subsets are used for training the model. This process is then repeated k times, ensuring that each of the k subsets is employed as the test set exactly once. However, it is important to note that running K-fold cross-validation multiple times increases the computational cost and time, as it necessitates training and testing the model K times. This can become particularly resource-intensive for large datasets or complex models [ ]. Consequently, some studies opt for alternative validation techniques, which may explain why only four studies in this context have chosen to use the K-fold cross-validation technique.

## 5. Discussion
In this paper, we investigate various studies to determine the extent of research conducted in the field of code clones using RNN techniques. This section presents the main findings of our work, based on the research questions we posed, along with recommendations for future research that may be of interest to the research community.
RQ1: We conducted an extensive search across various sources, including ScienceDirect Digital Library, Scopus Digital Library, and IEEE Xplore Digital Library, and identified 20 studies that utilized RNN techniques for detecting code clones. for further details, please refer to and .
Our findings reveal that nine RNN techniques were used to identify code clones, categorized as TRNN, LSTM, and GRU. Among these, the LSTM category was the most frequently used (70%), followed by TRNN (20%) and GRU (10%). Additional details can be found in and Figs and .
Among the 20 reviewed studies, only S9 utilized multiple RNN techniques, specifically OLSTM and Binary Tree-LSTM. None of the studies integrated RNN techniques from different categories, highlighting the limited utilization of diverse RNN techniques for code clone detection. Consequently, further research is required to explore the efficacy of combining different RNN techniques for this purpose.
Traditional RNNs encounter challenges with gradients that hinder their ability to learn long-term dependency [ , ]. To address this issue, Hochreiter and Schmidhuber [ ] devised LSTM, which incorporates a memory cell for extended state retention. However, the use of LSTM can lead to training delays [ , ]. To mitigate this, Bouaziz et al. [ ] proposed a solution in the form of parallel LSTM, enabling concurrent stream processing. Furthermore, the sentence-level LSTM [ ] enhances LSTM performance in NLP tasks by facilitating parallel operations and improving the extraction of complex information from text. Interestingly, despite the demonstrated superior performance of parallel LSTM and sentence-level LSTMs in NLP tasks [ , ], none of the reviewed studies employed parallel LSTM or sentence-level LSTM for code clone detection. Therefore, further research is needed to investigate the applicability of these LSTM techniques to code clone detection.
Furthermore, Marcin et al. [ ] introduce a less complex Tree-Structured Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) architecture compared to the prominent Tree-Structure LSTM model used in sentiment analysis. Despite this, no prior exploration has been conducted on the potential of the Tree-Structure GRU’s for detecting code clones. Consequently, additional research is necessary to investigate its capabilities in identifying code clones.
RQ2: Code clones are categorized as syntactic (Type-I, Type-II, and Type-III), and semantic (Type-IV) [ ]. Our findings indicate that most of the selected studies concentrated on identifying semantic clones within code written in a single programming language. Only four studies (S3, S4, S5, and S6) examined detection across different languages, or platforms. Therefore, additional research is required to investigate how RNN techniques can identify semantic clones across different programming languages and platforms. Additionally, our findings indicate that only two studies (S3, S4) used RNN techniques to detect semantic similarities among binary code fragments. This highlights the need for further research in this vital area, given its significance in security applications like vulnerability discovery and malware analysis [ ].
RQ3: The performance of DL models is notably influenced by the selected code representation [ ]. Specifically, the accuracy of DL models, including RNNs models, heavily relies on the specific code representation used [ , ]. shows that the dominant code representation in the selected studies is the AST, while only two studies (S4 and S8) using lower-level representations like assembly code and Bytecode instructions.
Compilation and decompilation techniques normalize code structures by transforming syntactically different but semantically similar structures into a consistent binary form [ , , ]. Therefore, we suggest harnessing RNN techniques to identify semantic clones through lower-level representations, like three-address code, Bytecode/Assembly instructions, or integrate both higher and lower-level code representations.
While existing research extensively examines code clone identification within single programming languages, limited attention has been given to detecting clones across multiple languages. With the increasing prevalence of multi-language software development in major applications like twitter, Uber, and Netflix, the demand for cross-language clone detection is growing. Notably, only two studies (S6 and S5) have utilized RNN techniques for detecting clone across language, using AST representations to capture significant features. Nevertheless, further investigation is needed to effectively leverage RNN techniques for detecting code clones across languages, using different code representation techniques.
It is well-established that effective code clone detection relies heavily on code representation techniques, particularly in the context of identifying semantic clones [ ]. Consequently, this observation opens up opportunities for further and more comprehensive research, with a particular emphasis on the thorough examination of code representation techniques in the context of machine learning and deep learning techniques across various research domains.
RQ4: Based on our research findings, the majority of selected studies focused on subject systems coded in Java and C programming language. This choice was driven by the availability of benchmarks like BigCloneBench, GoogleCodeJam, and OJClone.
BigCloneBench benchmark, offering a large-sized dataset and support for a wider range of functionalities (43 in total), is superior for Java clone datasets compared to GoogleCodeJam. It provides a significant advantage, as it contains a substantial proportion (98%) of semantic clones. On the other hand, among the selected studies that focused on the C programming language, OJClone stood out as the sole publicly available benchmark. Consequently, there is a need for research to create new benchmarks for programming language like Python, Scratch, and C# to advance the research on detecting clones within these languages.
Additionally, we noted two studies (S5 and S6) that proposed techniques for detecting semantic clones across multiple programming languages, specifically Java, C#, C++, and Python. These studies created their datasets from GitHub repositories and Apache Software. However, the absence of validated benchmarks hinders the assessment of their effectiveness. Therefore, additional research is necessary to create dependable benchmarks for evaluating studies on cross-language semantic clone.
In recent years, numerous studies have addressed detecting Java code clones using the BigCloneBench benchmark. Certain Java clone detectors concentrate exclusively on Bytecode-level clone, neglecting Java source code. To address this limitation, Schafer et al. [ ] introduced Stubber, a tool that compiles Java source code into Bytecode without dependencies. This advancement allowed Bytecode-based clone detectors to be evaluated on BigCloneBench for more than 95% of Java source files. Therefore, Additional research is necessary to establish benchmarks for evaluating the efficacy of binary code-level clone detection techniques.
Furthermore, We observed that most selected studies used open-source for datasets, with the exception of two studies (S3 and S20) which utilized commercial software. It’s important to note that clones could be present within commercial software. Therefore, there is a need to broaden research in this domain to include commercial applications.
RQ5: Our analysis showed that among the six tools used to build RNN models in the selected studies (as detailed in and ), Pytorch and TensorFlow were the most common, being used in 55% of the studies. This prevalence can be attributed to their established recognition, open-source nature [ , , ], and widespread adoption for neural networks [ ]. Researchers have a promising opportunity to enhance code clone detection by considering alternative frameworks with high rankings for implementing DL models, such as MXNet [ ] and Theano [ ].
RQ6: Our findings highlight that the prevalent evaluation metrics for the selected studies include precision, recall, F1-score, accuracy, and AUC-ROC. However, it’s crucial to acknowledge that relying solely on threshold-dependent metrics might introduce bias in interpreting ML model performance [ ]. To address this, incorporating threshold-independent metrics like Matthew’s Correlation Coefficient (MCC) [ ] and/or the Area Under the ROC Curve [ ] is recommended. Moreover, it should be noted that evaluating studies with BigCloneBench may result in different recall values due to incomplete labeling. Furthermore, some studies employ non-universal precision evaluation metrics, requiring manual validation of all clones. Thus, a comprehensive evaluation of existing RNN code clone prediction models is imperative.
RQ7: Most of the selected studies commonly use BigCloneBench and OJCloneasas benchmarks for assessing semantic clone detection techniques. These studies consistently exhibit enhanced performance on the BigcloneBench and/or OJClone datasets.
Based on the data in and Figs and , which provide a comparative analysis of studies employing RNN applications for code clone detection on the BigCloneBench, and OJClone datasets, we clearly observed that ASTNN [ ] (S2) demonstrated exceptional precision at 99.8%, while SCDetector [ ] (S15) achieved higher recall and F1-score when compared to other clone detection approaches on the BigCloneBench dataset, reaching 98% for both metrics. On the other hand, Ullah et al.’s DFS technique [ ] (S19) exhibited strong performance on OJClone, boasting impressive precision, recall, and F1-score values of 99.4%, 99.5%, and 99.4%, respectively, closely followed by ASTNN [ ] with precision, recall, and F1-score at 98.9%, 92.7%, and 95.5%. Additionally, the DFS technique [ ] (S19) outperformed other techniques on both benchmarks in terms of precision, recall, and F1-score, with ASTNN [ ] as the next best performer. Conversely, CDPU [ ] (S14) and PBCS [ ] (S1) displayed the lowest performance in precision, recall, and F1-score on both benchmarks when compared to other techniques.
Furthermore, we have found that studies (S3, S4, S5, and S6) propose cross-platform semantic similarity detection techniques. Specifically, studies (S5 and S6) introduce RNN-based techniques to identify analogous code fragments across different languages. In contrast, study (S4) focuses on detecting binary code similarity across varied architectures, compilers, or optimizations. Additionally, study (S3) presents an innovative RNN-based technique for detecting binary similarity across platforms. Notably, it is worth noting that cross-language models exhibit relatively poorer performance compared to single-language models [ ], highlighting the necessity for further research in this domain.
In the context of validating deep learning techniques used in the selected studies, it is important to recognize that the inherent randomness in dataset creation can significantly impact the performance of predictive models. To address this, we strongly recommend following the guidelines outlined by Hall et al. [ ] to ensure the robust design of empirical investigations. Particular attention should be given to the use of threshold-independent metrics and the implementation of preprocessing techniques such as feature selection and data balancing to enhance the setup of deep learning models. Furthermore, our observations highlight the importance of using manually validated datasets that effectively capture code clones within code fragments.

## 6. Threats to validity
This section highlights various potential threats that could impact the validity of this SLR, despite the authors’ efforts to implement a rigorous methodology to ensure accurate findings.
A significant threat involves the challenge of identifying all relevant studies, a common issue encountered in systematic literature reviews [ , ]. There is a possibility that certain studies focusing on RNN techniques in code clone analysis might have been unintentionally missed. To mitigate this threat, we implemented a strategy that entailed the selection of seven widely acknowledged research databases: Science Direct, Springer, ACM, Scopus, IEEE, Willey, and World Scientific. Additionally, we conducted a snowballing process by examining the references of selected studies and incorporating relevant studies.
Another threat revolves around the formulation of an effective and comprehensive set of search terms. To address this concern, we developed a comprehensive search strategy. This strategy involved extracting keywords from the research questions, identifying synonyms or alternative spellings, and confirming their presence in related studies.
To reduce the risk of including irrelevant studies or unintentionally excluding relevant ones during the study selection phase, we implemented a two-step process. Initially, two authors independently applied the inclusion and exclusion criteria to filter out irrelevant studies. In cases of disagreement, discussions among the authors were conducted to resolve any discrepancies.
Potential threats also arise during the phase of quality assessment and data extraction. To mitigate these risks, we executed a formal procedure encompassing the creation of a set of rigorous quality assessment criteria and a comprehensive data extraction form. The assessment of study quality was conducted independently by two authors. After that, third author independently selected a separate set of studies through a randomized process and conducted a double-checked of the selection process, any disagreements among authors were addressed and resolve. Following this, a single author meticulously reviewed each study, extracting and documenting relevant information using a predefine template. In addition, other authors independently examined a randomized selection of studies, engaging in a meticulous cross-verification process to ensure the accuracy of results. Any differences among authors were addressed through to reach at a consensus.

## 7. Conclusion
This study reports findings from a systematic literature review (SLR) that investigates the utilization of RNN techniques for code clone detection. The review involved comprehensive searches across seven online databases to identify relevant studies. Ultimately, twenty studies published between 2015–2022 were selected to address the research objectives. These selected studies were grouped into three categories: Traditional recurrent neural network (TRNN), long short-term memory (LSTM), and gate recurrent unit (GRU). Each category encapsulating distinct techniques. Research questions were formulated to explore the current state of RNN techniques in clone research from various perspectives, including the specific RNN techniques used, types of detected clones, code representation techniques, evaluation metrics, popular datasets, studies achieving better results when compared to alternative approaches, and prevalent tools for implementing RNN models.
The results indicate that among the RNN techniques, the LSTM variations like OLSTM, Bi-LSTM, Binary Tree-LSTM, and Child-Sum Tree-LSTM, are most commonly used. Furthermore, the AST is the prevalent code representation technique, used in 13 studies. Our review also reveals that, researchers predominantly favored datasets and benchmarks written in the Java programming language. However, it’s essential to highlight that only 12 studies made their datasets available for further use. Regarding the tools used for implementing RNN models, Pytorch stands as the most commonly used tool, closely followed by TensorFlow. However, regarding the evaluation metrics, most studies used F-score, precision, and recall to assess the performance of the implemented RNN models.
As a result of this study, several observations should be considered for future research using RNN techniques for code clone detection:(1) No studies have investigated the potential of new RNN architectures, such as parallel LSTM, sentence-level LSTM, and Tree-Structured GRU, within the field of code clone research. (2) Only two studies have used RNN techniques to detect semantic clones across diverse programming languages. (3) Only two studies have used RNN techniques to identify semantic similarity among binary code fragments. (4) Only one study has used a combination of PDG and AST to represent code fragments. (5) Manually validated benchmarks are lacking for programming languages like Python, Scratch, and C#. Furthermore, there is a scarcity of manually validated benchmarks encompassing array of programming languages. (6) The DFS technique [ ] (S19) demonstrated superior performance on both benchmarks in terms of precision, recall, and F1-score, achieving F1-scores of 97.9% and 99.4%, respectively. Following closely, ASTNN [ ] F1-scores of 93.8% and 95.5% on the BigCloneBench and OJClone benchmarks, respectively. Conversely, CDPU [ ] (S14) and PBCS [ ] (S1) exhibited the lowest performance levels in precision, recall, and F1-score on both benchmarks when compared to other techniques. It is worth noting that Study (S4), which utilized OLSTM, delivered the most impressive results among the detection techniques, attaining an impressive F-score of 98.04% when applied to open-source datasets sourced from diverse programming language applications. The utilization of RNN techniques for code clone detection is a promising field requiring further research. Consequently, it is crucial to invest more research efforts into implementing RNN-based techniques to address the challenge of code clone detection. Our analysis presents the current state of this research, furnishing vital insights for developers, researchers, and stakeholders. We anticipate that these findings will inspire future advancements in the field of code clone detection through the application of RNN techniques.

## Supporting information
S1 File

## PRISMA checklist for systematic review process.
(DOC)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Appendix

## List of relevant studies and quality assessment scores.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

The authors express their gratitude for the support of University of Peshawar in the development of this work.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0296858.r001Decision Letter 0
SoldaniJacopoAcademic Editor© 2024 Jacopo Soldani2024Jacopo Soldanihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
30 Oct 2023

PONE-D-23-28599A systematic literature review on the applications of recurrent neural networks in code clone researchPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Quradaa,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 14 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Jacopo Soldani
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
1. When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
3. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The paper proposes a systematic review on the application of Recurrent Neural Network in code-clone research. At first, 2099 scientific papers have been obtained from 7 different online databases by using a proper research string. Then, they have been filtered by removing (1) the duplicates and (2) the papers do not satisfy the eligibility requirements on title/abstract defined by the authors. After the filters, 49 papers have been selected. Four more papers have been added by considering the references of the selected papers. All the selected studies (49+4=53) have been assessed by the authors by reading the full texts and assigning a score according to quality assessment criteria defined by the authors. At the end, 20 papers have been included in the analysis.
The main issue of the proposed work is the shallowness. The papers considered are not deepened in the review, making difficult to understand their approach. In my opinion, the analysis conducted (which counts how many papers use a particular RNN architecture, or a particular code representation) is not enough to accept the manuscript.
For example, most of the selected papers represent the code using its AST. However, most of them use RNN architectures that can handle only sequential data (AST are trees). Hence, it would be interesting to understand how they transform the AST into a sequence, and especially if they use different strategies.
Another example is on the clone types (which are never defined). An interesting analysis could be to consider the scores obtained by the approaches under study in the different types of clones. This could be helpful to show if there are tasks that are satisfactory resolved by RNN architecture, and especially if there are tasks that deserve more attention.
Lastly (and most importantly), how model selection/model assessment has been conducted in the selected papers is never considered. It is known that the results obtained by ML models is highly influenced by how model selection/model assessment are conducted. To this end, it is crucial to understand if the dataset considered have public split to perform model selection/model assessment, and if there are standard strategies (e.g. cross-validation, hold-out, double-cross validation). This is crucial especially for the RQ7: without using the same model assessment strategy, we cannot compare different approaches.
Other issue:
- In 6 database searches, the search has been performed only on the abstracts. Why has not the search been performed on the full text (as it has been done in the Spring Link Digital Library)? For example, I found this paper “AST-path Based Compare-Aggregate Network for Code Clone Detection” (10.1109/IJCNN52387.2021.9534099) that it is not considered in the review.
- The inclusion criteria “The study must focus on code clone detection using RNN techniques.” is vague. Are there papers which contain the search term in the abstract that does not employ RNN architectures? I suggest the author to better specify the meaning of this criteria.
- All the exclusion criteria (except for the last one) are the same of the inclusion criteria: in fact, they are the negation of the inclusion criteria. I think this is useless.
- The clone-detection type are not defined.
- The PDG acronym is never defined. Also, the acronym of the Control Dependency Graph should be (CDG) and not CFG
Reviewer #2: The paper presents a systematic review of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) applications for code clone detection. The authors' approach is solid and aligns with established literature recommendations for the task. Furthermore, by focusing on RNNs, their work has significant novelty compared to existing systematic reviews on clone detection.
I have a minor concern regarding the terminology used. The authors distinguish between different recurrent models by calling "shallow" RNN the original recurrent architecture by Rumelhart et al. (1985) [3] and similarly "shallow" LSTM the original work by Hochreiter et al. (1997) [2]. The term "shallow" isn't commonly used in this context by the Machine Learning literature and might confuse readers. For instance, shallow RNNs might refer to a completely different model, e.g., Dennis et al. (2019) [1].
My primary concern is with the sources included in the literature review. The deep learning community predominantly focuses on and publishes at conferences such as Neurips, ICLR, ICML, or AAAI [4]. Despite the inclusion of "databases renowned for publishing research on deep learning applications," none of them contains the proceedings of these fundamental venues. While these conferences focus on methodological issues, they also widely cover deep learning applications. Therefore, the paper might have missed significant contributions to RNNs and their application to clone detection. For completeness, their inclusion is fundamental when dealing with Deep Learning applications. One possible way to include these sources in the systematic review would have been to include DBLP as a further database.
In conclusion, while the paper is well-written, rigorous, and significant, I recommend considering possible missouts from deep learning venues in a further revision before possible acceptance.
References:
[1]: Dennis, Don, et al. "Shallow RNN: accurate time-series classification on resource constrained devices." Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (2019).
[2]: Hochreiter, Sepp, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. "Long short-term memory." Neural Computation 9.8 (1997): 1735-1780.
[3]: Rumelhart, David E; Hinton, Geoffrey E, and Williams, Ronald J (Sept. 1985). [Learning internal representations by error propagation](https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a164453.pdf). Tech. rep. ICS 8504. San Diego, California: Institute for Cognitive Science, University of California.
[4]: https://scholar.google.nl/citations?view_op=top_venues&hl=en&vq=eng_artificialintelligence
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0296858.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
12 Nov 2023

I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the Editor and the reviewers for their valuable feedback and comments.
Editor's Journal comments and responses
• Comment 1: [Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming.]
Response : We would like to inform you that we have adhered to PLOS ONE's style requirements as outlined in the PLOS ONE style templates.
• Comment 2: [We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.]
Response : We propose a modification to the Data Availability statement. Currently, all data are contained within our systematic literature review paper. Additionally, I have incorporated a Supporting Information file containing all pertinent studies and their corresponding quality assessment scores. Consequently, I kindly request a revision of the Data Availability statement to read, "All relevant data are within the paper and its Supporting Information file".
• Comment 3: [Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly.]
Response : captions for the Supporting Information files have been included at the end of the revised manuscript. Additionally, We have updated the in-text citations in accordance with the journal's guidelines.
Reviewers comments and responses
Comments from Reviewer 1:
• Comment 1: [ The main issue of the proposed work is the shallowness. The papers considered are not deepened in the review, making difficult to understand their approach. In my opinion, the analysis conducted (which counts how many papers use a particular RNN architecture, or a particular code representation) is not enough to accept the manuscript.]
Response : We appreciate the reviewer’s insightful suggestion and agree that it would be useful to conduct a meta-analysis instead of sample descriptive analysis. However, It is widely acknowledged that comparing and assessing clone detection techniques poses significant challenges, primarily due to the diversity of subject systems, benchmark datasets, and the lack of standardized similarity measures [1]. In the course of our Systematic Literature Review (SLR), we observed that most of the selected studies utilized different datasets and evaluation metrics (heterogeneous studies), making it infeasible to combine their results for a meta-analysis [2]. Moreover, with only 20 selected studies (most of them are heterogeneous studies), the application of a meta-analysis, as cautioned by Paul and Barari [2] and Borenstein et al. [3], would be inappropriate and they recommended to employ SLR to synthesize research in that domain. Therefore, we decided to use a descriptive synthesis analysis, as recommended by Paul and Barari [2] and Borenstein et al. [3]. It is important to note that this chosen technique for synthesizing the extracted data has been employed in several prior SLRs within this research domain, as indicated by references [1], [4],[5],[6],[7], and [8]. Nevertheless, we acknowledge the important of addressing this limitation in the paper. In response, we have added a sentence in the revised manuscript on page 15, lines 297–301, exploring why we opted not to use meta-analysis. 
• Comment 2: [ For example, most of the selected papers represent the code using its AST. However, most of them use RNN architectures that can handle only sequential data (AST are trees). Hence, it would be interesting to understand how they transform the AST into a sequence, and especially if they use different strategies. ]
Response : We appreciate the insightful recommendation from the reviewer. It would indeed be interesting to explore how code representation techniques are transformed into formats suitable for Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) based techniques. However, for our current study, providing a detailed elaboration of the transformation process for code representations into RNN-compatible formats might slightly extend beyond the scope of our work. Our aim in this research question (RQ3) is to extract data related to the techniques employed for representing source code in the selected studies. This approach aligns with the methodology applied in other SLRs in this domain [5], [6], [7], and [8], where code representation techniques are presented without extensive details on the conversion mechanisms, as these details are comprehensively covered in the referenced studies.
Nonetheless, we acknowledge that this comment has highlighted an opportunity for future and more extensive research in this direction. We have incorporated a recommendation to this opportunity in the revised manuscript. Please refer to page 35 of the revised manuscript, lines 676–680.
• Comment 3: [ Another example is on the clone types (which are never defined). An interesting analysis could be to consider the scores obtained by the approaches under study in the different types of clones. This could be helpful to show if there are tasks that are satisfactory resolved by RNN architecture, and especially if there are tasks that deserve more attention.]
Response : Thank you for pointing this out. The reviewer is correct and we have taken this feedback seriously and made substantial revisions to address the issue. In the revised manuscript, we have added a background section that contains a sub-section to clarifying the definitions of clone types and cloning process. For detailed information, we kindly direct your attention to the revised manuscript, specifically on pages 5 and 6, lines 119–141.
In response to the concern about the analysis of the scores obtained by the approaches under study for different types of clones in RQ 2, we agree and have made updates. We have now included the performance scores for each clone type in each selected study in Table 11 and have also revised the relevant paragraphs in RQ2. Additionally, we have added Figure 10 to visually present the performance scores for each clone type in the selected studies, providing a more comprehensive overview and we updated the corresponding paragraphs. You can find this updates on pages 19,20, and 21, lines 368-400.
• Comment 4: [ Lastly (and most importantly), how model selection/model assessment has been conducted in the selected papers is never considered. It is known that the results obtained by ML models is highly influenced by how model selection/model assessment are conducted. To this end, it is crucial to understand if the dataset considered have public split to perform model selection/model assessment, and if there are standard strategies (e.g. cross-validation, hold-out, double-cross validation). This is crucial especially for the RQ7: without using the same model assessment strategy, we cannot compare different approaches. ]
Response : We are grateful for the reviewer's insightful suggestion, and we acknowledge the importance of demonstrating how model selection and assessment have been conducted in the selected studies. In response to this valuable comment, we have made several updates to address this concern.
First, It is widely acknowledged that comparing and assessing clone detection techniques presents significant challenges, primarily due to the diversity of subject systems, benchmark datasets, and the lack of standardized similarity measures [1]. Consequently, we have refined the analysis of Research Question 7 (RQ7) to focus exclusively on the comparative analysis of studies that utilize RNN applications for code clone detection that used similar benchmarks, specifically BigCloneBenchmark and OJClone, as well as similar evaluations metrics. This adjustment aligns with the methodologies found in the relevant SLRs in this research domain [5] and [6]. This refinement enables us to offer a comprehensive performance comparison of each RNN-based technique, as summarized in Table 17 on page 28 and figures 15 and 16 on page 30 within the revised manuscript.
Furthermore, we have incorporated details regarding the validation techniques used in these studies for model comparison and selection during their respective comparative analyses. This information can be found in a dedicated table, labelled as Table 19, located on page 32 within the revised manuscript. All updates in RQ7 can be found in the revised manuscript on pages 27-32, lines 497 to 614. Additionally, we have added a paragraph in the discussion section addressing the validation techniques in the revised manuscript on page 38, lines 747 - 755.
• Comment 5: [ In 6 database searches, the search has been performed only on the abstracts. Why has not the search been performed on the full text (as it has been done in the Spring Link Digital Library)? For example, I found this paper “AST-path Based Compare-Aggregate Network for Code Clone Detection” (10.1109/IJCNN52387.2021.9534099) that it is not considered in the review. ]
Response : You have raised an important point here. However, In practice, papers abstracts are designed to highlight the most important aspects of a paper, which can be useful for quickly determining the relevance of a paper to the research topic at hand. Notably, in Springer Link Digital Library, advanced search settings offer researchers the ability to perform searches based on specific criteria, including keywords, exact phrases, the presence of at least one word, exclusion of specific words, and searching within titles. Detailed information on these search options is available in the search tips page located at [https://rd.springer.com/searchhelp]. 
Due to certain limitations, we made the decision to search using the full text of papers, as this particular online library, Springer Link Digital Library, does not provide the option to search solely within paper abstracts. This decision is in alignment with the methodologies identified in relevant SLRs within this research domain [1], [5], and [7]. A summary of the search process settings for each digital library is provided in the revised manuscript in Table 3 on page 11 to facilitate the reproducibility of this process.
In the paper titled 'AST-Path Based Compare-Aggregate Network for Code Clone Detection' (DOI: 10.1109/IJCNN52387.2021.9534099), the abstract presents a method for representing a code fragment as a collection of compositional paths within its abstract syntax tree (AST). This representation is used for training a machine learning (ML) classifier to identify code clone pairs. However, it is evident from the paper's abstract that its primary focus is on the application of ML techniques for code clone detection. In our research, as indicated in our search string on page 9, lines 198-204, our specific emphasis is on RNN techniques rather than general ML techniques. Consequently, when we apply our search string to all online databases, this paper will be excluded from our search results.
• Comment 6: [ The inclusion criteria “The study must focus on code clone detection using RNN techniques.” is vague. Are there papers which contain the search term in the abstract that does not employ RNN architectures? I suggest the author to better specify the meaning of this criteria.]
Response : Thank you for pointing this out. The inclusion criteria, "The study must focus on code clone detection using RNN techniques," means that a study can be included in our analysis only if its main emphasis is on detecting code clones (identical or near-identical pieces of code) using RNN techniques.
In response to this review, we have consequently revised this inclusion criteria to emphasize this point. Please refer to revised manuscript on page 11, lines 238-239. 
• Comment 7: [ All the exclusion criteria (except for the last one) are the same of the inclusion criteria: in fact, they are the negation of the inclusion criteria. I think this is useless.]
Response : We appreciate the reviewer for pointing this out. Upon a thorough review of the inclusion and exclusion criteria in our SLR, we have identified only a single criterion within the inclusion criteria, specifically the first criterion, is the opposite of the first criterion in the inclusion criteria. However, we want to highlight that this alignment is consistent with the established practices observed in prior SLRs [4], [5], [6], and [7]. In response to this feedback, we have carefully revised both the inclusion and exclusion criteria. For revised details, Please refer to revised manuscript on page 11, lines 238 to 248.
• Comment 8: [ The clone-detection type are not defined.]
Response : Thank you for pointing this out and we have taken action to address your comment. In the revised manuscript, we have added a background section that contains a sub-section to clarifying the definitions of clone types and cloning process. For detailed information, we kindly direct your attention to the revised manuscript, specifically on pages 5 and 6, lines 119–141.
• Comment 9: [ The PDG acronym is never defined. Also, the acronym of the Control Dependency Graph should be (CDG) and not CFG. ]
Response : Thank you for bringing this to our attention. We fully agree with your comment and we have taken action to address your concerns. As a result, we have revised the acronym of the Control Dependency Graph to (CDG), which we believe is now clearer. You can find this change on page 21 of the revised manuscript, in the lines 407-408.
Additionally, we have made further revisions to include the acronyms of the control flow graph (CFG) and program dependency graph (PDG). You can find these updates in the same revised manuscript on page 22 specifically in lines 412 and 413.
Comments from Reviewer 2:
• Comment 1: [ I have a minor concern regarding the terminology used. The authors distinguish between different recurrent models by calling "shallow" RNN the original recurrent architecture by Rumelhart et al. (1985) [3] and similarly "shallow" LSTM the original work by Hochreiter et al. (1997) [2]. The term "shallow" isn't commonly used in this context by the Machine Learning literature and might confuse readers. For instance, shallow RNNs might refer to a completely different model, e.g., Dennis et al. (2019) [1]. ]
Response : Thank you for pointing this out. The reviewer is correct and we have taken this feedback seriously, making substantial revisions to correct the terminology used. In the revised manuscript, we have change the terminology 'shallow RNN (SRNN)' into 'Original RNN (ORNN)', 'Shallow LSTM (SLSTM)' into 'Original LSTM (OLSTM)', and 'Shallow GRU (SGRU)' into 'Original GRU (OGRU)' in all sections, tables , and figures. 
• Comment 2: [My primary concern is with the sources included in the literature review. The deep learning community predominantly focuses on and publishes at conferences such as Neurips, ICLR, ICML, or AAAI [4]. Despite the inclusion of "databases renowned for publishing research on deep learning applications," none of them contains the proceedings of these fundamental venues. While these conferences focus on methodological issues, they also widely cover deep learning applications. Therefore, the paper might have missed significant contributions to RNNs and their application to clone detection. For completeness, their inclusion is fundamental when dealing with Deep Learning applications. One possible way to include these sources in the systematic review would have been to include DBLP as a further database.]
Response : Thank you for your suggestion. Exploring the DBLP database, which serves as an online reference for bibliographic information on significant computer science publications, would have indeed been an interesting point. However, as you may be aware, the process of conducting a SLR requires strict adherence to a well-defined protocol. In our current work, we are strictly following the protocol and guidelines established by Kitchenham et al. [9]. These guidelines provide a comprehensive framework for the search process and the criteria for selecting study resources.
In the context of an SLR, it is essential to create a comprehensive search string that encompasses all terms relevant to the research questions. This search string should be consistently applied across all selected online databases. While attempting to utilize the DBLP database, we encountered an issue. Unfortunately, we were unable to apply our search string, located on page 9 lines 198-204, within its search engine. This limitation arises from the fact that the advanced search options in the DBLP database are still under development, as indicated on their FAQ page [https://dblp.org/faq/1474589.html]. This hinders our ability to effectively utilize our search string within this database. Furthermore, we observed that both the phrase search operator and the Boolean NOT operator were disabled due to technical issues, as specified in their search help page [https://dblp.org/faq/1474589.html]. Consequently, our search string could not be effectively utilized within the DBLP database.
In an effort to address this limitation, we conducted searches for the mentioned conferences, namely Neurips, ICLR, ICML, and AAAI, in an attempt to locate any missing resources. However, the protocol that we are following in this SLR recommends the utilization of online databases as the primary source of study.
References 
1. Rattan D, Bhatia R, Singh M. Software clone detection: A systematic review. Information and Software Technology. 2013;55(7):1165-99.
2. Paul J, Barari M. Meta-analysis and traditional systematic literature reviews—What, why, when, where, and how? 2022;39(6):1099-115.
3. Borenstein M, Hedges LV, Higgins JP, Rothstein HR. Introduction to meta-analysis: John Wiley & Sons; 2021.
4. Al-Shaaby A, Aljamaan H, Alshayeb M. Bad smell detection using machine learning techniques: A systematic literature review. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering. 2020;45(4):2341-69.
5. Lei M, Li H, Li J, Aundhkar N, Kim D-KJJoS, Software. Deep learning application on code clone detection: A review of current knowledge. 2022;184:111141.
6. Manpreet K, Dhavleesh R. A systematic literature review on the use of machine learning in code clone research. Computer Science Review. 2023;47:100528.
7. Zakeri-Nasrabadi M, Parsa S, Ramezani M, Roy C, Ekhtiarzadeh M. A systematic literature review on source code similarity measurement and clone detection: Techniques, applications, and challenges. Journal of Systems and Software. 2023;204:111796.
8. Ain QU, Butt WH, Anwar MW, Azam F, Maqbool B. A Systematic Review on Code Clone Detection. IEEE Access. 2019;7:86121-44.
9. Kitchenham B, Pearl Brereton O, Budgen D, Turner M, Bailey J, Linkman S. Systematic literature reviews in software engineering – A systematic literature review. Information and Software Technology. 2009;51(1):7-15.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0296858.r003Decision Letter 1
SoldaniJacopoAcademic Editor© 2024 Jacopo Soldani2024Jacopo Soldanihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
20 Dec 2023

A systematic literature review on the applications of recurrent neural networks in code clone research
PONE-D-23-28599R1
Dear Dr. Quradaa,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Jacopo Soldani
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors have addressed all the comments raised in previous review. I do not have any further comments.
Reviewer #2: The authors addressed the concerns I had in my review. They sufficiently clarified the terminology for recurrent models in the manuscript. Additionally, their explanation regarding the absence of main Machine Learning venues due to adherence to a well-defined protocol and technical limitations within the DBLP database is well-founded. It might still be beneficial to briefly mention this reasoning within the main body of the manuscript for transparency and completeness.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0296858.r004Acceptance letter
SoldaniJacopoAcademic Editor© 2024 Jacopo Soldani2024Jacopo Soldanihttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
25 Jan 2024

PONE-D-23-28599R1 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Quradaa, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Jacopo Soldani 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE