pmcPLoS BiolPLoS Biol212plosbiol101183755plosPLOS Biology1544-91731545-7885PLOSPMC12445530PMC12445530.112445530124455304096618610.1371/journal.pbio.3003372PBIOLOGY-D-25-000531Meta-Research ArticleScience PolicyScience and Technology WorkforceCareers in ResearchScientistsPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsScientistsSocial SciencesEconomicsLabor EconomicsEmploymentCareersResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentPeer ReviewBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyLanguageBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLanguageSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyLanguageBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyGender IdentitySocial SciencesPsychologyGender IdentitySocial SciencesEconomicsEconomic AnalysisEconomic Impact AnalysisResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentBiology and Life SciencesConservation BiologyEcology and Environmental SciencesConservation ScienceConservation BiologyLanguage, economic and gender disparities widen the scientific productivity gap
Language, economic and gender disparities widen the scientific productivity gaphttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6576-3410AmanoTatsuyaConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing Ramírez-CastañedaValeriaConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – review & editing Berdejo-EspinolaVioletaInvestigationProject administrationValidationWriting – review & editing BorokiniIsraelInvestigationWriting – review & editing ChowdhuryShawanFunding acquisitionInvestigationWriting – review & editing GolivetsMarinaInvestigationWriting – review & editing González-TrujilloJuan DavidInvestigationWriting – review & editing Montaño-CentellasFlaviaInvestigationWriting – review & editing PaudelKumarInvestigationWriting – review & editing WhiteRachel L.InvestigationWriting – review & editing VeríssimoDiogoConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – review & editing 1
School of the Environment, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia2
Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Science, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia3
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley, California, United States of America4
Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, California, United States of America5
Department of Ecology, Montana State University—Bozeman, Bozeman, Montana, United States of America6
School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia7
Department of Community Ecology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research—UFZ, Halle, Germany8
Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Sede Bogotá, Colombia9
Instituto de Ecología, Universidad Mayor de San Andrés, La Paz, Bolivia10
Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, United States of America11
Greenhood Nepal, Kathmandu, Nepal12
School of Applied Sciences, University of Brighton, Brighton, United Kingdom13
Department of Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United KingdomDirnaglUlrichAcademic Editor – and – can be found in S1 Data. The raw data plotted in – are from the survey questions, which our ethics approval prevents us from sharing to secure confidentiality of the respondents. Access to these raw data should be requested from the University of Queensland Ethics office, which can be contacted at humanethics@research.uq.edu.au. All codes used in the analysis are available at: https://osf.io/b3cza.

## Data Availability
The model-based estimates underlying – and – can be found in S1 Data. The raw data plotted in – are from the survey questions, which our ethics approval prevents us from sharing to secure confidentiality of the respondents. Access to these raw data should be requested from the University of Queensland Ethics office, which can be contacted at humanethics@research.uq.edu.au. All codes used in the analysis are available at: https://osf.io/b3cza.

## Introduction
Currently, not everyone can contribute to science in an equal manner due to a number of barriers. This is a serious equity issue in science, as all scientists, regardless of their background, should have an equal opportunity to contribute to science, as stated in the UNESCO Recommendation on Open Science [ ]. These barriers also deprive the scientific community of the diversity of people, ideas, and approaches that are key to innovation in science and to addressing ongoing global challenges [ – ]. Therefore, the scientific community urgently needs to understand and dismantle the barriers to scientists, particularly those from historically and currently underrepresented groups.
Many factors other than one’s own abilities can affect the performance, recognition, and representation of scientists. For example, women publish fewer articles [ , ], attract fewer citations [ ], are less successful in grant applications [ ], win a lower proportion of awards [ ], are under-represented as journal editors [ ], patent at a lower rate [ ], perform more teaching [ ] and internal services [ ], are less likely to hold a tenured position [ ], and more likely to leave academia [ ] than men. Women, non-binary individuals, and people of color are more vulnerable to the negative impact of unprofessional peer reviews on their careers [ ]. Scientists from lower-income countries also publish fewer articles [ ], receive less favorable review outcomes [ ], are less funded [ ], and face more barriers when traveling for academic purposes [ ] than those from higher-income countries. Non-native English speakers spend more time when conducting scientific activities and disseminating research [ ] and find their science rated lower [ , ] than native English speakers, and tend to suffer from dissatisfaction, anxiety [ ], and imposter syndrome [ ].
Few studies to date, however, have assessed the relative and combined impacts of gender, linguistic, and socio-economic backgrounds on scientific productivity by individual scientists. For instance, the difference in scientific productivity has been tested extensively among gender identities [ ], but rarely between native and non-native English speakers. This is likely because it is almost impossible to collect accurate information on the linguistic background of authors in large bibliometric studies, while survey-based studies tend to be targeted at a single country or focused only on non-native English-speaking scientists. Scientific productivity, typically measured by the number of English-language publications, is still widely used to evaluate the performance of scientists, although its validity is often questioned [ ]. We urgently need to assess which attributes of scientists other than gender identities influence their productivity, to understand how not accounting for those attributes can bias the common metric of scientific performance, further disadvantaging the careers of scientists from underrepresented groups.
This study capitalizes on a survey of 908 environmental scientists from eight nationalities to test how the productivity of scientists differs depending on their gender, linguistic, and economic backgrounds. This dataset has three major advantages: the survey (i) covers participant nationalities with varying levels of English proficiency and income, (ii) records the self-reported first languages of participants, and (iii) measures the scientific productivity in terms of the number of English and non-English-language publications for scientists with 1–55 years in their careers. This allows us to compare the relative effect of participants’ gender identity, first language, and economic backgrounds, and their combined impacts, on the number of their publications in English and in non-English languages across different career stages.

## Results and discussion
The survey collected responses from 908 researchers in environmental sciences from eight nationalities each with varying levels of English proficiency and income [ ]: Bangladeshi (n = 106), Bolivian (100), British (112), Japanese (294), Nepali (82), Nigerian (40), Spanish (108), and Ukrainian (66) (See Materials and methods for more detail and for the number of participants by English proficiency, income level, and gender identity).
We found that women, non-native English speakers, and those from lower-income countries published statistically fewer English-language peer-reviewed papers than men, native English speakers, and those from higher-income countries, respectively, when controlling for the number of years in research and their disciplines ( – , ). The male–female productivity gap was especially wide in early career researchers ( ), although the interaction term was not statistically significant ( ). The gender-other interaction term was significant ( ), however, the small sample size of the gender-other category (e.g., only two in English native, ) makes it difficult to conclude whether this is a real pattern or a statistical artifact. In contrast, the significant interaction term for those with low English proficiency indicates that the language productivity gap was wider in scientists at a later career stage ( , ). The interaction between the number of years in research and income level was not significant, indicating that the income productivity gap did not differ between participants with different levels of research experience ( and ).
 The results were in stark contrast when we ran the same analysis but using the total number of English- and non-English-language papers as a measure of productivity. Non-native English speakers at early to mid-career stages published statistically more peer-reviewed papers in English and non-English languages combined, than native English speakers ( and ). The income productivity gap was also reversed; those from lower-income countries published a statistically higher total number of peer-reviewed papers than those from higher-income countries ( and ). Women still published less than men even when the analysis was based on the number of papers in English and non-English languages combined ( and ).
The analysis above used the level of countries’ English proficiency to approximate the level of each participant’s English proficiency. To further test the potential role of individuals’ levels of English proficiency, we also conducted a separate analysis focusing only on non-native English-speaking participants. In this analysis, we included an additional explanatory variable—the number of years spent living in countries where English is the first language—as more exposure to English is known to be correlated with higher English proficiency [ , ]. We found that non-native English speakers who have lived longer in English-speaking countries published more peer-reviewed papers in English ( ). Although the number of years spent living in countries where English is the first language can also be associated with other factors, such as access to collaboration, this result indicates that scientific productivity in English varies even among non-native English speakers, and can be explained partly by the individuals’ level of English proficiency.
These results provide clear evidence that language, economic, and gender disparities widen the scientific productivity gap, particularly when focusing only on English-language publications. This is likely due to the numerous barriers that women and non-binary people, non-native English speakers, and those from lower-income countries experience when conducting science [ , , , , , , ]. For example, non-native English speakers spend up to 51% more time to write a paper in English, experience paper rejection due to English writing up to 2.6 times more often, and are requested to improve their English writing during paper revision up to 12.5 times more often, compared to native English speakers [ ]. Our findings are based on regression analyses, and thus, may not necessarily indicate causation. Nevertheless, when the total number of English- and non-English-language papers was used as a measure of scientific productivity, we found no or even reversed productivity gap between non-native English speakers and native English speakers, and between lower-middle-income and high-income countries. This gives a strong signal that the need to publish papers in a language that is not their first language, which also often demands considerable cost [ ], has led to fewer English-language publications from non-native English speakers and those from lower-income countries. As a result, these scientists are portrayed as less productive based on English-language publication metrics.
To further visualize the accumulated impact of linguistic, economic, and gender backgrounds of individual researchers on their scientific productivity, we used the models developed in and to estimate the expected absolute and percentage difference in scientific productivity between researchers with different combinations of the three attributes ( ). When using the number of English-language peer-reviewed papers published as a measure of productivity, being a woman alone was associated with, on average, a reduction in the number of peer-reviewed publications at a late career stage by over 10 compared to men, while being a woman and a non-native English speaker equated to a 20 or more reduction in peer-reviewed publications at a late career stage, compared to male native English speakers ( ). The relative productivity impact of being a woman was largest at an early career stage, with over 45% reduction in the number of publications compared to men, while the relative impact was reduced at a later career stage, with about 20% reduction in the number of publications ( ). The relative productivity impact of being a non-native English speaker and from a lower-income country was largest at a late career stage. Being a woman and a non-native English speaker equated to up to a 60% reduction, and being a woman, a non-native English speaker, and from a lower-income country was associated with even a 70% reduction in the number of publications ( )
 The linguistic and economic productivity gap persisted but clearly narrowed, when using the total number of English- and non-English-language papers published as a measure of scientific productivity ( and ). In absolute terms, being a woman and a non-native English speaker equated to a reduction of up to 15 publications on average ( ), rather than over 20 ( ), compared to male native English speakers. Being a woman, a non-native English speaker, and from a lower-income country equated to a reduction of up to five ( ), rather than 15 ( ) publications, compared to male native English speakers from a high-income country. The additive impact of being a woman, a non-native English speaker, and from a lower income country was also drastically reduced in relative terms when taking non-English-language publications into account, with the productivity gap between female non-native English speakers and male native English speakers narrowing to up to 30% ( ), rather than over 60% ( ), and the productivity gap between female non-native English speakers from a lower income country and male native English speakers from a high-income country falling to over 20% ( ), rather than 70% ( ).
These results provide robust evidence that the impact of each of the three attributes (gender, linguistic, and economic background) adds up to create an almost insurmountable disadvantage, especially for female non-native English speakers from lower-income countries, in contributing to and participating in science. Being a woman alone was associated with a considerable disadvantage in terms of productivity, especially at an early career stage, with the number of publications almost halving compared to male counterparts. The larger gender productivity gap at an earlier career stage is likely due to multiple disadvantages for early-career women, such as a higher rate of taking a career break due to parental, family, and caring responsibilities [ ], larger impact of parenthood [ ], and less involvement in collaborations [ ] compared to men.
Being a non-native English speaker is associated with a further 15% reduction, and being from a lower-income country equates to an additional 10% reduction in publications. The productivity impact of being a non-native English speaker and from a lower-income country was larger for those at a later career stage. A potential explanation for this is the Matthew Effect; scientists who have previously been successful are more likely to succeed again in the future, causing differences in future success between winners and non-winners to further grow as their career progresses [ , ]. This indicates that the language and economic disparity may have a cumulative and long-lasting impact on scientists’ productivity over their careers. It may also be explained, for example, by the recent increase in pressure on early-career researchers to publish in English, even in countries where English is not widely spoken [ ], or by the tendency of early-career researchers to leverage emerging artificial intelligence technologies more to boost their productivity [ ]. It is worth emphasizing, however, that non-native English speakers at an early career stage still publish less in English than their native English-speaking counterparts ( and ).
Our study may potentially be underestimating the productivity impact of the gender, linguistic, and economic backgrounds of scientists, both at earlier and later career stages. First, our analysis excluded researchers without any first-authored peer-reviewed paper in English, which might have caused the underestimation of the productivity gap at an early career stage. Second, the survey that produced the data used in this study is unlikely to have included participants who have discontinued their scientific careers (see Materials and methods), potentially creating survivorship bias in the results. To fully understand the impact of the three attributes on scientific productivity, future longitudinal research needs to scrutinize differences in career trajectories between those with different linguistic and economic backgrounds, as has been done for gender identities [ ]. Qualitative causal inference approaches, such as process tracing and general elimination methodology, would also be useful to better understand the mechanisms underlying the patterns found in this study. Future studies should also assess the association between such attributes and other metrics of scientific productivity, such as authorship positions, journals for publications, and citations. We also recognize that the categories of gender, language and economic background used in this study are coarse, as also reflected in the modest improvements in the predictive measure of the final model from the null model ( and , and ), and more detailed background information, such as more detailed gender identities, or individuals’ levels of English proficiency and income, may further explain the variation in productivity. Other factors that were not collected in the survey, such as job titles and the type of institutions, may also explain the variation in productivity. The survey data used in this study are limited only to researchers in environmental sciences and within the eight nationalities. We call for further research to assess whether similar patterns would hold in other disciplines and countries with different publishing cultures and collaboration norms.
The results of this study have implications for how we should assess an individual scientist’s productivity in research assessment. Despite the increasing tendency to diversify the criteria used to assess an individual scientist’s contributions in, for example, hiring, promotion, or funding decisions (Declaration on Research Assessment (DORA): https://sfdora.org/), the number of publications in English, together with other publication metrics, is still widely used in research assessment. The combined impact of gender, linguistic, and economic backgrounds of individual scientists is rarely taken into account. For example, the Australian Research Council (ARC) has introduced the Research Opportunity and Performance Evidence (ROPE) policy to allow researchers to declare significant interruptions that have affected their research capacity, productivity, or contribution in the National Competitive Grant Program [ ]. Nevertheless, examples of “significant interruptions” proposed by the ARC only include interruptions to academic employment, disasters, misadventure, medical conditions, disability, caring and parental responsibilities, and community obligations [ ], leaving out the considerable disadvantages associated with individuals’ linguistic and economic backgrounds. Our findings suggest that being a non-native English speaker and from a lower-income country also should be a factor that is considered explicitly in any research assessment as a major impediment to the research capacity, productivity, and contribution of scientists.
The scientific community also largely ignores non-English-language publications in research assessment, even in countries where English is not widely spoken [ ]. Our results indicate that this common practice could further exacerbate the disadvantages of non-native English speakers and those from lower-income countries. Non-English-language publications can also be an important source of evidence, based on a robust study design, to inform decisions in addressing global challenges, such as the biodiversity and climate crises [ , ]. Including non-English-language publications in research assessment by individuals, institutions, and funders, which also conforms with the DORA’s emphasis on what is published rather than where it is published, can also reduce, though not eliminate, the impact of linguistic and economic disadvantages in science.
Our findings indicate a clear need to understand the cumulative impact of having multiple attributes that can disadvantage a scientist, not only on the number of publications, but more broadly on the contribution, performance, and representation of individual scientists. Recent studies on gender inequality in science point the way forward; we already know how gender impacts scientific productivity [ ], citations [ ], funding success [ ], employment [ ], promotion [ ], representation [ ], and so on. As science is becoming increasingly globalized, individual scientists’ attributes other than gender identity, most notably, but not limited to, linguistic and economic backgrounds, also form the fundamental basis of diversity in science. We urge the scientific community to assess the cumulative disadvantage faced by currently and historically underrepresented groups in science, and take actions to achieve their full contribution to and fair participation in science. Quantifying the impact of these barriers alone would not solve the issue. However, those who are not directly affected by the barriers cannot easily visualize their impacts. Therefore, as an initial step towards addressing these barriers, we need to try and build a consensus within the scientific community about the impact of various barriers by generating and presenting the evidence.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
The survey obtained the University of Queensland’s Institutional Human Research Ethics Approval (committee: Science Low and Negligible Risk Committee, approval number: 2021/HE000566). All participants were over 18 years old and agreed to participate in the survey through written consent. The survey provided the Participant Information Sheet that clarifies the voluntary nature of participation, the aims of the research, how the data would be used, and that all data would be confidential.

## Data
The data used in this study was collected by a survey published in another study [ ]. The survey was conducted between June and October 2021, with the aim of quantifying the amount of effort needed by individual researchers with different linguistic and economic backgrounds to conduct scientific activities in English and their first language (see [ ] for more details of the survey). The survey was targeted at eight nationalities: Bangladeshi, Bolivian, British, Japanese, Nepali, Nigerian, Spanish, and Ukrainian. These nationalities were selected based on the levels of each country’s English proficiency (based on the English Proficiency Index [ ]) and income (based on the World Bank list of economies [ ]): Bangladeshi, Nepali (low English proficiency and lower-middle income), Japanese (low English proficiency and high income), Bolivian, Ukrainian (moderate English proficiency and lower-middle income), Spanish (moderate English proficiency and high income), Nigerian (English as an official language and lower-middle income), and British (English as an official language and high income). Anyone who has one of the selected nationalities and has published at least one first-authored peer-reviewed English-language paper in ecology, evolutionary biology, conservation biology, or related disciplines was eligible to participate in the survey, regardless of their career level or profession.
The survey was initially developed in English, translated into the relevant languages for each nationality (Bangla for Bangladeshi, Japanese for Japanese, Nepali for Nepali, Spanish for Bolivian and Spanish, and Ukrainian for Ukrainian) and distributed in each of the eight countries in as unbiased a way as possible, through major mailing lists, and/or academic societies, universities, and institutions of relevant disciplines, or directly to relevant researches who were systematically identified on literature search systems. Using personal networks was avoided to reduce potential biases in participant recruitment (see [ ] for more details of the survey distribution). Due to this nature of survey distribution, the survey was largely limited to those researchers who were active in their careers at the time of the survey, and unlikely to include those who had already discontinued their scientific careers.
The survey was answered by a total of 908 researchers in environmental sciences (mostly ecology, evolutionary biology, conservation biology, and related disciplines) with at least one first-authored peer-reviewed paper in English. The number of participants with each nationality was as follows: Bangladeshi (n = 106), Bolivian (100), British (112), Japanese (294), Nepali (82), Nigerian (40), Spanish (108), and Ukrainian (66). The gender composition of the participants was 339 female, 556 male, and 13 participants in other categories, with the median age of 39 (range: 18–77) years old and median 13 (range: 1–55) years of experience in research. See for the number of participants by English proficiency, income level, and gender identity.

## Statistical analysis
We first performed a generalized linear model assuming a negative binomial distribution, with the number of English-language peer-reviewed papers published by survey participants as the response variable, and five explanatory variables: the number of years in research (centered), a country’s English language proficiency (English native as the reference category, moderate, and low), a country’s income level (high as the reference category, and lower-middle), the gender identity of the participant (male as the reference category, female, and other), and the research discipline of the participant (conservation biology as the reference category, ecology, evolutionary biology, other biological sciences, and other). We could not control for nationalities, as the variable was almost perfectly collinear with English proficiency and income levels. We also included three interactions: the number of years in research and a country’s English language proficiency, the number of years in research and a country’s income level, and the number of years in research and the gender identity of the participant. We first tested whether the three interactions were significant using the likelihood ratio test and found that the interaction between the number of years in research and a country’s income level was not significant ( ). We therefore removed this non-significant interaction from all analyses. After removing this interaction, we confirmed that a country’s income level itself was significant based on the likelihood ratio test and decided to keep this explanatory variable in the final model. We interpreted the results derived from the final model.
We next fitted the same model as the final model in the first analysis, but using the total number of English- and non-English-language peer-reviewed papers published by participants as the response variable. Lastly, we fitted the same model as the final model in the first analysis, but excluding native English speaking participants and including the number of years spent living in countries where English is the first language as an additional explanatory variable.
To assess the predictive performance of the three final models, we also performed 10-fold cross-validation for each final model and the null model (i.e., the model only with the intercept) and calculated a bias-adjusted estimate of the mean-square error of each model as a predictive measure [ ].
We then used the models developed in the first and second analyses (shown in and , respectively) to estimate the expected absolute and percentage difference in scientific productivity between male native English speakers from a high-income country (baseline) and (i) female native English speakers from a high-income country (representing the effect of being a female), (ii) female non-native English speakers from a high-income country (representing the effect of being a female non-native English speaker), and (iii) female non-native English speakers from a lower-middle income country (representing the effect of being a female non-native English speaker from a lower-middle income country). Here, non-native English speakers were defined as those with low English proficiency.
For each of the seven coefficients that are necessary for the calculation (intercept, the number of years in research, English proficiency—low, income level—lower-middle, gender—female, the number of years in research × English proficiency—low, and the number of years in research × gender—female), we derived 1,000 coefficient estimates from a normal distribution with the mean of the estimated coefficient and s.d. of the standard error of the coefficient in each model. We used the 1,000 sets of coefficient estimates to calculate 1,000 estimates of the expected number of (i) English-language peer-reviewed papers and (ii) English-language and non-English-language peer-reviewed papers combined, for (a) a male native English speaker from a high-income country (with a varying number of years in research between 1 and 38 years), (b) a female native English speaker from a high-income country (between 1 and 38 years), (c) a female non-native English speaker from a high-income country (between 1 and 30 years), and (d) a female non-native English speaker from a lower-middle income country (between 1 and 24 years). The year range used was the actual year range for the participants of the respective groups. We then calculated the absolute and percentage differences between (a) and (b), (c), and (d), respectively, and used the median and 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of the 1,000 estimates to plot the results. The estimates assumed the reference category (conservation biology) for discipline. We decided not to estimate the effect of gender—other due to the small sample size (13 participants, ).
The analysis was conducted using R version 4.4.0 [ ] and the following R packages: tidyverse [ ], MASS [ ], lmtest [ ], gridExtra [ ], and cv [ ].

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Number of survey participants by English proficiency, income level, and gender identity.
(DOCX)
S2 Table

## Results of a generalized linear model (with a negative binomial distribution) of factors explaining variations in the number of English-language peer-reviewed papers published by survey participants whose first language is not English (n = 754).
Survey participants whose first language is English were excluded from this analysis. Number of years in research was centered before the analysis. The reference category for English proficiency, Income level, Gender, and Discipline was Low English proficiency, High income, Male, and Conservation biology, respectively. Significant results are shown in bold. The bias-adjusted estimate of mean-square error (used as a predictive measure) based on the 10-fold cross-validation of the final model is 240.55, representing a 24.26% improvement from the null model with 317.61.
(DOCX)
S1 Data

## The data underlying – and – .
(XLSX)

We thank all participants in the survey and M. Amano for English proofreading.

## Abbreviations
ARCAustralian Research Council
DORADeclaration on Research Assessment
ROPEResearch Opportunity and Performance Evidence
 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003372.r001Decision Letter 0
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2025 Roland G Roberts2025Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
17 Jan 2025

Dear Tatsuya,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Language, economic, and gender disparities widen the scientific productivity gap" for consideration as a Meta-Research Article by PLOS Biology. Please accept my apologies for the slow process as we recovered from the journal office closure over the holidays.
Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editorial staff, as well as by an academic editor with relevant expertise, and I'm writing to let you know that we would like to send your submission out for external peer review.
However, before we can send your manuscript to reviewers, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks in preparation for peer review. After your manuscript has passed the checks it will be sent out for review. To provide the metadata for your submission, please Login to Editorial Manager (https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology) within two working days, i.e. by Jan 21 2025 11:59PM.
If your manuscript has been previously peer-reviewed at another journal, PLOS Biology is willing to work with those reviews in order to avoid re-starting the process. Submission of the previous reviews is entirely optional and our ability to use them effectively will depend on the willingness of the previous journal to confirm the content of the reports and share the reviewer identities. Please note that we reserve the right to invite additional reviewers if we consider that additional/independent reviewers are needed, although we aim to avoid this as far as possible. In our experience, working with previous reviews does save time.
If you would like us to consider previous reviewer reports, please edit your cover letter to let us know and include the name of the journal where the work was previously considered and the manuscript ID it was given. In addition, please upload a response to the reviews as a 'Prior Peer Review' file type, which should include the reports in full and a point-by-point reply detailing how you have or plan to address the reviewers' concerns.
During the process of completing your manuscript submission, you will be invited to opt-in to posting your pre-review manuscript as a bioRxiv preprint. Visit http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/preprints for full details. If you consent to posting your current manuscript as a preprint, please upload a single Preprint PDF.
Feel free to email us at plosbiology@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Roli
Roland Roberts, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology
rroberts@plos.org
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003372.r002Decision Letter 1
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2025 Roland G Roberts2025Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
31 Mar 2025

Dear Tatsuya,
Thank you for your patience while your manuscript "Language, economic, and gender disparities widen the scientific productivity gap" went through peer-review at PLOS Biology. Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, an Academic Editor with relevant expertise, and by three independent reviewers. Please accept my apologies for the unusual delay in securing a decision for you.
You'll see that reviewer #1 is positive, and has a number of points that can be addressed textually (clarifications, limitations). Reviewer #2 is also very positive, and has a few suggestions, some of which might involve further analysis (e.g. country as fixed effect). Reviewer #3 is more cautious, and wants you to consider a number of alternative explanations and limitations, plus several analyses (with some overlap with rev #2), including the use of alternative metrics of “success.”
In light of the reviews, which you will find at the end of this email, we are pleased to offer you the opportunity to address the comments from the reviewers in a revision that we anticipate should not take you very long. We will then assess your revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments with our Academic Editor aiming to avoid further rounds of peer-review, although we might need to consult with the reviewers, depending on the nature of the revisions.
In addition to these revisions, you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests shortly.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within 1 month. Please email us (plosbiology@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns, or would like to request an extension.
At this stage, your manuscript remains formally under active consideration at our journal; please notify us by email if you do not intend to submit a revision so that we withdraw the manuscript.
**IMPORTANT - SUBMITTING YOUR REVISION**
Your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. Please submit the following files along with your revised manuscript:
1. A 'Response to Reviewers' file - this should detail your responses to the editorial requests, present a point-by-point response to all of the reviewers' comments, and indicate the changes made to the manuscript.
*NOTE: In your point-by-point response to the reviewers, please provide the full context of each review. Do not selectively quote paragraphs or sentences to reply to. The entire set of reviewer comments should be present in full and each specific point should be responded to individually.
You should also cite any additional relevant literature that has been published since the original submission and mention any additional citations in your response.
2. In addition to a clean copy of the manuscript, please also upload a 'track-changes' version of your manuscript that specifies the edits made. This should be uploaded as a "Revised Article with Changes Highlighted " file type.
*Resubmission Checklist*
When you are ready to resubmit your revised manuscript, please refer to this resubmission checklist: https://plos.io/Biology_Checklist
To submit a revised version of your manuscript, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' where you will find your submission record.
Please make sure to read the following important policies and guidelines while preparing your revision:
*Published Peer Review*
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/

*PLOS Data Policy*
Please note that as a condition of publication PLOS' data policy (http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability) requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions arrived at in your manuscript. If you have not already done so, you must include any data used in your manuscript either in appropriate repositories, within the body of the manuscript, or as supporting information (N.B. this includes any numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.). For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5
*Blot and Gel Data Policy*
We require the original, uncropped and minimally adjusted images supporting all blot and gel results reported in an article's figures or Supporting Information files. We will require these files before a manuscript can be accepted so please prepare them now, if you have not already uploaded them. Please carefully read our guidelines for how to prepare and upload this data: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive thus far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Roli
Roland Roberts, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology
rroberts@plos.org
----------------------------------------------------------------
REVIEWERS' COMMENTS:
Reviewer #1:
[identifies herself as Antica Culina]
I enjoyed reading this manuscript. The topic is very relevant and timely, as it is becoming clear that the current evaluation system in science is not promoting diversity. This study uses a survey approach to quantify the gender, language, and economic correlates of scientific productivity measured using the most common measure of productivity - scientific publications.
I only have a few comments:
1. I am not sure if the wording 'to their full potential' is meaningful. What would a full potential be? Would it be potential that one would reach if one would just do science without any restrictions? I think rather than referencing one's work in respect to some full potential standard, it needs to be highlighted that the output of researchers is different, and this is depended on many factors, some of which cannot be changed. And thus the person has reached their full potential given those circumstances. My full potential is inevitably different than a full potential of someone else, and I cannot change it, but those who evaluate me can take the circumstances into account when evaluating me. Or take different metrics.
2. Line 65 - unclear meaning of 'apparent'.
3. I suggest adding some basic summary info on the survey at the beginning of results, such as number of responses per country etc. This would facilitate putting the results into context.
4. Lines 88-90 - it is unclear if this sentence compares woman vs man, non-native vs native speakers etc, or all the former group vs all of the latter group.
5. Unclear meaning of the sentence lines 98-99
6. Discussion currently lists one reasons why this survey might have underestimated the productivity gap. However, if I read the Methods correctly, I see two more reasons. First, the survey was in English (is this correct?), so probably responded by people who speak English. Those that do not speak English have likely not answer it. Second, emails were sent to only those that have first authored at least one publication in English, which means that those that do not have such authorship were excluded, which is also likely more those from underrepresented groups.
7. Given that first and last authorship are usually more prestigious, do you think future surveys should also ask question about the authorship position?
8. Methods - please specify if the survey was sent in English only.
Reviewer #2:
Amano et al. perform an impressive cross-country survey of 908 environmental scientists to untangle the relative importance of linguistic, economic, and gender backgrounds on scientific productivity. I recommend this manuscript for publication with a few minor suggestions for improvement.
1. The authors left out several crucial variables on the survey that would have clarified the results immensely. Both the job title of the respondent and the prestige of their workplace institution could have explained several of the effects from the paper. For instance, it can be that women are systematically excluded from tenure-track positions, where productivity can be higher due to running a lab. Or, women are excluded from elite institutions, where productivity is higher due to greater administrative support and smaller teaching load. These possible explanations should be included in the discussion.
2. The authors group together all of the countries within income brackets together in the regression analysis.I would recommend controlling for each country specifically as a fixed effect, to isolate the effects within countries. This would strengthen the gender analysis, since none of the hypothesized mechanisms about gender depend on the country.
3. In addition to inferential statistics such as the p-values and coefficient estimates, the authors should report predictive statistics. For instance, in performing (say) 10-fold cross-validation, how well does the model do at predicting a researcher's productivity, compared to an average baseline where everyone is predicted to produce the same number of papers.
Reviewer #3:
The manuscript tried to address an important topic—structural disparities in scientific productivity related to language, income, and gender. The authors present a well-organized analysis using survey data and regression analysis. This study analyzes survey data from 908 environmental scientists across eight countries to examine how language, economic, and gender disparities relate to scientific productivity. The authors find that non-native English speakers, scientists from lower-income countries, and women report significantly fewer peer-reviewed publications compared to their native English-speaking, high-income country, and male counterparts. The authors argue that these disparities reflect structural inequities rather than differences in researcher ability or effort.
However, there are several key limitations before publication in a high-impact venue like PLOS Biology. The question I have about the manuscript are quite basic.
First, the survey is limited to 908 environmental scientists from eight countries, and eligibility required authors to have at least one first-authored English-language publication. This introduces selection bias by excluding those who may have already exited academia due to systemic barriers—potentially underestimating disparities. The paper acknowledges this but does not sufficiently explore the implications for generalizability or suggest methods to address survivor bias in future research.
Second, the study uses country-level proxies for both income and English proficiency rather than individual-level metrics. While practical, this potentially masks important within-country heterogeneity. For example, defining non-native English speakers as those from countries with "low" proficiency may oversimplify nuanced linguistic experiences. Furthermore, individual characteristics are widely known to be correlated with research capabilities. In addition, it is also worth considering including country fixed effect.
Thirdly, although the authors caution against making causal claims, some interpretations appear causal in tone. Furthermore, the mechanisms driving the observed productivity gaps are not deeply explored. Are disparities due to time costs, access to networks, publishing fees, mentorship, or other structural issues? Even speculative discussion or supporting evidence from qualitative research would enrich the paper's explanatory value.
Fourth, the regression results are not presented in a professional or standardized format. I recommend referring to classical economics papers as a guide for reporting. For example, with respect to the gender variable, the male category appears to be the omitted baseline, but this should be clearly stated in the table notes or main text. Additionally, while there are five discipline categories, four coefficients are shown. It seems the omitted reference category is missing from the presentation and should be explicitly identified. Most importantly, a more straightforward and interpretable way to demonstrate the effects of gender, language, and income would be to visualize their predicted margins, after controlling for all other covariates in the model. This would provide a clearer sense of the magnitude and direction of these effects, making the results more accessible to readers.
Fifth, the number of publications is used as the sole metric to describe scientists' productivity. However, this is a rather limited measure. More meaningful indicators of a scientist's success should be considered—such as citation counts, number of papers published in top field journals, and other quality-based metrics. Incorporating these measures would provide a more robust and nuanced evaluation of scientific productivity.
Finally, the focus on environmental sciences and the geographic distribution of respondents (e.g., heavy representation from Japan) may skew findings. The authors should discuss the limits of disciplinary generalizability and whether similar patterns would hold in fields with different publishing cultures or collaboration norms.
The paper concludes with important implications for research assessment but lacks actionable policy suggestions. I hope these comments are helpful in the development of your manuscript.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003372.r003Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
7 Aug 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Responses_Amano.docx
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003372.r004Decision Letter 2
RobertsRoland GSenior Editor© 2025 Roland G Roberts2025Roland G Robertshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
15 Aug 2025

Dear Tatsuya,
Thank you for the submission of your revised Meta-Research Article "Language, economic and gender disparities widen the scientific productivity gap" for publication in PLOS Biology. On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Ulrich Dirnagl, I'm pleased to say that we can in principle accept your manuscript for publication, provided you address any remaining formatting and reporting issues. These will be detailed in an email you should receive within 2-3 business days from our colleagues in the journal operations team; no action is required from you until then. Please note that we will not be able to formally accept your manuscript and schedule it for publication until you have completed any requested changes.
Please take a minute to log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process.
PRESS: We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with biologypress@plos.org. If you have previously opted in to the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may opt out on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
Thank you again for choosing PLOS Biology for publication and supporting Open Access publishing. We look forward to publishing your study. 
Sincerely, 
Roli
Roland G Roberts, PhD, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology
rroberts@plos.org