pmcCochrane Database Syst RevCochrane Database Syst Rev3102cochrev10090974714651858The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews1469-493X1361-6137John Wiley and Sons, Inc. and the Cochrane LibraryPMC11005019PMC11005019.111005019110050193859712610.1002/14651858.CD004667.pub6CD004667.pub6CD0046671Basic care during pregnancyComplementary & alternative medicineEffective practice & health systemsPregnancy & childbirthMidwife continuity of care models versus other models of care for childbearing women
Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth GroupSandallJanejane.sandall@kcl.ac.uk ). Whether in high‐, middle‐, or low‐income countries, appropriate access to quality maternity care during pregnancy improves maternal and infant mortality and morbidity rates, promotes healthy behaviours, and addresses emotional and social issues ( ; ; ; ; ). Evidence has shown that high‐quality care from a midwifery workforce is crucial to achieving international goals and targets in reproductive, maternal, newborn, and child health improvements ( ; ​; ). In many parts of the world, midwives are the primary care providers for childbearing women (​ ), however access to midwifery care in many low‐ and middle‐income countries, and in some high‐income countries, such as the USA, is markedly lower than in other high‐income countries, with midwives representing a small percentage of healthcare professionals (​ ; ; ; )​.
The World Health Organization recommends midwife continuity of care models, in which a known midwife licensed and educated to international standards (such as International Confederation of Midwives (ICM) global standards) ( ), or a small group of known midwives, supports a woman throughout the antenatal, intrapartum, and postnatal continuum, in settings with well‐functioning midwifery programmes (​ ​; ). In addition, there is increasing evidence that such models can mitigate inequity, social disadvantage, and structural determinants of poor maternal and newborn health outcomes in a range of populations and settings ( ; ; ; ; ). However, there is debate about the clinical and cost‐effectiveness of these models (​ ),​ and how models are organised, implemented sustainably ( ), and evaluated (​ ).

## Description of the condition
The concept of continuity of care more widely is rooted in primary care ( ; ). It involves care over time by the same care provider/s to encompass informational, management, and relational continuity to improve personalised integrated care ( ; ). As defined by , informational continuity concerns the timely availability of relevant information; management continuity involves communicating facts and judgements across the team, institutional and professional boundaries, and between professionals and patients; and relationship continuity means an ongoing therapeutic relationship between the service user and one or more health professionals.
There is evidence that continuity of care between primary care physicians and their patients is associated with better patient outcomes, including diagnostic accuracy ( ), improved patient satisfaction ( ; ), fewer emergency department visits ( ), fewer hospital admissions ( ; ; ), better care co‐ordination ( ), reduced mortality ( ; ), lower healthcare costs, and lower or more appropriate use of services ( ; ). Greater continuity of care is also independently associated with lower hospital utilisation for seniors with multiple chronic medical conditions in an integrated delivery system with high informational continuity ( ).

## Midwife continuity of care models
Midwife continuity of care models aim to provide care in either community or hospital settings, usually to women with uncomplicated or low‐risk pregnancies for whom the midwife will be the lead professional. In some models, midwives provide continuity of midwife care to all women with social risk factors/living in deprivation, or from a defined geographical location, and continue to provide continuity of midwife care to women who experience complications, in partnership with obstetricians and other professionals. In other models, midwives may provide continuity of midwife care to women with medical or obstetric risk factors as part of a wider team. Midwife continuity of care models must include the provision of maternity care by one or a small team of midwives during the antepartum and intrapartum periods, and some models may extend to the postnatal period in the community in some settings.
Within midwife continuity of care models, women receive dedicated support from the same midwife or team of midwives as appropriate ( ). Care may be provided in consultation and collaboration with other health and social care providers during pregnancy, birth, and the postpartum period. Around the world, midwife continuity of care has been implemented in different contexts with variation in the lead professional and degree of autonomous midwifery practice, the composition of the multidisciplinary team, and the target population. However, in all models, the aim is for women to develop relationships with their midwives throughout their pregnancy, birth, and the postnatal period, where offered in the health system. The midwife continuity of care model is based on the holistic premise that pregnancy, birth, and becoming a parent are transformative life events and includes: continuity of care; monitoring the physical, psychological, spiritual and social wellbeing of the woman and family throughout the childbearing cycle; providing the woman with individualised education, counselling and antenatal care; attendance during labour, birth and the immediate postpartum period by a known midwife; ongoing support during the postnatal period; minimising unnecessary technological interventions; and identifying, referring, and co‐ordinating care for women who require obstetric or other specialist attention.
Some midwife continuity of care models provide continuity of care to a defined group of women through a team of midwives sharing a caseload, often called 'team' midwifery. Thus, a woman will receive her care from a number of midwives in the team, the size of which can vary. Other models, often termed 'caseload midwifery', aim to offer greater relationship continuity by ensuring that childbearing women receive their ante‐, intra‐, and postnatal care from one midwife or their practice partner ( ; ).

## Other models of care
Other models of care include:
Obstetrician‐provided care. Where obstetricians are the primary care provider for many childbearing women, an obstetrician (not necessarily the one who provides antenatal care) is present for the birth, and nurses (usually) provide intrapartum and postnatal care.
Family doctor‐provided care, with referral to specialist obstetric care as needed. Obstetric nurses or midwives provide intrapartum and immediate postnatal care, but not at a decision‐making level or throughout the entire care episode, and a medical doctor is present for the birth.
Shared models of care, where responsibility for the organisation and delivery of care is shared between different health professionals throughout the initial booking to the postnatal period. These models are similar in that they do not aim to provide midwife continuity of care. Other models of care must include the provision of maternity care during the antepartum and intrapartum periods, and some models may extend to the postnatal period in some settings.

## How the intervention might work
The holistic concept of relational continuity refers to a continuous process of pregnancy, birth, and postnatal care and includes a "coordinated and smooth progression of care from the patient’s point of view" ( ; ), rather than isolated events. Continuity contributes to patient perceptions of having a trusted care provider who knows their social and medical history and harnesses an expectation that a known provider will care for them in the future, lessening stress and anxiety ( ; ; ; ). This longitudinal aspect develops a trusting relationship between women and their midwives. It enables midwives to work to their full scope of practice across women’s care journeys, improving their ability to identify women’s individual needs and providing a safety net ( ; ; ).
Relational continuity over time has been found to have a more significant effect on user experience and outcome in high‐income countries ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). It has been argued that neither management nor informational continuity can compensate for the lack of an ongoing relationship over time ( ; ; ).
Suggested mechanisms of effect in maternity and primary care literature include care providers taking greater responsibility, improved trust, confidence in the care provider, feeling safe to disclose concerns or risk factors, reduced stigma and discrimination, and improved engagement, access, and referral ( ; ; ; ; ; ). Lower rates of interventions could be linked to the greater agency experienced by women and midwives within midwife continuity of care models, and these effects are mediated, in part, by the context of the settings ( ). Continuity of care may also lead to enhanced co‐ordination or navigation of care, greater advocacy, timely follow‐up of test results, and greater adherence to treatments and multidisciplinary guidelines ( ; ; ; ). It may also provide more opportunities for social support from multidisciplinary services, families, and the local community, timely care, earlier help‐seeking, opportunities for early prevention, escalation of concerns, and diagnosis of complications to facilitate management and intervention ( ; ; ). This literature has resulted in more recent interest in continuity of care models for those with multi‐morbidities and disproportionate risk of health inequalities and multiple morbidities ( ; ). The general literature on continuity notes that a lack of clarity in the definition and measurement of different types of continuity has been one of the limitations of research in this field and that there is a need for better specification between models of care and outcomes ( ; ).

## Why it is important to do this review
This is an update of a Cochrane review first published in 2008 and last updated in 2016. The 2016 review is more than five years old, and new studies need to be incorporated. Midwife continuity of care is at the heart of maternal policy in some high‐income countries and is considered important globally by the World Health Organization (WHO). The applicability to low‐ and middle‐income settings is a key issue for local and national stakeholders. It is therefore important to explore whether the effects of midwife continuity of care models are influenced by variation in the model of care, maternal medical and obstetric risk status, social risk factors, and in low‐ to high‐income country settings.
This updated review aims to complement other systematic review work on models of maternity care ( ; ; ) and contribute to the knowledge base on the effects of midwife continuity of care models. This update includes a focus on how outcomes are influenced by variations in models of care, maternal medical and obstetric risk status, social risk factors, and low‐ to high‐income country settings. The definition of the intervention has changed from ‘midwife‐led continuity models’ to ‘midwife continuity of care models’ to include interventions for women with medical and obstetric risk who may receive collaborative specialist and obstetric‐led care and midwife continuity of care. This change aligns with current policy and recommendations for relational continuity and effective collaborative multidisciplinary networks of care ( ; ; ).

## Objectives
The primary objective of this review is to compare the effects of midwife continuity of care models with other models of care for childbearing women and their infants. We also explore whether the effects of midwife continuity of care are influenced by: 1) variation in midwifery models of care; 2) obstetric and medical risk factors; 3) social risk factors; 4) country income level.

## Methods

## Criteria for considering studies for this review

## Types of studies
We included randomised trials using individual‐ or cluster‐randomisation methods and quasi‐randomised trials. The latter group refers to trials where allocation may not have been genuinely random, for example when the allocation was alternate or unclear.

## Types of participants
Pregnant women from all demographics, regardless of age, ethnicity, socio‐economic status, education, place of residence, or level of deprivation. We also included pregnant women with various risk factors, including medical, obstetric, and social risks, and those receiving care in home, hospital, or community settings. The review also encompasses participants receiving care through either private or public healthcare systems and those residing in low‐ or high‐income countries. All women allocated to a midwife continuity of care model or another model of care were eligible for inclusion.

## Types of interventions

## Midwife continuity of care models ‐ intervention
For a model to be classified as a midwife continuity of care model, midwifery care is provided by a midwife and/or a small team of midwives throughout the antepartum and intrapartum periods, which may extend to the postpartum period in some settings.
In all models, care is provided in consultation with medical staff in pregnancy, birth, and the postpartum period as appropriate.
Midwife continuity of care models aim to provide care in either community or hospital settings. Normally, midwives are the lead professionals for healthy women with uncomplicated pregnancies. In some models, midwives provide continuity of midwifery care to all women with specialised needs, such as social risk factors, or from a defined geographical location, acting as lead professionals for women whose pregnancy and birth is uncomplicated and continuing to provide continuity of midwife care to women who experience medical and obstetric complications in partnership with other professionals. In some models, midwives may provide continuity of midwife care to women with obstetric risk factors as part of a wider team.
Some midwife continuity models provide continuity to a defined group of women through a team of midwives, often called 'team' midwifery. Thus, a woman will receive her midwifery care from a few midwives in the team, the size of which can vary (often between four and eight midwives). Other models, often termed 'caseload midwifery', aim to offer greater relationship continuity by ensuring that childbearing women receive their ante‐, intra‐, and postnatal care from one midwife or their practice partner backed up by a wider team or group practice.

## Other models of care ‐ comparison
These models of care include:
Obstetrician‐provided care, where obstetricians are the primary antenatal care providers for childbearing women. An obstetrician (not necessarily the one who provides antenatal care) is present for the birth, and nurses offer intrapartum and postnatal care.
Family doctor‐provided care, with referral to specialist obstetric care as needed. Obstetric nurses or midwives provide intrapartum and immediate postnatal care but not at a decision‐making level or throughout the entire care episode, and a medical doctor is present for the birth.
Shared models of care, where health professionals share responsibility for the organisation and delivery of care throughout the initial booking to the postnatal period. Other models of care must include the provision of maternity care during the antepartum and intrapartum periods, and some models may extend to the postnatal period in some settings.

## Types of outcome measures

## Primary outcomes
Spontaneous vaginal birth (defined by trial authors)
Caesarean birth
Regional analgesia (epidural/spinal)
Intact perineum
Fetal loss at or after 24 weeks gestation
Preterm birth (< 37 weeks)
Neonatal death (baby born alive at any gestation and dies within 28 days)

## Secondary outcomes
Healthy mother (defined as one who is alive at 28 days postpartum, without a Caesarean birth, postpartum haemorrhage (as defined by trial authors), third or fourth‐degree tear, or readmission within 28 days)
Maternal death
Induction of labour
Instrumental vaginal birth (forceps/vacuum)
Episiotomy
Third‐ or fourth‐degree tear
Postpartum haemorrhage (defined by trial authors)
Breastfeeding initiation (defined by trial authors)
Maternal readmission within 28 days
Maternal experience (defined by trial authors)
Attendance at birth by a known midwife who provided antenatal care
Cost (as defined by trial authors)
Healthy baby (defined as one born after 37 + 0 weeks gestation and alive at 28 days and without readmission within 28 days)
Birth weight less than 2500 g
Birth weight equal to or more than 4000 g
Apgar score less than or equal to seven at five minutes
Admission to special care nursery/neonatal intensive care unit
Fetal loss before 24 weeks gestation

## Search methods for identification of studies
The following methods sections of this review are based on a standard template used by Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth.

## Electronic searches
For this update, in collaboration with the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Information Specialist, a search was conducted on 17 August 2022 of the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Trials Register, which contains over 34,000 reports of controlled trials related to pregnancy and childbirth and represents over 30 years of searching.
Full details of the current search methods used to populate the Register, including search strategies for CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, and CINAHL, the list of handsearched journals and conference proceedings, and the list of journals reviewed via the current awareness service, can be found in .
The Information Specialist maintains the Trials Register, which contains trials identified through monthly searches of CENTRAL, weekly searches of MEDLINE and Embase, monthly searches of CINAHL, handsearches of 30 journals and conference proceedings, and weekly current awareness alerts for an additional 44 journals plus monthly BioMed Central email alerts.
Two people screen the search results and review the full text of all relevant trial reports identified through the search activities described above. Based on the intervention described, each trial report is assigned a number corresponding to a specific Pregnancy and Childbirth review topic and added to the Register.
The Information Specialist searches the Register for each review using this topic number for a more specific search set, fully accounted for in the relevant review sections (Included, Excluded, Awaiting Classification, or Ongoing).
Additionally, unpublished, planned, and ongoing trial reports were searched for on ClinicalTrials.gov and the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) using the search methods detailed in . This search was also conducted on 17 August 2022.

## Searching other resources
We searched for further studies in the reference lists of the studies identified.
We did not apply any language or date restrictions.

## Data collection and analysis
For methods used in the previous version of this review, see .
This update was conducted using a standard template from Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth, as outlined in the following methods sections of this review.

## Selection of studies
Three review authors (JS, CFT, HRJ) independently assessed for inclusion all potential studies identified as a result of the search strategy. We resolved any disagreement through discussion or, if required, we consulted other review authors (DD, HS, LJ).
We created a study flow diagram to map out the number of records identified, included, excluded, or awaiting classification.
All studies meeting our inclusion criteria were evaluated by three review authors (LJ, CFT, HRJ) against the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Trustworthiness Screening tool (CPC‐TST). This screening tool is a set of predefined criteria to select studies that, based on available information, are deemed sufficiently trustworthy to be included in the analysis. The criteria are:

## Research governance
Are any retraction notices or expressions of concern listed on the Retraction Watch Database relating to this study?
Was the study prospectively registered (for those studies published after 2010)? If not, was there a plausible reason?
Did the trial authors provide/share the protocol and/or ethics approval letter when requested?
Did the trial authors communicate with the Cochrane review authors within the agreed timelines?
Did the trial authors provide individual participant data (IPD) upon request? If not, was there a plausible reason?

## Baseline characteristics
Is the study free from characteristics of the participants that appear too similar (e.g. distribution of the mean (SD) is excessively narrow or excessively wide, as noted by ).

## Feasibility
Is the study free from characteristics that could be implausible? (e.g. large numbers of women with a rare condition (such as severe cholestasis in pregnancy) recruited within 12 months).
Is there a plausible explanation in cases with (close to) zero losses to follow‐up?

## Results
Is the study free from results that could be implausible? (e.g. massive risk reduction for primary outcomes with a small sample size)?
Do the numbers randomised to each group suggest that adequate randomisation methods were used (e.g. is the study free from issues such as unexpectedly even numbers of women ‘randomised’ including a mismatch between the numbers and the methods, if the authors say ‘no blocking was used’ but still end up with equal numbers, or if the authors say they used ‘blocks of 4’ but the final numbers differ by 6)?

The review did not include studies assessed as potentially ‘high‐risk’. Where a study was classified as ‘high‐risk’ for one or more of the above criteria, we attempted to contact the study authors to address any possible lack of information/concerns. Where adequate information was not obtained, the study remains ‘awaiting classification’, and the reasons and communications with the author (or lack of) are described in detail.
The process is described in its entirety in .
 

## Abstracts
Data from abstracts have only been included if, in addition to the trustworthiness assessment, the study authors have confirmed in writing that the data to be included in the review have come from the final analysis and will not change. Where such information is unavailable/not provided, the study remains ‘awaiting classification’ (as above).

## Data extraction and management
We adapted the data extraction template from Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth to extract data. Six review authors (JS, CFT, DD, HS, LJ, HRJ) extracted the data for eligible studies using the agreed form. We resolved discrepancies through discussion or, if required, we consulted the other review authors (AHS, SG, PG). Data were entered into Review Manager Web software ( ) and checked for accuracy.
When information regarding any of the above was unclear, we contacted the authors of the original reports to provide further details.
Review author D Devane is a co‐author of , and J Sandall, A Shennan, and C Fernandez Turienzo are co‐authors of , so they were not involved in the data extraction or risk of bias assessment for the studies on which they were co‐authors.

## Assessment of risk of bias in included studies
Six authors in groups of two (JS, CFT, DD, HS, LJ, HRJ) independently assessed the risk of bias for each study using the criteria outlined in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ). Any disagreement was resolved by discussion or by involving another assessor.

## Random sequence generation (checking for possible selection bias)
For each included study, we described the method used to generate the allocation sequence in sufficient detail to allow an assessment of whether it should produce comparable groups.
We assessed the method as:
low risk of bias (any genuinely random process, e.g. random number table; computer random number generator);
high risk of bias (any non‐random process, e.g. odd or even date of birth; hospital or clinic record number);
unclear risk of bias.

## Allocation concealment (checking for possible selection bias)
For each included study, we described the method used to conceal allocation to interventions before assignment. We assessed whether intervention allocation could have been foreseen before, during recruitment, or changed after the assignment.
We assessed the methods as:
low risk of bias (e.g. telephone or central randomisation; consecutively numbered, sealed, opaque envelopes);
high risk of bias (open random allocation; unsealed or non‐opaque envelopes, alternation; date of birth);
unclear risk of bias.

## Blinding of participants and personnel (checking for possible performance bias)
For each included study, we described the methods used, if any, to blind study participants and personnel from knowledge of which intervention a participant received. We considered that studies are at low risk of bias if they were blinded or if we judged that the lack of blinding would unlikely affect results. We assessed blinding separately for different outcomes or classes of outcomes.
We assessed the methods as:
low, high, or unclear risk of bias for participants;
low, high, or unclear risk of bias for personnel.

## Blinding of outcome assessment (checking for possible detection bias)
For each included study, we described the methods used, if any, to blind outcome assessors from knowledge of which intervention a participant received. We assessed blinding separately for different outcomes or classes of outcomes.
We assessed the methods used to blind outcome assessment as:
low, high, or unclear risk of bias.

## Incomplete outcome data (checking for possible attrition bias due to the amount, nature, and handling of incomplete outcome data)
We described the completeness of data for each included study, and for each outcome or class of outcomes, including attrition and exclusions from the analysis. We stated whether attrition and exclusions were reported and the numbers included in the analysis at each stage (compared with the total randomised participants), reasons for attrition or exclusion where reported, and whether missing data were balanced across groups or were related to outcomes. Where sufficient information was reported or could be supplied by the trial authors, we planned to re‐include missing data in the analyses which we undertook.
We assessed the methods as:
low risk of bias (e.g. no missing outcome data; missing outcome data balanced across groups);
high risk of bias (e.g. numbers or reasons for missing data imbalanced across groups; ‘as treated’ analysis done with the substantial departure of intervention received from that assigned at randomisation);
unclear risk of bias.

## Selective reporting (checking for reporting bias)
We described how we investigated the possibility of selective outcome reporting bias for each included study and what we found.
We assessed the methods as:
low risk of bias (where it is clear that all of the study’s pre‐specified outcomes and all expected outcomes of interest to the review have been reported);
high risk of bias (where not all the study’s pre‐specified outcomes have been reported; one or more reported primary outcomes were not pre‐specified; outcomes of interest are reported incompletely and so cannot be used; the study fails to include results of a key outcome that would have been expected to have been reported);
unclear risk of bias.

## Other bias (checking for bias due to problems not covered above)
For each included study, we described any important concerns we had about other possible sources of bias.

## Dichotomous data
For dichotomous data, we presented results as a summary risk ratio with 95% confidence intervals.

## Continuous data
We planned to use the mean difference if outcomes were measured similarly between trials. In future updates, as appropriate, we will use the standardised mean difference to combine trials that measure the same outcome but use different methods.

## Time‐to‐event data
No outcomes were expected using time‐to‐event data.

## Cluster‐randomised trials
In addition to individually randomised trials, we included a cluster‐randomised trial in the analyses ( ). This trial found a negative ICC, so no adjustment was made for clustering. We considered it reasonable to combine the results from cluster‐randomised and individually randomised trials if there was little heterogeneity between the study designs and an interaction between the effect of the intervention and the choice of randomisation unit was considered to be unlikely. We also conducted a sensitivity analysis by excluding from the meta‐analyses to which it contributed data (see ).

## Other unit of analysis issues
Multiple pregnancies were included, and both infants were included in the denominator.
For any study with more than two intervention groups in a meta‐analysis, we planned to (i) omit groups that were not relevant to the comparison being made or (ii) combine multiple groups that were eligible as the experimental or comparator intervention to create a single pair‐wise comparison.

## Dealing with missing data
For included studies, we noted levels of attrition. For all outcomes, we carried out analyses, as far as possible, on an intention‐to‐treat basis, i.e. we attempted to include all participants randomised to each group in the analyses. The denominator for each outcome in each trial was the number randomised minus any participants whose outcomes were known to be missing.

## Assessment of heterogeneity
We assessed statistical heterogeneity in each meta‐analysis using the Tau², I², and Chi² statistics. We regarded heterogeneity as substantial if an I² value was greater than 30% and either a Tau² was greater than zero or there was a low P value (less than 0.10) in the Chi² test for heterogeneity. We planned to explore several pre‐specified subgroup analyses (see ).

## Assessment of reporting biases
Where there were 10 or more studies in the meta‐analysis, we investigated reporting biases using funnel plots. We assessed funnel plot asymmetry visually and using Egger's test with the software Comprehensive Meta‐Analysis.

## Data synthesis
We carried out statistical analysis using the Review Manager software ( ).
Where clinical heterogeneity was sufficient to expect that the underlying treatment effects differed between trials, or where substantial statistical heterogeneity was detected, we used random‐effects meta‐analysis to produce an overall summary of whether an average treatment effect across trials was considered clinically meaningful. The random‐effects summary was treated as the average of the range of possible treatment effects and we discussed the clinical implications of treatment effects differing between trials. We would not have combined trials if the average treatment effect had been clinically meaningful. The results were presented as the average treatment effect with 95% confidence intervals and the estimates of Tau² and I².

## Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity
Where we identified substantial heterogeneity, we investigated it using subgroup analyses and sensitivity analyses. We considered whether an overall summary was meaningful and, if it was, we used random‐effects analysis to produce it.
We carried out the following subgroup analyses.
Caseload versus team models of midwifery care
Low‐risk versus mixed‐risk status
Women with social risk factors versus all women
Countries with a very high Human Development Index (HDI) > 0.8 versus high, medium, and low HDI

Subgroup analyses were restricted to the primary outcomes, which were:
Spontaneous vaginal birth (as defined by trial authors)
Caesarean birth
Regional analgesia (epidural/spinal)
Intact perineum
Fetal loss at or after 24 weeks gestation
Preterm birth (< 37 weeks)
Neonatal death (baby born alive at any gestation and dies within 28 days)

We assessed subgroup differences by interaction tests available within RevMan ( ). We reported the results of subgroup analyses quoting the Chi² statistic and P value, and the interaction test I² value.

## Sensitivity analysis
We conducted sensitivity analyses to investigate the impact of the risk of bias on our findings. We repeated the analysis, retaining only the studies at low risk of bias for random sequence generation, allocation concealment, and incomplete outcome data, to evaluate whether this altered the overall results. We also conducted a sensitivity analysis by excluding from the meta‐analyses to which it contributed data (see ).

## Summary of findings and assessment of the certainty of the evidence
We employed the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) approach, as delineated in the GRADE Handbook, to assess the certainty of the evidence for all available outcomes in the primary comparisons between midwife continuity of care and all other models of care for childbearing women and their infants. This was undertaken to enable the use of GRADE‐recommended informative statements for communicating the results of systematic reviews, which necessitate a rating of the certainty of evidence. Critical outcomes (spontaneous vaginal birth, caesarean section, regional anaesthesia, intact perineum, fetal loss after 24 weeks gestation, preterm birth, and neonatal death) are presented in . Outcomes that we deemed to be less important are presented in .
We utilised the GRADEpro Guideline Development Tool to import data from Review Manager Web ( ) to create the summary of findings tables. Using the GRADE approach, we produced a summary of the intervention effect and a measure of certainty for each outcome, using five considerations to assess the certainty of the body of evidence (study limitations, consistency of effect, imprecision, indirectness, and publication bias). The evidence can be downgraded from 'high certainty' by one level for serious (or by two levels for very serious) limitations, depending on assessments for risk of bias, indirectness of evidence, serious inconsistency, imprecision of effect estimates, or potential publication bias. We explain any downgrading decisions in the footnotes in the summary of findings tables.
In this update, we present the results of the review and certainty ratings, focusing on both relative and absolute effects. For estimating the certainty of evidence, we used baseline risks observed in control groups across the included studies and multiplied them by the relative effects. We have applied the GRADE partially contextualised approach for interpreting findings, as suggested in the latest GRADE guidance on imprecision ( ). This approach informed our interpretation of the size of the effects for the different outcomes. This was particularly since there are no known minimum clinically important differences (MCIDs) established for our critical outcomes. Our analysis and interpretation are aligned with GRADE's emphasis on absolute effects, particularly in the absence of MCIDs, thereby providing a clearer understanding of the practical significance of the results ( ).

## Results

## Description of studies
This review update includes a total of 17 studies (77 study reports), 42 excluded studies (69 study reports), one study awaiting classification (one study report), and three ongoing studies (three study reports).

## Results of the search
For this update, we identified a total of 221 records from electronic databases, and we found 17 potentially relevant studies from other sources. After the removal of duplicates, 218 records remained and we screened out 163 of these for either not being a trial or having a different scope. We assessed a total of 55 full trial reports for eligibility. Ten of these trial reports were found to be additional reports relating to three already included studies ( ; ; ). One new trial (seven reports) has been included ( ), two trials previously excluded in the last version of the review have now been included ( ; ), and one trial previously included has now been excluded ( ), making the final number of included studies 17. Twenty‐one new studies (34 study reports) were excluded, with reasons. One study is awaiting further classification ( ) (see ). Three studies are ongoing ( ; ; ) (see ). See for details of the most recent search results.
 

## Screening eligible studies for trustworthiness
We used the trustworthiness screening tool developed by Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth to assess the 17 studies meeting the review's inclusion criteria. These were screened by two review authors, and all assessments were discussed and agreed upon with the review team.
We had no concerns about trustworthiness for four studies and these were included ( ; ; ; ). For the remaining studies, there were minor concerns relating to research governance and the results of two studies. In 13 studies, we sought clarification from trial authors on ethics approval and whether a protocol had been developed. None of these studies were prospectively registered, but we were not concerned about this because all but one of these studies were published before 2010, when trial registration was not a requirement.

## Research governance
We sought clarification from the trial authors regarding ethics approval and the development of a protocol. In eight studies, although ethics approval was reported in the trial report, we also contacted the trial authors for further clarification and to obtain copies of any relevant paperwork. In two studies, the authors responded that all pertinent paperwork relating to ethics approval was no longer available due to the time‐lapse since the conduct of the study ( ; ). In another study, the authors responded to confirm that there was no protocol or trial registration but that they had received ethics approval ( ). For , the authors responded and provided copies of the protocol and ethics approval. For , the authors responded to confirm that they were almost sure that there had been no protocol before the commencement of the trial due to this not being a requirement of the time, but that ethics approval had been obtained. For , the author said there was no longer any paperwork available, but it went through the local ethics committee. In one study ( ), we could not get a response and received an email delivery failure. In one study ( ), we sought clarification from the author regarding the reason for retrospective trial registration and requested copies of both ethics approval and the protocol, which the authors provided. The authors responded that their trial was registered retrospectively because, at that time in China, it was not a requirement to pre‐register the trial. Hence, it was registered retrospectively after notification of this requirement from an international journal. In two studies, the authors responded to our enquiries and confirmed that a protocol was developed for each study and that ethics approval was also obtained ( ; ). In another study, the authors responded by saying local ethics approval was obtained ( ). For , the authors confirmed there was no protocol, but a research proposal was developed prior to the study, and ethics approval was obtained. In the final study, the authors provided a copy of the ethics approval ( ).

## Results
In two studies, we had minor concerns relating to the domain of the results. In one study, the study flow of participants was not clear ( ). We contacted the trial authors, who clarified the study flow and confirmed no follow‐up loss in their cluster trial ( ). In the second study, the randomisation methods were unclear ( ). The trial authors responded to our email request to report that a simple randomisation scheme was conducted, using a computer‐generated computer random sequence from 1 to 110. The list of random numbers and group allocation were kept concealed in sealed, opaque envelopes. They also reported that, following informed consent, women were randomly allocated to one of the two groups. The allocation was not revealed until the clerical assistant recorded the woman’s details ( ).
All 17 eligible studies were assessed at low risk after screening for scientific integrity/trustworthiness.

## Included studies
We included 17 studies involving 18,532 randomised women in total ( ; ; : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). See .
Included studies were conducted in Australia, Canada, China, Ireland, and the United Kingdom, with variations in model of care, risk status of participating women, and practice settings. The Zelen method was used in three trials ( ; ; ), and one trial used cluster‐randomisation ( ).
Five studies offered a caseload model of care ( ; ; ; ; ) and 12 studies provided a team model of care ( ; ; ; : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). The composition and modus operandi of the teams varied amongst trials. Levels of continuity (measured by the percentage of women who were attended during birth by a known carer) ranged between 63% and 98% for midwife continuity models of care to between 0.3% and 21% in other models of care.
Ten studies compared a midwife continuity of care model with a shared model of care ( ; ; : ; ; ; ; ; ; ), four studies compared a midwife continuity of care model with medical‐led models of care ( ; ; ; ), and three studies compared a midwife continuity of care model with various options of standard care including shared, medical‐led, and shared care ( ; ; ).
Participating women received ante‐, intra‐, and postpartum care in 15 studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), and antenatal and intrapartum care only in two studies ( ; ).
All midwife continuity of care models included visits to the obstetrician, family physicians (general practitioners, GPs), or both. The frequency of such visits varied. Such visits were dependent on women's risk status during pregnancy ( ), a routine for all women (one to three visits) ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), or based on the development of complications ( ; ; ; ; ; ), antenatal care from midwives and, if desired by the woman, from the woman's general practitioner ( ), or not reported ( ).
Women were classified as being at low risk of complications in nine studies ( ; ; : ; ; ; ; ; ), as 'low and high' in caseloads drawn from a defined geographical location in seven studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ), and at high risk of preterm birth in one study ( ).
No included studies specifically targeted women with social risk factors. Three studies offered midwifery continuity of care models in disadvantaged and ethnically diverse catchment areas ( ; ; ), and one targeted women with major depressive disorder ( ). Two ongoing studies targeted 'vulnerable' or disadvantaged women ( ; ).
There was wide variation in how socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and social risk factors were reported across all studies. Three studies reported area deprivation index measures ( ; ; ). Other socio‐economic indicators reported included employment ( ; ; ; ; ; ), marital status ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ), education ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ), income and home ownership ( ; ; ). Four studies did not report any measure of socio‐economic status ( ; ; ; ). Four studies reported ethnically diverse populations ( ; ; ; ), five studies reported a majority white ethnic population ( ; ; ; ; ), and eight studies did not report the ethnicity of participants ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Social risk factors were not reported in the majority of studies included, and those studies that did only reported specific risk factors, including migration status ( ; ), domestic violence and drug use ( ), and the requirement for interpreter services ( ). Three studies excluded women with specific social risk factors, including drug and alcohol use ( ; ), those who do not speak English ( ), or women who were receiving other specialist models of care due to social risk ( ).
The midwife models of care were hospital‐based in five studies ( ; ; ; ; ), or women were offered (i) antenatal care in an outreach community‐based clinic and intra‐ and postpartum care in a hospital ( ); (ii) ante‐ and postpartum community‐based care with intrapartum hospital‐based care ( ; ; ; ); (iii) antenatal and postnatal care in the hospital and community settings with intrapartum hospital‐based care ( ), or (iv) postnatal care in the community with hospital‐based ante‐ and intrapartum care ( ; ; ; ; ). Four studies offered intrapartum care in midwife birth centres in a maternity unit to all women in the trial ( ), or to women receiving midwife continuity of care only ( ; ; ). One study offered intrapartum care in a midwife birth centre in a maternity unit, and at home to all women in the trial according to local guidelines ( ).

## Excluded studies
We excluded 42 studies. Eleven studies were excluded as they were not a randomised trial ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Two studies were excluded as the study closed before completion ( ; ). Twenty‐eight studies were excluded as the intervention was not a midwife continuity of care model or the comparator was not other models of care ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). One study was excluded as the population included additional data from outside the trial ( ).
See .

## Risk of bias in included studies
See and for a summary of the risk of bias assessments.
 

## Allocation
Thirteen studies provided information on the methods used for generating randomisation sequences ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Four studies did not offer enough information to make a clear assessment ( ; ; ; ).
Regarding allocation concealment, we considered 12 studies to have a low risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). We judged four studies to have an unclear risk of bias: , and gave no information about the process of random allocation, while used sealed, opaque envelopes without specifying any numbering. We considered the trial, a cluster‐randomised trial, to have a high risk of bias for allocation concealment, as it was not possible to maintain concealment in this case.

## Blinding
We judged 15 of the included studies as low risk for blinding of participants and personnel ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), and two studies were at unclear risk of bias ( ; ).
We judged two studies as low risk of bias for blinding of outcome assessment ( ; ). We considered three studies as high risk of bias ( ; ; ), and 12 at unclear risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Incomplete outcome data
We judged 13 of the included studies at low risk of bias for incomplete outcome data on the basis that the attrition rate was less than 20% for all outcomes (other than satisfaction), or missing outcome data were balanced across groups ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Two of the studies did not provide sufficient information on loss to follow‐up and we judged them as unclear ( ; ), and we judged two studies as at high risk of detection bias ( ; ).

## Selective reporting
All outcomes stated in the methods section were adequately reported in the results of 14 studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). We judged two trials to be at unclear risk of bias due to selective reporting ( ; ), and one to be at high risk of reporting bias ( ).

## Other potential sources of bias
In most included studies, no other potential sources of bias were identified. However, we considered the risk of bias in to be unclear, as a small number of women crossed over between the study arms.

## Effects of interventions
See: ; 

## Comparison 1 (main comparison): midwife continuity of care models versus other models of care for childbearing women and their infants ‐ all trials
The certainty of the evidence is reported for the seven outcomes specified in the summary of findings table (see ). Pre‐specified subgroup analyses for each primary outcome (only) are presented separately under their respective outcomes.

## Primary outcomes

## 1.1 Spontaneous vaginal birth
Midwife continuity of care models likely increase spontaneous vaginal birth compared to other models of care (average risk ratio (RR) 1.05, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.03 to 1.07; I2 = 9%; 15 studies, 17,864 participants; ). This translates to an absolute increase from 66% in those assigned to other models of care to 70% (68% to 71%) in those assigned to midwife continuity of care. We judged the certainty of evidence as moderate, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1).

## Subgroup: variation in midwife continuity of care models (caseload/one‐to‐one or team)
Subgroup analysis for which data are available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 0.01, df = 1 (P = 0.91), I² = 0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in risk status (low versus mixed)
Subgroup analysis for which data are available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 0.05, df = 1 (P = 0.82), I² = 0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in country setting (very High Human Development Index (HDI) > 0.8 versus high, medium, and low HDI)
Subgroup analysis for which data are available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 3.99, df = 1 (P = 0.05), I² = 75.0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in social risk factors (women with social risk versus all women)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no available data for one of the subgroups, specifically women with social risk factors, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## 1.2 Caesarean birth
Midwife continuity of care models likely reduce caesarean section birth compared to other models of care (average RR 0.91, 95% CI 0.84 to 0.99; I2 = 25%; 16 studies, 18,037 participants; ). This translates to an absolute decrease from 16% in those assigned to other models of care to 15% (14% to 16%) in those assigned to midwife continuity of care. We judged the certainty of evidence as moderate, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1).

## Subgroup: variation in midwife continuity of care models (caseload/one‐to‐one or team)
Subgroup analysis for which data are available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 0.02, df = 1 (P = 0.87), I² = 0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in risk status (low versus mixed)
Subgroup analysis for which data are available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 0.47, df = 1 (P = 0.49), I² = 0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in country setting (very high Human Development Index (HDI) > 0.8 versus high, medium, and low HDI)
Subgroup analysis for which data are available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 3.49, df = 1 (P = 0.06), I² = 71.3%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in social risk factors (women with social risk factors versus all women)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no available data for one of the subgroups, specifically women with social risk factors, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## 1.3 Regional analgesia (epidural/spinal)
We are very uncertain about the effects of midwife continuity of care models compared to other models of care on the likelihood of regional analgesia (average RR 0.85, 95% CI 0.79 to 0.92; I2 = 51%; 15 studies, 17,754 participants; ). We judged the certainty of evidence as very low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1), inconsistency (‐1), and publication bias (‐1).

## Subgroup: variation in midwife continuity of care models (caseload/one‐to‐one or team)
Subgroup analysis for which data are available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 1.94, df = 1 (P = 0.16), I² = 48.5%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in risk status (low versus mixed)
Subgroup analysis for which data are available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 2.16, df = 1 (P = 0.14), I² = 53.8%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in country setting (very high Human Development Index (HDI) > 0.8 versus high, medium, and low HDI)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no data available for one of the subgroups, specifically women from high, medium, and low HDI countries, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## Subgroup: variation in social risk factors (women with social risk factors versus all women)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no available data for one of the subgroups, specifically women with social risk factors, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## 1.4 Intact perineum
Midwife continuity of care models compared to other models of care likely result in little to no difference in intact perineum (average RR 1.05, 95% CI 0.98 to 1.12; I2 = 40%; 12 studies, 14,268 participants; ), with the absolute rates being approximately 29% under other care models and about 31% (with a range of 29% to 33%) under midwife continuity of care. We judged the certainty of evidence as moderate, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1).

## Subgroup: variation in midwife continuity of care models (caseload/one‐to‐one or team)
Subgroup analysis for which data were available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 0.30, df = 1 (P = 0.58), I² = 0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in risk status (low versus mixed)
Subgroup analysis for which data were available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 2.16, df = 1 (P = 0.14), I² = 53.8%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in country setting (very high Human Development Index (HDI) > 0.8 versus high, medium, and low HDI)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no data available for one of the subgroups, specifically women from high, medium, and low HDI countries, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## Subgroup: variation in social risk factors (women with social risk factors versus all women)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no available data for one of the subgroups, specifically women with social risk factors, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## 1.5 Fetal loss at or after 24 weeks gestation
We are very uncertain about the effect of midwife continuity of care models on fetal loss at or after 24 weeks gestation (average RR 1.24, 95% CI 0.73 to 2.13; I2 = 0%; 12 studies, 16,122 participants; ). We judged the certainty of evidence as very low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1) and imprecision (‐2).

## Subgroup: variation in midwife continuity of care models (caseload/one‐to‐one or team)
Subgroup analysis for which data were available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 1.49, df = 1 (P = 0.22), I² = 33.0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in risk status (low versus mixed)
Subgroup analysis for which data were available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 0.13, df = 1 (P = 0.72), I² = 0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in country setting (very high Human Development Index (HDI) > 0.8 versus high, medium, and low HDI)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no available data for one of the subgroups, specifically fetal loss from women from high, medium, and low HDI countries, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## Subgroup: variation in social risk factors (women with social risk factors versus all women)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no available data for one of the subgroups, specifically women with social risk factors, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## 1.6 Preterm birth (< 37 weeks)
Midwife continuity of care models compared to other models of care may result in little to no difference in preterm birth (< 37 weeks) (average RR 0.95, 95% CI 0.78 to 1.16; I2 = 45%; 10 studies, 13,850 participants; ). Accordingly, the absolute risk of preterm birth remains similar across both care models, estimated at around 6% for both groups, with a possible range of 5% to 7% for midwife continuity of care, reflecting the statistical uncertainty. We judged the certainty of evidence as low due to downgrading for risk of bias (‐1) and inconsistency (‐1).

## Subgroup: variation in midwife continuity of care models (caseload/one‐to‐one or team)
Subgroup analysis for which data were available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 0.13, df = 1 (P = 0.72), I² = 0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in risk status (low versus mixed)
Subgroup analysis for which data were available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 0.11, df = 1 (P = 0.74), I² = 0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in country setting (very high Human Development Index (HDI) > 0.8 versus high, medium, and low HDI)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no available data for one of the subgroups, specifically women from high, medium, and low HDI countries, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## Subgroup: variation in social risk factors (women with social risk factors versus all women)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no available data for one of the subgroups, specifically women with social risk factors, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## 1.7 Neonatal death (baby born alive at any gestation and dies within 28 days)
We are very uncertain about the effect of midwife continuity of care models on neonatal death (baby born alive at any gestation and dies within 28 days) (average RR 0.85, 95% CI 0.43 to 1.71; I2 = 0%; 10 studies, 14,718 participants; ). We judged the certainty of evidence as very low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1) and imprecision (‐2).

## Subgroup: variation in midwife continuity of care models (caseload/one‐to‐one or team)
Subgroup analysis for which data were available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 0.63, df = 1 (P = 0.43), I² = 0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in risk status (low versus mixed)
Subgroup analysis for which data were available reveals no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups (test for subgroup differences: Chi² = 0.10, df = 1 (P = 0.76), I² = 0%; ).

## Subgroup: variation in country setting (very high Human Development Index (HDI) > 0.8 versus high, medium, and low HDI)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no available data for one of the subgroups, specifically women from high, medium, and low HDI countries, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## Subgroup: variation in social risk factors (women with social risk factors versus all women)
In this subgroup analysis, there were no available data for one of the subgroups, specifically women with social risk factors, which precluded the assessment of subgroup differences.

## Secondary outcomes
When compared to other models of care, midwife continuity of care models likely reduce Instrumental vaginal birth (forceps/vacuum) (average RR 0.89, 95% CI 0.83 to 0.96; I2 = 0%; 14 studies, 17,769 participants; ). This translates to an absolute decrease from 14% in those assigned to other models of care to 13% (12% to 14%) in those assigned to midwife continuity of care. We judged the certainty of evidence as moderate, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1).
Compared to other care models, midwife continuity of care models may reduce Episiotomy (average RR 0.83, 95% CI 0.77 to 0.91; I2 = 44%; 15 studies, 17,839 participants; ). This translates to an absolute decrease from 23% in those assigned to other models of care to 19% (17% to 21%) in those assigned to midwife continuity of care. We judged the certainty of evidence as low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1) and inconsistency (‐1).
Midwife continuity of care models likely result in little to no difference in:
Induction of labour (average RR 0.92, 95% CI 0.85 to 1.00; I2 = 41%; 14 studies, 17,666 participants; ), with the absolute rates being approximately 22% under other care models and about 21% (with a range of 19% to 22%) under midwife continuity of care. We judged the certainty of evidence as low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1) and inconsistency (‐1).
Postpartum haemorrhage (average RR 0.92, 95% CI 0.82 to 1.03; I2 = 0%; 11 studies, 14,407 participants; ), with the absolute rates being approximately 9% under other care models and about 8% (with a range of 7% to 9%) under midwife continuity of care. We judged the certainty of evidence as moderate, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1).
Breastfeeding initiation (average RR 1.06, 95% CI 1.00 to 1.12; I2 = 87%, 8 studies, 8575 participants; ), with the absolute rates being approximately 69% under other care models and about 73% (with a range of 69% to 78%) under midwife continuity of care. We judged the certainty of evidence as low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1) and inconsistency (‐1).
Birth weight less than 2500 g (average RR 0.92, 95% CI 0.79 to 1.08; I2 = 0%; 8 studies, 12,420 participants; ), with the absolute rates being approximately 5% under other care models and the same (5% with a range of 4% to 6%) under midwife continuity of care. We judged the certainty of evidence as low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1) and imprecision (‐1).
Admission to special care nursery/neonatal intensive care unit (average RR 0.89, 95% CI 0.77 to 1.03; I2 = 41%; 13 studies, 16,260 participants; ), with the absolute rates being approximately 9% under other care models and about 8% (with a range of 7% to 9%) under midwife continuity of care. We judged the certainty of evidence as moderate, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1).

We are very uncertain about the effect of midwife continuity of care models compared to other models of care on:
Third or fourth‐degree tear (average RR 1.10, 95% CI 0.81 to 1.49; I2 = 0%; 7 studies, 9437 participants; ). We judged the certainty of evidence as very low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1) and imprecision (‐2).
Maternal readmission within 28 days (average RR 1.52, 95% CI 0.78 to 2.96; I2 = NA, 1 study, 1195 participants; ). We judged the certainty of evidence as very low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1) and imprecision (‐2).
Attendance at birth by a known midwife (average RR 9.13, 95% CI 5.87 to 14.21; I2 = 95%; 11 studies, 9273 participants; ). We judged the certainty of evidence as very low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1), inconsistency (‐1), and publication bias (‐1).
Apgar score less than or equal to seven at five minutes (average RR 0.95, 95% CI 0.72 to 1.24; I2 = 22%; 13 studies, 12,806 participants; ). We judged the certainty of evidence as very low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1) and imprecision (‐2).
Fetal loss before 24 weeks gestation (average RR 0.82, 95% CI 0.67 to 1.01; I2 = 0%; 12 studies, 15,913 participants; ). We judged the certainty of evidence as very low, downgrading for risk of bias (‐1) and imprecision (‐2).

Three studies assessed maternal death ( ; ; ). There were no reported cases in either group across all three studies ( ). The lack of events precludes calculating a risk ratio or assessing differences between midwife continuity of care and other care models.
No data were provided in any study for the outcomes of:
Healthy mother
Neonatal readmission within 28 days
Healthy baby
Birth weight equal to or more than 4000 g

Data were reported for the following outcomes:
Maternal experience
Cost

However, the data were too heterogeneous to be meta‐analysed. As a result, we report these findings narratively rather than as part of a quantitative comparison with other outcomes.

## Maternal experience
Due to the lack of consistency in conceptualising and measuring women's experiences with their maternity care, a narrative synthesis of such data is presented. A total of 16 studies reported maternal experiences and/or satisfaction with various components of maternity care and childbirth ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Ten studies reported satisfaction ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), three reported women's experiences ( ; ; ), one reported women’s experiences within which satisfaction was a component ( ), and two reported women’s psychological state and satisfaction ( ; ).
The concept of women’s experiences of their maternity care is complex ( ), and concerns have been expressed about the methodological and psychometric quality of self‐report survey instruments to evaluate those experiences ( ). It was not surprising to find inconsistency in instruments and adaptations, including variations in psychometric properties, timing of administration, and outcomes used to 'measure' women’s experiences across studies. Because of such heterogeneity and, as is common, survey response rates of lower than 80% for most studies, meta‐analysis for this outcome was considered inappropriate and was not conducted.
Satisfaction outcomes as reported in the included studies included maternal satisfaction with different domains of antenatal, intrapartum, and postnatal care, i.e. venue/location of care and number of visits; health care provider seen and relationship, continuity, and access; choice, information, and decision‐making; availability of interpreters; knowledge and preparation for labour and birth, fetal monitoring, pain management, control in childbirth; staff attitudes and behaviours; support and length of postnatal stay. One study used the Labour and Delivery Satisfaction Index (LDSI) and the Attitudes about Labour and Delivery Experience (ADLE) questionnaire at two weeks postpartum, including a Six Simple Questions (SSQ) questionnaire at 36 weeks gestation and 48 hours, two and six weeks postpartum, to measure fluctuations in satisfaction ( ). Three studies assessed perceptions of control in labour using a three‐point scale ( ) and the Labour Agentry Scale between six and eight weeks and two and three years after birth ( ; ). also used a performance, importance, and quality impact framework to measure satisfaction by assessing expectations against which women rate the importance of that expectation. Reports of two studies ( ; ) included the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) and also examined women’s ratings of the structure of postnatal care, preparation for parenthood, postnatal depression, and support and advice with infant feeding. In brief, most of the included studies showed a higher level of satisfaction with most aspects of maternity care in midwife continuity compared to the other models of care.
Women’s experiences outcomes, as reported in included studies, included views and perceptions of care throughout the continuum, including their midwives and trust in them; safety and quality of care (i.e. access, clinic arrangements, continuity, communication, control); emotional, practical, and social support, and quality of life. Three reports from included postnatal surveys at six weeks and six months (including qualitative free‐text responses) to measure experiences of the quality of antenatal and early labour care ( ; ) and to explore how women characterised their midwives ( ). used both qualitative interviews and postnatal surveys at six to eight weeks after birth that incorporated various scales (i.e. the Social Support Scale, Trust in Nurses Scale ‐ Adapted for Midwives, Perceptions of Safety Scale, Labour Agentry Scale, Mother‐Infant Bonding Scale, PROMIS‐10 global). Overall, continuity models of care in both studies showed higher levels and better experiences across measures of trust, safety, quality of care, support, bonding, and physical health postnatally. Two reports from using adapted antenatal and postnatal questionnaires at eight to 10 weeks also found clear benefits for women who receive continuity of care ( ). They emphasised the importance of successful transfer services into community‐based settings ( ). Continuity midwives were described as empowering and going above and beyond such that women feel empowered, nurtured, and safe during their maternity journey ( ), yet regardless of the model of care, early labour care was primarily described negatively ( ).
 and measured women's childbirth experience and satisfaction throughout the childbearing period using an adapted postal survey two months after birth based on previous studies of similar models of care in Australia. Women receiving caseload midwife continuity of care reported significantly higher overall satisfaction ratings with antenatal, intrapartum, hospital postnatal care, and home‐based postnatal care. They reported a more positive experience of pain overall and more often reported feeling very proud of themselves. Women also felt more in control and more able to cope physically and emotionally. used the Chinese version State‐Trait Anxiety Inventory (C‐STAI) to measure women’s psychological state on admission to the labour and delivery room and a validated questionnaire to measure satisfaction with antenatal, intrapartum, and postnatal care at 42 days postpartum. Overall, women’s mean anxiety scores were not different between the midwife continuity model and other model, but at admission to the labour delivery room, the anxiety scores were lower in the continuity model. These women also reported greater satisfaction with maternity care. Similarly, used both the EPDS at antenatal baseline and six to eight weeks after birth and the Maternity Services Questionnaire and found no differences in psychosocial outcomes, but midwife continuity was highly successful at engaging women with mental health problems in treatment.

## Health economic analysis
No study included a definitive health economic evaluation to determine the cost‐effectiveness of the interventions under consideration ‐ rather the available health economics analysis comprised various forms of cost analysis. Seven trials included studies that reported costs for the compared models of maternity care ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). As findings from health economic analyses generally vary according to the structure of the healthcare system in a given country, the resource allocation, pricing and reimbursement mechanisms employed, the study perspective, design and the type of data collected, and the cost and outcome variables included in the analysis, considerable heterogeneity exists. Therefore, a narrative synthesis of the health economic data was undertaken and is presented below.
 (full report, providing cost analysis for ) reported a cost analysis from the healthcare perspective to compare midwife continuity of care with standard care. The authors stated that it was impossible to accurately assess and compare the total care costs. Instead, they reported a limited cost comparison for epidural resource use. They demonstrated lower total costs for women in the midwife continuity of care group compared to the standard care group (88 x GBP 220 = GBP 19,360 versus 143 x GBP 220 = GBP 31,460 respectively), representing an overall epidural care total cost saving (GBP 12,100). In addition, in a subgroup analysis of the midwife continuity of care (n = 51) and standard care (n = 49) arms, the authors reported that antenatal consultation costs were 20% to 25% cheaper for the midwife continuity of care arm due to differences in staff costs. The authors did not report the results of a formal statistical analysis of the cost variables.
 undertook a cost analysis, adopting a healthcare perspective, to compare the costs of the midwife continuity of care and other models of care groups. The cost analysis included healthcare resource usage during the antenatal, intrapartum, and postnatal periods. The cost in the antenatal period was assessed based on the number of antenatal visits, with average cost estimates of AUD 119 versus AUD 123 for low‐risk women and AUD 390 versus AUD 437 for high‐risk women, in the midwife continuity of care and other models of care groups, respectively. The cost of intrapartum care was assessed based on the midwife's attendance time and forceps delivery. This was estimated at costs of AUD 219 versus AUD 220 in the respective intervention and control groups. In the context of postnatal care, there was a shorter length of hospital stay in the midwife continuity of care arm, but they had more visits. The total postnatal care cost was estimated at AUD 745, on average, for the midwife continuity of care arm and AUD 833 for the other models of care arm. In terms of total cost, the study reported an average cost saving of AUD 98 or 8% per woman (i.e. AUD 1122 for midwife continuity of care versus AUD 1220 for standard care). The authors emphasised that incremental estimates only included the sum of those individual resource costs, with significant differences between the two programmes, and did not represent the full cost of intrapartum care or maternity care.
 reported a cost analysis from the healthcare perspective to compare the continuity of care arm to the routine care arm. Hospital‐related costs were estimated directly using the Australian Diagnostic‐Related Groups (AN‐DRGs) methodology, a classification system that links groupings of acute episodes of care to resource usage and treatment costs. The cost analysis included a range of maternity care resources, including antenatal services, midwife salaries, mode of delivery, and neonatal intensive care. The study reported significant differences in related AN‐DRG resource requirements across treatment groups and hence in costs. The average cost per birth, estimated based on a combination of antenatal service, mode of birth, and neonatal intensive care costs, was AUD 3324 for the midwife continuity care arm and AUD 3475 for the routine care arm, resulting in a saving of AUD 151, or 4.5%. The authors did not report the results of a formal statistical analysis of the cost variables, but they did so for the AN‐DRG counts on which these cost estimates were based.
 conducted a comprehensive cost analysis to compare the midwife‐managed versus standard shared care models evaluated . The cost analysis was undertaken from the healthcare perspective (i.e. National Health Service (NHS)) and used an individual patient‐based costing approach. A key consideration in the cost analysis was the assumption made with respect to the number of caseloads per midwife, but the authors explicitly explored this assumption in sensitivity analysis. The cost analysis covered a wide range of resource use activities, including antenatal clinic visits, day care attendances, antenatal admissions, tests and drugs, mode of birth, postnatal stay in the hospital, and postnatal home visits. In addition, the authors included estimates of capital costs for continuous electronic fetal heart monitoring equipment, overhead costs related to hospital portering, administration, heat and light allocated to departments, and healthcare personnel costs, such as those for midwives, obstetricians, and general practitioners. Findings were reported for the subtotal cost categories for antenatal, intrapartum, and postpartum care. At the base‐case assumption of a median caseload of 29 women per midwife, the average cost of midwife‐managed care was not significantly different from the standard shared care group for antenatal care (GBP 288 versus GBP 296, P = 0.48) and intrapartum care (GBP 241 versus GBP 241, P = 0.40). However, the average cost of postpartum care for the midwife continuity of care was higher than the standard group (GBP 470 versus GBP 352, P < 0.001). The lack of differences in costs for antenatal care and intrapartum care between the midwife‐managed and standard groups and, in particular, the higher costs of the midwife continuity of care compared to the standard care in the postnatal period, were explained to be mainly due to differences in the organisation of care, including different grades of midwives, locations of care, and scale of the programmes for each arm. The authors employed an alternative assumption of 29 women per midwife caseload in the sensitivity analysis used. In this case, the average cost for antenatal care was lower for the midwife continuity of care group (GBP 275 versus GBP 296, P = 0.05) but was higher for postnatal care cost (GBP 444 versus GBP 397, P < 0.01). The authors recommended that a health economic evaluation should be conducted.
 conducted a comprehensive cost analysis alongside a randomised controlled trial to compare the STOMP continuity of care model versus standard care. The cost analysis was undertaken from the healthcare perspective. The cost analysis covered various resource‐use activities, including antenatal care, intrapartum care, and postnatal care. The individual service components included antenatal clinic visits and admissions, day assessment unit, labour and birth, hospital and domiciliary postnatal care, and neonatal admissions to the special care nursery. In addition, a 24‐hour on‐call cover service was provided for women in labour in the midwife continuity of care group and was costed accordingly. A total cost variable was generated by adding the individual resource costs for these components, and mean costs were estimated and analysed in statistical analysis. The mean cost per woman in the continuity of care arm was estimated at AUD 2579 (95% CI 2236 to 2974), compared to AUD 3483 (95% CI 2864 to 4188) for the control group. This represented a non‐statistically significant cost saving of AUD 904 or 25.9% per woman. The author concluded that the STOMP model could be implemented within current resources if organisations were firmly committed to change.
 reported a cost analysis from the healthcare perspective to compare midwifery caseload care and standard maternity care based on data collected from a randomised controlled trial. Hospital‐related costs were estimated directly using the Australian Diagnostic‐Related Groups (AN‐DRGs) methodology, which is a classification system that links groupings of acute episodes of care to resource usage and treatment costs. The cost analysis included a range of maternity care resources, including the length of hospital stay, midwifery and obstetric clinical time, use of operating theatres, laboratory tests, imaging, wards, allied health, pharmacy, capital depreciation, and clinical overheads. Neonatal costs were not included. Total costs for each full episode of maternity care were estimated from the sum of the services provided to the woman for the duration of her stay. Overall, the median cost for the caseload midwifery arm was AUD 4628.27 (95% CI 2698.89 to 7164.96), compared to AUD 5903.67 (95% CI 3220.39 to 7541.55) for the standard care arm, resulting in a statistically significant cost saving of AUD 566.74 (95% 106.17 to 1027.30; P = 0.02) per woman. The authors suggest this saving was predominantly driven by the lower levels of unassisted vaginal birth in the midwifery arm. Further, they caution on the role of high‐cost outliers due to serious medical disorders, surgical complications, or accidental causes.
 conducted a comprehensive costs analysis to compare the midwife‐led versus standard consultant‐led models of care evaluated in the randomised controlled trial. The cost analysis was undertaken from the healthcare perspective. The cost analysis covered a wide range of resource use activities, including those related to antenatal visits, ultrasonography and cardiotocography, care in labour, provision of epidurals, antenatal, postnatal, and neonatal bed days, postnatal home visits, mode of delivery, administration, and overheads. A total cost variable was generated, and mean costs were estimated and analysed statistically. The mean cost per woman in the midwife continuity of care group was EUR 2598 (95% CI 2527 to 2670), compared to EUR 2780 (95% CI 2527 to 2670) in the standard consultant‐led group, resulting in an average cost saving of EUR 182 (95% CI 33 to 330) or 6.5% per woman.
In summary, seven studies employing various health economic methods and cost analysis presented cost data findings. Regardless of the cost analysis methods and the resource components included in the analyses, for those studies that reported overall total cost estimates (four studies), cost savings per woman ( : 4.3%, : 6.5%, : 8.0%, and : 25.9%) were demonstrated for midwife continuity of care models relative to standard care. Overall cost savings were suggested to be influenced by multiple individual resource categories, including staff salaries, number, location and length of antenatal visits, length of hospital stay, use of interventions, mode of delivery, neonatal intensive care, and the caseload of women allocated to maternity care models.

## Investigation of heterogeneity
The I² value was greater than 50% for three outcomes: regional analgesia (epidural/spinal) (I² = 51%) ( ), attendance at birth by a known midwife (I² = 95%) ( ), and breastfeeding initiation (I² = 87%) ( ). We downgraded the certainty of the evidence accordingly.
We note that outcomes with relatively low heterogeneity, such as caesarean section, instrumental vaginal birth, and postpartum haemorrhage, tend to be more consistent across studies. We suggest that this may be due to the influence of standardised clinical guidelines and protocols. These universally accepted practices may lead to more similar treatment effects within midwife continuity of care models and other models of maternity care. Conversely, outcomes with higher heterogeneity, as above, may be heavily impacted by factors that vary across different care models, populations, and study designs. These factors could include cultural norms, individual preferences (woman and clinician), clinical decision‐making processes, and the specific support provided in each care model. Ultimately, the degree of heterogeneity observed in some outcomes highlights the complex interplay of various factors that influence the effectiveness and treatment effects of different maternity care models.

## Investigation of publication bias
When we assessed the study results using funnel plots and Egger's tests (performed with SPSS software) for groups of 10 or more studies, we found that most of the outcomes showed little evidence of publication bias. However, we suspected publication bias for regional analgesia ( ) and attendance at birth by a known midwife ( ).

## Sensitivity analyses
We performed a sensitivity analysis excluding the cluster‐randomised North Staffordshire trial from all outcomes in the primary comparison (comparison 1) for which it had contributed data ( ). This exclusion did not alter the findings for any outcome, as the results remained consistent with the overall findings when all trials were included.
We also conducted sensitivity analyses to investigate the impact of risk of bias on our findings by repeating the analysis and retaining only those studies with low risk of bias for random sequence generation, allocation concealment, and incomplete outcome data to assess whether this would change the overall results. We discovered that the differences from the overall analyses were minor. The primary effect was that confidence intervals were slightly wider due to the reduced number of trials in the analysis. However, none of the conclusions drawn from the analysis were affected.

## Discussion

## Summary of main results
This review synthesises evidence from 17 studies involving 18,533 randomised women in five countries in a wide variety of settings and health systems. All studies involved midwife continuity of care models that included either team or caseload midwifery, women classified as at low, mixed, or high risk, and in high and middle‐income settings. All trials included qualified midwives, and none included lay or traditional midwives. There was wide variation in how socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and social risk factors were reported across all studies.
The studies compared midwife continuity of care throughout the antepartum and the intrapartum period (and postnatal period where offered) with other models of care. The latter involved obstetricians, family physicians, or both, collaborating with nurses and midwives in various organisational settings. Studies included models of care that offered intrapartum care in hospitals, midwife birth centres co‐located in a maternity unit, and home birth.
Midwife continuity of care models, as compared to other models of care, likely increase spontaneous vaginal birth, reduce caesarean sections and instrumental vaginal birth (forceps/vacuum), and may reduceepisiotomy.
It is likely that midwife continuity of care models, as compared to other models of care, result in little to no difference in intact perineum, postpartum haemorrhage, and admission to special care nursery/neonatal intensive care unit. There may be little or no difference in preterm birth (< 37 weeks), induction of labour, breastfeeding initiation, and birth weight less than 2500 g.
We are very uncertain about the effect of midwife continuity of care models, as compared to other models of care, on regional analgesia, fetal loss at or after 24 weeks gestation, neonatal death, third or fourth‐degree tear, maternal readmission within 28 days,attendance at birth by a known midwife, Apgar score less than or equal to seven at five minutes and fetal loss before 24 weeks gestation.
No maternal deaths were reported across three studies. Although the observed risk of adverse events was similar between midwifery continuity of care models and other models, our confidence in the findings was limited. Our confidence in the findings was lowered by possible risk of bias, inconsistency, and imprecision of some estimates.
No data were provided in any study for the outcomes of healthy mother, neonatal readmission within 28 days, healthy baby, and birth weight equal to or more than 4000 g.
Maternal experiences and cost implications were described narratively. Women receiving care from midwife continuity of care models, as opposed to other care models, generally reported more positive experiences during pregnancy, labour, and postpartum. Cost savings were noted in the antenatal and intrapartum periods in midwife continuity of care models.
Subgroup analyses were conducted based on variations in midwife continuity of care models (caseload/one‐to‐one or team), risk status (low versus mixed), country setting (very high Human Development Index (HDI) > 0.8 versus high, medium, and low HDI), and maternal social risk factors (women with social risk factors versus all women). The subgroup analyses revealed no differences or interactions for any primary outcomes, indicating consistent effects across the subgroups. However, data for some subgroups, particularly women with social risk factors and those from countries with low, medium, and high HDI, were limited or absent, indicating that further research is needed to better understand these groups' outcomes and improve equity.

## Overall completeness and applicability of evidence
This review supersedes the previous review published in 2016. See for further details.
Informed by the latest Cochrane methodology and Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth trustworthiness assessments, data extraction and assessment of all studies in the review have been rechecked independently by two authors in this update and re‐entered. We made several outcome changes to ensure clinical and policy relevance. This resulted in changes to the certainty of outcomes from the 2016 review.
For preterm birth, the effect estimate moved from showing an effect to maybe little or no difference. We identified and corrected a transcription error in and updated some data items following additional author correspondence. Other minor variations identified in comparison with the 2016 review were also addressed. This involved a change in both the number of events and denominators due to additional information being reported in and .
We found a decrease in caesarean birth in the midwife continuity of care models, a new finding in this review update. However, the mechanisms are undetermined.
Two subgroups were added: 'Women with social risk factors versus all women' and 'Countries with very high Human Development Index (HDI) > 0.8 versus high, medium, and low'.
Sixteen studies reported maternal experiences and/or satisfaction with various components of maternity care and childbirth. Due to the lack of consistency in conceptualising and measuring women's experiences with their maternity care, a narrative synthesis of such data is presented. The concept of women’s experiences of their maternity care is complex, and concerns have been expressed about the methodological and psychometric quality of self‐report survey instruments to evaluate those experiences. It was not surprising to find inconsistency in instruments, including their psychometric properties, timing of administration, and outcomes used to 'measure' women’s experiences across studies. Because of such heterogeneity and, as might be expected, response rates of lower than 80% for most studies, meta‐analysis for this outcome was considered inappropriate and was not conducted. Nonetheless, most of the included studies showed a more positive experience in various aspects of care in the midwife continuity models compared to the other models of care.
Findings from economic analyses vary according to the structure of health care in a given country, the type of data collected, and what factors are included in the modelling. Because of this heterogeneity, a narrative synthesis of such data is presented. Seven studies presented cost data using different economic evaluation methods. Most included studies suggest a cost‐saving effect in intrapartum and antenatal care associated with midwife continuity of care models. Regardless of the cost analysis methods and the components included in the analyses, for those who reported an overall cost estimation (four studies), cost savings per woman are demonstrated for midwife continuity of care models. Cost savings are suggested to be mainly influenced by staff salaries, number/location and length of antenatal visits, length of hospital stay, use of interventions, and the number of women allocated to maternity care models. More transparent and consistent approaches to cost analysis and health economic evaluation are required for robust cost‐effectiveness assessments and evidence synthesis in this important field.

## Quality of the evidence
The quality of the evidence varied across the included studies, with some outcomes demonstrating high‐quality evidence and others presenting more uncertainty.
Most of the included studies had a low risk of bias for random sequence generation, allocation concealment, and incomplete outcome data, suggesting that the methodology used in these studies was generally rigorous. However, blinding of participants and personnel was a challenge in most studies, as it is often difficult to achieve complete blinding in trials comparing different models of care. This limitation was addressed by revising the approach for judging studies with clear evidence of a lack of blinding. This allowed for a more accurate assessment of the potential risk of performance bias and ultimately enhanced the quality and reliability of the review findings.
Regarding the blinding of outcome assessment, the risk of bias varied among the studies, with some demonstrating low risk, others high risk, and several presenting unclear risk due to insufficient information. The variability in the risk of bias for this aspect may have contributed to the heterogeneity observed in some outcomes.
Our investigation of heterogeneity revealed that some outcomes, such as caesarean section, instrumental vaginal birth, and postpartum haemorrhage, showed relatively low heterogeneity. These outcomes may have been more consistent across studies due to the influence of standardised clinical guidelines and protocols. On the other hand, outcomes with higher heterogeneity, like regional analgesia and breastfeeding initiation, might be heavily impacted by factors varying across different care models, populations, and study designs.
We assessed publication bias using funnel plots and Egger's tests, with most outcomes showing little evidence of publication bias. However, regional analgesia and postpartum haemorrhage had a higher degree of publication bias, which we considered when evaluating the certainty of the evidence for these outcomes using GRADE.
We conducted sensitivity analyses to explore the impact of the risk of bias on the findings. Our results demonstrated that the overall findings and conclusions were not affected significantly. Despite some limitations, the quality of the evidence in this review is generally robust, supporting the benefits of midwife continuity of care models for mothers and babies compared to other models of care.

## Potential biases in the review process
In our review, we systematically searched for additional studies in the reference lists of the identified articles without imposing any language or date restrictions. We used the GRADE approach to make explicit judgements about the risk of bias in the included studies.
It is important to acknowledge that several review authors are also trial authors, which could potentially introduce bias. To mitigate this potential conflict of interest, we ensured that these review authors did not assess their own trials and their assessments, including data extraction and risk of bias assessment, were carried out by at least two other members of the review team.
We performed sensitivity and subgroup analyses to examine the effect of trial quality, including concealment of allocation, high attrition rates, or both. These analyses excluded poor‐quality studies to determine if their exclusion would significantly alter the overall results. We excluded the cluster‐randomised North Staffordshire trial from all outcomes in the primary comparison (comparison 1), where it contributed data ( ). This exclusion did not change the findings for any outcome, as the results remained consistent with the overall findings when all trials were included.
Additionally, we repeated the analysis while retaining only studies with a low risk of bias for random sequence generation, allocation concealment, and incomplete outcome data to evaluate whether this would impact the overall results. We found that the differences from the overall analyses were minor, primarily resulting in slightly wider confidence intervals due to the reduced number of trials in the analysis. However, these sensitivity analyses did not affect the conclusions drawn.
Subgroup analyses were conducted to explore potential differences in outcomes based on factors such as risk status, the type of midwife continuity of care models, variation in country setting, and variation in maternal social risk factors. Subgroup analyses for which there were available data revealed no significant subgroup differences or interactions, indicating a consistent effect across subgroups. Including these subgroup analyses in our review further strengthens our conclusions' robustness and helps address potential biases that may arise from the review process.

## Agreements and disagreements with other studies or reviews
Systematic reviews of women's experiences are consistent with existing evidence. The meta‐synthesis found that the relationship between the childbearing woman and midwife is central and, through this, additional benefits are realised: trust, personalised care, and empowerment. The narrative review found preliminary evidence showing that midwifery continuity of care is beneficial in reducing anxiety/worry and depression in pregnant women during the antenatal period.
A narrative review of reviews, which examined the impact of having midwife‐led maternity care for low‐risk women rather than from physicians, found that health and other benefits can result from having their maternity care led by midwives rather than physicians. Moreover, there appear to be no negative impacts on mothers and infants receiving midwife‐led care ( ). The review included non‐randomised studies showing the midwifery continuity of care benefits for specific groups, such as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women. Additionally, there are benefits for midwives, including high levels of job satisfaction and less occupational burnout, although these findings carry an inherently increased risk of bias.
The structured review appraised and summarised the evidence relating to the combined cost‐effectiveness, resource use, and clinical effectiveness of midwifery continuity models for women. Cost savings specific to women from high‐risk samples who received continuity of midwifery care compared with obstetric‐led standard care were stated for only one study in the review. Studies that measure the cost of continuity of midwifery care for women with complex pregnancies across the childbearing continuum are limited and apply inconsistent economic evaluation methods.
A review by looked at the effectiveness of collaborative midwife continuity of care models in high‐income countries to improve pregnancy outcomes for women with medical and obstetric complexity, using any study design. Limited evidence was identified about using collaborative midwife continuity of care models for women with medical and obstetric complexity in high‐income countries. also found limited evidence in this group with a need for further research.
A scoping review aimed to understand the global implementation of these models ( ). In high‐income countries, the most dominant model was where small groups of midwives provided care for designated women across the antenatal, childbirth, and postnatal care continuum. In low‐income countries, there was more variation, with many implemented for women, newborns, and families from priority or vulnerable communities. With the exception of New Zealand, no countries have managed to scale up the continuity of midwifery care model nationally.
 aimed to review the benefits and risks of caseload midwifery, compared with standard care comparable to the Swedish setting where the same midwife usually provides antenatal care and the check‐up postnatally but does not assist during birth and the first week postpartum. The risk of caesarean section may be reduced, with little difference found for several critical and important child and maternal outcomes, with low‐moderate certainty of evidence.

## Authors' conclusions

## Implications for practice
Midwife continuity of care models offer important benefits. Women receiving care from midwife continuity of care models, as opposed to other care models, generally reported more positive experiences during pregnancy, labour, and postpartum. Cost savings were noted in the antenatal and intrapartum period in midwife continuity of care models.
Given the exclusion of women with significant maternal disease and substance abuse from some mixed‐risk trials, care should be taken in applying the findings of this review to women with considerable medical or obstetric complications.
Policymakers and healthcare providers should recognise that these benefits are associated when midwives provide relational continuity throughout pregnancy, childbirth, and into the postnatal period. In some parts of the world, health systems may not support the provision of midwife continuity of care models, and barriers to implementation could include societal and gendered norms, organisational traditions, and differences in power and authority between professions ( ), health system financing, and health system integration. Therefore, policymakers who wish to achieve meaningful improvements in maternal and newborn outcomes, particularly around humanising birth, should explore how the integration of midwife continuity of care models into health systems can be supported and financed.

## Implications for research
There are remaining questions about the best way to structure midwife continuity of care models in different contexts. Further research should investigate whether the observed benefits can be attributed to the continuity model, the philosophy of care, or the strength and quality of the relationship between the care provider and the woman. It is important to conduct more research on the recently developed midwife continuity of care models for women with social risk factors ( ), and medical and obstetric risk factors, with a focus on collaboration with obstetric and medical specialists ( ; ; ).
Research in resource‐constrained countries is particularly needed. There was one study in resource‐constrained countries ( ), and additional trials are required in such settings.
The interface between midwife continuity of care models and the multidisciplinary support network is not well understood. Despite continuity of care being identified as a core component, its definition and measurement vary greatly, necessitating greater sophistication in future studies. Additional implementation studies should support countries transitioning to midwife continuity of care models, to determine optimal model types and strategies for sustainable national scale‐up. Acceptability to midwives of different models offering relational continuity should be assessed.
Future trials in this area could benefit from drawing on a framework for trials of complex interventions, and implementation science requiring theoretical modelling between processes and outcomes in the pre‐trial stage and a process evaluation of implementation outcomes in the trial ( ). Trials should provide a detailed description of intervention and standard models of care being assessed ( ), include process evaluations of their implementation ( ), and use reporting guidelines for complex interventions. Future research in this area would benefit from exploring the theoretical underpinnings of these complex interventions and their associations with processes and outcomes, including implementation assessments that include the impact on staff and the organisation, and the consideration of hybrid‐effectiveness trials and systematic use of implementation measures ( ).
A core data set, such as that proposed by , would facilitate comparisons within and between trials and enable more effective meta‐analyses of similar studies. Future trials should also include measures of optimal outcomes for mothers, babies, and morbidity. There remains relatively little information about the effects of midwife continuity of care models on mothers' and babies' health and wellbeing in the longer postpartum period. Future research should pay particular attention to outcomes that have been under‐researched, such as infant feeding and the parent‐infant relationship, and causes of significant morbidity, including postpartum mental health, urinary and faecal incontinence, duration of caesarean incision pain, pain during intercourse, prolonged perineal pain, and birth injury (to the baby).
It is important to understand whether women feel involved in the decision‐making process, and their sense of control, self‐confidence, coping mechanisms post‐birth, and experiences of post‐traumatic stress disorder. There is wide variation in the instruments used to measure women's views of and experiences of care. There is a need to develop meaningful, robust, valid, and reliable methods to assess psychosocial outcomes and well‐being in pregnant and childbearing women. All trials should include an assessment of maternal and fetal well‐being.
There is a lack of consistency in estimating maternity care cost, and further research using standard cost estimation approaches is required, including the cost to women and families.
The inconsistency in measuring continuity ( ), the choice of routinely collected and reported outcome measures in evaluations of maternity care models, and the lack of consistency in estimating maternity care cost necessitate more robust, reliable methods to assess psychosocial outcomes and well‐being in pregnant and childbearing women. Future trials should include economic analyses of relative costs and benefits.
Future studies should employ health economic evaluation study designs, including trial‐based and decision analytic‐based methods, or both, to definitively assess cost‐effectiveness, cost benefit, and the associated uncertainty in this context. Local guidance for the conduct of health economic evaluation should be followed. Future studies should consider costs from both the healthcare and societal perspective, health outcomes in the form of quality‐adjusted life years (QALYs), and other important outcomes to patients and the public. Where possible, resource use and unit costs should be reported separately, and locally generated preference‐based utility index scores adopted. Studies should also consider alternative time horizons for analysis, ranging from a follow‐up of the pregnancy to the longer term, using decision analytical modelling techniques, where appropriate. Appropriate forms of sensitivity analysis, including deterministic and probabilistic methods, should be employed to report uncertainty transparently. With more transparent and consistent approaches to cost analysis and health economic evaluation, there may exist the possibility for more complex forms of evidence synthesis, although issues of heterogeneity are likely to maintain the need for narrative synthesis.

## Feedback

## Bacon, May 2004,

## Summary
Are you planning to include intrapartum foetal death rates for women delivering in different types of unit, and with different levels of risk, as one of your outcome measures? We have been unable to find comparative data for a local review.
(Summary of comment from Sallie Bacon, May 2004)

## Reply
We have not looked at intrapartum deaths specifically, but have addressed this issue in the 'Discussion'.
(Summary of response from Jane Sandall, November 2007)

## Contributors
Sallie Bacon

## Blake, 19 November 2013

## Summary
The Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC) is the longest established national organization for women’s reproductive care in North America, with membership made up of obstetricians, gynaecologists, nurses, midwives, family physicians and scientists. We have long supported a woman’s right to choose the care provider of her preference for obstetrical care, and we actively support and promote collaborative models of care. We were therefore very interested to read the review of midwifery‐led care that you published in August of this year. We were not surprised by the main findings cited in the abstract: less use of epidural or intra‐partum analgesia, fewer instrumental deliveries and, in consequence, fewer episiotomies, longer length of labour. These differences would be expected with the different model of care; for some women an unmediated delivery is a goal. However, for others, access to analgesia is a key consideration; we cannot conclude from this difference that the midwifery‐led model is better for all women. We were interested by the findings of fewer preterm births, fewer deaths <24weeks, findings which are unexplained, and for which it is unlikely that we could identify an explanation based on who was providing the care, given that there are few, if any, clinical interventions by any provider prior to 24 weeks which can affect these outcomes. Beyond these matters, however, we are primarily contacting you because the abstract failed to list the important outcomes which do not differ with provider: perineal trauma, induction of labour, oxytocin augmentation of labour, caesarean section, antenatal hospitalisation, post‐partum haemorrhage, length of hospital stay, initiation of breast feeding, neonatal Apgar score, admission to neonatal nursery, fetal loss or death >24 weeks. Our greatest concern is that, although the abstract failed to list or consider these fundamentally important clinical outcomes that were equivalent, the authors still asserted that “most women should be offered midwifery‐led continuity models of care and women should be encouraged to ask for this option…” We believe this conclusion received, and continues to receive, the bulk of media and lay attention. In fact, those who do not actually read the review but only the abstract will come away with an incorrect understanding that is not supported by the results, an outcome that appears to be self‐serving and misleading. We expect better from the Cochrane Collaboration. This was an opportunity to provide women with reassurance that they have healthful options for their pregnancy care, and that they can feel confident that, regardless of their choice, the outcomes will be similar with respect to a safe and healthy pregnancy and delivery. Instead, the way this issue has been positioned, and by the selective use of the data, the Cochrane appears to advocate for a particular model of care, a disservice to women and the many other health care professionals who care for them.
Comment received from Jennifer Blake, Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada, November 2013.

## Reply
We are pleased to see the SOGC’s interest in our review and thank them for their comments.
We agree that findings of fewer preterm births and fewer deaths less than 24weeks are interesting. Midwife‐led continuity of care is a complex intervention, and it is impossible to unpick the relative importance of philosophy and continuity of care. We note in our review that questions remain about the mechanisms underlying these findings.
Our abstract is reported in original format in an effort to present information on multiple outcomes in as clear a manner as possible. Further to your comments, in the updated review, we have reformatted the presentation of outcomes in the abstract such that all primary outcomes are presented initially followed by all secondary outcomes. This will, we believe provide the reader with the totality of information on which to inform their health care decisions. Similarly, we have revised the conclusion to summarise the findings of the review and key areas for further research.
We trust this addresses your concerns.
Regards
Jane Sandall, August 2015

## Contributors
Jane Sandall

## What's new
 

## History
Protocol first published: Issue 1, 2004 Review first published: Issue 4, 2008
 

## Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to the investigators who provided additional information: P Brodie, R Burr, H Cheyne, D Forster, M Foureur, C Gu, C Homer, H McLachlan, P Spurgeon, C Warwick, J Wyatt.
We thank Toby Lasserson, Deputy Editor‐in‐Chief of the Cochrane Library, for his support with our summary of findings and in particular for discussions around how to make the findings of this review most useful and practical.
We thank Nancy Medley for her support in the production of the summary of findings table in the 2015 update. Nancy Medley's work was financially supported by the UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction (HRP), Department of Reproductive Health and Research (RHR), World Health Organization. The named authors alone are responsible for the views expressed in this publication.
We also acknowledge previous authors of the review, including M Hatem and WD Fraser.
This project was supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), via Cochrane Infrastructure funding to Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth. The views and opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Evidence Synthesis Programme, the NIHR, National Health Service (NHS) or the Department of Health and Social Care.
Jane Sandall is an NIHR Senior Investigator Emerita and, with Cristina Fernandez Turienzo and Hannah Rayment‐Jones, is supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Applied Research Collaboration South London (NIHR ARC South London) at King’s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust. Jane Sandall and Cristina Fernandez Turienzo are supported by a NIHR Global Health Research Group (NIHR133232) and Cristina Fernandez Turienzo by a NIHR DSE award in global clinical trials (NIHR301603). The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.
Hora Soltani is supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Applied Research Collaboration Yorkshire and Humber at Sheffield Hallam University. The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.
The following people conducted the editorial process for this article:
Sign‐off Editor (final editorial decision): Robert Boyle, National Heart & Lung Institute, Section of Inflammation and Repair, Imperial College London
Managing Editor (selected peer reviewers, provided editorial guidance to authors, edited the article): Liz Bickerdike, Cochrane Central Editorial Service
Editorial Assistant (conducted editorial policy checks, collated peer reviewer comments and supported editorial team): Leticia Rodrigues, Cochrane Central Editorial Service
Copy Editor (copy editing and production): Jenny Bellorini, Cochrane Central Production Service
Peer reviewers (provided comments and recommended an editorial decision): Jo Platt, Central Editorial Information Specialist (search), Nuala Livingstone, Cochrane Evidence Production and Methods Directorate (methods), Caroline Homer, Burnet Institute, Australia (clinical), Professor Alison McFadden, University of Dundee (clinical), and Jessica D'Urbano (consumer)

## Appendices

## Appendix 1. Detailed search methods for Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth

## Detailed search methods used to maintain and update the Specialised Register
Note: The Search Methods section of each protocol or review will contain our standard search paragraph. This describes very briefly the Group’s broad searching activities. This document describes in detail the sources searched for the Specialised Register, how the search results are dealt with and how review authors receive the search results relevant to their reviews.
The Register is a database containing over 25,000 reports of controlled trials in the field of pregnancy and childbirth. It represents more than 30 years of searching.
Search results are screened by two people and the full text of all relevant trial reports identified through the searching activities described below is reviewed.
Based on the intervention described, each trial report is assigned a number that corresponds to a specific Pregnancy and Childbirth review topic (or topics), and is then added to the Register.
The Information Specialist searches the Register for each review using this topic number rather than keywords. This results in a more specific search set that will be fully accounted for in the relevant review sections (Included, Excluded, Awaiting Classification or Ongoing).
Search strategies for the identification of studies
A. Electronic searches (none of these search strategies is meant to be a direct translation of another. They have been designed to complement each other but results do overlap).
(1) THE COCHRANE CENTRAL REGISTER OF CONTROLLED TRIALS (CENTRAL): The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) in The Cochrane Library is searched using MeSH terms relevant to pregnancy and childbirth, together with free text terms. CENTRAL contains reports of randomised trials and quasi‐randomised trials mostly taken from PubMed and Embase but also ClincalTrials.gov, the Specialized Registers of groups within Cochrane and other sources. This search is run monthly. (See: Search strategy below)
(2) MEDLINE: This current search strategy (2018) is run weekly via OVID MEDLINE and uses the Highly Sensitive Search Strategy for identifying randomized trials in MEDLINE: sensitivity‐maximizing version (2008 revision) published in Chapter 6, Section 6.4.11 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 5.0.2 (See: search strategy below)
(3) Embase: The search strategy is run weekly via NICE Healthcare Databases (provided by OVID) (See: search strategy below)
(4) CINAHL: NICE Healthcare Databases (provided by EBSCO) (See: search strategy below)
(5)Clinical Trials Registries: Each review has a topic specific search of ClinicalTrials.gov and the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) for unpublished, planned and ongoing trial reports. The exact search methods are documented in the review.
B. Searching other resources
(1) Journal and conference proceedings screening: see below for the lists of journals and conference proceedings that have been searched for RCTs/quasi‐RCTs to add to the Specialised Register.
(2) Current Awareness: see below for the current awareness we use.
(1) CENTRAL search strategy
#1 MeSH descriptor: [Pregnancy] explode all trees
#2 MeSH descriptor: [Pregnancy Complications] explode all trees
#3 MeSH descriptor: [Infant, Newborn] explode all trees
#4 MeSH descriptor: [Fetus] explode all trees
#5 MeSH descriptor: [Fetal Development] explode all trees
#6 MeSH descriptor: [Prenatal Diagnosis] explode all trees
#7 MeSH descriptor: [Fetal Monitoring] explode all trees
#8 MeSH descriptor: [Fetal Therapies] explode all trees
#9 MeSH descriptor: [Heart Rate, Fetal] explode all trees
#10 MeSH descriptor: [Extraembryonic Membranes] explode all trees
#11 MeSH descriptor: [Placenta] explode all trees
#12 MeSH descriptor: [Placental Function Tests] explode all trees
#13 MeSH descriptor: [Uterine Monitoring] explode all trees
#14 MeSH descriptor: [Pelvimetry] explode all trees
#15 MeSH descriptor: [Oxytocics] explode all trees
#16 MeSH descriptor: [Tocolytic Agents] explode all trees
#17 MeSH descriptor: [Tocolysis] explode all trees
#18 MeSH descriptor: [Maternal Health Services] explode all trees
#19 MeSH descriptor: [Peripartum Period] explode all trees
#20 MeSH descriptor: [Parity] explode all trees
#21 MeSH descriptor: [Perinatal Care] explode all trees
#22 MeSH descriptor: [Postpartum Period] explode all trees
#23 MeSH descriptor: [Labor Pain] explode all trees
#24 MeSH descriptor: [Anesthesia, Obstetrical] explode all trees
#25 MeSH descriptor: [Obstetric Surgical Procedures] explode all trees
#26 MeSH descriptor: [Analgesia, Obstetrical] explode all trees
#27 MeSH descriptor: [Obstetric Nursing] explode all trees
#28 MeSH descriptor: [Maternal‐Child Nursing] explode all trees
#29 MeSH descriptor: [Midwifery] explode all trees
#30 MeSH descriptor: [Apgar Score] explode all trees
#31 MeSH descriptor: [Breast Feeding] explode all trees
#32 MeSH descriptor: [Bottle Feeding] explode all trees
#33 MeSH descriptor: [Milk, Human] explode all trees
#34 {OR #1‐#33}
#35 pregnan*
#36 fetus
#37 foetus
#38 fetal
#39 foetal
#40 newborn
#41 "new born"
#42 birth
#43 childbirth
#44 laboring
#45 labour*
#46 antepart*
#47 prenatal*
#48 antenatal*
#49 perinatal*
#50 postnatal*
#51 postpart*
#52 caesar*
#53 cesar*
#54 obstetric*
#55 tocoly*
#56 oxytoci*
#57 placent*
#58 parturi*
#59 preeclamp*
#60 eclamp*
#61 intrapart*
#62 puerper*
#63 episiotom*
#64 amnio*
#65 matern*
#66 gestation*
#67 lactati*
#68 breastfe*
#69 breast NEXT fe*
#70 preconcept*
#71 periconcept*
#72 interconcept*
#73 {OR #35‐#72}
#74 #34 OR #73
(2) MEDLINE search strategy
1. randomized controlled trial.pt. 2. controlled clinical trial.pt. 3. randomized.ab. 4. placebo.ab. 5. drug therapy.fs. 6. randomly.ab. 7. trial.ab. 8. groups.ab. 9. or/1‐8 10. exp Pregnancy/ 11. exp Pregnancy Complications/ 12. exp Maternal Health Services/ 13. exp Fetus/ 14. exp Fetal Therapies/ 15. exp Fetal Monitoring/ 16. exp Prenatal Diagnosis/ 17. Perinatal Care/ 18. Labor pain/ 19. Analgesia, Obstetric/ 20. exp Obstetric Surgical Procedures/ 21. Infant, Newborn/ 22. exp Postpartum Period/ 23. Breastfeeding/ 24. or/10‐23 25. 9 and 24 26. exp animals/ not humans.sh. 27. 25 not 26
(3) Embase search strategy
CROSSOVER PROCEDURE/
DOUBLE BLIND PROCEDURE/
SINGLE BLIND PROCEDURE/
RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL/
crossover$.ti,ab
(cross ADJ over$).ti,ab
placebo$.ti,ab
(doubl$ ADJ blind$).ti,ab
allocat$.ti,ab
random$.ti,ab
trial$.ti
1 OR 2 OR 3 OR 4 OR 5 OR 6 OR 7 OR 8 OR 9 OR 10 OR 11
exp PREGNANCY/
exp PREGNANCY DISORDER/
exp OBSTETRIC PROCEDURE/
exp BREAST FEEDING/ OR exp BREAST FEEDING EDUCATION/
exp CHILDBIRTH/ OR exp CHILDBIRTH EDUCATION/
exp LABOR PAIN/
(antenatal* OR prenatal* OR puerper* OR postnatal* OR post‐natal* OR post ADJ natal* OR postpartum OR post‐partum OR post ADJ partum).ti,ab
(prepregnancy OR pre‐pregnancy OR pre ADJ pregnancy OR preconcept* OR pre‐concept* OR pre ADJ concept* OR periconcept* OR peri‐concept* OR peri ADJ concept*).ti,ab
((preterm OR premature) AND (labour OR labor)).ti,ab
(eclamp* OR preeclamp* OR pre ADJ eclamp*).ti,ab
amniocentes*.ti,ab
(chorion* ADJ vill*).ti,ab
(breastfe* OR breast‐fe* OR breast ADJ fe* OR lactation).ti,ab
(caesarean OR cesarean OR caesarian OR cesarian OR cesarien OR caesarien).ti,ab
(newborn OR new ADJ born).ti,ab
(pregnancy OR pregnant OR pregnancies).ti
episiotom*.ti,ab
13 OR 14 OR 15 OR 16 OR 17 OR 18 OR 19 OR 20 OR 21 OR 22 OR 23 OR 24 OR 25 OR 26 OR 27 OR 28 OR 29
12 AND 30

(4) CINAHL search strategy
exp CLINICAL TRIALS/
(clinic* ADJ trial*).ti,ab
(trebl* ADJ mask*).ti,ab
(tripl* ADJ blind*).ti,ab
(tripl* ADJ mask*).ti,ab
(doubl* ADJ blind*).ti,ab
(doubl* ADJ mask*).ti,ab
(singl* ADJ blind*).ti,ab
(singl* ADJ mask*).ti,ab
(randomi* ADJ control* ADJ trial*).ti,ab
RANDOM ASSIGNMENT/
(random* ADJ allocat*).ti,ab
placebo*.ti,ab
PLACEBOS/
QUANTITATIVE STUDIES/
(allocat* ADJ random*).ti,ab
breastfeeding.ti,ab
breastfed.ti,ab
exp BREAST FEEDING/
breast‐fe*.ti,ab
exp PREGNANCY/
exp PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS/
(prenatal OR antenatal OR antepartum OR postpartum OR postnatal).ti,ab
(pregnant OR pregnancy).ti
((preterm OR premature) AND (labor OR labour)).ti,ab
(midwife OR midwifery).ti,ab
CHILDBIRTH EDUCATION/
exp PREGNANCY, MULTIPLE/ OR exp PREGNANCY TRIMESTERS/
exp MATERNAL‐CHILD CARE/
(prenatal* OR pre‐natal* OR perinatal* OR peripartum OR antenatal* OR postnatal* OR post‐natal* OR postpart* OR post‐part* OR puerper* OR prepregnancy OR pre‐pregnancy OR preconcept* OR pre‐concept* OR periconcept* OR peri‐concept*).ti,ab
OBSTETRIC EMERGENCIES/
OBSTETRIC NURSING/
exp SURGERY, OBSTETRICAL/
exp DIAGNOSIS, OBSTETRIC/
1 OR 2 OR 3 OR 4 OR 5 OR 6 OR 7 OR 8 OR 9 OR 10 OR 11 OR 12 OR 13 OR 14 OR 15 OR 16
17 OR 18 OR 19 OR 20 OR 21 OR 22 OR 23 OR 24 OR 25 OR 26 OR 27 OR 28 OR 29 OR 30 OR 31 OR 32 OR 33 OR 34

Journal and conference proceedings screening (sometimes known as handsearching)
Journals
Currently, each issue (mainly the electronic version now) is scanned from start to end including supplements where available. Where a journal in the table below has stopped being searched, it is either because the journal is a more general journal; it was being searched by another Cochrane group; or that we no longer have access.
 
(2) Conference proceedings (from conference abstract books, journal supplements and online sources)
We have searched other conference proceedings as and when the abstracts have been made available to us. The table below gives a list of all conference proceedings searched.
 
Other strategies
(1) Current Awareness
a) ZETOC, The British Library's Electronic Table of Contents service sends the contents tables via e‐mail of the journals listed below. The contents are reviewed by the Trials Search Co‐ordinator. Hard copies of all possible reports of RCTs/CCTs relevant to the scope of the group are obtained, reviewed and added to the register by the Information Specialist if they meet the inclusion criteria.
African Journal of Reproductive Health
American Journal of Perinatology
Archives of Disease in Childhood
Archives of Disease in Childhood Fetal and Neonatal Edition
Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics
Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine
Archives of Women’s Mental Health
British Journal of Midwifery
Chinese Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Clinica e Investigacion en Ginecologia y Obstetricia
Clinical and Experimental Obstetrics and Gynecology
Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology
Contemporary Ob/GYN
Evidence Based Midwifery
Fetal Diagnosis and Therapy
Ginecologia y Obstetricia de Mexico
Giornale Italiano di Ostetricia e Ginecologia
Human Reproduction
Hypertension in Pregnancy
Italian Journal of Gynaecology and Obstetrics
JAMA Pediatrics
JOGC: Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology Canada
Journal – Association of Chartered Physiotherapists in Womens Health
Journal de Gynecologie, Obstetrique et Biologie de la Reproduction (Paris)
Journal of Maternal Fetal and Neonatal Medicine
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology of India
Journal of Paediatrics Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Journal of Perinatal and Neonatal Nursing
Journal of Perinatology
Journal of Prenatal and Perinatal Psychology and Health
Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Journal of Reproductive Medicine
Journal‐New Zealand College of Midwives
MCN, The American Journal of Maternal Child Nursing
MIDIRS Midwifery Digest
Midwifery Matters
Midwifery Today
Obstetrical and Gynecological Survey
Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Reproductive Medicine
Prenatal Diagnosis
Revue de Medecine Perinatale
Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Women and Birth
Zeitschrift fur Geburtshilfe und Neonatologie

b)Biomed Central (http://www.biomedcentral.com/home/) sends an email alert every 30 days for the anything new published in the following:
BMC: Pregnancy and Childbirth Journal
International Breastfeeding Journal
Anything related to the subject areas of Pregnancy and Childbirth, Pediatrics or Women’s Health.

Specialised Register inclusion criteria
TOPIC SCOPE: Controlled trials comparing alternative forms of care used either during pregnancy (but not to terminate early pregnancy), or within 28 days of delivery.
STUDY DESIGN: A controlled trial has been defined as a trial involving humans in which allocation to the intervention has either been at random, or by some quasi‐random method, such as by alternation, or on the basis of the case record number or date of birth.
These criteria have been applied fairly liberally to avoid excluding potentially useful studies involving concurrent comparisons of alternative policies. In other words, the Register includes reports which, if necessary, can subsequently be rejected as methodologically inadequate by a member of the Group preparing a systematic review.
All search results are deduplicated, screened by two people at the editorial base, and the full text of all relevant trial reports identified through the searching activities described above is reviewed.
Based on the intervention described, each trial report is assigned a number that corresponds to a specific Pregnancy and Childbirth review topic (or topics), and is then added to the Register.
The Information Specialist searches the Register for each review using this topic number rather than keywords and adds the results to the Studies Awaiting Classification section of the review for authors to assess. This results in a more specific search set that will be fully accounted for in the relevant review sections (Included, Excluded, Awaiting Classification or Ongoing).
No language or date restrictions are applied.

## Appendix 2. Search methods for ICTRP and ClinicalTrials.gov
Each line was run separately
ClinicalTrials.gov
Advanced search
midwife | Interventional Studies | continuity
midwife | Interventional Studies | continuous
midwife | Interventional Studies | model
midwifery | Interventional Studies | support
midwife | Interventional Studies | support
continuity of care | pregnancy
midwifery‐led | Interventional Studies
midwife‐led | Interventional Studies
ICTRP (searched 'with synonyms')
midwifery AND models AND care
midwifery AND continuity
midwife‐led
midwifery‐led

## Data and analyses
 

## Characteristics of studies

## Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of studies awaiting classification [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of ongoing studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Differences between protocol and review
2015 update
Breastfeeding on hospital discharge and maternal satisfaction were added as outcomes.
2016 update
Some of the primary and secondary outcomes were clarified. The primary neonatal outcome "Overall fetal loss and neonatal death (fetal loss was assessed by gestation using 24 weeks as the cut‐off for viability in many countries)" was changed to "All fetal loss before and after 24 weeks plus neonatal death."
The secondary neonatal outcomes, "Fetal loss and neonatal death less than 24 weeks" and "Fetal loss and neonatal death equal to/after 24 weeks" were changed to "Fetal loss less than 24 weeks and neonatal death" and "Fetal loss equal to/after 24 weeks and neonatal death".
2024 update
The title has changed for greater clarity of definition and relevance to women, families, decision makers, and the policy community (previous title "Midwife‐led continuity models versus other models of care for childbearing women").
Primary outcome changes: One primary outcome has been redefined as two separate primary outcomes. "All fetal loss before and after 24 weeks plus neonatal death" has been changed to "Fetal loss at or after 24 weeks gestation" and "Neonatal death" (baby born alive at any gestation and dies within 28 days). One primary outcome has been moved to a secondary outcome ("Instrumental vaginal birth (forceps/vacuum)").
Secondary outcome changes: Reduced from 35 to 18 outcomes. New secondary outcomes include: "Healthy mother (defined as one who is alive at 28 days postpartum, without a caesarean birth, postpartum haemorrhage (as defined by trial authors), third or fourth degree tear, or readmission within 28 days)"; "Healthy baby (defined as one who is born after 37 + 0 weeks gestation and is alive at 28 days and without readmission within 28 days)", and "Birth weight equal to or more than 4000 g". One outcome has been redefined: "Maternal satisfaction (not pre‐specified)" to "Maternal experience (defined by trial authors)".
New searches using the new definition in the review title identified three eligible studies. (previously in excluded studies), , and , broadening the scope of the review in terms of higher‐risk populations and middle‐income settings.
Data extraction and assessment of all studies in the review has been re‐entered and checked independently by two authors in this update. The methods have been informed by the latest Cochrane methodology and Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth trustworthiness assessments.
Two subgroups were added: "Women with social risk factors versus all women" and "Countries with very high Human Development Index (HDI) > 0.8 versus high, medium and low HDI".
Several outcome changes were made to ensure clinical and policy relevance:
Primary outcomes in the 2016 version
Spontaneous vaginal birth (as defined by trial authors)
Caesarean birth
Regional analgesia (epidural/spinal)
Instrumental vaginal birth (forceps/vacuum)
Intact perineum
All fetal loss before and after 24 weeks plus neonatal death
Preterm birth (less than 37 weeks)

Primary outcomes in the 2024 update have changed slightly to the following:
Spontaneous vaginal birth (as defined by trial authors)
Caesarean birth
Regional analgesia (epidural/spinal)
Intact perineum
Fetal loss at or after 24 weeks gestation
Preterm birth (< 37 weeks)
Neonatal death (baby born alive at any gestation and dies within 28 days)

Secondary outcomes in the 2016 version
Antenatal hospitalisation
Antepartum haemorrhage
Induction of labour
Amniotomy
Augmentation/artificial oxytocin during labour
No intrapartum analgesia/anaesthesia
Opiate analgesia
Attendance at birth by known midwife
Episiotomy
Perineal laceration requiring suturing
Mean labour length (hours)
Postpartum haemorrhage
Breastfeeding initiation
Duration of postnatal hospital stay (days)
Low birthweight (less than 2500 g)
Five‐minute Apgar score less than or equal to seven
Neonatal convulsions
Admission to special care nursery/neonatal intensive care unit
Mean length of neonatal hospital stay (days)
Fetal loss less than 24 weeks and neonatal death
Fetal loss equal to/after 24 weeks and neonatal death
Perceptions of control during labour and childbirth
Mean number of antenatal visits
Maternal death
Cord blood acidosis
Postpartum depression
Any breastfeeding at three months
Prolonged perineal pain
Pain during sexual intercourse
Urinary incontinence
Faecal incontinence
Prolonged backache
Breastfeeding on hospital discharge (not pre‐specified)
Maternal satisfaction (not pre‐specified)
Cost (not pre‐specified)

Secondary outcomes in the 2024 update
Healthy mother (defined as one who is alive at 28 days postpartum, without a Caesarean birth, postpartum haemorrhage (as defined by trial authors), third or fourth‐degree tear, or readmission within 28 days)
Maternal death
Induction of labour
Instrumental vaginal birth (forceps/vacuum)
Episiotomy
Third or fourth‐degree tear
Postpartum haemorrhage (defined by trial authors)
Breastfeeding initiation (defined by trial authors)
Maternal readmission within 28 days
Maternal experience (defined by trial authors)
Attendance at birth by a known midwife who provided antenatal care
Cost (as defined by trial authors)
Healthy baby (defined as one born after 37 + 0 weeks gestation and alive at 28 days and without readmission within 28 days)
Birth weight less than 2500 g
Birth weight equal to or more than 4000 g
Apgar score less than or equal to seven at five minutes
Admission to special care nursery/neonatal intensive care unit
Fetal loss before 24 weeks gestation

## Contributions of authors
Jane Sandall (JS)
JS contributed to the protocol and protocol update in 2024 by contributing to the design and writing. JS contributed to the design, screened retrieved papers against inclusion criteria, and appraised the quality of papers.
JS has been the contact author for the review since July 2006 and is the first author of the review. Since 2006, she has co‐ordinated the review process, written to authors for additional information, managed data for the review, re‐extracted data from papers, re‐entered data into Review Manager, re‐entered data for the included studies section, analysed and interpreted data, and provided a clinical and policy perspective. She has rewritten the Plain language summary, Abstract, Background, Methods, Description of studies, Methodological quality, Results, Analysis, and Discussion, and edited the final draft of the review.
JS revised the review in response to feedback from referees and the editor.
JS is the guarantor for the review.
Cristina Fernandez Turienzo (CFT)
CFT contributed to the 2024 review by contributing to the design and writing of the protocol, assessing trials for inclusion and trustworthiness, contacting authors for clarifications, appraising the quality of and extracting data from selected papers, contributing to the interpretation of data, and writing and commenting on the review.
Declan Devane (DD)
DD contributed to the protocol by contributing to the design and writing.
DD contributed to the review by contributing to the design of the review, appraising the quality of and extracting data from selected papers, contributing to the interpretation of data, writing the review, and providing a methodological and clinical perspective.
Simon Gates (SG) SG provided methodological and statistical expertise in the development of the review, and assisted with analysis of data and interpretation of results.
Paddy Gillespie (PG)
PG provided health economic expertise, and assisted with the interpretation of results in the economic analysis section.
Leanne Jones (LJ)
LJ contributed to the 2024 review by assessing trials for inclusion and trustworthiness, extracting the data, and updating the methods sections of the review.
Andrew Shennan (AS)
AS provided specialist obstetric expertise, and assisted with the interpretation of results.
Hora Soltani (HS) HS contributed to the design and commented on the first draft of the protocol.
HS contributed to the development of the protocol and review by contributing to the design, evaluation of the quality of the articles against the inclusion/exclusion criteria, data extraction, writing to authors for clarification of original article information, data interpretation, commenting on as well as writing the review, and drafting the economic analysis section.
Hannah Rayment‐Jones (HRJ)
HRJ contributed to the 2024 review by contributing to the design and writing of the protocol, assessing trials for inclusion and trustworthiness, writing to authors for clarification of original article information, appraising the quality of and extracting data from selected papers, contributing to the interpretation of data by providing a clinical perspective, writing and commenting on the review, managing articles, and drafting the background.

## Sources of support

## Internal sources
Department of Women and Children's Health, School of Life Course Science and Population Health, Faculty of Life Science and Medicine, King's College, London, UK
Employer
Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, UK
Employer
Health Services Executive, Dublin North East, Ireland
Employer
Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland
Employer

## External sources
National Institute for Health Research, UK
2013 update. NIHR Programme of centrally managed pregnancy and childbirth systematic reviews of priority to the NHS and users of the NHS: 10/4001/02
2015 update. UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World Bank Special Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction (HRP), Department of Reproductive Health and Research (RHR), World Health Organization, Switzerland
Support from WHO
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) , UK
The research was supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Applied Health Research and Care South London at King’s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and ARC Yorkshire and Humber at Sheffield Hallam University. The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.

## Declarations of interest
Jane Sandall: Jane Sandall was Head of Maternity and Midwifery Research NHS England 2/21‐8/23. She is also a member of the WHO Strategic and Technical Advisory Group of Experts (STAGE) for maternal, newborn, child, adolescent health, and nutrition. JS was Chief Investigator on the study , and had no involvement in the assessment of this trial for the review.
Cristina Fernandez Turienzo: CFT was lead author on , and had no involvement in the assessment of this trial for the review.
Declan Devane: Declan Devane is Director of Evidence Synthesis Ireland, Scientific Director of Cochrane Ireland, but had no involvement in the editorial processing of this review. DD was an author on . He had no involvement in the assessment of this trial for the review.
Hora Soltani: no known conflict of interest.
Simon Gates: no known conflict of interest. Simon was the Statistical Editor for Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth but had no involvement in the editorial processing of this review.
Paddy Gillespie: no known conflict of interest.
Leanne Jones: Leanne Jones was the Acting Managing Editor of Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth but had no involvement in the editorial processing of this review. Leanne is currently a Managing Editor within the Evidence Production & Methods Directorate for the Cochrane Central Executive, but again had no involvement in the editorial or peer review processing of this review.
Andrew Shennan: Andrew Shennan is chair of the FIGO preterm birth committee and has advised WHO in this capacity. He leads a NIHR global health research group. AS was co‐investigator on , and had no involvement in the assessment of this trial for the review.
Hannah Rayment‐Jones: no known conflict of interest.