pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC11825003PMC11825003.111825003118250033994634610.1371/journal.pone.0316388PONE-D-24-171051Research ArticleEcology and Environmental SciencesSustainability ScienceSocial SciencesEconomicsFinancePeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsAsiaPakistanSocial SciencesEconomicsLabor EconomicsSocial SciencesEconomicsEngineering and TechnologySignal ProcessingAutocorrelationResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesStatistical MethodsAutocorrelationPhysical SciencesMathematicsStatisticsStatistical MethodsAutocorrelationBiology and Life SciencesEcologyTheoretical EcologyEcology and Environmental SciencesEcologyTheoretical EcologyResearch and Analysis MethodsMathematical and Statistical TechniquesStatistical MethodsTest StatisticsPhysical SciencesMathematicsStatisticsStatistical MethodsTest StatisticsThe composite governance mechanisms and sustainable economic performance of Pakistan’s textile industry
The composite governance mechanisms and sustainable economic performance of Pakistan’s textile industryhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-5348-7655SaleemAsimaData curationFormal analysisMethodology SandhuMaqsood AhmadValidationWriting – review & editing HashmiAijaz MustafaConceptualization https://orcid.org/0009-0002-7169-6271JamilAishaWriting – review & editing 1
National University of Modern Languages, Islamabad, Pakistan2
College of Business and Economics, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, UAE3
Faculty of Management Sciences, National University of Modern Languages, Islamabad, Pakistan4
University of Lahore, Lahore, PakistanAnwarImranEditor .

## Data Availability
Data supporting to this article is uploaded in .

## 1. Introduction
In the ever-evolving landscape of contemporary markets, the pursuit of success has become more intense, necessitating not only prosperity for companies but also ensure lasting viability [ ]. In this context, sustainability has emerged as a pivotal factor for successful organizations, as underscored by more than 90% of CEOs who recognize its significance [ ]. The concept of sustainability, which originated from Brundtland’s seminal work in 1987, revolves around meeting present-day needs without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs [ ]. This principle has gained further impetus with the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), which makes corporate sustainability pivotal to attaining global sustainability goals by 2030 [ ]. Specifically, UNDP’s Sustainability Goal 12.6 urges corporations, particularly large and transnational entities, to embrace sustainable practices and integrate comprehensive sustainability disclosures into their annual reports [ ]. As emphasized by the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals, the corporate sector’s pivotal role in upholding sustainability is undeniable.
Suharyono and Hs [ ], stated that there are numerous international standards for measuring performance impacts, such as the United Nations Global Compact (UNGC), the Environmental Program (UNEP), and the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI). Among these performance measurement guidelines, GRI Standards are the most widely applied procedure for corporate sustainability. Sustainable performance has become a paramount concern in developing nations. However, research in this domain remains scarce [ ]. To address this gap, the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) has provided globally recognized sustainability standards, serving as a yardstick for gauging performance impact, enhancing reporting quality, and guiding optimal corporate decisions. While these standards have been extensively adopted, their contextual nuances, particularly in emerging economies, remain underexplored [ ].
Governance principles, as formulated by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) in 2004, encapsulate regulatory frameworks, policies, and mechanisms crafted by authorities to safeguard the interests of stakeholders and capital providers. These principles should align with an organization’s overarching objectives [ ]. Although the relationship between governance practices and organizational performance has drawn substantial attention over the past two decades, such as [ – ]. The evaluation of corporate governance in the context of sustainable performance still needs exploration. The existing research on sustainable performance impacts has mainly focused on advanced economies, leaving a dearth of insights in the context of developing nations such as India and Pakistan [ ].
Previous studies considered a single metric framework for measuring sustainable performance, focusing on the perspective of GRI Sustainability standards, namely Economic Social and Governance (ESG), referenced studies include [ – ]. The in-depth exploration of various dimensions of GRI Sustainability improves the credibility of sustainable practices. They highlight the fact that the preferable approach embraces economic sustainability in an era when every firm is concerned to improve its sustainable economic performance [ ]. The use of a composite index decreases the outliers and the aggregation process covers wider dimensions. Only a few studies have applied a composite index for both corporate governance and sustainable performance, e.g. Suharyono and Hs, Achim et al. [ , ]. Some studies have applied agency theory to evaluate the corporate governance-performance relationship. Bui and Krajcsak [ ], argued that numerous critical corporate governance theories have evolved over the years, and the empirical findings need to be elaborated on given the presence of multi-dimensional theoretical underpinnings.
In the Pakistani context, CG awareness dates back only a few decades. The evolution of the CG Code in Pakistan, initiated by the Security and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP) in 2002 and subsequently revised, led to changes in compliance dynamics. Early on, adherence to these codes was optional, but evidence suggests that companies that followed these codes outperformed those that did not [ ]. Gradually, these codes became mandatory, with subsequent revisions emphasizing such aspects as board structure, transparency, and regulatory compliance. Despite the growing interest in CG and its impact, research in Pakistan has yielded conflicting results, necessitating further investigation [ ]. Miao et al. [ ], argued that Pakistan has a comparatively simple legal regulatory system with inadequate control mechanisms, and requires both a unified Corporate Governance code and sound CG practices before it can foster certain corporate approaches and obtain optimal results. They maintained that Pakistan seems to treat CG based on personal relationships as the norm and that this may eventually result in financial ruin. Younas et al. [ ], however, specifically focusing on the corporate sector in Pakistan, showed that the adoption of the right governance practices positively influences corporate financial distress by reducing risk.
The textile sector is a leading manufacturing industry in Pakistan and is of particular interest. It holds a prominent position as an exporter of textile products in Asia, contributing substantially to GDP and employment [ ]. As evidenced by recent data from the Pakistan Economic Survey (PES), the textile industry has lately experienced robust growth and export performance, underscoring its strategic importance [ ]. This industry is the 8th biggest textile product exporter in Asia. The PES 2021–2022, surveying large-scale manufacturing industries (LSM), reported 18.16 percent growth in the textile sector (www.finance.gov.pk). The textile industry has shown an upswing among local and international markets, with a 34 percent growth in garment production during the year 2022. According to the Pakistan Bureau of Statistics (PBS), the textile sector saw a 25.4 percent increase in exports by 2022 [ ]. The textile industry has a lengthy production chain, with a contribution of approximately one-fourth of the industrial value addition. This sector employs about 40 percent of the industrial workforce. Aside from cyclical and seasonal fluctuations, this sector has maintained a total share of nearly 61.24 percent of domestic exports.
The textile industry in Pakistan comprises three subsectors listed on the Stock Exchange: textile composites, textile spinning, and textile weaving. The sector has received the maximum share of total financing of 202.9 billion, 94.6 percent of which has been financed by the industry itself. Tahir and Anuar [ ], found that the contribution of the textile sector is approximately 46 percent of the aggregate manufacturing and 8.5 percent contribution of the annual GDP of Pakistan. Considering the latest data from PBS, Pakistan’s earnings from apparel and textile exports increased from $2.933 billion in 2021 to $3.056 billion in 2022. According to PES 2021–2022, this industry is experiencing steady growth due to underlying oil price fluctuations, limited technology and investments, and the energy crisis; however, increased financing, imports of textile machines, and high exports show substantial forwarding in the textile industry (www.finance.gov.pk). The top managers of various businesses—Sarah Textiles, Taj Company, ENGRO Group, and Crescent Bank—after their failures have realized the importance of governance mechanisms for not only their management but also for avoiding future losses to the companies [ ]. Very few studies evaluated CGI in the context of the textile sector in Pakistan, such as Tahir et al. [ ]. Given these research gaps and contextual dynamics, the following core research question emerges:
Does a composite governance mechanism index influence the sustainable economic performance of Pakistan’s textile industry? The primary objective of the present study is to investigate the influence of the composite governance mechanism index on the sustainable economic performance of the textile industry in Pakistan.
In light of the gaps described above, the notable contributions made by this paper to the existing literature are as follows: 1) in line with the referenced studies [ , , ]; 2) the study modifies the theoretical understanding of the CG-sustainable performance relationship. The study also modifies the findings of the CG-performance literature on sectoral contexts within developing economies as a result of examining the application of CGMI to sustainable economic performance in Pakistan’s textile sector [ , ]; 3) the study applies GRI 201–1, an economic performance approach for evaluating sustainable performance impacts; 4) The study seeks to provide a robust theoretical foundation for the connection between CGMI and sustainable economic performance through the implications of five modified theoretical logics [ ].
The remainder of the study is structured as follows: Section 2 presents the literature review highlighting theoretical contributions, concepts, and empirical relationships; Section 3 discusses a comprehensive research methodology; Section 4 shows a thorough data analysis and an interpretation of the findings; Section 5 presents a discussion and some conclusions.

## 2. Literature review

## 2.1. Theoretical lens
The traditionalist concept of agency theory argues that a conflict of alignment exists in the principal-agent relationship, which negatively affects shareholders’ wealth maximization, and produces a residual loss when the firm’s revenues are transferred into managerial discretion [ ]. Lindkvist and Saric, Jensen and Meckling [ , ], calculated that the estimated agency costs for publicly traded corporations resulted in a 16% decline from the benchmark, or $1432 million, in firm value. As a result of the residual loss caused by agency conflicts and the rise in agency costs, the value of companies significantly decreased [ ]. Bui and Krajcsak [ ], highlighted agency theory among the theoretical underpinnings of corporate governance but indicated that the right governance mechanisms ensure that firm managers behave in their shareholders’ best interests. Referenced studies including Benson and Ganda [ ] and Munir et al. [ ], applied agency theory to establish the empirical relation between CGM, financial performance, and sustainability performance.
The present study applied agency theory to minimize agency conflict, and agency cost by applying the right governance mechanisms consisting of the board of directors, audit committee, disclosure and transparency, remuneration committee, and shareholder’s rights, and improve the sustainable performance of the firms.
Bui & Krajcsak [ ], described managers as stewards of the organization, and asserted that the presence of trust, collaboration, and cooperation between shareholders and managers decreases agency costs and enhances the firm’s performance. Stewardship theory is unique in creating increased trust between managers and shareholders [ , ]. According to Lambright [ ], shareholders’ interests as stewards are aligned with the wish to maximize the long-term stewardship of the company. These writers applied agency and stewardship theories to evaluate the CG-performance relationship [ ]. The study applied stewardship theory to consider trust, collaboration, and cooperation between shareholders and managers, on the one hand, and enhanced sustainable performance, on the other.
Stakeholder theory argues that organizations are accountable to the interests of both stakeholders and shareholders and effective governance mechanisms should align with their best interests [ ]. Munir et al. [ ], applied stakeholder theory and described the link between CG and sustainable performance in these terms: “the framework of governance mechanisms shall warrant the security of stakeholder’s rights by incorporating the social, environmental, and economic issues into the organization strategies and practices”, by Galbreath [ ]. Benson and Ganda [ ], applied stakeholder theory to evaluate the dynamic interactions between CGM, financial performance, and corporate sustainability. A combination of existing traditional theories was applied to align the interests of the corporate stakeholders and improve sustainable performance. Saleem et al. [ ], applied stakeholder theory for establishing the link between board diversity and sustainability.
The resource-based conception (RBT) highlights the view that firm performance depends on the resources commanded by the firm [ ]. RBT supported the view that a company’s operations and success are based on internal and external resources, namely labor, raw materials, and capital [ ]. Accessibility to these resources depends upon the company’s link with internal and external stakeholders and is significantly monitored in the course of effective corporate governance. James and Joseph [ ], argued that internal stakeholders facilitate the access to resources that positively influence firm performance. Bui and Krajcsak [ ], applied the RBV and demonstrated a significant empirical relationship between corporate governance performance impacts. Gardazi et al. [ ], argued that directors manage resources through expertise and skills, improved decision-making procedures, and ultimately corporate performance. The study applied governance mechanisms for the effective use of internal and external resources and to enhance sustainable performance.
According to the transaction cost theory, corporate governance frameworks depend on the overall effect of internal and external business transactions [ ]. The theory holds that corporate governance ensures the effective and efficient fulfillment of transactions by stakeholders. Bui and Krajcsak [ ], argued that firms engage in many transactions, such as employee hiring and contracts with suppliers, that incur negotiating and monitoring costs. They show empirically that the establishment of appropriate governance mechanisms can prune these costs through the establishment of clear procedures and rules for transactions. The study applied transaction cost theory to minimize the transaction cost by clarifying the transaction rules between managers and shareholders.
The studies also applied the Upper Echelons Theory (UET) that considered the impact of top-level management characteristics on firm outcomes [ ]. Phan and Duong [ ], applied UET and proved a significant positive influence of management characteristics on corporate performance, namely board size, gender diversity, and CEO’s knowledge capability.

## 2.2. Theoretical concepts

## 2.2.1. Corporate governance mechanisms
Existing studies such as Mensah and Adams [ ] have systematically developed CG, illustrating it as a process to maximize value for stakeholders that affects the direction and governance of enterprise affairs. It specifically focuses on enhancing a firm’s prosperity and accountability and the achievement over the long run of organizational objectives. Comprehensive governance practices are concerned, for example, with board size, audit committees, remuneration, shareholding and ownership, and governance disclosures [ ].
Tahir et al. [ ], documented board composition as a measure of board size and board independence. Arora and Bodhanwala [ ], discussed board size as the number of directors serving on a corporate board and highlighted it as the top decision-making forum directing the efforts of senior management. The dynamic composition of the Board of Directors (BOD) ensures the presence of sound CG practices [ ]. Aguilera et al. [ ], highlighted the BOD as an important internal governance mechanism. Studies such as Fariha et al. [ ] and Guney et al. [ ], proxied board structure in terms of board size, diversity, CEO duality, and independence. Javaid and Saboor [ ], created a sub-index of board structure along the dimensions of board size, the ratio of outside directors, dual CEOs, executive directors, number of board meetings and effectiveness, and the presence of a chief financial officer.
The audit committee (AC) is an extended representation of the organization’s board, defined by Rahman et al. [ ]. The AC audits financial statements at regular intervals and aims to improve the credibility of financial reports [ ]. The AC is responsible for designing, overseeing, and implementing the financial reporting practices of the company and is thus able to ensure better governance procedures [ ]. Salloum et al. [ ], argued that an effective AC is based on two attributes: the quality and independence of the AC director. The writers whom they cite, such as Fariha et al. [ ] and Rahman et al [ ], applied a range of attributes to measure AC characteristics: AC size, meetings, independence, diligence, and external audit quality. Farooq et al. [ ], created a CGI with 29 governance elements, divided into ownership structure, compensation, board committees, and audit committees.
Information disclosure and transparency (D&T) are important attributes for improving the quality of governance mechanisms [ ]. Bushman et al. [ ], conceptualized information D&T as the openness of corporate-related information to stakeholders and outside investors. Temiz [ ], claimed that D&T is a crucial element of CG, specifically focusing on the settlement of information gaps. D&T significantly contributes to enhancing corporate operational efficiency, documented by Lai et al. [ ]. According to Ashbaugh et al. [ ], effective information D&T practices reduce agency costs by limiting management’s chances to behave opportunistically and managing their actions. Truong et al. [ ], created a D&T index consisting of three sub-indices: financial D&T, business legal ownership, and investor relations, and the composition of the board and management. Javaid and Saboor [ ], created a CGI with a sub-index of disclosure, such as disclosure of CG elements, remuneration, audit committee, shareholding categories, executive members’ ownership, and financial reports.
According to Mintah [ ] the remuneration committee (RC) is a considerable sub-group of the board, with the specific duties of scrutinizing compensation-related board decisions: salary, bonus, rewards, superannuation payments, share options, commission, health insurance, pension contributions, and shareholder profit sharing. Harymawan et al. [ ], argued that effective RC reduces agency expenses and information asymmetry. Kanapathippillai et al. [ ], demonstrated that the presence of quality RC minimizes corporate risk levels through the escalation of voluntary disclosures. RC diligence and independence are key attributes that improve the RC quality. Harymawan et al. [ ], measured RC using two common proxies: executive remuneration and the board of directors’ remuneration.
The investors’ ownership concentration (OC) is a considerable driver of good governance mechanisms, ultimately resulting in performance improvement and efficiency gains [ ]. According to agency theory, OC can help in the effective monitoring of corporate operations management, the alleviation of agency costs, and the solving of information problems resulting in reasonable performance improvement. The most common measurement for OC is the shareholders’ percentage of shareholdings [ ]. Guluma [ ], measured OC as the total percentage of the top 10 block holdings. OC is an effective governance practice that occupies a position in the CGI Arora & Bodhanwala [ ]. Javaid and Saboor [ ] created an ownership structure sub-index consisting of seven elements: block holders, institutional ownership, direct ownership, managerial ownership, voting share percentage, ownership concentration, and family ownership.

## 2.3. Empirical relationships

## 2.3.1. CGM and sustainability performance
The extensive literature on CG practices and financial effectiveness is based on two performance metrics: one accounting-based and the other market-based, studies include [ , , ]. They applied agency theory to show that right governance mechanisms help to align the interests of the stakeholders and ultimately enhance financial performance. The cited studies evaluate the interdependencies between CG practices and sustainability performance, specifically focusing on reporting and the quality of the disclosure perspectives, e.g., Tjahjadi et al. [ ], evaluated the impact of right governance practices on the social, environmental, and economic sustainability performance of listed non-finance firms of the Indonesian Stock market for 2013–2017. The study applied six versions of the GRI reporting standards and contributed to UET and agency theory by demonstrating the significant influence of the size of the board of commissioners, their educational background, and that of the top management team on sustainable performance through multiple regression. Shrivastava and Addas [ ] made clear the significant influence of CG tools on Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) disclosure, the proportion of the corporate board that attended meetings, and the proportion of the board that was independent: as a measure of sustainability performance, the governance disclosure score measured for CG and ESG disclosure were applied. Studies have also determined the individual influence of diverse CGM on sustainability, but the results obtained are inconclusive, conflicting, debatable, and irreconcilable [ ]. They mentioned a theoretical gap owing to scant research in the context of sustainability studies, specifically for developing economies.
Munir et al. [ ], argued that the controversial findings on the interdependencies between CG, business performance, and sustainability performance could together develop a robust conceptual framework for evaluating these relationships. By contributing to agency theory, RBV, and stakeholder theory the study revealed the favorable effects of the board of governance attributes on the sustainability of the energy sector (Gardazi et al. [ ]. Naciti [ ], scrutinized the impact of board composition on the sustainable performance of 362 companies from 46 countries over the period 2013–2016 by applying the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimation. Aligning with stakeholder theory and agency theory, her findings indicated that companies supporting high board diversity and CEO duality are highly sustainable, and having more independent directors negatively affects sustainability, as measured by the sustainability score of ESG. She argued that only a handful of studies have evaluated the interrelation between board structure and the company’s sustainability procedures. Munir et al. [ ], employed Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) to show the favorable effects of CG on the sustainability of listed companies in the Australian security market (ASX). The sustainability performance index takes into account social, economic, environmental, health, and safety management systems. These writers examined the impact of CG on enterprise performance by considering non-financial organizations listed on the PSX from 2003 to 2014 Hussain et al. [ ]. The study supported agency theory by demonstrating the favorable effects of CG practices on business performance through GMM Arellano-Bond dynamic panel-data estimation.
Few studies have considered the impact of CGI on sustainability performance. Sar [ ], assessed the effect of CGM on the ESG sustainability performance of listed Indian FMCG companies obtained from the CMIE-PROWESS database. The questionnaire survey showed the favorable effects of CGM on ESG sustainability. Saleem et al. [ ], investigated the contribution of board diversity towards the achievement of sustainability of agile non-profitable organizations. The study applied SEM analysis and results supported the relationship between stakeholder’s theory of corporate governance and sustainability. These writers examined the effect of CG procedures on the corporate sustainability of listed South African companies from 2010 to 2020 by applying ESG, ROA, and ROE as sustainability performance measures [ ]. Their study applied Dynamic Ordinary Least Square (OLS) and Fully Modified OLS, and achieved significant but inconclusive results about sustainability. They argued that dynamic and healthy interactions between CG, corporate performance, and corporate sustainability would result in value creation. Achim et al. [ ], evaluated the effect of quality governance practices on the long-term development of 185 nations from 2005 to 2020, through panel regression analysis. The findings indicated that high-quality governance practices contribute positively to sustainable development. Madaleno and Vieira [ ], examined the effect of gender CG practices on the business performance and sustainability practices of listed companies in Spain and Portugal from to 2010–2017. The study took the GMM approach and established the favorable effects of gender governance on business finances and sustainability. Irshad et al. [ ], contributed to agency theory, RBV, and stakeholder theory by establishing the significant positive relationship between CG and the sustainable environmental performance of listed USA firms for 2004–2017. Kwarteng et al. [ ], aligning the study with agency theory, proved the significant positive effect of all the board characteristics on the sustainable performance of a list of Sub-Saharan African firms from 2010 to 2019. Board characteristics included board independence, board tenure, board size, board sub-committees, board gender, board-CEO duality, board educational competencies, CEO power, board meetings frequency, and foreign BOD. In line with the above theoretical findings, the following hypothesis may be proposed:
H1: The composite governance mechanism index has a positive influence on the sustainable economic performance of Pakistan’s textile industry.

## 2.3.2. Firm size, firm age, and GRI sustainability
To determine the indirect influence on GRI Sustainability, a recent study used firm size and age as control variables. Considering the modeling difficulties, the evidence studies Guluma [ ] and Arora and Bodhanwala [ ], employed firm age and firm size to evaluate the influence of CGM on corporate performance. According to Guluma [ ], large firms have major agency problems and need strong governance mechanisms, which ultimately influence firm performance. Guluma [ ], documented several measures for firm size: revenue volume, market capitalization, number of employees, firm age, and how long an enterprise has been operating in the market since larger firms tend to have a longer operating history and this significantly contributes to better performance. Referenced studies such as [ , , ], revealed a significant controlled effect of firm size and firm age on CGM-corporate financial performance.

## 3. Methodology
The methodology of the present study incorporated four important descriptions: detailed sample selection and data sources, measurement variables, modeling equation for the proposed models, and description of estimation techniques.

## 3.1. Sample selection and data sources
To determine the impact of CGM on GRI sustainability, we took for our initial study sample 124 textile firms listed on Pakistan’s Security Market (PSX), These textile firms were divided into three sub-sectors: textile composite (53 companies), textile spinning (61 companies), and textile weaving (10 companies). For the final sample selection, a dual sample selection criterion was applied: 1) the elimination of firms that became delinquent and questioned due to the lack of financial information, as disclosed by the annual reports of listed textile enterprises; and, 2) the elimination of firms that were never listed during the entire study period, as highlighted by Elston [ ] and Saleem & Hashmi [ ]. Finally, 26 companies were eliminated, and the panel consisted of 98 firms listed on PSX and considered for the evaluation of their sustainable performance: 43 companies that were textile composites, 49 companies that specialized in textile spinning, and 6 companies that specialized in textile weaving.
The study period covered 15 years between 2008 and 2023. The range of data shows a high crisis period following the 2008 financial crisis, another following the 2020 pandemic of COVID-19, financial constraints and financial frictions between 2015 and 2021, and other macroeconomic turbulences, in line with Abdulzahra et al. [ ].
The datasets for both GRI sustainability measures and CGI measures were collected from the annual reports of publicly traded textile companies. The study considered Pakistan because it is one of the GRI member states [ ], and the choice of the textile sector as the study sample is based on the following characteristics: 1) the textile sector consists of a higher proportion of firms than the other firms listed on the Pakistan security market (psx.com.pk); and 2) this sector provides a comprehensive understanding of the entire textile sector in Pakistan as composed of three sub-sectors, namely, textile composite, textile spinning, and textile weaving firms; 3) the textile sector is of significant importance to the economy [ ].

## 3.2. Descriptions of the variables
To measure sustainable economic performance, this study implemented three operationalized components of GRI 201–1, the sustainability of the economic performance approach: direct economic value generated (DEG), economic value distributed (DED), and economic value retained (DER), adopted from GRI [ ]. DEG is measured through revenues obtained in the form of net income, net revenues from asset sales, collections of interests, and dividends. DED is measured through salaries and other employee benefits, such as insurance, pensions, interest-free loans, operational expenses, taxes, payments of interest on loans, dividends, and community support programs. DER is the difference between the economic value generated and the economic value distributed. The study proceeded stepwise: 1) calculation of the aggregate score for DEG and DED dimensions that presents the overall use of the dimensions, and 2) calculation of the DER by taking the difference between DEG and DED, which represents the GRI sustainability performance score, similar to Saleem & Hashmi [ ]. The score for GRI sustainability performance was calculated as

 GRISustainabilityPerformance=DER=DEG−DED

According to Black et al. [ ], CG indices are more useful for determining rising firm value, specifically in developing markets. The comprehensive CGMI, adopted from Munisi and Randoy [ ], had five sub-indices, namely, the board of directors (BOD), audit committee (AC), Disclosure and Transparency (D&T), Remuneration Committee (RC), and shareholders’ rights (SR). This study applied an equal-weighted index creation method, which considers the allocation of equal (100%) weights to each item of the sub-index, as discussed in Javaid & Saboor [ ]. The validity of each statement used to measure the sub-indices was verified from the sample textile companies’ annual reports. A ‘Yes’ response showed the presence of an element and was coded 1 and a ‘No’ shows the absence of an element and was coded 0. The study proceeded stepwise to determine the index score: 1) The aggregate score for each sub-index on a firm-specific basis was calculated by averaging the value of all items in each sub-index, and 2) the aggregate score for CGMI was then determined by taking the average of the score of all five sub-indices, bearing in mind the following formula:

 CGMI=Aggregatescoreofsub−indexforeachfirmTotalnumberofitems

 presents the description of 39 items that were incorporated for measuring sub-indices, classified as BOD (7 elements), AC (5 elements), D&T (20 elements), RC (4 elements), and SR (3 elements), adopted from Munisi & Randoy [ ]. However, Akbar [ ], highlighted the fact that Pakistan lags in the adoption of CG principles and strategies.
 The study applied two control variables: firm size and firm age. Many current studies measure firm size by logarithm (ln) of total assets, and firm age by years of operating experience, referenced by Arora and Bodhanwala [ ], Do et al [ ], Affes & Jarboui [ ].

## 3.3. Empirical model
The empirical model consists of CGMI as an explanatory variable, GRI as a response variable for measuring sustainable performance effects, and firm age (F_age) and firm size (Fs) as control variables. In the equation, ‘t’ is the number of years, i’ the indexes firm, ‘eit’ the random error term and ‘α’ the intercept.

 GRIit=α0+α1CGMIit+α2FSIZEit+α3FAGEit+eit

## 3.4. Panel econometrics
The study applied commonly used panel regression approaches, Random Effect (RE) and Fixed Effect (FE) statistical methods, following the assumption that unobserved heterogeneity would not correlate with the explanatory variables. The implication of panel ordinary least squares (OLS) statistics gave biased and inconsistent results that may have been due to endogeneity issues, consistent with Arora and Bodhanwala [ ]. FE and RE estimation models were applied to test the relationship of individual-specific effects with the explanatory variables by controlling all the time-invariant differences between the entities and reducing biases in the estimated coefficients of the model because of omitted time-invariant characteristics. The Hausman test was then applied to determine whether the RE model provided a consistent and unbiased estimate.
The study also applied GMM through Arellano-Bond dynamic panel-data estimation to check robustness, a method adopted by Hussain et al. [ ]. The GMM model is an effective strategy for addressing panel data with an endogeneity bias [ ]. For the regression analysis, the applied preliminary statistics included unit root tests and the Durbin-Watson autocorrelation test.

## 4. Results and discussion

## 4.1. Descriptive statistics
 shows the summary statistics of the comprehensive metrics of CGMI and GRI Sustainability for the 1,092 observations. The mean values for BOD, AC, and D&T were 0.66, 0.62, and 0.64, respectively, indicating the implementation of CG practices in companies. The mean value for RC was low. i.e., 0.34, indicating less-established remuneration committees in industrial sectors. SR has a mean value of 0.53, indicating less consideration for shareholder rights in Pakistan than elsewhere. The mean value of CGMI is also less than 0.56, indicating less importance being given to governance mechanisms in Pakistani industries. The mean value of GRI is 8.93, ranging between a minimum of 7.02 and a maximum of 11.92, showing high DEG by firms through dividends, interest collections, and operational efficiency. The standard deviation of all the variables is less than 1, indicating that the data points are closer to the average value.
 The Fs has a mean value of 8.22, ranging between 5.73 and 10.30; the maximum value reveals that a larger firm possessed assets totaling Rs 35 million, while the minimum value indicates that one of the sample enterprises with a lower size owned assets totaling only Rs 537,821. F-age has a mean value of 14.51 ranging between 14.34 and 17.3, showing that the sample firms have a minimum of 14 years of operational history.

## 4.2. Preliminary statistics

## 4.2.1. Serial correlation
The study applied Durbin-Watson (D-B) serial correlation statistics to test the null hypotheses H0: no autocorrelation and H1: autocorrelation exists. Wooldridge [ ], stated that the value for D-W statistics ranges between 0 and 4, with 0 as a positive correlation, 4 as a negative correlation, and 2 as no correlation. Azami et al. [ ], reported that the acceptance value for D-W lies between 1.5 and 2.5. In , the Durbin-Watson statistic value, which measures the level of autocorrelation in the residuals, shows an acceptance value of 2.22 within the reported range of 6 and 14. Hence, the null hypothesis of no autocorrelation is not rejected.
 

## 4.2.2. Panel unit root test
The study applied three-panel unit root tests for stationarity analysis among the variables: the Levin-Lin-Chu (LLC), Im-Pesaran-Shin (IPS), and Fischer Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) tests, to test H1: Panels are stationary and H0: Panels contain unit roots. A value below 0.05 significance level indicated rejection of H0, hence stationarity is present. presents the results of the LLC, IPS, and ADF tests for GRI, BOD, AC, D&T, RC, SR, and CGMI, which consist of t-statistics above ±1.69 and p-values below 0.05, indicating that the acceptance of H1, i-e panels is stationary.
 

## 4.2.3. VIF multicollinearity test
Variance Inflation Factor (VIF) statistics were applied to estimate multicollinearity. The standard significance range for VIF was less than 5, stated by Wooldridge [ ]. The study found that the mean VIF for predictor variables was 1.78, hence the multicollinearity issue was satisfied.

## 4.3. Panel regression analysis

## 4.3.1. Fixed effect, random effect estimation
This study applied FE and RE statistics to determine the causality of CGMI on GRI Sustainability Performance. The RE statistics tested the H0, that there was ‘no interrelationship between the explanatory variables and the error term,’ and FE statistics evaluated the H1, that ‘an interrelationship existed between the explanatory variables and the error term,’ by Yngman et al. [ ]. The Hausman test estimates the null hypothesis H0, that the difference between the fixed effects and the random effects estimators is not systematic. The p-values below 0.05 rejecting H0 and indicating that the FE is more valid and has values greater than 0.05 fail to reject H0, and indicate the validity of the RE model.
 shows the results of the FE estimation model for Pakistan ‘s textile industry. shows the results of the RE estimation model, and Table 8 shows the results of the GMM estimation model. FE, RE, and GMM statistics obtained a significant p-value of 0.000, i.e., less than 0.05, and the t-statistics above ±1.69, indicate acceptance of Hypothesis H1: that CGMI positively influences the GRI Sustainability Performance of the textile sector in Pakistan. GMM shows the strong significant effect of L.GRI on GRI. Both Fs and Fage demonstrated a statistically significant favorable controlled effect on GRI Sustainability, with p-values <0.05. The confidence intervals do not include a zero value; standard error shows values closer to 0 and a positive beta coefficient indicates a significant positive relationship. The p-value for the Hausman model specification test is 0.05, supporting the validity of the fixed effect. F-statistics are 17.3 showing acceptable model fitness and the R-squared value presents an explained variance of 35%. Wald chi2 at 196.3 shows acceptable model fitness with CGMI significantly contributing to explain the variation in the GRI Sustainability.
 

## 4.3.2. Endogeneity test
Endogeneity exists due to the correlation between a predictor variable and the error term, possibly due to measurement error, omitted variables, sample selection bias or simultaneity [ ]. The issue can be resolved by incorporating instrument variables or lagged variables [ ]. The study tested the H0: the presence of a significant association between the error term and a predictor variable, at p-values above 0.05 and t-statistics less than ±1.69 significance. shows the results of endogeneity tests, i.e., the FE regression estimates between the error term and a predictor variable, reported p-value >0.05, and t-statistics below ±1.69, satisfying the endogeneity issue.
 

## 4.3.3. GMM estimation
Hussain et al. [ ], argued that the GMM is the best solution to the dilemma of endogeneity and unobservable heterogeneity, specifically focusing on the relationship between CG and business performance. The study applied GMM through the Arellano-Bond dynamic panel-data model to estimate the causal effect of CGMI on GRI Sustainability. Lagged GRI (L.GRI) is created as an instrument variable. Iftikhar et al. [ ], documented GMM estimation as the best method to resolve the endogeneity issue through the panel GMM estimation model.
 shows the results of the GMM Estimation model. GMM statistics for lagged GRI and CGMI have a significant p-value of 0.000. i.e., less than 0.05, and t-statistics above ±1.69, indicating acceptance of Hypothesis H1: CGMI positively influences the GRI Sustainability Performance of the textile sector in Pakistan. Both Fs and Fage demonstrated a statistically significant favorable controlled effect on GRI Sustainability, with p-values<0.05. The confidence intervals do not include a zero value, standard error shows values closer to 0 and a positive beta coefficient indicates a significant positive relationship. The p-value for the Hausman model specification test is 0.05, supporting the validity of the fixed effect. Wald chi2 shows acceptable model fitness with CGMI significantly contributing to explain the variation in the GRI Sustainability and the R-squared value presenting an explained variance of 36%. The Arellano-Bond test at second order difference with a p-value above 0.05 significance level shows the need to reject H1: serial autocorrelation is present. Hensen’s J test and Sargan’s test have p-values above 0.05, indicating the validity of the instruments.
 These results are in line with the studies [ , , ], who found a positive influence of CGM on sustainable performance. Javeed and Azeem [ ], argued that an advanced CG system is crucial for a company’s long-term existence. The findings mainly contributed to agency theory by reducing the agency cost and agency conflicts between managers and stakeholders [ , , ]. Significant sustainable performance is supported by the management of resources by skilled BOD, aligned with Gardazi et al. [ ]. The right governance mechanism enhances trust, while collaboration and cooperation between shareholders and managers decrease agency costs and enhance sustainable performance [ , ].

## 5. Discussion and conclusion
This study examined the effect of CGMI on the GRI Sustainability performance of Pakistan’s textile sector. The study implied a comprehensive CGM and created an index based on five sub-indices by applying the equal-weighted index creation method. Corporate sustainability was measured by incorporating GRI 201–1, an economic performance application consisting of DEG, DED, and DER. The study applied FE and RE panel regression models to the data gathered from the yearly statements of textile companies listed on the PSX from 2007 to 2022. The GMM model was applied to check the robustness. The statistics indicated the significant positive influence of CGMI on the sustainability of the GRI in this industry. The finding concluded that the right governance mechanisms consisting of BOD, AC, financial reporting D&T, RC, and SR, significantly improve the Firm’s sustainable performance. The combination of modified theoretical logic from agency theory, stewardship theory, stakeholder theory, resource-based theory, and transaction-cost theory significantly supported the empirical relationship between CGMI and GRI Sustainability.
The positive CGM-GRI sustainable performance relationship aligns with existing studies: Madaleno and Vieira [ ], Benson and Ganda [ ], Bui & Krajcsak [ ]. The impact of positive sustainable performance indicates the contribution of the right governance mechanisms in reducing the agency cost, transaction cost, minimizing the conflict of interests between stakeholders, and building trust, collaboration, and cooperation between shareholders and managers, and effective use of internal and external resources. The findings mainly contributed to agency theory [ , ]. Advanced theories are also supported, namely, stewardship theory [ ], stakeholders’ theory [ , ], and RBV [ ]. The transaction cost perspective is least explored regarding cost minimization with clear transaction rules [ ].
The findings from the study serve to modify the literature with indications that the textile sector in Pakistan is lagging in having the right governance mechanisms, in line with Farooq et al. [ ]. The scores obtained from the indices indicate the need for improvement in governance quality for this industry. RC and SR obtained very low scores on summary statistics, but effective regulatory measures could support their right implementation making a guaranteed contribution to the goal of maximizing shareholder value and better firm performance.
The conclusions drawn from the current study have considerable policy implications, especially focusing on good governance regulations for the corporate sector. Farooq et al. [ ], highlighted that findings from studies of this type will be supportive of researchers, academicians, practitioners, and regulators who faithfully demonstrate the true connection between governance practices and corporate performance. The study upholds the comprehensive realization of the contribution of governance mechanisms for sustaining the economic performance of the textile industry and catalyzes the role of policymakers and regulators in establishing and implementing policies that support the sustainable performance of good governance practices. The current study provides guidance for managers of organizations regarding better decision-making in consideration of stakeholders’ and shareholders’ interests, which are mainly governed by regulations and laws concerning governance mechanisms.
With all the foregoing discussion, the present study still has some limitations, which could be the scope of future studies. First, this study applied equal-weighted index creation for corporate governance mechanisms, whereas future studies could take a value-weighted index creation approach. Second, the study findings specifically contribute to the textile sector only; future scope can be extended to other important sectors, such as oil and gas, pharmaceuticals, and the automotive industry. In addition to contextual limitations, the current study is limited to Pakistan, and there is scope in the future for exploring the surrounding integrated territories: the Asian economies and the SAARC nations. Fourth, the study applied the GRI sustainability economic performance approach, while future studies can expand the scope of social and environmental sustainability standards to determine performance effects. Finally, the study implemented traditional random effect and fixed effect panel regression statistics but future studies could consider the generalized least squares (GLS) Models: GMM, ARDL, and FGLS models.

## Supporting information
S1 Data(XLSX)

The authors are most grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their constructive and helpful comments, which helped considerably to improve the presentation of the paper.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0316388.r001Decision Letter 0
TahirSafdar HusainAcademic Editor© 2025 Safdar Husain Tahir2025Safdar Husain Tahirhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
28 Jun 2024

PONE-D-24-17105Composite Governance Mechanisms and Sustainable Economic Performance of Pakistan Textile IndustryPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Saleem,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Aug 12 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Safdar Husain Tahir, PhD, Postdoc
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf.
2. Please provide a complete Data Availability Statement in the submission form, ensuring you include all necessary access information or a reason for why you are unable to make your data freely accessible. If your research concerns only data provided within your submission, please write "All data are in the manuscript and/or supporting information files" as your Data Availability Statement.
3. Please amend your list of authors on the manuscript to ensure that each author is linked to an affiliation. Authors’ affiliations should reflect the institution where the work was done (if authors moved subsequently, you can also list the new affiliation stating “current affiliation:….” as necessary).
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
Reviewer #3: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: I have evaluated article titled Composite Governance Mechanisms and Sustainable Economic Performance of Pakistan Textile Industry. I observe that this topic is important and interesting. While the topic is interesting, the paper requires revision to meet academic standards and enhance its appeal to a broader readership. Addressing these concerns will likely improve the manuscript’s chances of publication and its impact within the scholarly community, stock markets and other stakeholders.
Key concerns
Add justification for choosing Pakistan as a sample to clear the context.
The contribution section should be updated to reflect the paper's importance and uniqueness compared to existing literature. Including at least three new citations that relate to the work will help position the paper within the current research landscape.
The theoretical discussion in this paper is not enough and needs proper revision and development. While it reports on past studies in the introduction, it does not develop its own theoretical argument to support its main question. Moreover, I observe that this paper does not incorporate the theoretical implications of established corporate sustainable finance/standard finance. While discussing the topic of "Composite Governance Mechanisms and Sustainable Economic Performance of Pakistan Textile Industry," several theoretical frameworks could provide valuable support and context for the study. Kindly revisit and appropriately explain Upper Echelons Theory (UET), Managerial Network Theory (MNT), Resource-Based Theory (RBT) Stakeholder Theory, Institutional Theory, and Principal-Agent Theory. Additionally, discuss the theoretical implications of these theories in the results and discussion sections.
-Does corporate social responsibility mediate the relationship between corporate governance and firm performance? Empirical evidence from BRICS countries JCI 1.89IF(5) 10.6AJG 1SSCI Q1IF 9.8. W Akhter, A Hassan: Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management 31 (1), 566-578
-Impact of boardroom diversity on corporate financial performance: T Bagh, MA Khan, NM Hammad Humanities and Social Sciences Communications (HSSCOM) 10 (222), 13. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-023-01700-3.
Update literature on some recent studies demonstrating role of corporate governance, ESG performance, and sustainable growth on various dimensions of corporate domains.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e26757,
https://doi.org/10.24136/oc.2023.036; https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bir.2024.04.005
In empirical model section, Author should cite the following publications and explain how GGM method is suitable in handling endogeneity issue. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bir.2024.04.005.
I suggest that in the results section, create a heading “Baseline Estimation,” and under this heading, you should provide the interpretation of fixed effects. Authors should report either fixed effects or random effects based on the Hausman probability value. If the probability value is less than 0.05, only report fixed effect outcomes.
Then add heading Endogontiy Concerns and preset the GMM results
To ensure the robustness of the findings, additional robustness checks using alternative models (e.g., Feasible Generalized Least Squares) should be added. I suggest following stata code: xtgls dependent variablesindependent variables and controls variables
Or
xtscc dependent variable independent variables and controls variables i.year, fe
This paper lacks economic connectivity of findings and lacks quality discussion and implications of research, stating who will benefit and how and where it can be used further.
Proof- the paper properly and avoid using AI tools.
Reviewer #2: This manuscript considers the textile industry in Pakistan and attempts to provide an understanding of the relationship between corporate governance mechanisms and sustainable economic performance. Thank you for an interesting read.
Unfortunately, I don't believe this manuscript meets the criteria required for a research article in PLOS One. For instance, there were several cases in which the command of the English language was lacking. For example, on page 15 of 39: "The major responsibility of the AC is designing, overseeing, and implementing financial reporting practices of the company and, hence, ensuring better governance procedures". I fail to see how good financial reporting ensures better governance PROCEDURES. It may help ensure better overall governance, but how are governance PROCEDURES changed or affected by financial reporting? As another example, the in-text citation method is clunky and reduces readability considerably due to poor punctuation. Furthermore, the document is not self-consistent, as "Transparency and Disclosure" was abbreviated T&D and then later abbreviated using D&T. There are spacing issues (e.g., page 22 has "Akbar (2014)highlighted"). The use of "i.e.," was not done properly - it's "i-e" throughout the article. The services of a professional editor may help. Additionally, statistics can never "prove" anything - however, this phrasing was used many times throughout the text.
More worryingly, the connection between the various theories put forward from the literature and the current work was not clearly identified and fleshed out. Connections between paragraphs are lacking. A more substantive literature review, lending context to the current work instead of simply "They did __, They did ___" would be appropriate (e.g., page 19 of 39).
Of the 39 pages submitted, only 4 or so were related to methodology, and this was not well discussed. For example, "The study also eliminated sample components that were non-existent during the entire study period" - what does this mean? Which companies were removed from the original sample, and why? On page 21 of 39, "DER is the difference between the economic value generated and the economic value retained." Earlier, "economic value retained" was DER. So how can DER be the difference between DEG and DER? Further, "The study applied an item-wise disclosure measurement" - what is this and how is it calculated? The CGMI formula on page 22 is a bit odd to me. This creates a different percentage for each company, which may not be really fair. If company A scores 100%, and company B scores 100%, but company A had 25 factors and company B had 10, this formula considers company A and company B the same. They are clearly not. It may be best to weight this in a different way.
Section 3.3 has the empirical model, and this is where to explain how firm age and firm size were calculated. For example, the authors said firm age is the "number of years company experience since inception" (what does this mean? The number of years the company has been operating?) and firm size is "the logarithm of total assets". Why not just put "log(total assets)" in the model directly? And is this actually log_10, or is this ln? The abbreviation GMM is used without definition (I know it's generalized method of moments, but it can also stand for Gaussian mixture model, so please clarify). The last sentence indicates that unit root tests and the Durbin-Watson autocorrelation test were conducted, but the reason for these tests and what they accomplish was not provided. At the top of page 19, what is a "d-statistic"? Also, a null hypothesis cannot be "accepted" - it can only be rejected or not rejected.
Table 3 indicates a significance level (alpha) of 2.223. This is not possible, as the significance level must be a probability (so a value between 0 and 1). Table 4 lists p-values, but no confidence intervals. Please provide appropriate measures of variation.
Based on this and other vague descriptions (e.g., page 26: "The Hausman test determines the validity of models with p-values below 0.05, accepts H_1 and values greater than 0.05 accept H_0" - this is not a description of the test itself, as many statistical tests use 0.05 as a threshold), it's not clear that the authors understand their use of the statistical methods presented in this work.
I could go on, but suffice to say I believe this article requires quite a lot of revision. Perhaps with sufficient editing this may be brought to a venue other than PLOS One.
Reviewer #3: I appreciate the effort displayed by the authors to develop the manuscript. Hopefully, the comments provided will enhance the quality of the manuscripts.
In the abstract section, I will recommend that authors specifically state the model accepted by Hausman and complement it with the dynamic model, not simply state that fixed and random models were applied. Similarly, the abstract should be written in a clear and informative manner. 
The authors have made considerable efforts to develop the manuscript. Similarly, I have seen that the authors have highlighted the importance of the textile industry to the Pakistani economy, but they have not provided insights into the need for investigating the issue addressed. In particular, the motivation and problems that necessitate the investigation of carrying out the study are crucial.
Please check the citation properly.
In 4.3.3, while reporting the results, I think the reporting of your results should be based on which of the fixed and random effect models the Hausman test selected. This is then followed by a discussion of the GMM results.
Can the authors show the VIF results as well?
Please indicate the number of observations in the results tables and the constant values.
Table 3 can be merged with Table 4 or 5.
The composite measure can also be tested separately as an additional analysis in order to identify the impact of each component on sustainable economic performance.
The discussion and conclusion sections are not detailed enough. I suggest the authors should develop this section and align it with the theory that supports the findings.
The authors should also ensure that the writting is done in a professional manner.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes: Badru Bazeet Olayemi
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0316388.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
6 Sep 2024

Response Letter
The Editor, 
PLOS ONE JOURNAL
Manuscript ID # PONE-D-24-17105
Dear Dr. Safdar Husain Tahir,
Thank you for giving us an opportunity to revise our manuscript (PONE-D-24-17105), entitled “The Composite Governance Mechanisms and Sustainable Economic Performance of Pakistan’s Textile Industry” for publication consideration in your journal. We very much appreciate the constructive criticism provided by the reviewers. Now we have made a sustained effort to address each issue raised by all three reviewers and to improved our manuscript accordingly.
Here are the important amendments we have made to the manuscript:
All reviewers comments and our responses
Reviewer 1: Email Comments and our Responses
1. Thank you for the constructive comments. Now we have addressed all the mentioned concerns and improved the manuscript in line with suggestions of the distinguished referees. 
2. Justification for choosing Pakistan, specifically textile sector as a sample is added, please see paragraph 2 on page 4 in red color.
3. The study contributions are revised in line with the objectives of the study, an updated to reflect the paper's importance and uniqueness compared to existing literature. The new relevant citations are added, such as Afes and Anis, 2023); Achim et al. (2023); (Bui and Krajcsak, 2024), please see on page 6.
4. The theoretical discussion in the paper is revised and based upon the reporting of past studies, theoretical argument developed to support the main research question, please see section 2.1 theoretical lens on pages 7, 8, and 9.
Additionally, literature review section is revised and theoretical relevance is added on CGMI-performance relationship, please see pages 12, 13 and 14.
5. The theoretical contributions of the study are reviewed, five theoretical logics are incorporated: agency theory, stewardship theory, stakeholder theory, resource-based theory and transaction cost theory, adopted from (Bui and Krajcsak, 2024). Detail of theoretical lens follow a conceptual description of each theory, supported existing literature, and implications of the theory for study objectives. UET theory added in description, reference cited as (Augier & Teece, 2018); (Phan & Duong, 2021), please see page 9.
Secondly, the discussion and conclusion sections are revised, alignment of the findings with the past studies added. Theoretical implications are modified and restated to support the study findings, references cited as (Galbreath, 2018); (Munir et al. 2019); Madaleno and Vieira (2020); Benson & Ganda (2022); (Farooq et al., 2022); (Bui and Krajcsak, 2024), please see paragraph 2 on page 26 in red color
6. Thank you for your valuable suggestions. We have now reviewed all the recommended articles and incorporated relevant literature from recent studies. The references cited include (Iftikhar et al., 2024), (Kwarteng et al., 2023), and (Irshad et al., 2023). Please refer to page 14 for more details.
7. The mentioned publication added and reference cited as (Iftikhar et al., 2024), Please see page 25.
8. The results and discussion section are revised and a sequence followed by first presentation of Fixed effect estimation, Random effect estimation, Hausman test. Then endogeneity estimations satisfy the use of fixed and random effect model. Finally, GMM estimation model is applied for Robustness check. Instead of baseline estimation heading, a separate heading is added for each panel estimation model, please see page 23-25.
9. Limited past studies reference is available for implementation of FGLS in context of sustainable economic performance. We mentioned the implementation of other generalized least squares (GLS) Models: GMM, ARDL, and FGLS models, as recommendations for future research, please see page 29.
10. The whole conclusion and discussion section revised, followed by reporting of the study findings, alignment with the past studies and implications of the theories on the study findings are added, see on page 26,27, and 28.
Economic connectivity of the study findings is restated in context of minimizing agency cost and transaction cost.
Secondly, no AI content is incorporated writing the manuscript. Additionally, statement of Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies is added, see page 29.
Reviewer 2: Email Comments and our Responses
1. Thank you for the constructive comments. We have addressed all the mentioned concerns and improved the manuscript scope for possible publication in PLOS ONE.
A native English editor has polished the language to enhance clarity and readability.
2. With due respect, the major concern of the study is sustainable performance through better governance procedures, so the financial reporting is a least focused area. 
Perhaps this comment is the result of misinterpretation of our arguments. 
The findings concluded the significant impact of financial reporting disclosure and transparency on the corporate sustainable performance, please see page 27.
3. All the intext citations are corrected by applying APA 7th Edition referencing style.
The whole document is revised and punctuations are corrected by applying Grammarly software.
4. Now the whole document is revised and reviewed, specifically “Transparency and Disclosure".
Spacing issues are corrected, Use of i-e reviewed and amended by applying Grammarly Software.
Additionally, the sentences are reviewed and the phrases are replaced by a professional Editor. Now we are confident that the manuscript is up to the mark for PLOS ONE standard.
5. The theories mentioned in “the theoretical lens” section on pages 7, 8, and 9 are revised.
In addition, we have aligned the current work in the “literature review” section on pages 12, 13, 14 and 15 as well as coherence of concepts and the paragraphs are re-arranged. 
Now we have also discussed the strengths and weaknesses of different authors as well as critical analysis the current literature. 
Theoretical relevance from the existing studies is redescribed in the interpretation of results and discussion, kindly see section 4, pages 19 to 26.
6. Thanks for the valuable comment. Now the methodology section is revised, modified, and incorporated the necessary changes in each sub-heading. 
Kindly note, methodology section focused on four modules: sample selection and data sources, measurement variables, modeling equation for the proposed models, and description of estimation techniques.
The sample selection section is revised and criteria is restated and cited as (Elston, 2021; Saleem & Hashmi 2022), please see on pages 16, 17 and 18.
Please note, 26 companies were eliminated, and the panel consisted of total 98 firms. This is mentioned on page 16.
We have enhanced the methodological section as well as corrected confusing sentences by a professional native editor. 
7. Thank you for your careful review and for pointing out the errors in our manuscript. We have made the necessary corrections as follows:
Correction to DER Definition: We appreciate your observation regarding the inconsistency in the definition of DER. We have corrected this in the manuscript to clarify that DER represents the difference between DEG (Economic Value Generated) and DED (Economic Value Distributed).
Item-Wise Disclosure Measurement: We have revised the description of the item-wise disclosure measurement. As noted, it considers the mean value of all disclosure items, as detailed in Sobhani et al. (2012). Additionally, we have re-examined the references and updated the citations in the manuscript to reflect the most accurate sources: Ahmad et al. (2023) and Saleem & Hashmi (2022). Please refer to page 17 of the revised manuscript for these updates.
8. The mentioned CGMI formula is reviewed and corrected, referenced by (Munisi & Randoy, 2013) on page 17.
Secondly, A ‘Yes’ response shows the presence of element and is coded with 1 and a ‘No’ shows the absence of element and is coded with 0. The aggregate score for each sub-index is obtained averaging the items present divided by total no. of items and then CGMI score was calculated. 
The CGMI score obtained shows the implementation of corporate governance principles by each firm.
9. Section 3.2 “Descriptions of Variables” on page 17 is revised and relevant proxies are added for both firm size and firm age with cited references e.g., (Arora & Bodhanwala 2018; (Do et al., 2021); (Affes & Jarboui, 2023)
Kindly note, the study applied two control variables: firm size and firm age. Many current studies measure firm size by logarithm (ln) of total assets, and firm age by years of operating experience, e.g. (Arora & Bodhanwala 2018; Do et al., 2021; Affes & Jarboui, 2023). Please see on page 18 for more details. 
10. Now, the GMM abbreviation is revised and meaning added in both abstract and empirical relationships in section 2.3. Please see on page 13.
11. Thank you for pointing out the econometric errors in our manuscript. We have made the necessary corrections as follows:
Section 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 Serial Correlation and Panel unit root test are re-examined and interpretation of results are revised, please see on page 21 and 22.
12. Kindly note, the "d-statistic" is the Durbin-Watson statistic value, which measures the level of autocorrelation in the residuals.
Hence, the null hypothesis of no autocorrelation is not rejected. Please see more details on page 21.
Kindly note, Table 3 is corrected with modified description of “d statistic” Kindly see it on page 21. 
13. Thanks for the comment. Please note, the Table 4 shows the results of LLC, IPS and ADF test with P value. All the three tests for stationarity are reviewed, as there will be no confidence intervals.
Table 5, 6, 8 shows estimations for Fixed effect, Random effect and GMM estimations. In addition, we have re-calculated empirical estimation, confidence intervals in all three tables. The interpretations of the tables are also restated, please see on page 23, 24, 25 and 26.
Regarding the appropriate measures of variation, we have added r-square, Wald chi2 for each model. Please see tables 5, 6, 8 for more details.
14. The description of Fixed effect, Random effect and Hausman test are corrected, under section 3.4 “Panel Econometrics” on page 19 and 4.3.1. “Fixed Effect and Random Effect” on page 23 and GMM Model on page 25.
15. Thank you for your detailed feedback. We have carefully addressed all the suggestions you provided and have made substantial revisions to the manuscript. Additionally, a professional native speaker has polished the language to enhance clarity and readability We believe that these improvements have significantly strengthened the paper, making it appropriate for possible publication in PLOS ONE.
Reviewer 3: Email Comments and our Responses
1. Thank you for recognizing our efforts in developing the manuscript. We appreciate your thoughtful comments and have worked diligently to incorporate them, with the aim of further enhancing the quality of the paper.
2. Thank you for your kind suggestion. In response, we have revised the abstract to explicitly state the model accepted by the Hausman test and have included details about the dynamic model. We have also ensured that the abstract is now written in a clearer and more informative manner. Please see the abstract on page 1. 
3. Thank you for acknowledging our efforts in developing the manuscript. In response to your feedback, we have now provided a clearer justification for focusing on Pakistan's textile sector. We have highlighted the motivation and the specific challenges that make this investigation crucial. Please refer to “Introduction section” paragraph 2 on page 4 for these additions.
4. Thank you for pointing that out. We have thoroughly reviewed and corrected all in-text citations, ensuring they adhere to the APA 7th Edition referencing style.
5. In Section 4.3.1, we have revised the interpretation of results to align with the model selected by the Hausman test, followed by a discussion of the GMM results. We have also updated the reporting of results in Tables 6, 7, and 8, and revised the interpretation accordingly. Please refer to pages 22 to 25, where these changes are highlighted in red.
6. We have performed the VIF test, and the values are all below 5, indicating no issues with multicollinearity. The VIF results are provided on page 22.
7. The number of observations and constant values are corrected and added in the tables, please see table 2 (descriptive statistics) and table 3 serial correlation in section 4 “Results and Discussion” on page 27.
8. Table 4 is the results of Panel Unit root test, and table 7 shows Endogeneity test. Table 3 is the Durbin Watson serial correlation test, and experts recommend separate presentation provides better impact.
9. The GRI variable has been reviewed, and we have referenced a study by Ahmad et al. (2023), which supports the use of averaging the scores of each performance dimension to obtain a more accurate overall performance score. Please refer to page 17 for this discussion.
10. The entire conclusion and discussion sections have been revised. We have included a comprehensive report of the study findings, aligned them with previous research, and discussed the implications of the theories on our results. Please refer to pages 26, 27, and 28 for these updates.
11. A professional native speaker has polished the language to enhance clarity and readability.
12.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Letter to editor CGMI.doc
10.1371/journal.pone.0316388.r003Decision Letter 1
TahirSafdar HusainAcademic Editor© 2025 Safdar Husain Tahir2025Safdar Husain Tahirhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
27 Sep 2024

PONE-D-24-17105R1The Composite Governance Mechanisms and Sustainable Economic Performance of Pakistan's Textile IndustryPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Saleem,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Nov 11 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Safdar Husain Tahir, PhD, Postdoc
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Please provide a response to the reviewers, addressing each comment with corresponding page and paragraph numbers. Ensure that all changes made in the main document are highlighted clearly.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0316388.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
6 Oct 2024

The Editor, 
PLOS ONE JOURNAL
Manuscript ID # PONE-D-24-17105R1
Asima Saleem
National University of Modern Languages, Islamabad
Pakistan
Email: asimas009@mail.com
Dated: 3-10-2024
Dear Dr. Safdar Husain Tahir,
Thank you for giving us an opportunity to revise our manuscript (PONE-D-24-17105R1), entitled “The Composite Governance Mechanisms and Sustainable Economic Performance of Pakistan’s Textile Industry” for publication consideration in your journal. We very much appreciate the constructive criticism provided by the reviewers. Now we have made a sustained effort to address each issue raised by all three reviewers and to improved our manuscript accordingly.
Here are the important amendments we have made to the manuscript:
Journal Requirements
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Response: The following suggestions are incorporated and addressed as:
The reference list has been thoroughly reviewed to ensure that all citations are complete, correct, and up-to-date.
We conducted a search to identify if any of the cited articles have been retracted. None of the references in the manuscript have been found to be retracted. 
For manuscript improvement, some relevant, current references are added to maintain the scientific integrity of the manuscript, cited as (Tahir et al., 2014), (Tahir et al., 2016), (Saleem et al., 2021), (Raza et al., 2023), (Tahir et al., 2024), (Tahir et al., 2019), (Chandani & Ahmed, 2021). Please see (page 3 para 2), (page 6 para 1), (page 8 para 2), (page 10 para 2), (page 14 para 2), highlighted in red.
All the modifications to the reference list, are added in the rebuttal letter, with a detailed explanation of pages and paragraphs for the changes.
Additional Editor Comments:
Please provide a response to the reviewers, addressing each comment with corresponding page and paragraph numbers. Ensure that all changes made in the main document are highlighted clearly.
Response: The editor comments are incorporated and modified in the current reviewer’s response sheet and rebuttal letter as well.
The response to each comment is modified with corresponding page and paragraph numbers. All the changes made in the document are highlighted in red.
Reviewer 1: Email Comments and our Responses
i. I have evaluated article titled Composite Governance Mechanisms and Sustainable Economic Performance of Pakistan Textile Industry. I observe that this topic is important and interesting. While the topic is interesting, the paper requires revision to meet academic standards and enhance its appeal to a broader readership. Addressing these concerns will likely improve the manuscript’s chances of publication and its impact within the scholarly community, stock markets and other stakeholders.
Response: Thank you for the constructive comments. Now we have addressed all the mentioned concerns and improved the manuscript in line with suggestions of the distinguished referees. 
ii. Add justification for choosing Pakistan as a sample to clear the context.
Response: Justification for choosing Pakistan, specifically textile sector as a sample is added, please see paragraph 2 on page 4 in red color.
iii. The contribution section should be updated to reflect the paper's importance and uniqueness compared to existing literature. Including at least three new citations that relate to the work will help position the paper within the current research landscape.
Response: The study contributions are revised in line with the objectives of the study, an updated to reflect the paper's importance and uniqueness compared to existing literature. The new relevant citations are added, such as Afes and Anis, 2023); Achim et al. (2023); (Bui and Krajcsak,2024), please see on page 6 paragraph 3.
iv. The theoretical discussion in this paper is not enough and needs proper revision and development. While it reports on past studies in the introduction, it does not develop its own theoretical argument to support its main question.
Response: The theoretical discussion in the paper is revised and based upon the reporting of past studies, theoretical argument developed to support the main research question, please see section 2.1 theoretical lens on pages 7 (Paragraph 3), page 8 (Paragraph 1 and 2), and page 9 (Paragraph 1 and 2).
Additionally, literature review section is revised and theoretical relevance is added on CGMI-performance relationship, please see page 12 (paragraph 2), page 13 (paragraph 2) and page 14 (paragraph 2), page 15 (paragraph 1).
v. Moreover, I observe that this paper does not incorporate the theoretical implications of established corporate sustainable finance/standard finance. While discussing the topic of "Composite Governance Mechanisms and Sustainable Economic Performance of Pakistan Textile Industry," several theoretical frameworks could provide valuable support and context for the study. Kindly revisit and appropriately explain Upper Echelons Theory (UET), Managerial Network Theory (MNT), Resource-Based Theory (RBT), Stakeholder Theory, Institutional Theory, Principal-Agent Theory
Additionally, discuss the theoretical implications of these theories in the results and discussion sections.
Response: The theoretical contributions of the study are reviewed, five theoretical logics are incorporated: agency theory, stewardship theory, stakeholder theory, resource-based theory and transaction cost theory, adopted from (Bui and Krajcsak, 2024). Detail of theoretical lens follow a conceptual description of each theory, supported existing literature, and implications of the theory for study objectives. UET theory added in description, reference cited as (Augier & Teece, 2018); (Phan & Duong, 2021), please see page 9 (paragraph 2).
Secondly, the discussion and conclusion sections are revised, alignment of the findings with the past studies added. Theoretical implications are modified and restated to support the study findings, references cited as (Galbreath, 2018); (Munir et al. 2019); Madaleno and Vieira (2020); Benson & Ganda (2022); (Farooq et al., 2022); (Bui and Krajcsak, 2024), please see paragraph 1 on page 27 in red color
vi. Does corporate social responsibility mediate the relationship between corporate governance and firm performance? Empirical evidence from BRICS countries JCI 1.89IF(5) 10.6AJG 1SSCI Q1IF 9.8. W
Akhter, A Hassan: Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management 31 (1), 566-578
-Impact of boardroom diversity on corporate financial performance: T Bagh, MA Khan, NM Hammad Humanities and Social Sciences Communications (HSSCOM) 10 (222), 13. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-023-01700-3.Update literature on some recent studies demonstrating role of corporate governance, ESG performance, and sustainable growth on various dimensions of corporate domains.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e26757

https://doi.org/10.24136/oc.2023.036

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bir.2024.04.005

Response: Thank you for your valuable suggestions. We have now reviewed all the recommended articles and incorporated relevant literature from recent studies. The references cited include (Iftikhar et al., 2024), (Kwarteng et al., 2023), and (Irshad et al., 2023). Please refer to page 15 (paragraph 1) for more details.
vii. In empirical model section, Author should cite the following publications and explain how GGM method is suitable in handling endogeneity issue. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bir.2024.04.005.
Response: The mentioned publication added and reference cited as (Iftikhar et al., 2024), Please see page 26 Paragraph 1.
viii. I suggest that in the results section, create a heading “Baseline Estimation,” and under this heading, you should provide the interpretation of fixed effects. Authors should report either fixed effects or random effects based on the Hausman probability value. If the probability value is less than 0.05, only report fixed effect outcomes.
Then add heading Endogeneity Concerns and preset the GMM results
Response: The results and discussion section are revised and a sequence followed by first presentation of Fixed effect estimation, Random effect estimation, Hausman test. Then endogeneity estimations satisfy the use of fixed and random effect model. Finally, GMM estimation model is applied for Robustness check. Instead of baseline estimation heading, a separate heading is added for each panel estimation model, please see page 23-25 (paragraph 1 and 2).
ix. To ensure the robustness of the findings, additional robustness checks using alternative models (e.g., Feasible Generalized Least Squares) should be added. I suggest following stata code: xtgls dependent variables independent variables and controls variables Or xtscc dependent variable independent variables and controls variables i.year, fe
Response: Limited past studies reference is available for implementation of FGLS in context of sustainable economic performance. We mentioned the implementation of other generalized least squares (GLS) Models: GMM, ARDL, and FGLS models, as recommendations for future research, please see page 29 paragraph 2.
x. This paper lacks economic connectivity of findings and lacks quality discussion and implications of research, stating who will benefit and how and where it can be used further.
Proof- the paper properly and avoid using AI tools.
Response: The whole conclusion and discussion section revised, followed by reporting of the study findings, alignment with the past studies and implications of the theories on the study findings are added, see on page 27, and 28 (paragraph 2).
Economic connectivity of the study findings is restated in context of minimizing agency cost and transaction cost.
Secondly, no AI content is incorporated writing the manuscript. Additionally, statement of Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies is added, see page 30.
Reviewer 2: Email Comments and our Responses
xi. This manuscript considers the textile industry in Pakistan and attempts to provide an understanding of the relationship between corporate governance mechanisms and sustainable economic performance. Thank you for an interesting read.
Response: Thank you for the constructive comments. We have addressed all the mentioned concerns and improved the manuscript scope for possible publication in PLOS ONE.
xii. Unfortunately, I don't believe this manuscript meets the criteria required for a research article in PLOS One. For instance, there were several cases in which the command of the English language was lacking. For example, on page 15 of 39: "The major responsibility of the AC is designing, overseeing, and implementing financial reporting practices of the company and, hence, ensuring better governance procedures".
Response: Grammarly software original version is applied for all grammatical, punctuation, readability, consistency, and sentence structuring errors. 
Additionally, an English literature scholar from National University of Modern Languages has edited the language, proofreading and necessary English language editing.
xiii. I fail to see how good financial reporting ensures better governance PROCEDURES. It may help ensure better overall governance, but how are governance PROCEDURES changed or affected by financial reporting?
Response: With due respect, the major concern of the study is sustainable performance through better governance procedures, so the financial reporting is a least focused area. 
Perhaps this comment is the result of misinterpretation of our arguments. 
The findings concluded the significant impact of financial reporting disclosure and transparency on the corporate sustainable performance, please see page 28 (paragraph 1).
xiv. As another example, the in-text citation method is clunky and reduces readability considerably due to poor punctuation.
Response: All the intext citations are corrected by applying APA 7th Edition referencing style.
The whole document is revised and punctuations are corrected by applying Grammarly software.
xv. Furthermore, the document is not self-consistent, as "Transparency and Disclosure" was abbreviated T&D and then later abbreviated using D&T. There are spacing issues (e.g., page 22 has "Akbar (2014)highlighted"). The use of "i.e.," was not done properly - it's "i-e" throughout the article. The services of a professional editor may help. Additionally, statistics can never "prove" anything - however, this phrasing was used many times throughout the text.
Response: Now the whole document is revised and reviewed, specifically “Transparency and Disclosure".
Spacing issues are corrected, Use of i-e reviewed and amended by applying Grammarly Software.
Additionally, the sentences are reviewed and the phrases are replaced by a professional Editor. Now we are confident that the manuscript is up to the mark for PLOS ONE standard.
xvi. More worryingly, the connection between the various theories put forward from the literature and the current work was not clearly identified and fleshed out. Connections between paragraphs are lacking. A more substantive literature review, lending context to the current work instead of simply "They did __, They did ___" would be appropriate (e.g., page 19 of 39).
Response: The theories mentioned in “the theoretical lens” section are revised, please see on page 7 (paragraph 3), page 8 (paragraph 1 and 2), and page 9 (paragraph 1 and 2) 
In addition, we have aligned the current work in the “literature review” section on pages 12, 13, 14 and 15 as well as coherence of concepts and the paragraphs are re-arranged. 
Now we have also discussed the strengths and weaknesses of different authors as well as critical analysis the current literature. 
Theoretical relevance from the existing studies is redescribed in the interpretation of results and discussion, kindly see section 4, pages 22 (paragraph 1), page 23 (paragraph 1 and 2), page 24 (paragraph 1), page 24 (paragraph 1), page 26 (paragraph 1 and 2), page 27 (paragraph 1).
xvii. Of the 39 pages submitted, only 4 or so were related to methodology, and this was not well discussed. For example, "The study also eliminated sample components that were non-existent during the entire study period" – what does this mean? Which companies were removed from the original sample, and why? 
Response: Thanks for the valuable comment. Now the methodology section is revised, modified, and incorporated the necessary changes in each sub-heading. 
Kindly note, methodology section focused on four modules: sample selection and data sources, measurement variables, modeling equation for the proposed models, and description of estimation techniques.
The sample selection section is revised and criteria is restated and cited as (Elston, 2021; Saleem & Hashmi 2022), please see on page 16 (paragraph 2 and 3), page 17 (paragraph 1) and page 18 (paragraph 1).
Please note, 26 companies were eliminated, and the panel consisted of total 98 firms. This is mentioned on page 16 (paragraph 3), page 17 (paragraph 1).
We have enhanced the methodological section as well as corrected confusing sentences by a professional native editor. 
xviii. On page 21 of 39, "DER is the difference between the economic value generated and the economic value retained." Earlier, "economic value retained" was DER. So how can DER be the difference between DEG and DER? Further, "The study applied an item-wise disclosure measurement"
Response: Thank you for your careful review and for pointing out the errors in our manuscript. We have made the necessary corrections as follows:
Correction to DER Definition: We appreciate your observation regarding the inconsistency in the definition of DER. We have corrected this in the manuscript to clarify that DER represents the 
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Responses to reviewers comments (6-10-2024).docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0316388.r005Decision Letter 2
AnwarImranAcademic Editor© 2025 Imran Anwar2025Imran Anwarhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
11 Dec 2024

The Composite Governance Mechanisms and Sustainable Economic Performance of Pakistan's Textile Industry
PONE-D-24-17105R2
Dear Dr. Asima Saleem,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Imran Anwar
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
10.1371/journal.pone.0316388.r006Acceptance letter
AnwarImranAcademic Editor© 2025 Imran Anwar2025Imran Anwarhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
15 Jan 2025

PONE-D-24-17105R2 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Saleem, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Imran Anwar 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE