pmcPLoS Negl Trop DisPLoS Negl Trop Dis532plosntd101291488plosPLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases1935-27271935-2735PLOSPMC12517478PMC12517478.112517478125174784078896510.1371/journal.pntd.0013350PNTD-D-25-001461Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsDogsBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsVertebratesAmniotesMammalsDogsMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsTropical DiseasesNeglected Tropical DiseasesRabiesMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesRabiesMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesZoonosesRabiesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationSocial SciencesSociologyEducationWorkshopsBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsPets and Companion AnimalsBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsPets and Companion AnimalsBiology and Life SciencesAgricultureAnimal ManagementLivestockBiology and Life SciencesVeterinary ScienceVeterinary DiseasesBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineVaccination and ImmunizationVaccine DevelopmentRabies control via co-creation: A model for sustainable one health interventions
Rabies control via co-creationhttps://orcid.org/0009-0001-7828-6534BorNicholasConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing NjengaGeoffreyInvestigationSoftwareVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing SlaterAnnabelVisualizationWriting – review & editing MunywokiPeterkinData curationInvestigationWriting – review & editing ChepyatichDorcasInvestigationWriting – review & editing OwinoDavidMethodologyWriting – review & editing MurungiMaurice K.Writing – review & editing MuloiDishon M.Writing – review & editing ThomasLian F.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
International Livestock Research Institute, Nairobi, Kenya2
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, Midlothian, United Kingdom3
Vétérinaires Sans Frontières Germany, Nairobi, Kenya4
Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Leahurst Campus, Neston, United KingdomBowenRichard A.Editor ]. Domestic dogs are responsible for 99% of human rabies cases where transmission occurs through bites and scratches from rabid dogs [ ]. Globally, rabies causes 59,000 human deaths annually [ ] with approximately 41% of these deaths occurring in Africa [ ]. While rabies has been eliminated in most high-income countries, it persists in low and middle-income countries, leading the World Health Organization (WHO) to classify it as a neglected tropical disease [ ]. A 2005–2018 review of rabies incidents and mortalities in 28 African countries showed that Kenya reported the highest number of canine rabies cases to the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) database [ ].
Rabies is one of the top five priority zoonotic diseases in Kenya with human and animal health professionals advocating for increased resource allocation towards its elimination [ ]. In response, the government through the Zoonotic Disease Unit (ZDU), which is mandated to coordinate and implement the One Health approach to managing zoonotic diseases, developed the National Rabies Elimination Strategy (2014–2030). The strategy aims to eliminate dog-mediated rabies by 2030, with Machakos County selected as one of the pilot counties due to its high rabies burden [ ].
Rabies control strategies focus on vaccinating 70% of at-risk dog populations and timely administration of post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) to dog bite and scratch victims [ ]. Despite these seemingly straightforward control strategies, barriers to rabies elimination exist in different settings. These barriers include resource constraints, limited collaboration, and low rabies awareness among communities [ , ]. Sensitization, an act of raising awareness on a particular subject, has been shown to increase rabies vaccine uptake and encourage participation as evidenced in different communities in Burkina Faso and Tanzania [ , ].
The One Health High Level Expert Panel, an advisory group to the quadripartite organizations, supports community participation as a fundamental aspect of global health policies and disease control strategies. It emphasizes inclusivity, equity, and accessibility [ ].
Co-creation is an example of community participation method where community members, researchers, and policymakers unite to address public health challenges by leveraging the community’s insights and scientific expertise in designing and delivering health interventions [ ]. By co-creating health solutions with communities, involved stakeholders build trust and foster knowledge sharing for better health outcomes [ ]. Researchers and policy makers acknowledge the community’s perspectives and stimulate productive engagements, thus making communities active producers and disseminators of campaign messages [ ].
As a step towards supporting community engagement with rabies control, this study sought to understand the value of dogs to the owners and co-create rabies sensitization materials that incorporate these values.

## Methods

## Ethical approval and participants’ consent
ILRI’s Institutional Research Ethics Committee (ILRI-IREC 2023-09) and the National Commission for Science, Technology, and Innovation (NACOSTI/P/23/25371) approved this study. Written consents were obtained from all study participants while community members who co-created sensitization materials have been acknowledged. This study also received approval from the University of Liverpool Research Ethics Committee reference number 12560.
This study involved collecting data on the value of dogs as described by the community, gathering ideas on ideal rabies sensitization materials, and obtaining feedback on the draft materials and research experiences.

## Study site
In October 2021, the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), Vétérinaires Sans Frontières Germany (VSF-Germany), and the Machakos County Government initiated a free rabies vaccination campaign in Machakos County. The study was conducted in Mwala sub-county where we capitalized on participant recruitment during the ongoing rabies vaccination campaign. Mwala sub-county has a human population of 181,896 [ ]. This semi-arid region primarily relies on rain-fed agriculture and small-scale livestock keeping. The residents cultivate maize, beans, fruits, vegetables, sorghum, and millet. Commonly reared livestock species include goats, sheep, dairy and beef cattle [ ].

## Key informant interviews
Community members who presented their dogs for the vaccination campaign were conveniently recruited to the study. Informed consent was obtained from each participant, and a semi-structured interview lasting approximately five minutes was conducted. These interviews aimed to identify the value of dogs to the community with the goal of co-creating relevant sensitization materials that align with these values. The interviews were held on 22 – 24 June 2023. Two enumerators were responsible for conducting an average of 34 interviews daily.
The interview guide for the KIIs was developed in English. However, interviews were conducted in the language most comfortable for each respondent: either English, Kiswahili, or Kikamba. Two enumerators (NB and PM) translated the guide into the respondent’s preferred language. Enumerator NB was fluent in English and Kiswahili, while PM was fluent in all the three languages. Respondents who preferred to be interviewed in Kikamba were assigned to PM.
The subsequent research activities – FGD and co-creation workshops— were conducted in English and Kiswahili as the randomly selected participants reported being comfortable with both languages. These sessions were similarly guided by tools developed in English, with real-time translation by the facilitators into the language preferred by participants. This approach ensured participants could express their views with clarity.

## Data transcription and analysis
The interview audio responses were recorded and later transcribed verbatim in Microsoft Word. All the transcripts from the KIIs were reviewed to identified the value of dogs to the owners and the wider community. Reading and reviewing the transcripts allowed us to inductively identify and summarize the value of dogs [ ].

## Focus group discussion (FGD)
All key informants were assigned unique numbers. Twenty-four key informants were randomly selected using a random number generator [ ]. The selected community members were invited for two gender-segregated FGDs. We presented the summarized roles and values of the dogs to FGD attendees. Each value was displayed on a sticky note and explained to them. Pairwise ranking [ ] was conducted collectively with the participants and the dog values were ranked from the most important to the least important. Different pairs of dog values were compared against each other from the summarized dog values. The participants would choose the ‘more important’ dog value against each pair. For example, security was compared against societal norm and if security was perceived to be more important than societal norm, the assigned letter for security would be recorded on that cell. The assigned value that ‘won’ against each pair was counted across that row to come up with a score. The scores were used to ranking the value of dogs as shown in and .
 At the end of the FGD, the same attendees were shown a rabies educational video produced by the ILRI team [ ].

## Co-creation workshops
All FGD participants were invited to participate in two co-creation workshops. In the first workshop, they worked in groups to co-create rabies sensitization materials. Products from this session were used by the research team to develop prototypes of the sensitization materials that were then presented to the participants in the second co-creation workshop.
The aim of the second co-creation workshop was to identify the most relevant prototype of the vaccination announcement poster and educational poster. This workshop gave the participants an opportunity to select the best images to include in the materials, the colours to use and the reasons for their choices. This provided the research team with a clear understanding of their reasoning, which guided the production of the final output of the materials.
In both workshops, informed consent was obtained to photograph and acknowledge them as co-creators in the publication.

## 1st co-creation workshop: development of draft sensitization material by research participants
In the first co-creation workshop, the research team introduced the rabies topic and recapped the values of dogs as captured in the KIIs. This workshop was organized into ideation and storyboarding sessions. The ideation session harnessed the collective creativity of the participants to generate ideas, while the storyboarding session transformed the generated ideas into visual storyboards [ ]. Each participant was given coloured sticky notes to write the exact words they wished to see on a rabies vaccination campaign poster ( ). Participants were encouraged to withhold criticism while peers shared their ideas.
 In the storyboarding session, participants translated their ideas into visual storyboards. Each group sketched their storyboards while focusing on the value of dogs in the community, their motivation for vaccinating them, and the feelings post vaccination. The completed storyboards were pinned on the walls for peer reviewing.

## Development of prototype sensitization materials by the research team
The first co-creation workshop revealed the need for two separate products: a rabies vaccination announcement poster and an educational poster. The research team transformed the co-created storyboards into two product prototypes. The rabies vaccination announcement poster was suggested for use during campaigns. The rabies educational poster would create awareness on rabies and the importance of vaccinating dogs against rabies.

## 2nd co-creation workshop: selection of images to incorporate into the sensitization materials
A strategic decision in our design process was to initially omit images from the prototype of the sensitization materials. This offered the participants an opportunity to select images that were relevant to their context.
The research team identified images that closely represent their context and the dog values. These images included photos taken during the vaccination campaigns while some were generated using via DALL.E 2 software - a text-to-image artificial intelligence image generator [ ]. We used specific community context prompts and reference images to guide AI in generating the desired images. An example prompt was “Generate an image that depicts the bond between individuals and their dogs, emphasizing companionship. The image should be contextualised to Kenya, Machakos County. The person should wear a yellow T-shirt”.

## Participants’ perceptions of the research experience and co-creation processes
Finally, an exit survey was conducted to capture participants’ experiences throughout the research and co-creation processes. They shared key learnings and provided suggestions for future interventions.

## Results

## Study participants
A total of 102 key informants, 68 males and 34 females, were initially recruited into the study. From these, twenty-four participants, 12 males and 12 females, were selected to participate in a focus group discussion and two co-creation workshops.

## Value of dogs to the community members
Interactions with community members revealed that dogs’ roles also held significant value to them. In this paper, we use dogs’ roles and values interchangeably. The roles were both tangible and intangible. Examples of tangible roles include providing security while intangible roles include providing friendship and companionship.
Most participants reported keeping dogs primarily for security purposes. Dogs protected their households, livestock, and crops. One informant explained, “A dog is both a pet and a source of security. It alerts you at night if there is any danger. When it barks, you go out and check. During the day, you can get an emergency travel, and your dog will guard against thieves or invaders. If invaders see that your dog is aggressive, they won’t enter your compound. I would be uneasy without a dog since I cannot leave my homestead unattended.” [Male Respondent]
Dogs protected their livestock and crops from wild predators such as mongoose, squirrels, and predatory birds like hawks and eagles. “There was a time when I didn’t have a dog, and mongoose would eat my chicken while I was asleep since there was no alert.” [Female Respondent]
Other reasons for keeping dogs included hunting and herding, although these practices have diminished as the community has shifted to smallholder agriculture. “It is
mostly about taking care of the homestead now, and less about hunting or chasing away wild animals like cheetahs,” [Female Respondent]. A few participants reported breeding dogs to sell puppies, while others gave them away to friends and neighbours for free.
When asked about the possibility of living without a dog, their response shifted from tangible to intangible roles such as friendship, companionship, societal norms, and status symbols. One participant remarked, “This dog is like one of my kids. I love it. It has its own house and plate. It welcomes me when I get home,” while another shared, “It feels good to have a dog at home. It is not right to stay without a dog because others have them. We view dogs as flowers in a home.” [Female Respondent]
We summarised the roles and values of dogs reported by community members as the following: security, societal norms, status symbols, herding, hunting, pet/friend, livestock and crop protection, breeding to sell puppies or give away to friends and other community members. These roles and values were further explored and ranked in the FGD.

## Pairwise ranking scores on the value of dogs from the FGD
Two separate FGDs were held, one for female participants and another for male participants, each lasting approximately 2 hours. and show the pairwise ranking scores for female and male FGD participants respectively. Female participants stressed the importance of a dog being a friend before it can be useful in any capacity. “A dog that is not your friend cannot serve you,” remarked one female participant. This is reflected in the equal ranking of security (home and livestock) roles and the companionship/friendship role by the female group.
Although the idea of a dog as a pet and friend ranked below their value for security (of the home, livestock, and crops in that order) among the men; they reiterated that security benefits depend on the foundational relationship of friendship with the dog. “A dog that is not your friend cannot protect you, your livestock, nor your crops,” a male participant remarked.

## 1st co-creation workshop
Two co-creation workshops were held with 24 community members. In the first workshop, participants emphasized the need for clear, visually engaging sensitization materials, preferring familiar bright colours like yellow. The rabies announcement poster should include the vaccination campaign’s dates, time, and venue. Visuals showing veterinarians vaccinating dogs their owners restrain them will help build trust and depict an active vaccination process.
An educational poster should raise awareness of rabies symptoms, modes of transmission, prevention strategies, and actions to take in the event of a dog bite or scratch. “We would like to see materials that are clear and self-explanatory,” one participant shared.
The storyboarding process revealed community insights on the value of their dogs and how sensitization materials can be designed in a contextual manner. Participants illustrated their views on the roles of dogs in their lives, emphasizing security, companionship, and societal status. These storyboards captured the tangible benefits of dog ownership and highlighted the emotional and social bonds between the community members and their dogs ( ).
 They shared that sensitization materials should be educational, culturally relevant and emotionally captivating to illustrate the human-dog bond.
“Sketching and discussing our experiences has helped me understand that everyone value their dog differently. This is good because it brings us together and shows us new ways of protecting our community from rabies.” [Male FGD Participant].

## 2nd co-creation workshop
In the second co-creation workshop, participants reviewed three rabies vaccination announcement posters and one education poster. They emphasized visual clarity, cultural relevance, and simple design. They also stressed the use of bright colours, clear messages, and local languages like Kikamba and Kiswahili to reach a wider audience. “The bright colours speak to us. It’s part of who we are as a Kamba community. Seeing these vibrant colours on the posters makes the message stand out. It draws attention and makes one desire to read and learn more about protecting our dogs and community from rabies,” [Female Respondent].
The figures below present synthesized participants’ feedback on the draft posters and images that guided the final design modifications.
 was voted as the best announcement poster and was taken forward for final production. It had a clear layout and used bright colours that attracted attention. The font size was also legible, and the poster contained essential details such as the date, venue, and vaccination campaign costs.
 Participants evaluated various images presented to them for their suitability based on dog values. Synthesized comments for each image are presented in – . Within , images A and B were AI-generated while images C – F were captured during the vaccination campaigns.
 There was a consensus to use images C and F found in in the rabies vaccination announcement poster. Picture C was selected because the vaccinator had personal protective equipment and demonstrated proper dog-handling techniques. Picture F illustrated a dog owner actively bringing their dogs to the vaccination site. It also highlighted gender equality and community involvement in rabies control programs.
“The images in the sensitization materials should demonstrate proper practices. We would like to see that,” [Male Respondent].
“Seeing a true representation of our involvement in dog care by highlighting both men and women as active participants, reinforces the message of shared community responsibility,” [Female Respondent].
The educational poster was praised for its organized layout, use of bright colours, and clear messaging. Suggestions included replacing the image of a tap with a water jug to reflect the local realities in rural settings. They also recommended changing the image of a doctor in a scrub suit to one in a white laboratory coat as they are accustomed to that. Additionally, participants suggested increasing the font size, and including an image of a dog owner restraining the dog while a veterinarian is vaccinating it ( ).
 

## Final co-created sensitization materials
The final sensitization materials incorporated participants’ suggestions, the selected images, simple designs, and clear messages. Recommendations for bright colours and larger fonts were adopted for better visibility and legibility. Although posters with local language was encouraged, the final products were in English and will be translated at a later date ( and ).
 

## Participants’ perceptions of the participatory process, key learnings, and future wishes
Twenty-three out of 24 participants engaged in exit interviews, indicating a positive reception of the process. Participants primarily viewed the co-creation process as a form of training due to its emphasis on vaccinating dogs against rabies. They indicated that, through the process, they had learned what to do in the event of a dog bite.
“I have learned about the importance of vaccinating dogs against rabies and taking bite victims to the hospital after a dog bite,” [Respondent 12, Female].
“I have learned that when bitten by a dog, one should wash the bite wound with soap and water before seeing the doctor. You should not apply onions on the bite wound as we have been doing. I have also learned that vaccinating your dog against rabies is important.” [Respondent 6, Male].
Research participants mentioned that local animal health authorities should sensitize the community on rabies for better turn out in vaccination campaigns.
“Continue sharing information about rabies with the community. Use media and distribute posters in schools, community meetings, and relevant gatherings.” [Respondent 8, Female]
Regarding the co-creation process, participants felt their opinions were respected and considered by their peers.
“I felt respected, listened to, and my opinions valued,” [Respondent 1, Male].
“Drawing our dogs and seeing them on paper makes it real and important to keep them healthy and vaccinated,” [Female Participant].

## Discussion
This study explores the process, benefits and potential of incorporating community insights into the co-creation of rabies sensitization materials. As previously indicated, the co-created materials incorporated images and messages that emphasized the value of dogs. Human and animal health practitioners often advocate for the use of the One health approach in controlling rabies [ ]. While this is a good starting point, engaging the community and raising awareness before conducting public health interventions may foster trust and drive behaviour change [ ] which is critical for sustainability. Sustained control efforts are essential for diseases like rabies in order to adequately control or eliminate the disease in a population [ ]. Involving the community in the planning, implementing, and monitoring stages of vaccination activities has been shown to be feasible with promising outcomes for mass dog vaccination [ ].
Key barriers to achieving vaccination goals include low awareness of rabies and inadequate knowledge about vaccination campaigns, as observed during a rabies outbreak in Peru [ ]. Similarly, the lack of rabies educational programs was a hindrance to achieving 70% vaccination coverage in Laikipia County in Kenya. In these campaigns, they achieved a vaccination coverage of between 2 – 24% over the 3-year period [ ] which is below the recommended 70% threshold.
The co-creation process allowed dog owners to reflect on the value of their dogs and recognized the importance of vaccinating them whom they described as their ‘friends.’ Another key finding was the desire for simple and clear messaging in the sensitization materials. This aligns with findings from another study which recommended that health messages should be memorable and actionable to the target audience [ ]. There was the desire to disseminate key messages to other community members. We hope the co-creation process established a cohort of community champions equipped with accurate information on rabies control. These findings resonate with studies in Tanzania, Kenya, and Burkina Faso that established that rabies sensitization increased the likelihood of rabies vaccine uptake [ , , ]. The effective communication of key messages and planning for vaccination should involve the community and reflect local realities [ ]. Improving the dog’s owners knowledge of rabies has been established to increase the intention of vaccinating their dogs [ ] hence the relevance of these sensitization materials. These materials also incorporated visual aids (images) which have been found to be missing in rabies leaflets [ ].
Participatory research has been shown to improve study outcomes, data accessibility, and public transparency in environmental health [ ]. Our findings support the use of participatory and non-fear-driven approaches which may lead to successful health outcomes. It is worth noting that community engagement -which is perceived as a bottom-up approach - tends to be more expensive but more sustainable than a top-down approach [ , ]. Sanitation interventions with minimal community involvement during the planning and implementation stages were unsuccessful in India. This failure is attributed to a lack of local ownership, contextual relevance, and sustained behavior change. Excluding communities from decision-making processes often results in interventions that are misaligned with local cultural practices, and user preferences, thereby leading to poor adoption, limited use, and inadequate maintenance of sanitation infrastructure. [ ]. Cost-effective analysis is important, especially in resource-limited settings as it is cheaper to vaccinate dogs against rabies than purchase post exposure prophylaxis for victims.
Our work builds on the recommendations by Murungi et al [ ] that future rabies vaccination campaigns be accompanied with increased community engagement.
The key limitation of our study is that research participants were selected from community members who presented their dogs at vaccination sites. They are therefore more likely to reflect the perceptions of those community members already interested and engaged in caring for their dogs and controlling rabies. The other limitation is that the interview guide was drafted in English and then back-translated to Kiswahili and Kikamba. However, trained multilingual enumerators ensured conceptual consistency so any slight wording differences are unlikely to have introduced meaningful subjective bias. Future research should evaluate the impact of incorporating community sensitization on rabies control by comparing vaccination uptake and coverage in areas where sensitization is conducted versus the sites where sensitization is not conducted.

## Conclusion
This study demonstrated that dogs in Machakos County hold both tangible and intangible value for their owners—providing security for homes, livestock, and crops, as well as companionship and friendship, which was seen as a prerequisite for meaningful service. By engaging communities through key informant interviews, focus group discussions, and co-creation workshops, we uncovered how these values may positively shape rabies control practices. The participatory co-creation process not only raised rabies awareness but also encouraged reflection on the role of dogs and motivated owners to vaccinate them.
These findings highlight that integrating community insights into health interventions can improve uptake by aligning communication with local values and lived experiences. We recommend that rabies control programs move beyond top-down messaging and instead co-create educational and promotional materials with communities to foster trust, increase awareness, and enhance participation. This approach is essential for achieving sustainable vaccination coverage and should be adopted for other One Health initiatives targeting diseases of public health importance.

We thank officials from the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Security, and Cooperative Development, Machakos County for their support in planning this study. We acknowledge Madeline Wong, Fenja Tramsen, and Kristen Tam for capturing the photos during the co-creation workshops. Special acknowledgment to all the twenty-four participants who co-created the sensitization materials and consented to being named on outputs from this project. They include Ann Kiseli, Ann Ngei, Carolyne Mutie, Catherine Mueni, Daniel Muli, Elizabeth Musyoka, Esther Mutinda, Felix Mwangangi, Henry Makenzi, Joel Kioko, John Wambua, Joseph Mutisya, Josephine Mutua, Nelson Mandela, Nicholas Ndolo, Patrick Kimeu, Patrick Muthiani, Phyllis Kithama, Rebecca Kioko, Rebecca Mumbe, Rhoda Peter, and Ruth Mumba.
 10.1371/journal.pntd.0013350.r001Decision Letter 0
BowenRichard A.Academic EditorBrookesVictoria J.Section Editor© 2025 Bowen, Brookes2025Bowen, Brookeshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
8 May 2025

PNTD-D-25-00146Rabies Control via Co-Creation: A Model for Sustainable One Health InterventionsPLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases  Dear Dr. Bor, Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Please submit your revised manuscript within 30 days Jul 07 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosntds@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pntd/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file. Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript: * A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers '. This file does not need to include responses to any formatting updates and technical items listed in the 'Journal Requirements' section below. * A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes '. * An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript '. If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, competing interests statement, or data availability statement, please make these updates within the submission form at the time of resubmission. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter. We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript. Kind regards, Richard A. Bowen, DVM PhDAcademic EditorPLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases Victoria BrookesSection EditorPLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-4304-636XX
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-1765-0002
Additional Editor Comments: Your manuscript has been reviewed by 3 experts, each of whom applauded your effort and has provided major or minor suggestions for clarification or improvement. Please review these comments, revise your manuiscript as you think best and resubmit.Journal Requirements:
1) Please ensure that the CRediT author contributions listed for every co-author are completed accurately and in full.
At this stage, the following Authors/Authors require contributions: Nicholas Bor, Geoffrey Njenga, Annabel Slater, Peterkin Munywoki, Dorcas Chepyatich, David Owino, Maurice K. Murungi, Dishon Muloi, and Lian F. Thomas. Please ensure that the full contributions of each author are acknowledged in the "Add/Edit/Remove Authors" section of our submission form.
The list of CRediT author contributions may be found here: https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/s/authorship#loc-author-contributions
2) Please provide an Author Summary. This should appear in your manuscript between the Abstract (if applicable) and the Introduction, and should be 150-200 words long. The aim should be to make your findings accessible to a wide audience that includes both scientists and non-scientists. Sample summaries can be found on our website under Submission Guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/s/submission-guidelines#loc-parts-of-a-submission

3) Please upload all main figures as separate Figure files in .tif or .eps format. For more information about how to convert and format your figure files please see our guidelines: 

https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/s/figures

4) Some material included in your submission may be copyrighted. According to PLOSu2019s copyright policy, authors who use figures or other material (e.g., graphics, clipart, maps) from another author or copyright holder must demonstrate or obtain permission to publish this material under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) License used by PLOS journals. Please closely review the details of PLOSu2019s copyright requirements here: PLOS Licenses and Copyright. If you need to request permissions from a copyright holder, you may use PLOS's Copyright Content Permission form.
Please respond directly to this email and provide any known details concerning your material's license terms and permissions required for reuse, even if you have not yet obtained copyright permissions or are unsure of your material's copyright compatibility. Once you have responded and addressed all other outstanding technical requirements, you may resubmit your manuscript within Editorial Manager. 
Potential Copyright Issues:
- Please confirm (a) that you are the photographer of Figures 1, 2, 6, and 8, or (b) provide written permission from the photographer to publish the photo(s) under our CC BY 4.0 license.
- Figures 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8. Please confirm whether you drew the images / clip-art within the figure panels by hand. If you did not draw the images, please provide (a) a link to the source of the images or icons and their license / terms of use; or (b) written permission from the copyright holder to publish the images or icons under our CC BY 4.0 license. Alternatively, you may replace the images with open source alternatives. See these open source resources you may use to replace images / clip-art:
- https://commons.wikimedia.org
- https://openclipart.org/.
- The following Figures contain a logo or branding: Figures 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8. We are not permitted to publish this under our CC-BY 4.0 license, even with permission. We ask that you please remove or replace it.
5) We note that your Data Availability Statement is currently as follows: "N/A". Please confirm at this time whether or not your submission contains all raw data required to replicate the results of your study. Authors must share the “minimal data set” for their submission. PLOS defines the minimal data set to consist of the data required to replicate all study findings reported in the article, as well as related metadata and methods (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-minimal-data-set-definition).
For example, authors should submit the following data: 
- The values behind the means, standard deviations and other measures reported;
- The values used to build graphs;
- The points extracted from images for analysis..
Authors do not need to submit their entire data set if only a portion of the data was used in the reported study.
If your submission does not contain these data, please either upload them as Supporting Information files or deposit them to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories. 
If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent. If data are owned by a third party, please indicate how others may request data access.
6) Please amend your detailed Financial Disclosure statement. This is published with the article. It must therefore be completed in full sentences and contain the exact wording you wish to be published. Please ensure that the funders and grant numbers match between the Financial Disclosure field and the Funding Information tab in your submission form. Note that the funders must be provided in the same order in both places as well.
- State the initials, alongside each funding source, of each author to receive each grant. For example: "This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (####### to AM; ###### to CJ) and the National Science Foundation (###### to AM)."
- State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.".
If you did not receive any funding for this study, please simply state: u201cThe authors received no specific funding for this work.u201d
Reviewers' comments: Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Key Review Criteria Required for Acceptance?

As you describe the new analyses required for acceptance, please consider the following:

Methods:

-Are the objectives of the study clearly articulated with a clear testable hypothesis stated?
-Is the study design appropriate to address the stated objectives?
-Is the population clearly described and appropriate for the hypothesis being tested?
-Is the sample size sufficient to ensure adequate power to address the hypothesis being tested?
-Were correct statistical analysis used to support conclusions?
-Are there concerns about ethical or regulatory requirements being met?
Reviewer #1: Please see attached comments.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes, to all of the above questions. MH
**********

Results

-Does the analysis presented match the analysis plan?
-Are the results clearly and completely presented?
-Are the figures (Tables, Images) of sufficient quality for clarity?
Reviewer #1: See attached comments.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes, to all of the above questions. MH
**********

Conclusions

-Are the conclusions supported by the data presented?
-Are the limitations of analysis clearly described?
-Do the authors discuss how these data can be helpful to advance our understanding of the topic under study?
-Is public health relevance addressed?
Reviewer #1: See attached comments.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes, to all of the above questions. This is a very novel idea for the bottom-up approach to public health. MH
**********

Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications?

Use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity. If the only modifications needed are minor and/or editorial, you may wish to recommend “Minor Revision” or “Accept”.
Reviewer #1: See attached comments.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: N/A
**********

Summary and General Comments

Use this section to provide overall comments, discuss strengths/weaknesses of the study, novelty, significance, general execution and scholarship. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. If requesting major revision, please articulate the new experiments that are needed.
Reviewer #1: This manuscript presents findings from a co-creation strategy aimed at developing communication materials for rabies awareness and mass dog vaccination campaigns (MDVC). The study makes a valuable contribution to the rabies literature by addressing a critical, yet often overlooked, barrier to successful MDVC implementation—namely, communication challenges and insufficient community engagement. By involving community stakeholders in the development of communication tools, the study offers a practical and context-sensitive approach to improving public health interventions. I recommend this manuscript for publication, pending minor revisions that I believe will strengthen the clarity and overall impact of the work.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: To the author, I am not sure who or how this idea was developed, but I really like it and wish I had thought of something similar with my own rabies work. Community work is fulfilling, and I am sure you feel that something good was accomplished here based upon all of the comments the participants provided. Thank you for including those in the manuscript. More effective and believable to read their actual comments. This community buy in and participation is exciting and I hope that others will model the idea. Thank you. I enjoyed reading and reviewing your manuscript.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes:  Melinda Hergert
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.] Figure resubmission: While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step. If there are other versions of figure files still present in your submission file inventory at resubmission, please replace them with the PACE-processed versions. Reproducibility: To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that authors of applicable studies deposit laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
AttachmentSubmitted filename: 2025-04-11_PNTD-D-25-00145_Review.docx
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PNTD-D-25-00146_review.docx
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013350.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
10 Jul 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013350.r003Decision Letter 1
BowenRichard A.Academic EditorBrookesVictoria J.Section Editor© 2025 Bowen, Brookes2025Bowen, Brookeshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
11 Jul 2025

Dear Bor,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Rabies Control via Co-Creation: A Model for Sustainable One Health Interventions' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Best regards,
Richard A. Bowen, DVM PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Victoria Brookes
Section Editor
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-4304-636XX
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
orcid.org/0000-0003-1765-0002
***********************************************************
Thank you for addressing the comments and suggestions from reviewers. I believe this is a valuable addition to the highly important quest to promote vaccination of dogs against rabies to decrease the burden of human rabies. I especially enjoyed all of the posters and other graphics you provided.
p.p1 {margin: 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px 0.0px; line-height: 16.0px; font: 14.0px Arial; color: #323333; -webkit-text-stroke: #323333}span.s1 {font-kerning: none
10.1371/journal.pntd.0013350.r004Acceptance letter
BowenRichard A.Academic EditorBrookesVictoria J.Section Editor© 2025 Bowen, Brookes2025Bowen, Brookeshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Dear Mr Bor,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Rabies Control via Co-Creation: A Model for Sustainable One Health Interventions," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Editorial, Viewpoint, Symposium, Review, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript will be published online unless you opted out of this process. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.
Best regards,
Shaden Kamhawi
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases
Paul Brindley
co-Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases