pmcPLoS MedPLoS Med277plosmed101231360plosPLOS Medicine1549-12771549-1676PLOSPMC10166482PMC10166482.110166482101664823709385210.1371/journal.pmed.1004225PMEDICINE-D-22-036351Research ArticleSocial SciencesSociologyEducationEducational AttainmentMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthMaternal HealthPregnancyMedicine and Health SciencesWomen's HealthObstetrics and GynecologyPregnancySocial SciencesSociologyEducationSchoolsMedicine and Health SciencesPediatricsChild HealthMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthChild HealthMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareSocioeconomic Aspects of HealthMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthSocioeconomic Aspects of HealthBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyEmbryologyPlacentaBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyReproductive SystemPlacentaMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyReproductive SystemPlacentaPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsAge GroupsChildrenPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsFamiliesChildrenPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsAge GroupsChildrenInfantsPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsFamiliesChildrenInfantsAssociation between antenatal diagnosis of late fetal growth restriction and educational outcomes in mid-childhood: A UK prospective cohort study with long-term data linkage study
Fetal growth restriction and mid-childhood educational attainmenthttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3562-0598OlgaLaurentyaData curationFormal analysisWriting – original draft https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0799-1105SovioUllaData curationFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4597-1794WongHilaryData curationFormal analysisWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2124-0997SmithGordonConceptualizationData curationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6510-5626AikenCatherineConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology and NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom2
Department of Paediatrics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United KingdomMyersJenny E.Academic Editor ]. A major long-term concern is the potential for suboptimal intrauterine environments to lead to impaired fetal neurodevelopment, which could explain previously described associations between low birth weight and poorer educational outcomes in childhood [ ]. However, studying the relationship between FGR and long-term outcomes is complicated for several reasons. First, babies that are born small-for-gestational-age (SGA) include both true cases of FGR and those who are healthy but constitutionally small. Hence, analysing associations by observed birth weight alone may fail to identify the true impact of FGR. Identifying true cases of FGR requires combining ultrasonic estimates of fetal size with other antenatal indicators of placental dysfunction [ ]. Second, antenatal diagnosis of suspected FGR leads to enhanced fetal monitoring and intervention, principally, early-term delivery (37 to 38 weeks gestational age). Intervention could improve outcomes by reducing the exposure of the fetus to a hostile intrauterine environment. However, early-term delivery is itself associated with poorer educational outcome [ ]. Hence, it is also possible that poor long-term educational outcome in SGA babies is caused by intervention, as recently proposed in a study of Australian children [ ]. There is currently a critical gap in knowledge about the natural history of antenatally diagnosed FGR and long-term neurodevelopmental outcome. Addressing this gap requires a prospective study with detailed phenotyping of intrauterine growth, where clinical management was not influenced by study data and robust long-term data on educational attainment is available.
The aim of this study was to determine whether antenatally diagnosed FGR predicted poorer educational attainment in childhood by employing data linkage between a large prospective UK birth cohort and a national registry of educational data.

## Methods

## Study design and data sources
The Pregnancy Outcome Prediction Study (POPS) recruited unselected nulliparous women with singleton pregnancies at The Rosie Hospital, Cambridge, England, between January 2008 and July 2012 (n = 4,212). The full cohort design and demographics have previously been described [ – ]. Women were recruited following confirmation of a single viable fetus and dating of the pregnancy based on the crown-rump length measured by ultrasound (<14 weeks of gestation). Three further research visits were conducted at 20, 28, and 36 weeks of gestation where fetal biometry, liquor, and pulsatility indices in the uterine and umbilical arteries were measured using Doppler flow velocimetry. Maternal blood samples were obtained at all research visits. Assays for pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A), alpha fetoprotein (AFP), and soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1:placental growth factor ratio (sFlt1:PlGF) were performed on a Roche Diagnostics Cobas e411 platform, as previously described [ , – ]. Antenatal, delivery, and neonatal outcome data were collected from various sources, including questionnaires, paper records, and electronic medical record systems. The cohort has several features making it ideal to study the relationship between FGR and educational attainment. First, all participants were meticulously phenotyped with respect to markers of FGR. [ , ] Although there is no universally accepted definition of FGR, all the elements included in the current definition have been previously reported in the cohort [ – ], and the rationale for their inclusion is discussed elsewhere [ , ]. Second, all antenatal measurements were made prospectively within defined gestational time frames using standardised investigations, allowing deep phenotyping of fetal growth [ , ]. Third, clinicians were blinded to the results of all research scans and investigations [ ], reducing confounding of the relationship between antenatal factors and educational outcome by clinical interventions.
Educational outcomes were obtained from the National Pupil Database, a national record-level data resource curated by the UK Department for Education (DfE; last follow-up at the end of school year 2019). All fully/partially state-funded schools in England have a mandatory reporting requirement to return individual-level pupil data on an annual basis [ ]. Standardised pupil assessment data were available for the cohort at ages 5, 6, and 7 (see and files for details of assessment). Binary outcomes (below versus at or above standard) were generated for attainment aged 5 and aged 6. At aged 7, children were assessed separately on 4 educational domains (reading, writing, mathematics, and science), each of which was expressed as a binary outcome [ ]. Because participants started school over the course of 5 different school years, analyses were adjusted for year of starting school.
We obtained written informed consent for participation in the POPS cohort and collection of immediate outcome data. In order to obtain long-term outcome data, having confirmed the vital status of the mother and child, we contacted POPS participants in 2018 with information about the proposed linkage and allowing participants to opt out (45 exercised this choice). All data were linked anonymously and accessed via the Office of National Statistics Secure Research Service. Approvals were obtained from Cambridgeshire 2 Research Ethics Committee (antenatal study), Cambridge Central Research Ethics Committee, and the UK Confidentiality Advisory Board (linkage study).
Data cleaning was performed upon POPS data by cross-checking implausible clinical data values with paper records or, if unsolved, setting the values to missing. This process was rigorously checked and supervised to avoid unnecessary data exclusions.
The reporting of this study conforms to the REporting of studies Conducted using Observational Routinely-collected Data (RECORD) extension of the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) guidelines ( STROBE Extension Checklist).

## Outcomes, exposures, and covariates
The main outcome of the study was educational attainment assessed at 5 years, 6 years, and 7 years, represented, respectively, by a binary outcome at each age, with the assessment aged 7 divided into 4 key learning domains ( ).
To avoid a confounding effect of prematurity, infants delivered prior to 37+0 weeks of gestation were excluded from analyses. The estimated fetal weight (EFW) was calculated using the Hadlock III formula [ ] from individual biometry measurements (abdominal circumference, head circumference, femur length, biparietal diameter) obtained at antenatal ultrasound at approximately 36 weeks as previously described [ ]. The calculated EFW was converted to a gestational age-adjusted percentile, and participants were classified as either appropriate-for-gestational age (AGA; EFW ≥10th and ≤90th centiles) or small-for-gestational age (SGA; EFW <10th centile) [ ]. Infants born large-for-gestational age (LGA; EFW >90th) were excluded from analyses.
We divided the cohort into categories that were prespecified according to clinical understanding of the risk associated with poor fetal growth and placental dysfunction ( ). Antenatally determined EFW categories were used to subdivide the cohort according to the presence or absence of any markers for FGR to give 4 groups: (i) FGR; (ii) healthy SGA; (iii) AGA with markers of placental dysfunction; and (iv) healthy AGA. Healthy AGA was used as the referent group throughout. FGR was defined as an EFW <10th centile combined with one or more defined markers of placental dysfunction. Healthy SGA was defined as an EFW <10th in the absence of any features of placental dysfunction. Markers of placental dysfunction were defined as any of the following ( ): (i) lowest decile of abdominal circumference (AC) growth velocity between 20 and 36 weeks; (ii) EFW <third centile at 36 weeks; (iii) umbilical artery pulsatility index (UMB-PI) in the highest decile at 36 weeks; (iv) uterine artery pulsatility index (UT-PI) in the highest decile at 20 weeks; (v) maternal PAPP-A <0.4 multiples of the median for gestational age (MoM) at 12 weeks [ ]; (vi) maternal sFlt1:PlGF ratio >38 at 36 weeks [ ]; and (vii) maternal AFP >2.0 MoM at 20 weeks [ ].
Covariates included in the analysis were sex; school funding type (academy, community, or voluntary; standard models of UK state school funding; [ ]); maternal factors, including BMI, partner status, age, smoking status during pregnancy, occupation, and ethnicity (all recorded at recruitment); index of multiple deprivation (IMD score: 2007; [ ]), gestational age, presence of significant childhood morbidity, season of birth, and school year of assessment.
To minimise the impact of significant childhood morbidities that were not linked to intrauterine development on the analyses, we adjusted for relevant morbidities. Data were extracted from Hospital Episode Statistics (HES; provided via NHS Digital) relating to (i) emergency department attendances, (ii) hospital inpatient stays, and (iii) hospital outpatient appointments to compile a prespecified list of conditions ( ).

## Statistical analyses
The study analyses followed a prespecified statistical analysis plan agreed by all study authors ( ). Children with relevant childhood morbidities ( ) were included in the analyses, and the models were instead adjusted for this factor, rather than excluding this small number of children as their exclusion did not materially alter the results. Other primary analyses were conducted as planned. Sensitivity analyses by using EFW threshold <20th percentile or excluding women with ultrasound scan >35 weeks of gestational age did not substantively alter the results and so these have not been reported here ( and Tables).
Baseline demographics were described using numerical and categorical variables, presented as mean ± standard deviation and N (%), respectively. The associations between exposure groups and educational outcomes were modelled using multivariable logistic regression, adjusted for identified covariates.
Covariates that had a small proportion of missing values, including maternal BMI, partner status, and school funding status, were imputed using chained equations (MICE) under a “missing-at-random” assumption [ ]. The R package “mice” was used to generate 20 imputed datasets, using linear regression for continuous variables and logistic regression for categorical variables. These variables included in the imputation models: gestational age, birth weight centiles, delivery modes, maternal factors (age, BMI, occupation, ethnicity, partner status, alcohol consumption, smoking status), IMD, school funding type, and early years z-scores. Analyses run on each dataset were pooled according to Rubin’s rules [ ], and imputed values were found comparable to observed values. No imputation was performed with respect to FGR markers as the missing percentages ranged from 0% to 1.4%. Only children with at least one “present” FGR marker or all “absent” FGR markers were included in the analyses.
We assumed prospectively that approximately 75% of the cohort would have linked data available and that approximately 10% of the cohort would have EFW <10th centile, with 80% being defined as AGA. Our power calculations were thus based on the assumption that approximately 6% to 7% might be expected to meet our definitions of FGR, with approximately 50% meeting the definition of healthy AGA. The study was thus powered to detect a 50% difference in the percentage of FGR children failing to attain expected educational standards at age 5 versus healthy AGA at 80% power with alpha = 0.05. In the event, the data available were such that the FGR versus healthy AGA comparison was adequately powered at 50% difference between groups, but due to smaller numbers, the healthy SGA versus healthy AGA comparison was not powered at 50% difference.
All analyses were conducted using R version 3.6.1. [ ]. Where p-values (two-sided) are reported, an alpha level of 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Results
Approximately 65% of all antenatally recruited participants (2,754/4,212) were included in the analytic sample, representing 75% of those eligible for data linkage (2,754/3,677) ( ). Mean gestational age at delivery was 40 weeks, and the average birthweight was approximately 43rd centile ( ). The demographic characteristics of the analytic sample reflected the total eligible study participants, and there were no material differences (Tables and ).
 The analytic sample was distributed as follows: FGR 9% (250/2,754), AGA with markers of placental dysfunction 34.5% (949/2,754), healthy SGA 4.6% (126/2,754), and healthy AGA 51.9% (1,429/2,754) ( ).

## Educational attainment aged 5 and 6
Of participants with linked educational outcome data at age 5 and 6, 20% (559/2,735) and 12% (314/2,699), respectively, did not meet expected educational standards. Children with antenatal FGR had a higher chance of not achieving these standards at age 5 compared to those who were healthy AGA (25% versus 19%; adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 1.33; 95% CI 0.93 to 1.89 p = 0.11; ) and at age 6 (18% versus 11%; aOR 1.68; 95% CI 1.12 to 2.48, p = 0.01; ).
 

## Educational attainment aged 7
At age 7, the proportions failing to attain expected educations standards were 16% for reading (N = 381/2,354), 22% for writing (N = 525/2,351), 17% for mathematics (N = 396/2,351), and 10% for science (N = 226/2,351). Children with an antenatal diagnosis of FGR had an increased risk of not achieving the expected standard in reading (21% versus 15%; aOR 1.46; 95% CI 0.99 to 2.13, p = 0.05; ), writing (28% versus 23%; aOR 1.46; 95% CI 1.02 to 2.07, p = 0.04; ), and mathematics (24% versus 16%; aOR 1.49; 95% CI 1.02 to 2.15, p = 0.03; ) compared to the referent group, but there was no difference between the groups in the science domain.
There were no significant differences in educational attainment at any age when children who were either healthy SGA or AGA with placental dysfunction were compared to those who were healthy AGA (Tables A and B in ). However, the 95% CI surrounding the point estimates of effect for the healthy SGA group were wide, reflecting smaller group size and hence greater levels of uncertainty about where the true value may lie. The associations were very similar when cases of FGR defined using ultrasonic markers were compared to cases defined by biochemical markers of placental dysfunction (Tables A-F in ). FGR was also associated with mid-childhood educational performance in unadjusted models (Tables A-F in ).

## Educational attainment stratified by birthweight
Participants with FGR were stratified by actual birthweight (<10th centile versus ≥10th centile). The association between antenatal FGR and later educational performance remained only in those in whom FGR was correctly identified (actual birthweight <10th centile; ). Due to the smaller group sizes, the association no longer met the prespecified threshold for statistical significance in all analyses, but the direction of the association was consistent.

## Discussion
Fetuses with evidence of antenatal FGR had increased likelihood of lower educational attainment through mid-childhood. The association was consistent across serial assessments aged 5 through 7. Although not statistically significant at age 5, potentially due to the nature of the assessment or the higher percentage of children overall who do not meet expected standards at this stage, the estimate of effect was broadly similar across all ages studied, suggesting that the impact of FGR on educational performance is consistent across the early school years. By age 7, a clear difference could be detected between educational domains, with children who exhibited FGR being more likely than other children to perform poorly in reading, writing, and mathematics. Our findings suggest that a suboptimal intrauterine environment caused by placental insufficiency (e.g., reduced partial pressure of oxygen, reduced supply of nutrients, or chronic pro-inflammatory response [ , ]) is associated with poorer future educational attainment. Fetal neural development relies on a tightly regulated and highly stereotyped series of transcriptional and epigenetic modulations [ ] that may be vulnerable to environmental disruption induced by placental dysfunction, for example, in the context of preeclampsia [ ]. Our results are in keeping with previous findings suggesting lower cognitive, linguistic, and communication skills [ , ], and also lower social adjustment and emotional readiness for school [ ] in children affected by FGR.
A key strength of the present study is that the imaging and biochemical data used to define FGR were not revealed to the attending clinicians, an important feature of the prospective study design to avoid multiple biases. FGR detected near term would usually lead to early-term delivery and the influence of this on the outcome is complex, incompletely understood, and is likely to differ between true cases of FGR and healthy constitutionally small infants. Early-term delivery could potentially mask associations by abbreviating the duration of exposure to the hostile intrauterine environment in true cases of FGR. Alternatively, birth at early term is associated with an increased risk of special educational needs, which is part of the continuum of risk associated with earlier delivery across the whole range of gestational age [ ]. Hence, it is possible that early-term delivery, indicated by the antenatal suspicion of FGR, could actually be an iatrogenic cause of poor educational attainment, particularly in constitutionally small fetuses. In the present study, these biases were avoided by prospective data collection and blinding of the results to the attending clinicians.
The current analysis is highly relevant for clinicians considering intervention for suspected FGR near term. Early-term delivery is currently considered in this context to reduce the risk of stillbirth, as FGR infants have an 8-fold risk of antepartum intrauterine fetal death prior to the onset of labor, as well as increased risks of intrapartum and neonatal death [ ]. If the association between FGR and poor educational outcomes was secondary to earlier delivery at term rather than to the disease process of FGR, as has been proposed [ ], clinicians may consider nonintervention, with a subsequent increased risk of stillbirth. Our data indicate that late FGR is an independent predictor of poor educational outcomes and that this association cannot be explained by iatrogenic harm arising from earlier delivery at term. Consistent with this, a randomised controlled trial has previously shown that routine induction of labor at 37 weeks for EFW <10th percentile (without taking into account markers of FGR) was not associated with an overall increase or decrease in the risk of poor neurodevelopmental outcome in childhood [ ]. There was no negative effect of early-term delivery despite the fact that many infants in the trial would have been constitutionally small. The neutral overall effect of early-term delivery in this trial may be explained by a balancing of benefit gained by early-term delivery in true cases of FGR versus harm to healthy constitutionally small infants. Hence, it is plausible that if early-term delivery is targeted only to true cases of FGR, neurodevelopmental outcomes might be improved by reducing fetal exposure to a suboptimal intrauterine environment. Moreover, better methods for the diagnosis of FGR might avoid iatrogenic harm by avoiding unnecessary intervention for constitutionally small fetuses. However, FGR remains a theoretical concept with no gold diagnostic standard. Our phenotyping in this study is derived from current best understanding and consensus regarding optimal markers [ , ]. Our observations provide a rationale for developing enhanced methods of screening and diagnosis for late FGR. Deep phenotyping of small fetuses may allow stratified antenatal care, targeting the intervention of early-term delivery specifically to FGR cases who are most likely to benefit. Hence, FGR should be a priority area for discovery science methods to identify new predictors [ ] and for interventional trials to determine the short- and long-term consequences of interventions [ ].

## Limitations
This study has several limitations. First, it relies on educational data collected by the UK Department of Education. Although this is an extremely well-curated source with mandatory reporting requirements [ ], only pupils in state-funded schools in England are included. It is therefore possible that pupils of higher socioeconomic status (who are more likely to attend private schools) and those of non-UK backgrounds (who may be more likely to attend school outside England) may be disproportionately missing. However, the high linkage rate and lack of significant demographic difference between the whole cohort and the analytic sample ( ) suggests that the study group was representative of the whole cohort.
Second, the cohort originates from a single centre in Cambridge, UK, and is less socioeconomically and ethnically diverse than the whole population of the UK [ ]. It was recruited in a relatively affluent area with a good state-funded education system [ ]. This may reduce the general applicability of the results. However, the relative homogeneity of the population reduces the potential for noise and bias. Other novel findings from the study have previously been externally validated in demographically dissimilar populations [ , , ].
Third, although adjustment for a wide range of potentially confounding variables was made, there are inevitably further unmeasured confounders that may influence childhood neurocognitive development [ , ].
Finally, since FGR lacks a gold standard universally accepted definition, there might be a possibility of misidentifying FGR or healthy AGA. However, all participants were meticulously phenotyped with respect to reported markers of FGR, as reported elsewhere [ , ].

## Conclusions
Compared with children with normal fetal growth and no markers of placental dysfunction, FGR is associated with poorer educational attainment in mid-childhood.
Data are obtained from the original dataset before imputation. For fields where there is no “missing” row, data were 100% complete. Maternal age was defined as age at recruitment. Maternal BMI was derived from weight measured at recruitment divided by the square of height (kg/m2). All other maternal characteristics were either self-reported at the 20-week gestational age visit from examination of the clinical record or linkage to the hospital’s electronic databases. Deprivation was quantified using IMD 2007 based on census data from the area of the mother’s postcode [ ]. Birth weight percentiles and z scores were calculated using UK 1990 growth reference [ ]. SGA at delivery is defined as birth weight <10th percentile according to UK 1990 growth reference [ ]. *p < 0.05 in comparisons of the analytic sample versus all eligible POPS participants.
Markers of placental dysfunction are defined as one or more of the following: low AC growth between 20 and 36 weeks, high uterine artery pulsatility index at 20 weeks, high umbilical artery pulsatility index at 36 weeks, EFW <third centile, low PAPPA, sFlt-1:PlGF ratio, high AFP.
For adjusted models, covariates included in all models: maternal factors (age at pregnancy, BMI at recruitment, ethnicity, occupation, partner status, smoking history), infant factors (gestational age, sex, birth seasonality, childhood physical health), socioeconomic factors (IMD, school funding type, academic year).

## Supporting information
S1 Appendix

## Data analysis plan.
Analysis plan for assessing whether prenatal diagnosis of late fetal growth restriction is predictive of later educational achievement.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Appendix

## Assessment of educational attainment aged 5, 6, and 7 years in the UK.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 RECORD STROBE Extension Checklist

## The RECORD statement—Checklist of items, extended from the STROBE statement, which should be reported in observational studies using routinely collected health data.
Reference: Benchimol EI, Smeeth L, Guttmann A, Harron K, Moher D, Petersen I, Sørensen HT, von Elm E, Langan SM, the RECORD Working Committee. The REporting of studies Conducted using Observational Routinely-collected health Data (RECORD) Statement. PLoS Medicine 2015; in press. *Checklist is protected under Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. NA, not applicable.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Childhood medical conditions for model adjustment.
These conditions are not linked to intrauterine development but could impact childhood educational performance and therefore were adjusted in primary analyses. This prespecified morbidity list was defined in consultation with a paediatric consultant (HW). A full year of hospital episode statistics (HES) was obtained for each child, as it is highly likely that any child with a significant excludable health condition would have at least one HES-recorded appointment within a year. Children without any HES data recorded during the time frame (1 year) are assumed to not have any of the prespecified morbidities. There may be a small number of children who were being managed entirely via the private healthcare system or not have required any hospital management at all over the course of a year; however, given the medical complexity of the prespecified conditions, this is unlikely and would only apply to a very small number of children.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Ultrasonic biometry and markers of placental dysfunction of all POPS participants and the analytic sample.
Abbreviations: AC, abdominal circumference; AFP, alpha-feto protein; EFW, estimated fetal weight; PAPP-A, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A; sFlt1:PlGF, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1:placental growth factor ratio; UMB-PI, umbilical artery pulsatility index; UT-PI, uterine artery pulsatility index.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Baseline characteristics among exposure groups.
Values are median (IQR) or N (%) as appropriate. Maternal age was defined as age at recruitment. Maternal BMI was derived from weight measured at recruitment divided by the square of height (kg/m2). All other maternal characteristics were either self-reported at the 20-week gestational age visit, from examination of the clinical record, or linkage to the hospital’s electronic databases. Deprivation was quantified using the IMD 2007 based on census data from the area of the mother’s postcode. Birth weight percentiles and z scores were calculated using UK 1990 growth reference. Abbreviations: AGA, appropriate-for-gestational age; BMI, body mass index; FGR, fetal growth restriction; GA, gestational age; IMD, index of multiple deprivation; IQR, interquartile range; SGA, small-for-gestational age.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Table

## Educational attainment aged 5–7 years by fetal growth status.
Table A. Rate of passing educational standard aged 5–7 years in all exposure groups. No/total (%) of participants of each group who failed corresponding educational assessment are displayed. *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 versus healthy AGA (referent) based on chi-squared test. Abbreviations: AGA, appropriate-for-gestational age; FGR, fetal growth restriction; GA, gestational age. Table B. Association between educational attainment aged 5–7 years and presence of any markers of placental dysfunction by fetal growth status. Outcome: Not achieving expected educational standard at each age/domain (as appropriate). Odds ratios (OR; for unadjusted models) or adjusted odds ratios (aOR; for adjusted models) with 95% confidence intervals are displayed with antenatal healthy AGA (Total N = 1,429) as the referent group. Markers of placental dysfunction are defined as one or more of the following: low AC growth between 20–36 weeks, high uterine artery pulsatility index at 20 weeks, high umbilical artery pulsatility index at 36 weeks, EFW <third centile, low PAPPA, sFlt-1:PlGF ratio, and high AFP. For adjusted models, covariates included in all models: maternal factors (age at pregnancy, BMI at recruitment, ethnicity, occupation, partner status, smoking history), infant factors (gestational age, sex, birth seasonality, childhood physical health), socioeconomic factors (IMD, school funding type, academic year). Abbreviations: AC, abdominal circumference; AFP, alpha-feto protein; AGA, appropriate-for-gestational age; aOR, adjusted odds ratio; CI, confidence interval; EFW, estimated fetal weight; FGR, fetal growth restriction; OR, odds ratio; PAPP-A, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A; sFlt1:PlGF, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1:placental growth factor ratio; SGA, small-for-gestational age; UMB-PI, umbilical artery pulsatility index; UT-PI, uterine artery pulsatility index.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Table

## Associations between educational attainment aged 5–7 and markers of placental dysfunction by fetal growth status.
Table A. Association between educational attainment aged 5 and markers of placental dysfunction by fetal growth status. Outcome: Not achieving expected educational standard aged 5. Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals are displayed with antenatal healthy AGA (N = 1,418) as the referent group. aLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile, Low PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP; bLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile; cLow PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP. Covariates included in fully adjusted models: maternal factors (age at pregnancy, BMI at recruitment, ethnicity, occupation, partner status, smoking history), infant factors (gestational age, sex, birth seasonality, childhood physical health), socioeconomic factors (IMD, school funding type, academic year). Abbreviations: AC, abdominal circumference; AFP, alpha-feto protein; AGA, appropriate-for-gestational-age; aOR, adjusted odds ratio; CI, confidence interval; EFW, estimated fetal weight; FGR, fetal growth restriction; NA, not applicable; PAPP-A, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A; sFlt1:PlGF, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1:placental growth factor ratio; SGA, small-for-gestational-age; UMB-PI, umbilical artery pulsatility index; UT-PI, uterine artery pulsatility index. Table B. Association between educational attainment aged 6 and markers of placental dysfunction by fetal growth status. Outcome: Not achieving expected educational standard aged 6. Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals are displayed with antenatal healthy AGA (N = 1,399) as the referent group. aLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile, Low PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP; bLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile; cLow PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP. Covariates included in fully adjusted models: maternal factors (age at pregnancy, BMI at recruitment, ethnicity, occupation, partner status, smoking history), infant factors (gestational age, sex, birth seasonality, childhood physical health), socioeconomic factors (IMD, school funding type, academic year). Abbreviations: AC, abdominal circumference; AFP, alpha-feto protein; AGA, appropriate-for-gestational age; aOR, adjusted odds ratio; CI, confidence interval; EFW, estimated fetal weight; FGR, fetal growth restriction; NA, not applicable; PAPP-A, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A; sFlt1:PlGF, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1:placental growth factor ratio; SGA, small-for-gestational age; UMB-PI, umbilical artery pulsatility index; UT-PI, uterine artery pulsatility index. Table C. Association between educational attainment aged 7 (Reading domain) and markers of placental dysfunction by fetal growth status. Outcome: Not achieving expected educational standard aged 7 in Reading domain. Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals are displayed with antenatal healthy AGA (N = 1,214) as the referent group. aLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile, Low PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP; bLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile; cLow PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP. Covariates included in all models: maternal factors (age at pregnancy, BMI at recruitment, ethnicity, occupation, partner status, smoking history), infant factors (GA, sex, birth seasonality, childhood physical health), socioeconomic factors (IMD, school funding type, academic year). Abbreviations: AC, abdominal circumference; AFP, alpha-feto protein; AGA, appropriate-for-gestational age; aOR, adjusted odds ratio; CI, confidence interval; EFW, estimated fetal weight; FGR, fetal growth restriction; NA, not applicable; PAPP-A, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A; sFlt1:PlGF, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1:placental growth factor ratio; SGA, small-for-gestational age; UMB-PI, umbilical artery pulsatility index; UT-PI, uterine artery pulsatility index. Table D. Association between educational attainment aged 7 (Writing domain) and markers of placental dysfunction by fetal growth status. Outcome: Not achieving expected educational standard aged 7 in Writing domain. Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals are displayed with antenatal healthy AGA (N = 1,216) as the referent group. aLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile, Low PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP; bLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile; cLow PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP. Covariates included in all models: maternal factors (age at pregnancy, BMI at recruitment, ethnicity, occupation, partner status, smoking history), infant factors (GA, sex, birth seasonality, childhood physical health), socioeconomic factors (IMD, school funding type, academic year). Abbreviations: AC, abdominal circumference; AFP, alpha-feto protein; AGA, appropriate-for-gestational age; aOR, adjusted odds ratio; CI, confidence interval; EFW, estimated fetal weight; FGR, fetal growth restriction; NA, not applicable; PAPP-A, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A; sFlt1:PlGF, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1:placental growth factor ratio; SGA, small-for-gestational age; UMB-PI, umbilical artery pulsatility index; UT-PI, uterine artery pulsatility index. Table E. Association between educational attainment aged 7 (Mathematics domain) and markers of placental dysfunction by fetal growth status. Outcome: Not achieving expected educational standard aged 7 in Mathematics domain. Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals are displayed with antenatal healthy AGA (N = 1,216) as the referent group. aLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile, Low PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP; bLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile; cLow PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP. Covariates included in all models: maternal factors (age at pregnancy, BMI at recruitment, ethnicity, occupation, partner status, smoking history), infant factors (GA, sex, birth seasonality, childhood physical health), socioeconomic factors (IMD, school funding type, academic year). Abbreviations: AC, abdominal circumference; AFP, alpha-feto protein; AGA, appropriate-for-gestational age; aOR, adjusted odds ratio; CI, confidence interval; EFW, estimated fetal weight; FGR, fetal growth restriction; NA, not applicable; PAPP-A, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A; sFlt1:PlGF, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1:placental growth factor ratio; SGA, small-for-gestational age; UMB-PI, umbilical artery pulsatility index; UT-PI, uterine artery pulsatility index. Table F. Association between educational attainment aged 7 (Science domain) and markers of placental dysfunction by fetal growth status. Outcome: Not achieving expected educational standard aged 7 in Science domain. Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals are displayed with antenatal healthy AGA (N = 1,216) as the referent group. aLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile, Low PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP; bLow AC velocity, High UT-PI, High UMB-PI, EFW <third centile; cLow PAPP-A, sFlt-1:PlGF >38, High AFP. Covariates included in all models: maternal factors (age at pregnancy, BMI at recruitment, ethnicity, occupation, partner status, smoking history), infant factors (GA, sex, birth seasonality, childhood physical health), socioeconomic factors (IMD, school funding type, academic year). Abbreviations: AC, abdominal circumference; AFP, alpha-feto protein; AGA, appropriate-for-gestational age; aOR, adjusted odds ratio; CI, confidence interval; EFW, estimated fetal weight; FGR, fetal growth restriction; NA, not applicable; PAPP-A, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A; sFlt1:PlGF, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1:placental growth factor ratio; SGA, small-for-gestational age; UMB-PI, umbilical artery pulsatility index; UT-PI, uterine artery pulsatility index.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Table

## Association between FGR and educational attainment aged 5–7, stratified based on actual birth weight.
Outcome: Not achieving expected educational standard at each corresponding age. Adjusted odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals of FGR are displayed with healthy AGA as the referent group. P values are based on on logistic regression models of educational performance between 4 antenatal exposure groups: (1) Antenatal FGR; (2) Antenatal healthy SGA; (3) Antenatal AGA with markers of placental dysfunction; and (4) Antenatal healthy AGA. Models are stratified into infants who were SGA vs. AGA at birth. All models are adjusted for the following: maternal factors (age at pregnancy, BMI at recruitment, ethnicity, occupation, partner status, smoking history), infant factors (gestational age, sex, birth seasonality, childhood physical health), socioeconomic factors (IMD, school funding, academic year). Markers of placental dysfunction are defined as one or more of the following: low AC growth between 20–36 weeks, high UT-PI at 20 weeks, high UMB-PI at 36 weeks, EFW <third centile, low PAPPA, sflt1:PlGF ratio, and high AFP. Abbreviations: AC, abdominal circumference; AFP, alpha-feto protein; AGA, appropriate-for-gestational age; aOR, adjusted odds ratio; CI, confidence interval; EFW, estimated fetal weight; FGR, fetal growth restriction; PAPP-A, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A; sFlt1:PlGF, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1:placental growth factor ratio; SGA, small-for-gestational age; UMB-PI, umbilical artery pulsatility index; UT-PI, uterine artery pulsatility index.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Table

## Sensitivity analysis comparing EFW threshold <10th vs. <20th percentile when associating antenatal late FGR and educational attainment aged 5–7.
Outcome: Not achieving expected educational standard at each corresponding age. Adjusted odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals of FGR are displayed with healthy AGA as the referent group. *P values < 0.05, based on logistic regression models of educational performance between 4 antenatal exposure groups: (1) Antenatal FGR; (2) Antenatal healthy SGA; (3) Antenatal AGA with markers of placental dysfunction; and (4) Antenatal healthy AGA. All models are adjusted for the following: maternal factors (age at pregnancy, BMI at recruitment, ethnicity, occupation, partner status, smoking history), infant factors (gestational age, sex, birth seasonality, childhood physical health), socioeconomic factors (IMD, school funding, academic year). Markers of placental dysfunction are defined as one or more of the following: low AC growth between 20–36 weeks, high uterine artery pulsatility index at 20 weeks, high umbilical artery pulsatility index at 36 weeks, EFW <third centile, low PAPPA, sflt1:PlGF ratio, and high AFP.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S8 Table

## Sensitivity analysis comparing full cohort vs. cohort without subjects with clinically indicated scans at >35 weeks of gestation when associating antenatal late FGR and educational attainment aged 5–7.
Outcome: Not achieving expected educational standard at each corresponding age. Adjusted odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals of FGR are displayed with healthy AGA as the referent group. *P values < 0.05, based on logistic regression models of educational performance between 4 antenatal exposure groups: (1) Antenatal FGR; (2) Antenatal healthy SGA; (3) Antenatal AGA with markers of placental dysfunction; and (4) Antenatal healthy AGA. All models are adjusted for the following: maternal factors (age at pregnancy, BMI at recruitment, ethnicity, occupation, partner status, smoking history), infant factors (gestational age, sex, birth seasonality, childhood physical health), socioeconomic factors (IMD, school funding, academic year). Markers of placental dysfunction are defined as one or more of the following: low AC growth between 20–36 weeks, high uterine artery pulsatility index at 20 weeks, high umbilical artery pulsatility index at 36 weeks, EFW <third centile, low PAPPA, sflt1:PlGF ratio, and high AFP.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

GS acknowledges the support of GE (provided two ultrasound systems for the POP study) and Roche Diagnostics Ltd (provided equipment and consumable for the analysis of PAPP-A, AFP, and sFlt1:PLGF).
This work was produced using statistical data from ONS. The use of the ONS statistical data in this work does not imply the endorsement of the ONS in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data. This work uses research datasets which may not exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.

## Abbreviations
ACabdominal circumference
AFPalpha fetoprotein
AGAappropriate-for-gestational age
aORadjusted odds ratio
CIconfidence interval
EFWestimated fetal weight
FGRfetal growth restriction
HESHospital Episode Statistics
IMDindex of multiple deprivation
LGAlarge-for-gestational age
MoMmultiples of the median for gestational age
PAPP-Apregnancy-associated plasma protein-A
POPSPregnancy Outcome Prediction Study
sFlt1:PlGFsoluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1:placental growth factor ratio
SGAsmall-for-gestational age
UMB-PIumbilical artery pulsatility index
UT-PIuterine artery pulsatility index
 10.1371/journal.pmed.1004225.r001Decision Letter 0
DavidsonCallamSenior Editor© 2023 Callam Davidson2023Callam Davidsonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
16 Nov 2022

Dear Dr Aiken, 
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Association between antenatal diagnosis of late fetal growth restriction and educational outcomes in mid-childhood" for consideration by PLOS Medicine.
Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Medicine editorial staff as well as by an academic editor with relevant expertise and I am writing to let you know that we would like to send your submission out for external peer review.
However, before we can send your manuscript to reviewers, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Due to current unforeseen staff shortages at PLOS Medicine, editorial decisions are likely to be delayed until the journal is operating at full capacity. While the editorial team will endeavour to ensure a timely handling process, we appreciate that authors may wish to consider submitting manuscripts with particularly time-sensitive findings to an alternative venue at this time. 
Please re-submit your manuscript within two working days, i.e. by Nov 18 2022 11:59PM.
Login to Editorial Manager here: https://www.editorialmanager.com/pmedicine
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks in preparation for peer review. Once your manuscript has passed all checks it will be sent out for review. 
Feel free to email us at plosmedicine@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Callam Davidson
Associate Editor
PLOS Medicine
10.1371/journal.pmed.1004225.r002Decision Letter 1
DavidsonCallamSenior Editor© 2023 Callam Davidson2023Callam Davidsonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
2 Feb 2023

Dear Dr. Aiken,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Association between antenatal diagnosis of late fetal growth restriction and educational outcomes in mid-childhood" (PMEDICINE-D-22-03635R1) for consideration at PLOS Medicine. 
Your paper was evaluated by a senior editor and discussed among all the editors here. It was also discussed with an academic editor with relevant expertise, and sent to independent reviewers, including a statistical reviewer. The reviews are appended at the bottom of this email and any accompanying reviewer attachments can be seen via the link below:
[LINK]
In light of these reviews, I am afraid that we will not be able to accept the manuscript for publication in the journal in its current form, but we would like to consider a revised version that addresses the reviewers' and editors' comments. Obviously we cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response, and we plan to seek re-review by one or more of the reviewers. 
In revising the manuscript for further consideration, your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer and the editors. Please also check the guidelines for revised papers at http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/revising-your-manuscript for any that apply to your paper. In your rebuttal letter you should indicate your response to the reviewers' and editors' comments, the changes you have made in the manuscript, and include either an excerpt of the revised text or the location (eg: page and line number) where each change can be found. Please submit a clean version of the paper as the main article file; a version with changes marked should be uploaded as a marked up manuscript.
In addition, we request that you upload any figures associated with your paper as individual TIF or EPS files with 300dpi resolution at resubmission; please read our figure guidelines for more information on our requirements: http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/figures. While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the PACE digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at PLOSMedicine@plos.org.
We hope to receive your revised manuscript by Feb 23 2023 11:59PM. Please email us (plosmedicine@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns.
***Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.***
We ask every co-author listed on the manuscript to fill in a contributing author statement, making sure to declare all competing interests. If any of the co-authors have not filled in the statement, we will remind them to do so when the paper is revised. If all statements are not completed in a timely fashion this could hold up the re-review process. If new competing interests are declared later in the revision process, this may also hold up the submission. Should there be a problem getting one of your co-authors to fill in a statement we will be in contact. YOU MUST NOT ADD OR REMOVE AUTHORS UNLESS YOU HAVE ALERTED THE EDITOR HANDLING THE MANUSCRIPT TO THE CHANGE AND THEY SPECIFICALLY HAVE AGREED TO IT. You can see our competing interests policy here: http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/competing-interests.
Please use the following link to submit the revised manuscript: 

https://www.editorialmanager.com/pmedicine/

Your article can be found in the "Submissions Needing Revision" folder. 
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please ensure that the paper adheres to the PLOS Data Availability Policy (see http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/data-availability), which requires that all data underlying the study's findings be provided in a repository or as Supporting Information. For data residing with a third party, authors are required to provide instructions with contact information for obtaining the data. PLOS journals do not allow statements supported by "data not shown" or "unpublished results." For such statements, authors must provide supporting data or cite public sources that include it. 
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript. 
Sincerely,
Callam Davidson, 
PLOS Medicine

plosmedicine.org

-----------------------------------------------------------
Requests from the editors:
Please revise your title according to PLOS Medicine's style. Please place the study design ("A cohort study”) in the subtitle (ie, after a colon).
In the last sentence of the Abstract Methods and Findings section, please describe the main limitation(s) of the study's methodology.
The Data Availability Statement (DAS) requires revision. For each data source used in your study: 
a) If the data are owned by a third party but freely available upon request, please note this and state the owner of the data set and contact information for data requests (web or email address). Note that a study author cannot be the contact person for the data.
b) If the data are not freely available, please describe briefly the ethical, legal, or contractual restriction that prevents you from sharing it. Please also include an appropriate contact (web or email address) for inquiries (again, this cannot be a study author).
Thank you for including an Author Summary. The third bullet point under ‘Why was this study done’ appears better suited to ‘What did the researchers do and find?’.
Please describe and cite your Supporting Information items as outlined here: https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/supporting-information#loc-item-description
Line 209: For consistency, please place numerators/denominators within and percentages outside of parentheses. 
Please remove the Competing interests, Funding, and Author contributions from the main text – all are captured as metadata via the submission form questionnaire. The acknowledgements can be kept in the main text. 
Please add to the competing interests (submission form): GS serves on PLOS Medicine’s editorial board. 
For [Internet] sources in the References, please include the date accessed. 
Comments from the reviewers:
Reviewer #1: Alex McConnachie, Statistical Review
This review considers the statistical aspects of the paper by Olga et al, looking at fetal growth restriction and measures of educational attainment at age 5-7.
The basic approach of using logistic regression, with adjustment for potential confounders, to estimate associations between the exposures of interest and failure to achieve the expected educational milestones is reasonable, though by dichotomized the outcomes, there is a risk that the study is losing power. It could have been more efficient to look at the outcomes as continuous measures, though this could be difficult, depending on the distribution of the outcomes.
The main issue with the analysis is that the authors have taken two separate exposures (small for gestational age, and placental dysfunction) and combined these to produce a single variable with 4 levels. They then look at each of the three subgroups with one or both exposures, and compare them to the subgroup with neither exposure. They interpret a "significant" p-value as giving evidence of an association, and a "non-significant" p-value as meaning that the outcomes were comparable. This is a false argument.
For example, looking at supplementary table 4B, at age 7, the adjusted OR for reading for FGR vs Healthy AGA is 1.46, p=0.05, whereas for Health SGA vs Healthy AGA, the adj OR is 1.41, p=0.2. Here, the ORs are quite similar, but only for the FGR subgroup is it statistically "significant", since the sample size is bigger (250 FGR, 126 Healthy SGA). The adj OR for AGA with placental dysfunction is 0.93, which is quite close to 1, so for this outcome the data appear consistent with there being an association with SGA, but not placental dysfunction.
On the other hand, for writing at age 7, the adj ORs are 1.46, 0.98, and 1.25 for FGR, AGA with placental dysfunction, and Healthy SGA, respectively. This values are consistent with there being an association with SGA, which is amplified in the presence of placental dysfunction. Without SGA, placental dysfunction has no association with achievement, but in the presence of SGA, placental dysfunction makes achievement in writing at age 7 worse.
A better modelling approach might have been to first assess whether SGA and/or placental dysfunction were independently associated with educational outcomes, and then to test whether there is an interaction. If the FGR group have the lowest educational achievement, this could simply be because they have both risk factors, which independently predict poorer performance. Alternatively, it could be that the FGR group does particularly poorly, which would be evidenced by an interaction between the two exposures.
Unfortunately, there may be little power to detect interactions with this sample size. Nevertheless, the authors need to avoid simply interpreting their results in terms of whether the p-values are less than 0.05. At least as much emphasis should be put on the sizes of the associations when interpreting the results.
Minor points:
The STROBE checklist is used, but should REPORT extension have been used, since routine data linkage has been performed?
Line 177 states that "…childhood morbidities not linked to intrauterine development could potentially confound the relationship between perinatal factors and mid-childhood educational attainment." I am probably misunderstand something, but if they are not linked to IU development, how can they be confounders? Besides, why does it matter if the association between perinatal factors and educational achievement is confounded, if that is not the focus of the analysis?
Reviewer #2: PLOS One 
Editor in Chief
December 4, 2022
Re: Laurentya Olga et al. Association between antenatal diagnosis of late fetal growth restriction and educational outcomes in mid-childhood
Comments for the authors:
The study entitled 'Association between antenatal diagnosis of late fetal growth restriction and educational outcomes in mid-childhood' focuses on reading, writing and mathematical skills of children born with fetal growth restriction (FGR). From a clinical point of view, the study is very relevant. FGR studies with long-term outcomes are needed to optimize the timing of the delivery, to counsel the parents and to develop preventive strategies in order to help these children to reach their full academic potential. 
In this cohort study, antenatal assessments included ultrasound examination (estimated fetal weight (EFW), uterine and umbilical artery Doppler measurements) as well as maternal serum concentrations of PAPP-A, AFP, s-Flt and PlGF at 20, 28 and 36 gestational weeks. The study cohort was divided to four antenatal phenotype groups for comparisons of educational outcomes. My comments concerning the manuscript are listed below, the major ones being numbers 2 and 4. I understood that a statistician will separately review the manuscript, and therefore this review does not include any comments on the applied statistics. 
1. According to CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) middle childhood is determined as age 6-8 years. Is it appropriate to use term mid-childhood in the title as the study results range from 5-7 years?
2. The researchers divided the cohort to four groups antenatally 1) FGR, 2) healthy SGA, 3) appropriate for gestational age (AGA) with markers of placental dysfunction and 4) healthy AGA (reference group). FGR was defined as EFW < 10th centile and any of the following: (a) lowest decile of abdominal circumference (AC) growth velocity between 20 and 36 weeks, (b) EFW <3rd centile at 36 weeks, c) umbilical artery pulsatility index in the highest decile at 36 weeks, d) uterine artery pulsatility index in the highest decile at 20 weeks, e) maternal PAPP-A <0.4 MoM at 12 weeks, f) maternal sFlt1:PlGF- ratio >38 at 36 weeks, g) maternal AFP >2.0 MoM at 20 weeks. The researchers explain that they have tried to phenotype the groups carefully in order to distinguish constitutionally small children from children diagnosed antenatally with FGR/placental insufficiency. 
My main concern regarding this study is that this phenotyping is not optimal for late FGR. Several FGR inclusion criteria in this study are used to predict the development of FGR/indicate an increased FGR risk, but they are not indicative of FGR per se. The researchers could phenotype FGR in this large cohort more precisely according to internationally accepted criteria for FGR. In addition, longitudinal development of placental insufficiency, for example umbilical artery PI findings at earlier time points would ensure the readers that only late FGR cases were included. Naturally, it would be also interesting to know the results in various subgroups, formed according to the measured biomarkers, in this exceptional data set. 
3. The growth charts used in this study are from 1990. Any newer charts available?
4. In healthy AGA group, 21% of the children performed below the standard in overall educational attainment at 5 years of age and 23% performed below the standard in writing skills at 7 years of age. What is the reason that every fourth - fifth AGA child with no signs of placental insufficiency did not to achieve the standard in these educational tests? The educational standard, other health/educational issues in the AGA group despite extensive confounding factor evaluation, teaching, or what? We should be worried about this proportion; one can even argue that this is a greater problem than 5% additional increase in poor performance in writing skills at 7 years in the FGR group compared to this healthy AGA group. 
5. Could a more detailed discussion on possible mechanisms behind the educational problems in FGR included? The authors discuss that early iatrogenic delivery might have an input. On the other hand, one can argue that delaying the delivery might result in non-optimal outcome. 
6. There are publications focusing on reading, writing and other educational outcomes in FGR children with placental insufficiency for example by Geva et al and Partanen et al, which would enhance the findings of the current study and could be discussed. 
Reviewer #3: The objective of this study was to determine if fetal growth restriction diagnosed in the prenatal period is associated with poorer education in childhood. 
The study is based on the pregnancy outcomes prediction study that included unselected nulliparous women between 2008 and 2012. The samples included 4200 patients. Three visits were conducted for research purpose at 20, 28, 36 weeks. Several analytes were measured in peripheral blood including PAPP-A, AFP, PlGF and s-Flt. This study is unique in many ways and could lead to important publication. The outcomes of children in term of education were obtained from the national database in England. Standardized assessments are available for the age of 5, 6, and 7. The article follows the STROKE guidelines which are in Appendix 3. To avoid the confounding effect of preterm birth, the analysis was restricted to infants born at 36 weeks and beyond. 
Imputation for covariant was performed using chained equation under a missing at random assumption (detail on page 9). 
Results: 
* 65% of patients were included in the analysis 
* Mean gestational age at delivery 40 weeks
* The prevalence of fetal growth restriction was 9%
* Education at ages 5 and 6: antenatal diagnosis of FGR had a higher rate of not meeting educational standards compared to AGA (lines 220-224). 
* Education at age 7: overall the proportion failing to attend expected education were 16% for reading, 22% for writing, 17% for mathematics and 10% for science. However, the risk was higher for FGR although OR were 1.46-1.49 for the different domains. 
Assessment: I find the article very well written and is straightforward. The results are clear, and the conclusions are justified by the data. The results have a lot of information for patients counselling and management. 
Questions for the authors:
Fetal growth restriction was defined as a combination of biometric parameters and one or more markers of placental dysfunction. Most obstetrical units use only biometry as an estimated fetal weight less than 10th percentile. What would be the results if the authors use only fetal biometry such as estimated fetal weight below 10th centile, change in abdominal circumference, etc.? I wonder if babies who are SGA without evidence of growth restriction would also have normal education retainment. It would be worth for the obstetrical community to have this information because many around the world do not use PAPP-A or the sFlt-1/PlGF ratio.
Any attachments provided with reviews can be seen via the following link:
[LINK]
10.1371/journal.pmed.1004225.r003Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
22 Feb 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Laurentya_Response to reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pmed.1004225.r004Decision Letter 2
DavidsonCallamSenior Editor© 2023 Callam Davidson2023Callam Davidsonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
21 Mar 2023

Dear Dr. Aiken,
Thank you very much for re-submitting your manuscript "Association between antenatal diagnosis of late fetal growth restriction and educational outcomes in mid-childhood: A prospective cohort study with long-term data linkage" (PMEDICINE-D-22-03635R2) for review by PLOS Medicine.
I have discussed the paper with my colleagues and the academic editor and it was also seen again by two reviewers. I am pleased to say that provided the remaining editorial and production issues are dealt with we are planning to accept the paper for publication in the journal.
The remaining issues that need to be addressed are listed at the end of this email. Please take these into account before resubmitting your manuscript:
***Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.***
In revising the manuscript for further consideration here, please ensure you address the specific points made by each reviewer and the editors. In your rebuttal letter you should indicate your response to the reviewers' and editors' comments and the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please submit a clean version of the paper as the main article file. A version with changes marked must also be uploaded as a marked up manuscript file.
Please also check the guidelines for revised papers at http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/revising-your-manuscript for any that apply to your paper. If you haven't already, we ask that you provide a short, non-technical Author Summary of your research to make findings accessible to a wide audience that includes both scientists and non-scientists. The Author Summary should immediately follow the Abstract in your revised manuscript. This text is subject to editorial change and should be distinct from the scientific abstract.
We hope to receive your revised manuscript within 1 week. Please email us (plosmedicine@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns.
We ask every co-author listed on the manuscript to fill in a contributing author statement. If any of the co-authors have not filled in the statement, we will remind them to do so when the paper is revised. If all statements are not completed in a timely fashion this could hold up the re-review process. Should there be a problem getting one of your co-authors to fill in a statement we will be in contact. YOU MUST NOT ADD OR REMOVE AUTHORS UNLESS YOU HAVE ALERTED THE EDITOR HANDLING THE MANUSCRIPT TO THE CHANGE AND THEY SPECIFICALLY HAVE AGREED TO IT.
Please ensure that the paper adheres to the PLOS Data Availability Policy (see http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/s/data-availability), which requires that all data underlying the study's findings be provided in a repository or as Supporting Information. For data residing with a third party, authors are required to provide instructions with contact information for obtaining the data. PLOS journals do not allow statements supported by "data not shown" or "unpublished results." For such statements, authors must provide supporting data or cite public sources that include it.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.
Please note, when your manuscript is accepted, an uncorrected proof of your manuscript will be published online ahead of the final version, unless you've already opted out via the online submission form. If, for any reason, you do not want an earlier version of your manuscript published online or are unsure if you have already indicated as such, please let the journal staff know immediately at plosmedicine@plos.org.
If you have any questions in the meantime, please contact me or the journal staff on plosmedicine@plos.org.  
We look forward to receiving the revised manuscript by Mar 28 2023 11:59PM.   
Sincerely,
Callam Davidson,
Associate Editor 
PLOS Medicine

plosmedicine.org

------------------------------------------------------------
Requests from Editors:
Please include the study setting in the title.
The Data Availability Statement (DAS) requires revision. For the raw data from the POPS study, please include an appropriate contact (web or email address) for inquiries (this cannot be a study author).
Please quantify the key findings from the study in your Author Summary. 
Thanks for including a completed RECORD checklist - when completing the checklist, please use section and paragraph numbers, rather than page numbers (as these will change during the publication process).
Please remove the Data Availability Statement from the main text and ensure all the relevant information is captured in the submission form questionnaire (your response will be published alongside the article).
Changes from the planned analysis should be identified as such in the Methods section of the paper, with rationale.
Comments from Reviewers:
Reviewer #1: Alex McConnachie, Statistical Review
I thank the authors for their consideration of my original points. I am generally happy with their responses.
I note that a power calculation has been added, but this is not reproducible as it stands. It would help if the authors give the assumed percentages in the FGR and healthy AGA groups. If the calculation was done prior to the study, then the numbers required in each group to achieve 80% power should be given. If this calculation was post-hoc, based on the numbers achieved, then this should be stated.
For the healthy SGA vs. healthy AGA comparisons, it is OK to say that that the CIs are wide, but given the newly added power calculation, it would seem that this comparison is very underpowered. Someone only reading the abstract, lines 44-45, or lines 69-70 in particular, will not get that nuance, and will infer that the only subgroup at increased risk of poor achievement is the FGR group. When making headline statements, the authors could be a little more careful.
As an afterthought, I wonder whether there is any possibility that some of those in the healthy SGA group could in fact be undiagnosed FGR - could there be a subgroup of false negatives? What about false positives? How good are the tests for FGR? How would misdiagnoses affect the results? This could, perhaps, be discussed in the limitations section.
10.1371/journal.pmed.1004225.r005Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version3
25 Mar 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Laurentya_Response to reviewers_v2.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pmed.1004225.r006Decision Letter 3
DavidsonCallamSenior Editor© 2023 Callam Davidson2023Callam Davidsonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
28 Mar 2023

Dear Dr Aiken, 
On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Professor Jenny Myers, I am pleased to inform you that we have agreed to publish your manuscript "Association between antenatal diagnosis of late fetal growth restriction and educational outcomes in mid-childhood: A UK prospective cohort study with long-term data-linkage study" (PMEDICINE-D-22-03635R3) in PLOS Medicine.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. Please be aware that it may take several days for you to receive this email; during this time no action is required by you. Once you have received these formatting requests, please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes.
When making the formatting changes, please also address the following editorial comment:
* Lines 200-203: 'Sensitivity analyses by using EFW threshold <20th percentile or excluding
201 women with ultrasound scan >35 weeks of gestational age did not substantively alter the results and
202 so these have not been reported here'. Please include the sensitivity analyses as Supporting Information and cite them here.
In the meantime, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pmedicine/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process. 
PRESS
We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with medicinepress@plos.org. If you have not yet opted out of the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may do so on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Thank you again for submitting to PLOS Medicine. We look forward to publishing your paper. 
Sincerely, 
Callam Davidson 
Associate Editor 
PLOS Medicine