379blackwellopenDrug and Alcohol ReviewDrug Alcohol RevPMC1268928212689282126892824120646610.1111/dar.70057Is Addiction Research Addicted to Artificial Intelligence? Mapping the Intersection of Artificial Intelligence, Substance Use and Mental Health Through a Bibliometric Analysis
VanhéeLoïs ScarpaSimone 
1
Department of Computing Sciences, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden
2
The Norwegian College of Fishery Science, UiT the Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway
3
Department of Social Work, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden*

Correspondence:
 
Loïs Vanhée (lois.vanhee@umu.se)

✉Corresponding author.
8112025451e70057e7005711122025© 2025 The Author(s). Drug and Alcohol Review published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australasian Professional Society on Alcohol and other Drugs.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## ABSTRACT

## Issues
From extracting insights from large‐scale, multimodal data to prevention and support, there is growing interest in the applications and implications of recent advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) within the fields of addiction, substance use and mental health, which we refer to as ASUM. However, due to the absence of a structured mapping of AI for ASUM, it remains unclear how this interest is translated into concrete research results.

## Approach
This paper addresses this gap by conducting a bibliometric analysis of AI for ASUM, exploring: (i) the scale of ASUM‐related research (number of publications, authors, institutions and countries); (ii) the evolution of ASUM‘s research productivity over time, both in absolute terms and relative to its parent disciplines; (iii) the key topics within ASUM and their interrelations.

## Key Findings
Results, supplemented by a comparison of similar fields, show that, while ASUM is an emerging and rapidly expanding domain (with a 25‐fold increase in research output since 2012, attracting growing attention relative to parent disciplines as well as appearing to rely on applying more advanced AI methods than related fields), it remains largely fragmented through a dispersed group of infrequent contributors.

## Implications
An integration of the findings suggests two dominant trajectories through which AI for ASUM is currently being realised: as AI‐driven analytic support and as innovative research and therapeutic methods (e.g., virtual reality, chatbots).

## Conclusions
The paper concludes by situating AI for ASUM as an emerging scientific field, outlining the scientific and practical challenges and opportunities that are likely to arise, and high‐potential research areas open for exploration.

Keywords: addiction, artificial intelligence, bibliometric analyses, mental health, substance use

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Sep 29; Received 2025 Mar 31; Accepted 2025 Sep 29; Issue date 2026 Jan.

1.

## Introduction
Understanding the entanglements between addiction and/or problematic substance use (ASU) and mental health (MH), which we refer to as ASUM in this paper, has long been the object of extensive interest across both research and practice in the involved fields. The strong entanglement between these two fields is straightforward: many individuals with pre‐existing MH conditions (e.g., depression, anxiety, post‐traumatic stress disorders, mood disorders) face increased risks of addiction and problematic substance use (e.g., substance‐induced coping, addictive escapism, habitual use of psychoactive medication). This bidirectional relationship is well‐documented: addictive behaviours, whether substance‐based or behavioural, frequently co‐occur with and exacerbate mental health disorders, creating complex, mutually reinforcing cycles (e.g., [ , , , ]).
Better understanding and managing this entanglement carry major societal implications, as ASU and MH disorders affect more than one billion people worldwide, accounting for 7% of the global disease burden (measured in disability‐adjusted life years), 19% of all years lived with disability [ ], and contributing to morbidity, mortality, suffering, diminished quality of life, impaired daily functioning, stigmatisation and significant socioeconomic burdens, on individuals, families and healthcare systems alike [ , , , , , , , , , ]. Despite the scientific and practical importance of integrating ASU and MH perspectives, such interdisciplinary integration remains inherently challenging, as it requires navigating the complex interdependencies of the many variables and dynamics involved in both domains. Recent advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) offer promising prospects for addressing ASUM challenges in both research and practice. For the sake of concision, the rest of this paper refers to AI for ASUM as the research field intersecting AI, ASU and MH. AI for ASUM is an umbrella concept, purposefully abstract for capturing the mixture of research interests tied to intersecting AI, ASU and MH, including: ASUM research and applications using AI methods, AI research using ASUM contexts, ASUM research on AI‐induced addictions, AI research on ASUM factors in AI development and use. In related fields, contemporary AI technologies have demonstrated direct applicability by enabling large‐scale data analysis across a wider range of sources (e.g., clinical records, psychometric assessments, social media, public documents) and data types (e.g., natural language, images) [ , , , , , ]. Such methods can be leveraged to support research activities (e.g., semi‐automating preliminary analyses, complementing statistical tools), as well as practical tasks such as tracking risks, improvements, dropouts and treatment outcomes across diverse populations. They can also incorporate novel data sources (e.g., natural language, voice, images) and generate actionable insights for decision‐making (e.g., screening, monitoring individual progression, assessing institutional performance, informing policy) [ , , ].
As a complementary development, AI has also been proven relevant for supporting interdisciplinary research and application through the integration of diverse insights into unified models and enabling in silico hypothesis testing (e.g., computational psychiatry, generative social sciences) and for generating and interrogating realistic synthetic data and populations [ , , , , , ]. In applied contexts, AI has supported innovations such as chatbots for prevention and treatment, precision and personalised health advising and policy development, particularly as healthcare systems become increasingly digitalised [ , , , ]. In terms of social impact, AI methods may enhance care quality and accessibility (e.g., through immediate, low‐cost interventions; reduced geographic and financial barriers; and reduced stigma) while optimising resource use in contexts with limited access to qualified therapists or constrained budgets [ , ]. However, the deployment of AI in this context also introduces serious legal, ethical, and technical risks (e.g., data privacy, algorithmic bias, power asymmetries), which demand cohesive scientific and societal responses [ , , ]. Altogether, AI for ASUM presents a promising frontier for interdisciplinary research and high‐impact applications, including the development of dedicated vocabularies, conceptual models, datasets, research methods, tools tailored to understanding and addressing addiction and mental health challenges.
However, despite the marked relevance of AI for ASUM and the significant societal challenges it seeks to address, no structured mapping currently exists of the scientific landscape of AI for ASUM. This paper aims to fill that gap by providing a ‘helicopter‐view’ assessment (i.e., developing a general overview, leaving detailed exploration for future work) of the main trends and areas of interest in the field of AI for ASUM, guided by the following research questions:

What is the level of development of the field of AI for ASUM in terms of its general scale and spread and core group of contributors?
Is the interest in AI for ASUM growing over time, both in absolute terms and in relation to its parent fields (i.e., AI, ASU and MH)?
What are the key topics addressed in AI for ASUM research? How do these topics interrelate? How specialised is AI in AI for ASUM?
How does AI for ASUM compare with relatable fields such as AI for mental health in student populations, AI and cognitive behavioural therapy? Is it larger? Does it rely on more advanced AI techniques?
What are the potential challenges and opportunities of AI for ASUM research (e.g., plausibly underexplored high‐value topics)?
Following guidelines in the domain of bibliometric analysis [ ], this study addresses these questions by examining the meta‐information of 1889 AI for ASUM‐related publications (e.g., publication year, authorship, keywords). We pursue two main lines of analysis. First, we assess the productivity of the field by analysing the number of documents, authors, affiliations and countries involved (in Section  ) and the evolution of AI for ASUM productivity over time, in absolute and relative to AI, ASU and MH (in Section  ). Then, we examine the topics of the field (in Section  ) by analysing keyword co‐occurrences. The findings from these analyses are integrated into a discussion (in Section  ) that provides an overview of AI for ASUM as a scientific field and offers foresight into future directions and opportunities emerging in this evolving context.
1.1.

## Related Work
Despite a seemingly growing interest in the field of AI for ASUM, to our knowledge this paper is the first to propose a broad overview of the scientific trends of AI for ASUM through bibliometric analyses. However, some related studies capture an overview of the research landscape, often by focusing on tangential yet diverging topics, including AI and psychotherapy [ ], AI for MH in student populations [ , ], technology in psychological interventions [ ], psychological interventions for depression in children and adolescents [ ], and AI and cognitive behavioural therapy [ ]. Some bibliometric analyses focus on addiction and SUDs, but to our knowledge, none of them intersect with AI methods. These include studies on: smartphone addiction [ ], internet gaming addiction [ ], digital addiction [ ], social media addiction [ ], SUD interventions (digital, multidisciplinary care) [ , ], SUD‐related factors (genetic, childhood, ethnicity and social groups) [ , , ] and SUDs involving specific substances (tobacco, cannabis, heroin, cocaine, psychostimulants) [ , ].
The scope can be broadened for including insights gathered from systematic reviews, which can provide insights on possible pathways of AI for ASUM research. These insights, which often overlap across multiple papers, include: using AI to enable or enhance analyses based on: biomarkers, healthcare data, psychometric tests, and neuroimaging; applying AI for the detection or identification of substance use, substance‐induced brain changes, overdose prediction, substance use forecasting, social determinants of health, stress, loneliness, wellbeing and social inclusion; using AI to enable personalised treatments, primarily through chatbots and relapse risk prediction; listing a range of AI methods using in ASU or MH, including elastic net, artificial neural networks, support vector machines, random forest, logistic regression, decision trees and deep learning; specific substances such as alcohol, cannabis, hallucinogens, tobacco, opioids, sedatives and hypnotics; listing ethical and technical concerns related to the use of AI (e.g., privacy, accountability, fairness, transparency); listing interfaces and infrastructures relevant to AI use (e.g., smartphones, chatbots, big data) [ , , , , , , , ]. While these studies collectively present a broad variety of issues related to AI for ASUM, many of these issues appear once or twice. Subsequently, the obtained insights do not allow to quantify which of these topics are early‐phase or niche investigations and which ones are further established areas of research, nor how these topics are commonly integrated with each other, which is one of the objects offered by the bibliometric analysis developed in this paper.

2.

## Method
2.1.

## Data Collection and Filtering
Bibliometric analyses are a widely used research method [ ] for detecting statistical patterns within the bibliographic metadata of large (N > 100) corpora of scientific documents. The typical steps for conducting bibliometric analyses consists of: (i) selecting an appropriate database; (ii) acquiring documents from this database, usually through a search query, (iii) retrieving the metadata associated with the documents found in the query (e.g., title, abstract, publication venue); (iv) filtering out irrelevant documents; (v) extracting metadata of related entities (e.g., authors, affiliations) of the filtered documents; (vi) developing metrics to provide quantitative evidence for answering the research questions (data processing, plotting and network analysis); and (vii) analysing this evidence to derive insights relevant to the research questions. Figure  summarises the key steps involved in the data collection process.
 
Database. The Scopus database, accessed via the Scopus API, was chosen for its capability to deliver structured data with clear and unambiguous unique identifiers for each document, along with support for advanced algorithmic queries and statistical operations (e.g., retrieving all documents that cite or are cited by those within the corpus). Furthermore, Scopus is among the largest available databases and is frequently utilised in bibliometric analyses [ , ].
The exact query can be found in Appendix  . The query retrieved 1933 documents (pre‐filtering), referred to as corpus. The cut‐off date for the data collection was 15 March 2025. In addition to the bibliometric metadata of the corpus, the number of documents per year was retrieved for AI, ASU and MH (in general, beyond the ASUM corpus). This step was performed through series of year‐specific queries (e.g., MH AND PUBYEAR 2025 was used for retrieving the number of MH‐related publications in 2025).

Filtering. The corpus was refined through the following filtering steps. First, retracted documents were removed (N = 2) and conference reviews, which only list accepted papers and their abstract without being additive contributions per se, were excluded (N = 42). This filtering process yielded a final set of N = 1889 documents (i.e., the final AI for ASUM corpus), representing 99% of the original query.

Data processing. Data were extracted using the Scopus API through a custom Java program. This process ensured the consistent identification of all documents, authors, institutions and countries, facilitating subsequent processing. For each document, core metadata was collected (including title, author IDs, institutional affiliations as institution IDs, subject area codes, etc.). Additionally, each author ID was matched to the corresponding author name, and each institution ID was linked to its institution name and country.

Search query. The documents were retrieved based on the following query:
Query=AIANDASUANDMHwhere AI, ASU and MH are defined through the presence of keywords within their title, abstract, author‐defined keywords, or publication venue. The exact query and process for producing it are detailed in Appendix  .
As an important bibliometric decision, the potential inclusion of ‘logistic regression’ led to discussions among the co‐authors depending on their primary disciplinary background. On one hand, logistic regression can be considered an AI method based on its operating principles; on the other hand, it is commonly regarded as a non‐AI statistical method. In the end, it was decided to exclude logistic regression, for the sake of giving further emphasis over the more modern AI methods, which are the primary object of investigation of this paper. However, a noteworthy finding is that including logistic regression expands the corpus by 11,016 additional documents, making it seven times larger. While this expanded corpus is not further analysed in this paper, the large number of documents featuring logistic regression at the very least suggests a marked affinity of ASUM research for methods and workflows affiliated with AI research.

2.2.

## Analysis
2.2.1.

## Analytic Strategy
This paper builds over an array of bibliometric tools for answering the research questions. As an overall strategy, this paper applies a breadth first approach, seeking to cover the main bibliographic variables towards acquiring a general situation awareness of the status of AI for ASUM as a scientific field, rather than narrowing to one specific aspect and hence missing out the big picture.
For Research Question 1, the level of development of AI for ASUM as a field is assessed along two dimensions. The first dimension, focusing on the scientific production of AI for ASUM as a field, is operationalised by measuring the scale of key standard agglomerating performance bibliometric indicators (i.e., number of publications, authors, institutions, countries) [ ]. The second dimension, focusing on the degree of involvement of the scientists producing AI for ASUM research, is operationalised through measuring the average contribution per AI for ASUM author and describing how the community of regular AI for ASUM producers is composed. For Research Question 2, the evolution of interest towards AI for ASUM is measured in terms of the number of AI for ASUM documents produced each year, both in absolute and relative to the number of documents produced per year by AI, ASU and MH. For Research Question 3, the topics addressed by AI for ASUM research, their interrelation, and the type of used AI methods are identified by relying on a standard bibliometric method called keywords co‐occurrence networks [ ]. These networks identify the most commonly used keywords, how frequently specific keywords are used together (by pairs of keywords, by clusters of keywords, and by overall proximity). Research Question 4 is addressed by crossing the results obtained for the previous research questions of this current study with results developed in bibliometric analyses of similar fields (e.g., AI for mental health in education). Research Question 5 is addressed by crossing the findings identified in the previous research questions of this current study with topics and issues that are commonly acknowledged as important in similar contexts (e.g., untapped AI methods, ethical and legal implications of using AI in ASUM contexts).

2.2.2.

## Analysis Method: Keyword Co‐Occurrence Networks
This paper studies the concepts used in AI for ASUM using a keyword co‐occurrence network. These networks enable the identification of key topics and the relationships between them within the AI for ASUM corpus. Each node in the network represents a keyword that has been used at least N = 11 times (this threshold was chosen for readability, keeping the number of nodes below 100). Larger nodes correspond to more frequently used keywords. Edges represent co‐occurrence relationships between two keywords (i.e., when both keywords appear in the authors' keyword lists of documents of the corpus). To enhance readability, only edges reflecting at least five co‐occurrences are displayed. Thicker edges indicate more frequent co‐occurrences. Additionally, a clustering algorithm was applied, with clusters represented by the colour of each node. These clusters group together keywords that frequently co‐occur based on the algorithm developed by Waltman et al. [ ]. The algorithm automatically defines the number of clusters and the keywords belonging in each cluster towards maximising the integration of co‐occurring words within a given cluster and minimising non‐co‐occurring words within a given cluster. The standard parameters defined by VOSviewer were used (i.e., resolution was set to 1, minimal cluster size was set to 1). The ‘resolution’ parameter could have been altered, should the number of clusters would have been too large (≥ 10) or too small (≤ 3) for analysis. Additionally, a graph projection algorithm was used to map the network onto a 2D image. In this projection, keywords that co‐occur more frequently appear closer to each other and unrelated keywords are positioned farther apart from each other. These algorithms and visualiations were generated using the standard VOSviewer library [ , ]. Due to variations in spelling and terminology, a preprocessing step was performed to merge duplicates of keywords. This step unified different spellings (e.g., modeling vs. modelling), singular and plural forms, closely related concepts (e.g., psychological health vs. mental health), and acronyms (e.g., artificial intelligence vs. AI). While this step reduces some linguistic diversity that can provide information about subcommunities (e.g., authors/journals favouring UK vs. US English), this step sharpens the identification of core concepts and their interrelations, which is the focus of this paper.

3.

## Results
3.1.

## Field Scale, Individual Productivity, Turnover: Key Bibliometric Figures
Table  presents the common key bibliometric indicators for overviewing the scale and general properties of the research fields (i.e., number of documents, number of unique authors, number of author appearances, number of unique affiliated institutions, number of appearances of affiliated institutions, number of countries), applied to the AI for ASUM corpus. The term ‘Unique authors/affiliated institutions/countries’ denotes the count of distinct authors, institutions or countries. In contrast, ‘Author/affiliated institutions/countries appearances’ represents the total occurrences of authors, institutions or countries within the corpus. For instance, if an author A has contributed to three documents in the corpus, A would increase the number of unique authors by one and of author appearances by three. Table  also introduces the following derived indicators: average contribution per author (representing the average number of documents each author produces), the number of appearances per author, and the number of co‐authors per document.
 As a complementary result, in order to identify the size of the group of core contributors regularly contributing to AI for ASUM research, we counted the number of authors who appear in multiple contributions. n = 40 authors appear in > 5 papers (i.e., 0.44% of the whole set of authors of AI for ASUM), among which n = 2 authors appear in > 10 papers (i.e., 0.002% of the whole set of authors of AI for ASUM).

3.2.

## Evolution of Scientific Productivity Over Time
Figure  shows the number of documents published per year for the AI for ASUM corpus, both in absolute terms (in black) and relative to the AI, ASU and MH fields, allowing to assess how the production of the AI for ASUM field has evolved over time and whether this field has grown in importance relatively to the AI, ASU and MH fields. Because of the high variability of these proportions, due to the parent fields being of significant sizes, each coloured line was normalised in [0,1], whose maximum is identified in the legend. For example, the proportion of the research on AI for ASUM versus ASU (red line) reaches its peak in 2024. The legend of Figure  indicates that, at this point, AI for ASUM corresponds to 0.893% of all ASU research. This number is derived from the following: 362 AI for ASUM documents were retrieved as published in 2024. A total of 40,535 ASU documents were retrieved as published in 2024. The proportion of AI for ASUM relative to ASU on this year is: 362/40533 ≃ 0.00893 = 0.893% as listed in the figure. As a comparison with a non‐peak date, in 2017, the 69 documents published for AI for ASUM corresponded to 0.232% of all ASU documents, that is, the proportion of AI for ASUM documents relative to all ASU documents in 2017 is approximately a quarter of the proportion of AI for ASUM documents relative to all ASU documents met in 2024, that is, the year where the proportion AI for ASUM documents relative to all ASU documents is the highest.
 
3.3.

## Key Topics: Keywords Co‐Occurrences
Figure  presents the co‐occurrence network for the AI for ASUM corpus. Within this figure, the top 10 keywords and their number of occurrences are:

machine learning (N = 440),

alcohol use disorder (N = 157),

addiction (N = 135),

AI (N = 106),

MH (N = 109),

substance use disorder (N = 99),

natural language processing (N = 89),

depression (N = 88),

functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (N = 79),

opioid use disorder (N = 77).
 An observation of the top keywords shows a combination of keywords from AI, ASU and MH. When investigating these keywords domain per domain, AI‐related keywords tend to relate to generic technical terminology, with machine learning being by far more prevalent than any other term (N = 440 for machine learning and N = 157 for the second‐best term). In contrast, keywords related to ASU and MH topics are represented through a mix of both generic (e.g., substance use disorder, depression) and specific terms (e.g., functional magnetic resonance imaging). Moreover, four of these keywords are intersections between ASU and MH (i.e., alcohol use disorder, addiction, substance use disorder, opioid disorder), whereas no such intersection can be observed with AI‐related terms.
An analysis of the full list of keywords shows similar patterns as for the top‐10 keywords: all three domains are indeed represented to a comparable extent through domain‐specific terminologies (e.g., electroencephalography, depression, anxiety) and interdisciplinary terminologies can be found binding ASU and MH (e.g., computational model, electronic health record, neuroimaging). As key differences, a relatively extensive specialised AI terminology can be retrieved (N = 13 terms), primarily revolving around machine‐learning/data‐driven AI, that is, systems designed to extract insights from large datasets, including neural networks, random forests, Bayesian networks, classification. Moreover, the number of occurrences of these terms outweighs by far other AI‐related terms. Additionally, interdisciplinary concepts binding between AI, ASU and MH can be observed, such as computational psychiatry (N = 19), computational model (N = 13), and strongly suspected through: social media (N = 57), chatbot (N = 23), virtual reality (N = 19), mhealth (mobile phone health, N = 15), digital health (N = 14) and Reddit (N = 11). Other specialised keywords can be indirectly related to AI, ASU and MH, including (non‐problematically labelled) substance and addictive context (e.g., Internet), specific psychological processes, medically related terms such as electronic health records and comorbidity.
Additionally, the keyword co‐occurrence network retrieved six clusters, denoted by various colours in the figure. Keywords and related clusters are spatially organised by proximity of joint use. The following themes can be attributed to these clusters:

Cluster 1 (red): specialised machine learning research, and plausibly related specific populations (e.g., students, adolescents) and topics (e.g., anxiety, pain), possibly due to their co‐occurrence in commonly used databases
Cluster 2 (green): basic research integrating cognitive and neuropsychological concepts (e.g., dopamine, craving, electroencephalography, fMRI) with AI‐driven methods (e.g., computational psychiatry, computational models, reinforcement learning), to investigate core ASU‐related concepts (e.g., addiction, SUD, alcohol use disorder)
Cluster 3 (purple): research focused on specific substances, often in relation to associated risk factors
Cluster 4 (dark blue): applied research involving digital interfaces (e.g., mobile health, virtual reality, digital health, social media), supported by AI tools (e.g., AI, NLP, Large Language Models (LLM)) within broader healthcare contexts (e.g., public health, psychiatry, mental health)
Cluster 5 (yellow): applied clinical research focusing on prevalent substances (e.g., opioids, cannabis) and co‐occurring mental health conditions (e.g., post‐traumatic stress disorder, schizophrenia, psychosis, comorbidity), leveraging healthcare data sources (e.g., electronic health records), and predictive AI techniques (e.g., machine learning, predictive models)
Cluster 6 (light blue): this cluster appears to be very small and loosely connected internally. No theme is associated for further analysis
The physical proximities between the nodes identifies general proximities between the concepts and clusters and hence a possible general organisation of the field. Machine learning lies at the centre, with NLP to the left, specific ML algorithms at the top, reinforcement learning to the right, and AI‐related interfaces at the bottom. A horizontal reading from left to right appears to reflect a transition from healthcare applications for ASU (on the left, based on generic AI methods) to basic ASU research (on the right, employing more specialised AI techniques).

4.

## Discussion
4.1.

## Addressing Research Questions
4.1.1.

## Research Question 1: Level of Establishment of AI for ASUM

The scale of AI for ASUM can be estimated based on the number of documents, unique authors, author appearances, affiliated institutions, and countries listed in Table  . These numbers indicate that the field comprises thousands of documents (N = 1889) and authors (N = 9127), allowing to associate AI for ASUM to a small to medium‐sized research domain. While having achieved a relative scale, more established fields usually scale in tens of thousands of publications or more (e.g., both ASU and MH scale in hundreds of thousands of publications). The number of unique institutions (N = 2895) remain relatively limited, both in general and in relation to the number of authors.
The degree of involvement of the AI for ASUM authors can be observed through individual research productivity and author persistence/attrition, as fields in which authors develop multiple contributions can be expected to relate to the development and consolidation of ideas over time. The data presented in Table  brings into light a low number of contributions per author, with each author, on average, producing N = 0.21 documents and appearing in N = 1.25 documents. The community of core contributors remains relatively small (only 40 authors, i.e., < 0.05% of the whole set of authors appeared in > 5 documents)—despite a relatively high average number of authors per document (> 6).
From this observation, it can be derived that the field may be nascent (i.e., most authors will end up contributing multiple times to the field but this potential is not realised yet) and/or may face a high turnover (i.e., most authors contribute once and then exit the field).

4.1.2.

## Research Question 2: Growth of Interest Over Time
Figure  highlights that steady AI for ASUM research began by 2005 with a limited (N < 5) yet continued flow of publication every year, followed by a period of slow growth up to 2013 (N < 15), and then experienced a major and sustained surge in the number of publications per year after 2013, rising from N = 14 documents in 2012 to N = 24 in 2013, and reaching N = 362 in 2024 (i.e., a 25‐fold increase between 2012 and 2024). This trend suggests that AI for ASUM is a rapidly rising emerging research domain.
The proportions represented by the coloured lines in Figure  exhibit a rapid growth since 2012, reflecting a notable increase in the relative interest in AI for ASUM within AI, ASU and MH. This growth indicates that AI for ASUM is developing a dedicated interest and possibly evolve towards being a standalone field rather than being a byproduct of the independent growth of its parent fields. Specifically, a remarkable 20‐fold increase in relative interest can be observed in ASU research between 2012 and 2024, with a 12‐fold and 5‐fold increase for MH and AI, respectively. AI for ASUM now represents about 1% of all ASU research and, when taking addiction and SU separately, AI for ASUM represents 5% of all addiction‐related research—which is a very remarkable demonstration of the widespread adoption of AI within this subfield. These observations point to a relatively recent yet significant adoption of AI methods within the traditionally non‐AI domains relevant to AI for ASUM.
AI for ASUM appears to achieve a significantly greater increase in number of publications per year, in growth and in relative growth than related fields that were scrutinised along bibliometric lenses (primarily along AI for MH). For comparison, related fields typically observe, within a similar 2012‐2024 time period, a 3‐ to 10‐fold (vs. 25‐fold for AI for ASUM) increase in absolute publications and a 2‐ to 5‐fold increase in publications relative to AI and their target domain (vs. 5‐, 12‐ and 20‐fold for AI for ASUM) [ , , , ].

4.1.3.

## Research Question 3: Key Topics of AI for ASUM

The analysis of the top keywords, listed in Section  suggests a balanced representation of the key disciplines involved in AI for ASUM, with no single field being broadly underrepresented. The investigation of the keywords ordered domain per domain, listed in Section  , suggests that AI for ASUM may build on prior interdisciplinary bridges binding ASU and MH whereas no comparable bridge exists with AI.
The investigation of the exhaustive list of keywords listed in Section  shows a strong prevalence of machine‐learning/data‐driven AI terms and much lower representation of other AI methods, suggesting a broad use of AI as a data analysis method. Additionally, the strong representation of interdisciplinary concepts intersecting AI, ASU and MH listed in Section  suggests some interest in AI being used as empirical and applicative methods for ASUM research (e.g., simulations for theory‐testing, therapeutic tools).
The description of the clusters listed in Section  highlights that clusters 2, 4 and 5 seem to engage all three domains (AI, ASU, MH), while Cluster 1 appears predominantly AI‐centred, Cluster 3 largely ASU‐focused and Cluster 6 primarily MH‐oriented. Overall, it can be deduced that AI for ASUM as an interdisciplinary field is realised through collaborative research across AI, ASU and MH domains, albeit also containing highly disciplinary subfields.
The node proximity analysis listed in Section  suggests that the AI for ASUM field can be organised around two dimensions. One dimension covers technological implementations (distinguishing machine learning, NLP and reinforcement learning) and another covers basic to applicative ASU research. The two dimensions show some correlations, with basic ASU research relating to specialised AI techniques, whereas applicative ASU research relating to generic data‐driven AI methods relevant for the extraction and integration of data. As a summary, the spatial organisation shows that ASU and MH domains appear to be relatively central and well‐integrated with one another, whereas AI technologies are often used in isolation, that is, the use of one AI technology typically precludes the use of any other.

4.1.4.

## Research Question 4: AI for ASUM and Related Fields
When compared with bibliometric analyses from related fields (primarily on AI applied in a sub‐part of MH and/or related AI technologies such as chatbots), AI for ASUM is overall at par or one order of magnitude larger than other fields [ , , ]. The number of appearances per author and contributions per author are at par with values reported in related studies [ ].
When considering the topics of AI for ASUM, while certain similarities are evident with related fields such as AI for MH (e.g., common mental health disorders, neuroimaging methods, healthcare digitalisation, virtual reality), the AI for ASUM field demonstrates a more advanced use of AI‐related terminology. First, AI for ASUM covers a broad spectrum of methods that go beyond data‐driven machine learning and AI‐powered devices to include reinforcement learning, computational psychiatry and computational modelling. Second, AI for ASUM seems to foster a balanced discourse across AI, ASU and MH, whereas some other fields can end up being primarily driven by technological concerns [ , ]. Arguably, ASUM topics may be exposed to become tokenised and/or to be reduced to the functional value they have for AI research (e.g., as an application field or training or benchmark databases used in technical AI research that may be disconnected from the underlying societal issues). The analysis reveals that, while possible and observable through early markers (e.g., Cluster 1 (red) detailed in Section  ), this type of disciplinary research is not, as of today, an overwhelming paradigm driving the field of AI for ASUM.

4.1.5.

## Research Question 5: Challenges and Opportunities
The analysis reveals a relatively well‐functioning exchange between disciplines involved in AI for ASUM, indicating potential for long‐term field development. Three major implementation trends emerge, each with potential for expansion.
The first is the application of generic, data‐driven machine learning methods (e.g., deep learning, support vector machines, Bayesian networks) for analytical support. This trend is either disciplinary (within computer science) or multi‐disciplinary in nature (which means using methods from one domain in another without establishing an integrated framework [ ]). Functionally, it represents a methodological update of statistical tools and is expected to grow rapidly before plateauing. High‐impact opportunities include systematically mapping existing AI for ASUM methods to core ASUM topics (described in Section  ), leveraging new data types (e.g., high‐dimensional, unstructured or textual data) and developing AI‐assisted tools for ASUM practitioners.
The second trend involves the development of ASUM‐specific AI methods, such as reinforcement learning, computational modelling and computational psychiatry, often combined with AI‐friendly technologies (e.g., chatbots, virtual reality, mobile apps). This trend is more interdisciplinary (which means involving the creation of specialised vocabularies, theories and frameworks [ ]). Although its future trajectory is uncertain, this trend aims to address ASUM challenges more directly and could lead to paradigm‐shifting innovations. Continued development will require deeper disciplinary engagement, including coherent theoretical foundations and comprehensive systematic reviews [ , , , , , , , , , , , , ].
Additional high‐impact opportunities arise from gaps in the current landscape. First, there is a notable absence of research on specific preventive work (e.g., risk prediction) and therapeutic practices, suggesting untapped potential in exploring AI's role in therapy delivery and support. Second, apart from a few categories (e.g., teenagers, veterans), the field lacks an intersectional approach to socio‐demographic diversity, despite its relevance to ASUM [ , , ]. Third, ethical and legal considerations, such as algorithmic fairness, privacy and neuroethics, are conspicuously missing despite their importance [ , , , , ]. The same observation applies to the study of the integration and implications of AI for ASUM for wider society, including the societal, economic, environmental, legal, ethical, medical and political requirements and implications of a field as socially sensitive as AI for ASUM [ , , , ], possibly framed within the responsible research and innovation [ ] framework. Fourth, several promising AI subfields are nearly absent, including affective computing, automated planning, agent‐based modelling, psychosocial modelling and therapeutic game design [ , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. Finally, although not identified in the current results, the potential for AI‐induced addiction warrants urgent attention. AI technologies are already used to create addictive environments (e.g., recommender systems in streaming platforms, social media, dating apps), making this an important, yet overlooked, research avenue [ , , , , ]. These gaps can be explained as a normal process of technological adoption: AI solutions address long‐lasting needs of the ASUM community, hence yielding to direct and narrow adoption of visible AI solutions towards practical problem‐solving, without (yet) needing to consider the breadth of possibilities offered by AI methods and investigating the sociotechnical entanglements from using these methods. A significant added value and opportunities can be expected to arise from these perspectives being broadened.
Overall, the field can be expected to go through a significant scale‐up over the next years arising from a buildup of the field across multiple dimensions. AI for ASUM is a relatively difficult field to step into for new researchers (requiring, among others, collaboration across disciplines, knowledge of handling sensitive data, advanced technical infrastructures, contact with practitioners). Despite these requirements, the results showed that the vast majority of authors are irregular contributors (99.6% of the authors appear in 5 documents or less). As AI methods get increasingly adopted in ASUM research, it can be expected that these limitations are alleviated over time and, hence, further fundamental contributions can be achieved. Incidentally, there seems to be a high value in organising the AI for ASUM field towards enabling the development of easily accessible and well‐accepted competences, methods, datasets and networks.

4.2.

## Limitations and Future Work
As with any method, bibliometric analyses have inherent limitations regarding scope and accuracy [ ]. Bibliometric databases are incomplete and may omit relevant publications, especially in fields underrepresented in Scopus. Keyword‐based searches can miss relevant keywords due to terminologies being non‐exhaustive, involve concepts that are tangentially related or keywords may be susceptible to introducing false‐positives (e.g., ‘risk prediction’). In order to mitigate this limitation, this paper has engaged in a thorough compilation of keywords arising from related bibliometric research and taxonomies, proposing > 600 keywords where most papers are bound to 5‐10 keywords. As such, we can be relatively confident that the findings representatively capture the key variables tied to the whole field. The primary variable that can yield to a significant divergence arises from the inclusion of logistic regression, which was discussed in Section  . This particular case calls for future research on observing the trends in use of logistic regression: is logistic regression subsumed by ML (e.g., as an upgrade of the analysis method), without creating new arenas of research? While our investigations (left aside for space considerations) showed that this expanded definition of AI for ASUM, while much larger, has seen a significant increase over the last years, a future bibliometric analysis conducted in a few years, once AI methods would have been further established, could further identify the stability, growth or reduction in the use of logistic regression and whether, over time, topics tied to logistic regression would have become tied to ML methods instead.
Further, bibliometric analyses provide only a partial perspective, potentially overlooking hidden citations [ ]. The exploratory nature of this study also introduces a risk of statistical anomalies. To mitigate this, we implemented robust validation procedures, including advanced data quality checks, triangulation of unexpected results and extensive manual review.
Future work may refine this overview by targeting specific variables or communities. A comprehensive content analysis could uncover themes beyond those indicated by author keywords. Advanced topic modelling techniques, such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation [ ], could track topic evolution over time and help identify underexplored areas. Similarly, longitudinal analysis of AI method adoption could reveal emerging trends and help interpret past findings. Such efforts could further structure the field, strengthening the connection between research, technology and outreach in the highly socially critical domain that is ASUM.
Last, additional bibliometric measures could be considered for future work, including, for example, top authors/institutions/countries/journals, author network analyses, disciplinary analyses, assessing where/how AI methods are used in ASUM. The systematic collection and identification of these findings could complement and enrich the current analysis by further identifying where is AI for ASUM research published and towards what audience.

5.

## Conclusion
This paper presents a comprehensive analysis and mapping of the scientific landscape of the AI for ASUM field, based on the metadata of 1889 documents. A variety of bibliometric indicators were employed to assess the field, including general publication metrics, temporal trends and keyword co‐occurrences. This multifaceted investigation was compiled into high‐level insights on the key trends and dynamics of AI for ASUM as well as opportunities for high‐impact development of the research and application fields. This study expands the state of the art by providing the first scientific mapping of the rapidly emerging field at the intersection of AI, ASU and MH. By doing so, this paper provides the first empirical grounding of an array of variables and properties that are to be thoroughly assessed and monitored towards enabling the rationalised sustainable development of the sensitive and socially critical field that is AI for ASUM, may it be for backing up with evidence a priori intuitions one may have about the field or for identifying how AI for ASUM resembles and diverges from related fields on the forefront of integrating AI methods in their research and practice.
Overall, AI for ASUM can be described as an emerging field that: (i) is of small to medium size, encompassing thousands of papers and authors; (ii) demonstrates rapid growth, both in absolute terms and relative to its parent disciplines, while still remaining a niche area within those research fields; (iii) has experienced an early adoption of AI methods compared with, for example, AI for MH; (iv) has developed a relatively specialised understanding and use of AI techniques, though (v) plausibly exhibits uneven degrees of interdisciplinary integration across its subfields; and (vi) is characterised by very few regular authors, contributing multiple papers, suggesting the nascency of the field and potential challenges for long‐term researcher retention and field sustainability that must be addressed to ensure continued development. The main topics in AI for ASUM can be categorised as either disciplinary, such as technical data‐driven AI or substance‐centred research, or markedly interdisciplinary, including: AI methods for foundational ASUM research (e.g., reinforcement learning, computational psychiatry, computational modelling); AI tools for ASUM practice (e.g., chatbots, virtual reality, smartphones, digital health, social media) and (unnamed) machine learning applications in mainstream medical research to study common substances and mental health disorders. A summary of the main challenges and opportunities points to the relatively unique position of AI for ASUM as a field. Within this frame, the analysis developed by this paper brings into light straightforward high‐value opportunities for developing the field along three directions: (i) broadening the current technical prospects of the field, from its current focus on data‐driven AI methods to the integration of the plurality of AI methods and benefits they can provide; (ii) broadening the scientific perspective, from its current focus on technical operationalisation of AI to including the sociotechnical entanglements inherent to AI technology use (e.g., intersectional, ethical, legal, societal, political and cultural implications); and (iii) organising the research communities around the particularly demanding field that is AI for ASUM, which requires specialised infrastructures, skills, datasets, networks and collaborations, from a field that is costly to implement (e.g., almost all authors appear only once) to a highly optimised research field where common needs are easily served (e.g., shared infrastructures, regular trainings, relevant journals). Last, when considering other fields, this study brings into light that AI for ASUM appears to be at the forefront of the research landscape of integrating AI into society‐critical research and practice by having adopted AI methods a few years earlier than related fields. While this leading position may make AI for ASUM less likely to benefit from importing insights from other fields, AI for ASUM research and practice is in a unique position for now only defining its future on its own but also to become a major source of inspiration for the development in general of AI for social good.

## Author Contributions
Under the primary responsibility of the first author, both authors contributed to the conceptualisation, writing (original draft, revisions and editing), methodology, validation, resources, data curation and funding acquisition. The first author contributed to software, investigation, formal analysis, resources, visualisation, supervision and project administration.

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Supporting information

Data S1.

## Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support of the Swedish Research Council (Vetenskaprådet) grant number 2023‐04505 (Anxiety‐Sensitive Artificial Intelligence) and of the Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare (Forte), grant number 2024‐00388. The first author acknowledges the support of Melania Borit in discussing early ideas that yielded to the development of this article.

Appendix A.

## A Scopus Query

## Method for Query Definition
ASU is defined as ADDICTION OR PROBLEMATIC_SU. ADDICTION is defined on the single keyword ‘addict*’. Due to the many occurrences of drug related terms in a non‐problematic use of drugs (e.g., drug development, medical drug use, alcohol use in chemical processes), PROBLEMATIC_SU is defined as PROBLEMATIC AND SU.
AI, MENTAL_HEALTH, and PROBLEMATIC AND SU are categorised sets of concepts that are broad, open‐ended, and rapidly evolving. For maximising the inclusion and ensuring the representativity of these fields while excluding false positives (i.e., irrelevant documents from other fields), the following steps were followed:

Include keywords used to describe these queries in related bibliometric and systematic literature review works [ , , , , ];
Include keywords from core taxonomies, glossaries and textbooks of the field. References [ , , ] were used for AI; the table of contents of the DSM‐V was used for MH [ ]; SU was based on the list of substances from the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) and with substance categories drawn from the 5th and 6th editions of the Addiction Severity Index (ASI) [ , ]; and PROBLEMATIC was based on regularly occurring qualifiers of problematic use of substance in the retrieved literature (abuse, dependency, illegal, illicit, use disorder, withdrawal).
Include recent emerging trends, which are not yet part of existing taxonomies (e.g., ChatGPT).
Snowball sampling: An initial corpus and the documents cited by this corpus were collected; the most frequent terms and bigrams (pairs of subsequent terms) used in these documents (with > 10 occurrences, for avoiding over‐specifying) were listed; keywords that are may be relevant for qualifying some of the queries were identified; these keyword were added to the list. This process was repeated up until no additional keyword could be identified this way.
Generalise identified keywords by replacing them with their stem whenever possible (e.g., ‘schizophrenic’ as “schizophren*“).
A false‐positive analysis was then conducted to identify concepts that led to the inclusion of irrelevant documents in the base query. Fifty randomly selected documents retrieved by the query were assessed by two authors to identify false positives. When a false‐positive document contained a clear marker indicating its irrelevance (e.g., the compound term ‘drug delivery’), such documents were excluded by incorporating the marker into an AND NOT clause in the query. Positive results caused by context‐insensitive markers (e.g., ‘stress’) were addressed by removing these markers from the list. In the final iteration, ≤ 2% of the retrieved documents were identified as false positives.

## Exhaustive Query

((((TITLE‐ABS("affective computing" OR "agent architecture" OR "agent‐based algorithm" OR "artificial agent" OR "artificial intelligence" OR "automat* transcription" OR "automated planning" OR "backpropagation" OR "bayesian network" OR "bidirectional encoder representations from transformers" OR "chat gpt" OR "chatbot*" OR "chatgpt" OR "computer vision" OR "conversational agent" OR "decision tree" OR "deep learn*" OR "expert system" OR "explainable ai" OR "generative adversarial network" OR "interactive intelligent system*" OR "large language model" OR "latent dirichlet allocation" OR "llm" OR "machine learning" OR "markov decision process*" OR "naive bayes" OR "natural language process*" OR "neural network" OR "nlp" OR "perceptron" OR "prompt engineering" OR "q‐learning" OR "random forest" OR "reinforcement learning" OR "supervised learning" OR "support vector machine" OR "tensorflow" OR "transfer learning" OR "turing test" OR "virtual agent")) OR (SRCTITLE("affective computing" OR "agent architecture" OR "agent‐based algorithm" OR "artificial agent" OR "artificial intelligence" OR "automat* transcription" OR "automated planning" OR "backpropagation" OR "bayesian network" OR "bidirectional encoder representations from transformers" OR "chat gpt" OR "chatbot*" OR "chatgpt" OR "computer vision" OR "conversational agent" OR "decision tree" OR "deep learn*" OR "expert system" OR "explainable ai" OR "generative adversarial network" OR "interactive intelligent system*" OR "large language model" OR "latent dirichlet allocation" OR "llm" OR "machine learning" OR "markov decision process*" OR "naive bayes" OR "natural language process*" OR "neural network" OR "nlp" OR "perceptron" OR "prompt engineering" OR "q‐learning" OR "random forest" OR "reinforcement learning" OR "supervised learning" OR "support vector machine" OR "tensorflow" OR "transfer learning" OR "turing test" OR "virtual agent")) OR (AUTHKEY("affective computing" OR "agent architecture" OR "agent‐based algorithm" OR "artificial agent" OR "artificial intelligence" OR "automat* transcription" OR "automated planning" OR "backpropagation" OR "bayesian network" OR "bidirectional encoder representations from transformers" OR "chat gpt" OR "chatbot*" OR "chatgpt" OR "computer vision" OR "conversational agent" OR "decision tree" OR "deep learn*" OR "expert system" OR "explainable ai" OR "generative adversarial network" OR "interactive intelligent system*" OR "large language model" OR "latent dirichlet allocation" OR "llm" OR "machine learning" OR "markov decision process*" OR "naive bayes" OR "natural language process*" OR "neural network" OR "nlp" OR "perceptron" OR "prompt engineering" OR "q‐learning" OR "random forest" OR "reinforcement learning" OR "supervised learning" OR "support vector machine" OR "tensorflow" OR "transfer learning" OR "turing test" OR "virtual agent"))) OR ((TITLE‐ABS("agent‐based comput*" OR "agent‐based model*" OR "agent‐based simulation" OR "agentbased comput*" OR "agentbased model*" OR "agentbased simulation" OR "individual‐based model*" OR "multi‐agent" OR "multiagent" OR "social simulation")) OR (SRCTITLE("agent‐based comput*" OR "agent‐based model*" OR "agent‐based simulation" OR "agentbased comput*" OR "agentbased model*" OR "agentbased simulation" OR "individual‐based model*" OR "multi‐agent" OR "multiagent" OR "social simulation")) OR (AUTHKEY("agent‐based comput*" OR "agent‐based model*" OR "agent‐based simulation" OR "agentbased comput*" OR "agentbased model*" OR "agentbased simulation" OR "individual‐based model*" OR "multi‐agent" OR "multiagent" OR "social simulation"))) OR ((TITLE‐ABS("robot*")) OR (SRCTITLE("robot*")) OR (AUTHKEY("robot*")))) AND ((TITLE‐ABS("acute stress disorder" OR "addicti* disorder" OR "adjustment disorder" OR "agoraphobia" OR "alcohol intoxication" OR "alcohol use disorder" OR "alcohol withdrawal" OR "alcohol‐induced disorder" OR "alcohol‐related disorder" OR "anorexia nervosa" OR "antisocial personality disorder" OR "anxi* disorder" OR "anxiety disorder" OR "anxiolytic intoxication" OR "anxiolytic use disorder" OR "anxiolytic withdrawal" OR "anxiolytic‐induced disorder" OR "anxiolytic‐related disorder" OR "attention‐deficit disorder" OR "attenuated psychosis syndrome" OR "autis*" OR "autism spectrum disorder" OR "avoidant food intake disorder" OR "binge‐eating disorder" OR "bipolar disorder" OR "bipolar i disorder" OR "bipolar ii disorder" OR "body dysmorphic disorder" OR "breathing‐related sleep disorder" OR "bulimia nervosa" OR "burnout" OR "caffeine intoxication" OR "caffeine use disorder" OR "caffeine withdrawal" OR "caffeine‐induced disorder" OR "caffeine‐related disorder" OR "cannabis intoxication" OR "cannabis use disorder" OR "cannabis withdrawal" OR "cannabis‐induced disorder" OR "cannabis‐related disorder" OR "cataton*" OR "central sleep apnea" OR "childhood‐onset fluency disorder" OR "circadian rhythm sleep‐wake disorder" OR "communication disorder" OR "conduct disorder" OR "conversion disorder" OR "cyclothymic disorder" OR "delayed ejaculation" OR "delirium" OR "delusional disorder" OR "depersonalization disorder" OR "depress*" OR "depressi* disorder" OR "depressive episodes with short‐duration hypomania" OR "derealization disorder" OR "developmental coordination disorder" OR "disinhibited social engagement disorder" OR "disruptive disorder" OR "disruptive mood dysregulation disorder" OR "dissociative amnesia" OR "dissociative disorder" OR "dissociative identity disorder" OR "dysthymia" OR "early ejaculation" OR "eating disorder" OR "elimination disorder" OR "encopresis" OR "enuresis" OR "erectile disorder" OR "excoriation disorder" OR "exhibitionistic disorder" OR "factitious disorder" OR "feeding disorder" OR "female orgasmic disorder" OR "female sexual arousal disorder" OR "female sexual interest disorder" OR "fetishistic disorder" OR "frotteuristic disorder" OR "functional neurological symptom disorder" OR "gambling disorder" OR "gender dysphoria" OR "genito‐pelvic pain disorder" OR "genito‐pelvic penetration disorder" OR "global developmental delay" OR "hair‐pulling disorder" OR "hallucinogen intoxication" OR "hallucinogen persisting perception disorder" OR "hallucinogen‐induced disorder" OR "hallucinogen‐related disorder" OR "hoarding disorder" OR "hyperactivity disorder" OR "hypersomnolence disorder" OR "hypnotic intoxication" OR "hypnotic use disorder" OR "hypnotic withdrawal" OR "hypnotic‐induced disorder" OR "hypnotic‐related disorder" OR "illness anxiety disorder" OR "impulse‐control disorder" OR "inhalant intoxication" OR "inhalant use disorder" OR "inhalant‐induced disorder" OR "inhalant‐related disorder" OR "insomnia disorder" OR "intellectu* development* disorder" OR "intellectual disabilit*" OR "intermittent explosive disorder" OR "internet gaming disorder" OR "kleptomania" OR "language disorder" OR "male hypoactive sexual desire disorder" OR "medication‐induced mental disorder" OR "medication‐induced movement disorder" OR "mental disorder" OR "mental disorder*" OR "mental health*" OR "mental illness*" OR "mental stress" OR "mental well‐being" OR "mental wellbeing" OR "mental wellness" OR "mental* distress*" OR "motor disorder" OR "narcolepsy" OR "neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure" OR "neurocognitive disorder" OR "neurodevelopmental disorder" OR "nightmare disorder" OR "non‐substance‐related disorder" OR "nonsuicidal self‐injury" OR "obsessive‐compulsive disorder" OR "obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea" OR "opioid intoxication" OR "opioid use disorder" OR "opioid withdrawal" OR "opioid‐induced disorder" OR "opioid‐related disorder" OR "oppositional defiant disorder" OR "panic attack" OR "panic disorder" OR "paraphilic disorder" OR "parasomnias" OR "pedophilic disorder" OR "persistent complex bereavement disorder" OR "persistent depressive disorder" OR "personality change due to another medical condition" OR "personality disorder" OR "phencyclidine intoxication" OR "phencyclidine use disorder" OR "phencyclidine‐induced disorder" OR "phencyclidine‐related disorder" OR "phonological disorder" OR "pica" OR "posttraumatic stress disorder" OR "pragmatic communication disorder" OR "premature ejaculation" OR "premenstrual dysphoric disorder" OR "psychiatr*" OR "psychological disorder*" OR "psychological health*" OR "psychological illness*" OR "psychological stress" OR "psychological well‐being" OR "psychological wellbeing" OR "psychological wellness" OR "psychological* distress*" OR "psychopathology" OR "psychoses" OR "psychosis" OR "psychot*" OR "psychotic disorder" OR "pyromania" OR "rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder" OR "reactive attachment disorder" OR "restless legs syndrome" OR "restrictive food intake disorder" OR "rumination disorder" OR "schizo*typal disorder" OR "schizophren*" OR "schizotypal personality disorder" OR "sedative intoxication" OR "sedative use disorder" OR "sedative withdrawal" OR "sedative‐induced disorder" OR "sedative‐related disorder" OR "selective mutism" OR "sexual dysfunction" OR "sexual masochism disorder" OR "sexual sadism disorder" OR "skin‐picking disorder" OR "sleep disorder" OR "sleep terrors" OR "sleep‐related hypoventilation" OR "sleep‐wake disorder" OR "sleepwalking" OR "social anxiety disorder" OR "social communication disorder" OR "social phobia" OR "somatic symptom disorder" OR "specific learning disorder" OR "specific phobia" OR "speech sound disorder" OR "stereotypic movement disorder" OR "stimulant intoxication" OR "stimulant use disorder" OR "stimulant withdrawal" OR "stimulant‐induced disorder" OR "stimulant‐related disorder" OR "stressor‐related disorder" OR "stuttering" OR "substance intoxication" OR "substance intoxication and withdrawal" OR "substance use disorder" OR "substance withdrawal" OR "substance‐induced disorder" OR "substance‐induced mental disorder" OR "substance‐related disorder" OR "suicid*" OR "suicidal behavior disorder" OR "tic disorder" OR "tobacco use disorder" OR "tobacco withdrawal" OR "tobacco‐induced disorder" OR "tobacco‐related disorder" OR "tourette disorder" OR "transvestic disorder" OR "trauma‐related disorder" OR "trichotillomania" OR "unspecified communication disorder" OR "voyeuristic disorder")) OR (SRCTITLE("acute stress disorder" OR "addicti* disorder" OR "adjustment disorder" OR "agoraphobia" OR "alcohol intoxication" OR "alcohol use disorder" OR "alcohol withdrawal" OR "alcohol‐induced disorder" OR "alcohol‐related disorder" OR "anorexia nervosa" OR "antisocial personality disorder" OR "anxi* disorder" OR "anxiety disorder" OR "anxiolytic intoxication" OR "anxiolytic use disorder" OR "anxiolytic withdrawal" OR "anxiolytic‐induced disorder" OR "anxiolytic‐related disorder" OR "attention‐deficit disorder" OR "attenuated psychosis syndrome" OR "autis*" OR "autism spectrum disorder" OR "avoidant food intake disorder" OR "binge‐eating disorder" OR "bipolar disorder" OR "bipolar i disorder" OR "bipolar ii disorder" OR "body dysmorphic disorder" OR "breathing‐related sleep disorder" OR "bulimia nervosa" OR "burnout" OR "caffeine intoxication" OR "caffeine use disorder" OR "caffeine withdrawal" OR "caffeine‐induced disorder" OR "caffeine‐related disorder" OR "cannabis intoxication" OR "cannabis use disorder" OR "cannabis withdrawal" OR "cannabis‐induced disorder" OR "cannabis‐related disorder" OR "cataton*" OR "central sleep apnea" OR "childhood‐onset fluency disorder" OR "circadian rhythm sleep‐wake disorder" OR "communication disorder" OR "conduct disorder" OR "conversion disorder" OR "cyclothymic disorder" OR "delayed ejaculation" OR "delirium" OR "delusional disorder" OR "depersonalization disorder" OR "depress*" OR "depressi* disorder" OR "depressive episodes with short‐duration hypomania" OR "derealization disorder" OR "developmental coordination disorder" OR "disinhibited social engagement disorder" OR "disruptive disorder" OR "disruptive mood dysregulation disorder" OR "dissociative amnesia" OR "dissociative disorder" OR "dissociative identity disorder" OR "dysthymia" OR "early ejaculation" OR "eating disorder" OR "elimination disorder" OR "encopresis" OR "enuresis" OR "erectile disorder" OR "excoriation disorder" OR "exhibitionistic disorder" OR "factitious disorder" OR "feeding disorder" OR "female orgasmic disorder" OR "female sexual arousal disorder" OR "female sexual interest disorder" OR "fetishistic disorder" OR "frotteuristic disorder" OR "functional neurological symptom disorder" OR "gambling disorder" OR "gender dysphoria" OR "genito‐pelvic pain disorder" OR "genito‐pelvic penetration disorder" OR "global developmental delay" OR "hair‐pulling disorder" OR "hallucinogen intoxication" OR "hallucinogen persisting perception disorder" OR "hallucinogen‐induced disorder" OR "hallucinogen‐related disorder" OR "hoarding disorder" OR "hyperactivity disorder" OR "hypersomnolence disorder" OR "hypnotic intoxication" OR "hypnotic use disorder" OR "hypnotic withdrawal" OR "hypnotic‐induced disorder" OR "hypnotic‐related disorder" OR "illness anxiety disorder" OR "impulse‐control disorder" OR "inhalant intoxication" OR "inhalant use disorder" OR "inhalant‐induced disorder" OR "inhalant‐related disorder" OR "insomnia disorder" OR "intellectu* development* disorder" OR "intellectual disabilit*" OR "intermittent explosive disorder" OR "internet gaming disorder" OR "kleptomania" OR "language disorder" OR "male hypoactive sexual desire disorder" OR "medication‐induced mental disorder" OR "medication‐induced movement disorder" OR "mental disorder" OR "mental disorder*" OR "mental health*" OR "mental illness*" OR "mental stress" OR "mental well‐being" OR "mental wellbeing" OR "mental wellness" OR "mental* distress*" OR "motor disorder" OR "narcolepsy" OR "neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure" OR "neurocognitive disorder" OR "neurodevelopmental disorder" OR "nightmare disorder" OR "non‐substance‐related disorder" OR "nonsuicidal self‐injury" OR "obsessive‐compulsive disorder" OR "obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea" OR "opioid intoxication" OR "opioid use disorder" OR "opioid withdrawal" OR "opioid‐induced disorder" OR "opioid‐related disorder" OR "oppositional defiant disorder" OR "panic attack" OR "panic disorder" OR "paraphilic disorder" OR "parasomnias" OR "pedophilic disorder" OR "persistent complex bereavement disorder" OR "persistent depressive disorder" OR "personality change due to another medical condition" OR "personality disorder" OR "phencyclidine intoxication" OR "phencyclidine use disorder" OR "phencyclidine‐induced disorder" OR "phencyclidine‐related disorder" OR "phonological disorder" OR "pica" OR "posttraumatic stress disorder" OR "pragmatic communication disorder" OR "premature ejaculation" OR "premenstrual dysphoric disorder" OR "psychiatr*" OR "psychological disorder*" OR "psychological health*" OR "psychological illness*" OR "psychological stress" OR "psychological well‐being" OR "psychological wellbeing" OR "psychological wellness" OR "psychological* distress*" OR "psychopathology" OR "psychoses" OR "psychosis" OR "psychot*" OR "psychotic disorder" OR "pyromania" OR "rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder" OR "reactive attachment disorder" OR "restless legs syndrome" OR "restrictive food intake disorder" OR "rumination disorder" OR "schizo*typal disorder" OR "schizophren*" OR "schizotypal personality disorder" OR "sedative intoxication" OR "sedative use disorder" OR "sedative withdrawal" OR "sedative‐induced disorder" OR "sedative‐related disorder" OR "selective mutism" OR "sexual dysfunction" OR "sexual masochism disorder" OR "sexual sadism disorder" OR "skin‐picking disorder" OR "sleep disorder" OR "sleep terrors" OR "sleep‐related hypoventilation" OR "sleep‐wake disorder" OR "sleepwalking" OR "social anxiety disorder" OR "social communication disorder" OR "social phobia" OR "somatic symptom disorder" OR "specific learning disorder" OR "specific phobia" OR "speech sound disorder"

OR "stereotypic movement disorder" OR "stimulant intoxication" OR "stimulant use disorder" OR "stimulant withdrawal" OR "stimulant‐induced disorder" OR "stimulant‐related disorder" OR "stressor‐related disorder" OR "stuttering" OR "substance intoxication" OR "substance intoxication and withdrawal" OR "substance use disorder" OR "substance withdrawal" OR "substance‐induced disorder" OR "substance‐induced mental disorder" OR "substance‐related disorder" OR "suicid*" OR "suicidal behavior disorder" OR "tic disorder" OR "tobacco use disorder" OR "tobacco withdrawal" OR "tobacco‐induced disorder" OR "tobacco‐related disorder" OR "tourette disorder" OR "transvestic disorder" OR "trauma‐related disorder" OR "trichotillomania" OR "unspecified communication disorder" OR "voyeuristic disorder")) OR (AUTHKEY("acute stress disorder" OR "addicti* disorder" OR "adjustment disorder" OR "agoraphobia" OR "alcohol intoxication" OR "alcohol use disorder" OR "alcohol withdrawal" OR "alcohol‐induced disorder" OR "alcohol‐related disorder" OR "anorexia nervosa" OR "antisocial personality disorder" OR "anxi* disorder" OR "anxiety disorder" OR "anxiolytic intoxication" OR "anxiolytic use disorder" OR "anxiolytic withdrawal" OR "anxiolytic‐induced disorder" OR "anxiolytic‐related disorder" OR "attention‐deficit disorder" OR "attenuated psychosis syndrome" OR "autis*" OR "autism spectrum disorder" OR "avoidant food intake disorder" OR "binge‐eating disorder" OR "bipolar disorder" OR "bipolar i disorder" OR "bipolar ii disorder" OR "body dysmorphic disorder" OR "breathing‐related sleep disorder" OR "bulimia nervosa" OR "burnout" OR "caffeine intoxication" OR "caffeine use disorder" OR "caffeine withdrawal" OR "caffeine‐induced disorder" OR "caffeine‐related disorder" OR "cannabis intoxication" OR "cannabis use disorder" OR "cannabis withdrawal" OR "cannabis‐induced disorder" OR "cannabis‐related disorder" OR "cataton*" OR "central sleep apnea" OR "childhood‐onset fluency disorder" OR "circadian rhythm sleep‐wake disorder" OR "communication disorder" OR "conduct disorder" OR "conversion disorder" OR "cyclothymic disorder" OR "delayed ejaculation" OR "delirium" OR "delusional disorder" OR "depersonalization disorder" OR "depress*" OR "depressi* disorder" OR "depressive episodes with short‐duration hypomania" OR "derealization disorder" OR "developmental coordination disorder" OR "disinhibited social engagement disorder" OR "disruptive disorder" OR "disruptive mood dysregulation disorder" OR "dissociative amnesia" OR "dissociative disorder" OR "dissociative identity disorder" OR "dysthymia" OR "early ejaculation" OR "eating disorder" OR "elimination disorder" OR "encopresis" OR "enuresis" OR "erectile disorder" OR "excoriation disorder" OR "exhibitionistic disorder" OR "factitious disorder" OR "feeding disorder" OR "female orgasmic disorder" OR "female sexual arousal disorder" OR "female sexual interest disorder" OR "fetishistic disorder" OR "frotteuristic disorder" OR "functional neurological symptom disorder" OR "gambling disorder" OR "gender dysphoria" OR "genito‐pelvic pain disorder" OR "genito‐pelvic penetration disorder" OR "global developmental delay" OR "hair‐pulling disorder" OR "hallucinogen intoxication" OR "hallucinogen persisting perception disorder" OR "hallucinogen‐induced disorder" OR "hallucinogen‐related disorder" OR "hoarding disorder" OR "hyperactivity disorder" OR "hypersomnolence disorder" OR "hypnotic intoxication" OR "hypnotic use disorder" OR "hypnotic withdrawal" OR "hypnotic‐induced disorder" OR "hypnotic‐related disorder" OR "illness anxiety disorder" OR "impulse‐control disorder" OR "inhalant intoxication" OR "inhalant use disorder" OR "inhalant‐induced disorder" OR "inhalant‐related disorder" OR "insomnia disorder" OR "intellectu* development* disorder" OR "intellectual disabilit*" OR "intermittent explosive disorder" OR "internet gaming disorder" OR "kleptomania" OR "language disorder" OR "male hypoactive sexual desire disorder" OR "medication‐induced mental disorder" OR "medication‐induced movement disorder" OR "mental disorder" OR "mental disorder*" OR "mental health*" OR "mental illness*" OR "mental stress" OR "mental well‐being" OR "mental wellbeing" OR "mental wellness" OR "mental* distress*" OR "motor disorder" OR "narcolepsy" OR "neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure" OR "neurocognitive disorder" OR "neurodevelopmental disorder" OR "nightmare disorder" OR "non‐substance‐related disorder" OR "nonsuicidal self‐injury" OR "obsessive‐compulsive disorder" OR "obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea" OR "opioid intoxication" OR "opioid use disorder" OR "opioid withdrawal" OR "opioid‐induced disorder" OR "opioid‐related disorder" OR "oppositional defiant disorder" OR "panic attack" OR "panic disorder" OR "paraphilic disorder" OR "parasomnias" OR "pedophilic disorder" OR "persistent complex bereavement disorder" OR "persistent depressive disorder" OR "personality change due to another medical condition" OR "personality disorder" OR "phencyclidine intoxication" OR "phencyclidine use disorder" OR "phencyclidine‐induced disorder" OR "phencyclidine‐related disorder" OR "phonological disorder" OR "pica" OR "posttraumatic stress disorder" OR "pragmatic communication disorder" OR "premature ejaculation" OR "premenstrual dysphoric disorder" OR "psychiatr*" OR "psychological disorder*" OR "psychological health*" OR "psychological illness*" OR "psychological stress" OR "psychological well‐being" OR "psychological wellbeing" OR "psychological wellness" OR "psychological* distress*" OR "psychopathology" OR "psychoses" OR "psychosis" OR "psychot*" OR "psychotic disorder" OR "pyromania" OR "rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder" OR "reactive attachment disorder" OR "restless legs syndrome" OR "restrictive food intake disorder" OR "rumination disorder" OR "schizo*typal disorder" OR "schizophren*" OR "schizotypal personality disorder" OR "sedative intoxication" OR "sedative use disorder" OR "sedative withdrawal" OR "sedative‐induced disorder" OR "sedative‐related disorder" OR "selective mutism" OR "sexual dysfunction" OR "sexual masochism disorder" OR "sexual sadism disorder" OR "skin‐picking disorder" OR "sleep disorder" OR "sleep terrors" OR "sleep‐related hypoventilation" OR "sleep‐wake disorder" OR "sleepwalking" OR "social anxiety disorder" OR "social communication disorder" OR "social phobia" OR "somatic symptom disorder" OR "specific learning disorder" OR "specific phobia" OR "speech sound disorder"

OR "stereotypic movement disorder" OR "stimulant intoxication" OR "stimulant use disorder" OR "stimulant withdrawal" OR "stimulant‐induced disorder" OR "stimulant‐related disorder" OR "stressor‐related disorder" OR "stuttering" OR "substance intoxication" OR "substance intoxication and withdrawal" OR "substance use disorder" OR "substance withdrawal" OR "substance‐induced disorder" OR "substance‐induced mental disorder" OR "substance‐related disorder" OR "suicid*" OR "suicidal behavior disorder" OR "tic disorder" OR "tobacco use disorder" OR "tobacco withdrawal" OR "tobacco‐induced disorder" OR "tobacco‐related disorder" OR "tourette disorder" OR "transvestic disorder" OR "trauma‐related disorder" OR "trichotillomania" OR "unspecified communication disorder" OR "voyeuristic disorder"))) AND (((((TITLE‐ABS("doobie" OR "acid" OR "adam" OR "alcoh*" OR "amphet*" OR "amphetamine" OR "amytal" OR "anabolic" OR "analgesics" OR "angel dust" OR "anxiolytics" OR "argila" OR "ayahuasca" OR "balloons" OR "barbit*" OR "barbiturates" OR "base" OR "bath salts" OR "bennies" OR "benzodiazepines" OR "benzos" OR "black beauties" OR "blotter" OR "boy" OR "buttons" OR "caffeine" OR "cannabinol" OR "cannabis" OR "central nervous system depressants" OR "china white" OR "cigarette" OR "cocaine" OR "codeine" OR "coke" OR "colombian" OR "crank" OR "crystal" OR "darvon" OR "demerol" OR "dexies" OR "dextromethorphan" OR "diazepam" OR "diet pills" OR "dilaudid" OR "dmt" OR "dope" OR "downers" OR "drug" OR "dusts" OR "dxm" OR "ecstasy" OR "fentanyl" OR "flakka" OR "flunitrazepam" OR "freebase" OR "ganja" OR "gas" OR "ghb" OR "glue" OR "goofballs" OR "grass" OR "hallucinogens" OR "hashish" OR "herb" OR "heroin" OR "hookah" OR "horse" OR "hypnotics" OR "ice" OR "inhalants" OR "joint" OR "jun" OR "k2" OR "ketamine" OR "khat" OR "kratom" OR "lady" OR "laughing gas" OR "librium" OR "loperamide" OR "lsd" OR "magic mushrooms" OR "marijuana" OR "mdma" OR "mescaline" OR "meth" OR "methadone" OR "methamphetamine" OR "methylphenidate" OR "microdots" OR "molly" OR "mushrooms" OR "narcolept*" OR "narghile" OR "nicotine" OR "nitrous oxide" OR "opiate" OR "opiates" OR "opioid*" OR "opium" OR "orphine" OR "oxy" OR "oxycodone" OR "oxycontin" OR "painkillers" OR "paint" OR "pcp" OR "pcp" OR "percodan" OR "percs" OR "peyote" OR "pot" OR "prescription opioids" OR "prescription stimulants" OR "psilocybin" OR "psychedelics" OR "psychoactive*" OR "qat" OR "quaaludes" OR "reds" OR "reefer" OR "rock" OR "rohypnol" OR "roofies" OR "salvia" OR "scag" OR "seconal" OR "sedatives" OR "shisha" OR "shrooms" OR "sinsemillia" OR "sleeping pills" OR "smack" OR "smok*" OR "snow" OR "snuff" OR "speed" OR "spice" OR "spliff" OR "steroids" OR "stp" OR "substance" OR "synthetic cannabinoids" OR "synthetic cathinones" OR "tabs" OR "talwin" OR "thc" OR "to drop" OR "to trip" OR "tobac*" OR "tobacco" OR "tramadol" OR "tranq" OR "valium" OR "vaping" OR "waterpipe" OR "weed" OR "whip‐its" OR "white crosses" OR "xanax" OR "xtc" OR "yellowjackets")) OR (AUTHKEY("doobie" OR "acid" OR "adam" OR "alcoh*" OR "amphet*" OR "amphetamine" OR "amytal" OR "anabolic" OR "analgesics" OR "angel dust" OR "anxiolytics" OR "argila" OR "ayahuasca" OR "balloons" OR "barbit*" OR "barbiturates" OR "base" OR "bath salts" OR "bennies" OR "benzodiazepines" OR "benzos" OR "black beauties" OR "blotter" OR "boy" OR "buttons" OR "caffeine" OR "cannabinol" OR "cannabis" OR "central nervous system depressants" OR "china white" OR "cigarette" OR "cocaine" OR "codeine" OR "coke" OR "colombian" OR "crank" OR "crystal" OR "darvon" OR "demerol" OR "dexies" OR "dextromethorphan" OR "diazepam" OR "diet pills" OR "dilaudid" OR "dmt" OR "dope" OR "downers" OR "drug" OR "dusts" OR "dxm" OR "ecstasy" OR "fentanyl" OR "flakka" OR "flunitrazepam" OR "freebase" OR "ganja" OR "gas" OR "ghb" OR "glue" OR "goofballs" OR "grass" OR "hallucinogens" OR "hashish" OR "herb" OR "heroin" OR "hookah" OR "horse" OR "hypnotics" OR "ice" OR "inhalants" OR "joint" OR "jun" OR "k2" OR "ketamine" OR "khat" OR "kratom" OR "lady" OR "laughing gas" OR "librium" OR "loperamide" OR "lsd" OR "magic mushrooms" OR "marijuana" OR "mdma" OR "mescaline" OR "meth" OR "methadone" OR "methamphetamine" OR "methylphenidate" OR "microdots" OR "molly" OR "mushrooms" OR "narcolept*" OR "narghile" OR "nicotine" OR "nitrous oxide" OR "opiate" OR "opiates" OR "opioid*" OR "opium" OR "orphine" OR "oxy" OR "oxycodone" OR "oxycontin" OR "painkillers" OR "paint" OR "pcp" OR "pcp" OR "percodan" OR "percs" OR "peyote" OR "pot" OR "prescription opioids" OR "prescription stimulants" OR "psilocybin" OR "psychedelics" OR "psychoactive*" OR "qat" OR "quaaludes" OR "reds" OR "reefer" OR "rock" OR "rohypnol" OR "roofies" OR "salvia" OR "scag" OR "seconal" OR "sedatives" OR "shisha" OR "shrooms" OR "sinsemillia" OR "sleeping pills" OR "smack" OR "smok*" OR "snow" OR "snuff" OR "speed" OR "spice" OR "spliff" OR "steroids" OR "stp" OR "substance" OR "synthetic cannabinoids" OR "synthetic cathinones" OR "tabs" OR "talwin" OR "thc" OR "to drop" OR "to trip" OR "tobac*" OR "tobacco" OR "tramadol" OR "tranq" OR "valium" OR "vaping" OR "waterpipe" OR "weed" OR "whip‐its" OR "white crosses" OR "xanax" OR "xtc" OR "yellowjackets"))) AND ((TITLE‐ABS("abus*" OR "addict*" OR "dependenc*" OR "illegal" OR "illicit" OR "us* disorder" OR "withdrawal")) OR (AUTHKEY("abus*" OR "addict*" OR "dependenc*" OR "illegal" OR "illicit" OR "us* disorder" OR "withdrawal")))) OR ((TITLE‐ABS("alcoholism" OR "crack abuse" OR "crack addiction" OR "crack dependence" OR "crack rehabilitation" OR "crack use disorder" OR "crack withdrawal" OR "overdose" OR "street drug" OR "substance use")) OR (AUTHKEY("alcoholism" OR "crack abuse" OR "crack addiction" OR "crack dependence" OR "crack rehabilitation" OR "crack use disorder" OR "crack withdrawal" OR "overdose" OR "street drug" OR "substance use")))) OR ((TITLE‐ABS("addict*")) OR (AUTHKEY("addict*"))))) AND NOT ((TITLE‐ABS("computer vision syndrome" OR "drug delivery" OR "drug development" OR "drug discovery" OR "narcolepsy" OR "plant stress" OR "serum withdrawal")) OR (AUTHKEY("computer vision syndrome" OR "drug delivery" OR "drug development" OR "drug discovery" OR "narcolepsy" OR "plant stress" OR "serum withdrawal")))

Vanhée L. and Scarpa S., “Is Addiction Research Addicted to Artificial Intelligence? Mapping the Intersection of Artificial Intelligence, Substance Use and Mental Health Through a Bibliometric Analysis,” Drug and Alcohol Review
45, no. 1 (2026): e70057, 10.1111/dar.70057.

Funding: The authors acknowledge the support of the Swedish Research Council (Vetenskaprådet) grant number 2023‐04505 (Anxiety‐Sensitive Artificial Intelligence) and of the Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare (Forte), grant number 2024‐00388.

## Endnotes

1
Addressing the aims of the Drug and Alcohol Review and its special issue on Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Substance Use and Addiction Research, this paper frames addiction as both substance‐induced and non‐substance‐induced addictions (e.g., gambling, internet use), SU alongside problematic SU (including SUDs), and MH within a medical framing of psychological disorders.

2
Technically, our analysis investigates ‘AI and ASUM’ as a field. However, due to the lack of any visible trace of AI‐induced addictions in the recovered literature, the terminology ‘AI for ASUM’ was kept to best signifying the contents actually covered in this paper. The issue is further discussed in Section  .

3
The method for obtaining the number of documents per year for the three independent fields of AI, ASU and MH is described in Section  .

4

https://nida.nih.gov/research‐topics/commonly‐used‐drugs‐charts.

## Data Availability Statement
The data that supports the findings of this study is available in the of this article.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

Data S1.

## Data Availability Statement
The data that supports the findings of this study is available in the of this article.