379blackwellopenAnatomical Sciences EducationAnat Sci EducPMC1190900311909003119090033998165710.1002/ase.70004Body donor programs in Australia and New Zealand: Current status and future opportunities
JenkinRebekah A KeayKevin A 
1
School of Medical Sciences (Anatomy), Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia*

Correspondence
, 
Dr. Rebekah A. Jenkin, School of Medical Sciences (Anatomy), Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. 
Email: rebekah.jenkin@sydney.edu.au

✉Corresponding author.
2122025183301301–3281632025© 2025 The Author(s). Anatomical Sciences Education published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Association for Anatomy.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract
Body donation is critical to anatomy study in Australia and New Zealand. Annually, more than 10,000 students, anatomists, researchers, and clinicians access tissue donated by local consented donors through university‐based body donation programs. However, little research has been published about their operations. This study sought to examine the characteristics of the nineteen body donation programs operating in Australia and New Zealand. Information was collected from publicly available sources, virtual interviews with 17/19 programs, and responses to a set of questions (11/19). Body donation is locally regulated in both countries. Four Australian programs operate as central mortuaries supplying users in their state, while the remainder and the New Zealand programs operate institutionally. Annually, 1000–1500 donors are received across both countries. Retention periods vary, although most donors are returned for disposition within 3 years. All facilitate the return of cremated remains to the family on donor election. Most programs (16/19) reported that they received sufficient donors, with many narrowing their acceptance area. Pre‐death registration of donors is required by 12/19 programs; five Australian programs will accept next‐of‐kin donations post‐mortem. Next‐of‐kin authorization is required for donation; New Zealand programs seek this at the time of donor registration. All programs recognize donors; fifteen host commemoration/thanksgiving services for donors and their families. Body donation is well supported by local communities in both countries. Opportunities for improvement include the development of regional standards, engagement with donors/the community about body donation, and recognition of the primacy of donor elections over next‐of‐kin wishes.
Keywords: Australia and New Zealand, body donation, body donor recognition, donor consent, next‐of‐kin consent

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Jan 20; Received 2024 Jun 15; Accepted 2025 Jan 29; Issue date 2025 Mar.

## INTRODUCTION
Education, training, and research related to human anatomy continue to rely on the availability of human tissue both in Australia and New Zealand , , , and internationally. , , , , Across the world, sources of human tissue vary. Australia and New Zealand are members of a small (but growing) group of countries where all locally sourced bodies are from consented donors; many other countries continue to use unclaimed bodies or the bodies of prisoners. , , , , 

Both Australia and New Zealand are constitutional monarchies that were colonized by Great Britain and thus have legal systems based on common law. Australia is a federation, with six states and two territories. It has a population of approximately 27 million, the majority living on the Eastern seaboard. New South Wales (NSW) and Victoria are the most populous states, with over 5 million people in each of their capital cities (Sydney and Melbourne, respectively). However, geographically, the largest state is Western Australia. There are forty‐two universities and twenty‐one medical schools located across the country in all states and one territory, including in metropolitan and rural areas. In addition, the majority of universities provide anatomy education to non‐medical students at undergraduate, graduate, and post‐graduate levels.
New Zealand consists of two main islands with a unitary government. Its population is just over 5 million. The capital of New Zealand is Wellington on the South Island, but the largest city is Auckland (located on the most populous North Island). New Zealand has eight universities and two medical schools: at the University of Auckland on the North Island, and at the University of Otago on the South Island. In addition, anatomy is taught to other non‐medical students at five institutions across New Zealand, including at Auckland and Otago. There were approximately 4200 medical students enrolled across Australia in 2021 and 600 across New Zealand in 2020. , , Demand for anatomy education is high and relies on altruistic donors. , 

It must be acknowledged, however, that the contemporary legal and ethical frameworks regulating body donation in both countries are substantially different to those which existed when anatomical education and body procurement commenced in the mid‐nineteenth century. The establishment of undergraduate medical programs at the University of Otago on the South Island of New Zealand (1876), at the University of Melbourne (Victoria) (1864) , and at the University of Sydney (NSW) (1883) was predicated on the procurement of unclaimed bodies from public institutions as authorized under local anatomy legislation modeled on the British Anatomy Act 1832. , , The law has been progressively updated alongside a shift in practice. In response to societal and economic changes in the early twentieth century, the availability of unclaimed bodies (of unconsented residents of public institutions) for anatomical dissection substantially declined. More residents of such institutions had family or friends willing and able to claim their bodies for burial (and to meet the expense of doing so), and the Australian government provided funds for burial costs to pensioners. The University of Otago experienced similar problems in securing unclaimed bodies. , Thus, public support for body donation was sought in both countries. , The University of Otago established a body bequest program in 1943, , , and the University of Sydney established a register of body donors in 1949. , Reliance on consented donors for anatomical study became standard practice across Australia and New Zealand in the mid‐twentieth century. , , , Changes to the applicable laws occurred later. , 

New Zealand has a single legislative instrument governing the use of human tissue, while each Australian state and territory has its own individual regulatory framework. , Both countries also have local policies and operating procedures issued by the relevant government departments that seek to guide operations under the relevant legislation and mandate reporting and inspection of programs and facilities. Common core elements include informed consent in writing; involvement of next of kin; tracking of all donors from reception through to disposition; and a prohibition on commercial trade in human tissue. , The regulatory framework in both countries includes mandatory reporting and annual inspection. Local authorities can, and have on occasion, put conditions on anatomy license holders, or suspended operations when legal, ethical and/or policy violations are identified. 

Notwithstanding this regulatory framework, information about the operations of licensed anatomy holders, and details of any issues, is not routinely reported. Despite each Australian jurisdiction and New Zealand having compulsory annual reporting requirements, no collated information about donations or donors is made public. The absence of such reporting perpetuates a degree of ignorance and potential misunderstanding of body donation and anatomical study. It is also a missed opportunity for the anatomy community in Australia and New Zealand to engage with the public and government about anatomy and body donation, and their reliance on the generous altruism of donors.
In addition, information about how a member of the public can become a body donor and about the operations of body donor programs more broadly is less accessible. In contrast to organ donation, body donation is neither widely promoted nor reported upon. Each program has its own website and contacts, providing the public with information about its program, and sometimes links to other programs across the state or country. 

Reporting on the operations of contemporary programs relying exclusively on local consenting donors ensures professional and community scrutiny and provides opportunities for programs to reflect on their own practices and share concerns and strategies to support their continued operation to the highest standards. Scrutiny and reflection are essential to ensure legal compliance, ethical operations, and community engagement , , and to ensure that past practices are appropriately acknowledged and learnt from. Research examining the operation of body donor programs in countries with varying regulation contributes to international knowledge , , and can provide guidance and insights to assist programs seeking to transition from using unclaimed bodies to consenting donors. , , , , Importantly, it also enables public recognition of altruistic donors and their families and may assist in developing community and professional understanding of the legal, ethical, and procedural processes that govern body donation. , , , , Evidence suggests that ignorance about legal, ethical, and practical procedures and policies governing body and organ donation contribute to reluctance by health professionals to discuss donation with donors and families. , Research conducted on donor populations also suggests that presumptions about donor characteristics and factors that motivate donors may be incorrect or neglect key groups of potential donors. Current success in securing adequate numbers of donors does not preclude changing circumstances, which may deter donors or necessitate greater numbers to support expanding needs.
This study collated information about body donor programs in Australia and New Zealand to address the dearth of information about these programs and their operations. It brings into the public domain operational information about body donation to inform contemporary practice both within and outside Australia and New Zealand. It also provides a snapshot of the status of body donation in communities where donor consent is mandatory, and programs rely on public support. It is possible that this research may also be useful in developing public information on body donation for dissemination in Australia and New Zealand.

## METHODS
The study received ethical approval from The University of Sydney Research Ethics Committee in 2017 (approval number 2017/959).
The study sought to recruit each of the nineteen body donor programs operating in Australia (17 programs) and New Zealand (2 programs) between 2019 and 2022. The primary method of information collection was an interview. Information on donor programs was downloaded from program websites at the time of the interview, and again in 2024 to check for updates or substantial changes in program operations. Contacts for all body donor programs (program manager or coordinator role‐based emails) were identified using donor program websites.
After early communications with potential interviewees, a list of questions and issues for discussion in the interview was drafted and sent with the formal invitation to participants in the study. The list was made available to all programs. A copy of the list of questions is provided as .
One body donor program declined to participate in both the interview and to answer the questions but provided information via email (in addition to that available on their website). One program provided information exclusively in response to the list of questions. Seventeen programs participated in either an online video or a telephone interview. Of these, ten programs also provided answers to the list of questions. Each interview included the program coordinator or manager along with their available colleagues; mortuary managers, academic coordinators of anatomy programs, and anatomy license holders. Information was thus gathered from the perspective of those managing the body donor programs, those operating anatomy facilities, and those engaged in anatomy teaching and research. The responses to the questions were used to cross‐check and supplement the data collection.
Interviews were conducted in a free‐flowing conversational manner with topics raised organically as the conversation proceeded. The majority of interviews were conducted between November 2020 and March 2022, except the interviews with programs that suspended their operations during the COVID‐19 pandemic, which were conducted through to February 2024. Interviews were generally 1 to 1.5 h in duration. With the consent of participants, written notes were taken, but not recordings. Participants were free to decline to discuss any issue. Email communication before and after interviews sought to clarify and confirm the information provided. All programs were sent a copy of the compiled information pertaining to their body donor program for review and were advised of the intention to publish the findings. The contents were amended to correct factual errors following their advice and to ensure consistency in terminology.
The information collected was compiled and presented using descriptive headings:

Overview of body donation programs in Australia and New Zealand
Characteristics of programs
The conditions for acceptance of donor registrations and donors
The ways in which programs recognize and thank donors and their families
These headings broadly correspond with the structure and operation of body donation programs in Australia and New Zealand. Information was largely descriptive in nature and thus statistical analysis was not possible. However, where appropriate, findings are presented using proportions or percentages. A detailed examination of program documentation, including consent forms, was outside the scope of this study as not all programs provide access to consent forms on their websites.

## RESULTS

## Overview of body donation programs
All body donor programs in Australia and New Zealand are situated within tertiary education institutions. Most Australian programs (14/17) are located on the eastern seaboard (stretching from Melbourne to Cairns). Every state in Australia has at least one body donor program, with the number of programs in each jurisdiction depending on whether there is a statewide central mortuary in operation or multiple separate body donor programs. The majority of programs (11/17) are located in the capital of the relevant state/territory jurisdiction, with three rural programs in NSW and two in Queensland. Western Australia, South Australia, Victoria, and Tasmania operate central mortuaries with one program accepting donors and supplying anatomy license holders in their respective jurisdictions. This includes single use license holders. Multiple body donor programs operate in NSW (eight) and Queensland (four). Only one of the two territories in Australia (the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) where the capital Canberra is located) has a body donor program. The Western Australian, Tasmanian, and ACT programs only transfer bodies to institutions and anatomy license holders within their jurisdictions. The South Australian program provides tissue to all anatomy license holders within South Australia and transfers interstate. The multiple NSW programs transfer bodies and body parts to other programs in their jurisdiction depending upon availability and the proposed use. Queensland programs are licensed on the basis of whether they receive donors and/or loan or transfer them intra‐ and interstate. Three of the four Queensland programs transfer donors interstate. The NSW programs also supply tissue to anatomy license holders at other institutions without body donor programs and for single‐use workshops. Two NSW programs accept donor tissue from interstate because their receipt of donors does not currently meet their needs. No Australian program transfers donors internationally.
A body donor program operates on each of the islands of New Zealand: at the University of Auckland on the North Island and the University of Otago on the South Island. Each supplies local institutions only, with no transfer between the islands or outside of New Zealand. There is no international transfer of donated bodies to Australia or elsewhere in the world from New Zealand.
All nineteen body donor programs have information about donation available on their website, usually embedded within the hosting university site. The information accessible on websites includes a description of the program; the importance of donors to education and research; the acceptance area; exclusion criteria; the donation process; and contact details. Approximately half of the programs include downloadable information brochures and consent forms, while the others require lodgment (online or via email) of an expression of interest to receive the relevant documentation and/or contact from the program manager or coordinator. Several programs shift their information and consent forms from publicly downloadable to ‘on request’ when their programs close acceptance of donors due to limited capacity. The majority of programs have a dedicated program coordinator or manager role (either full or part‐time), with primary responsibility for communication with donors and their families. Rather than having a dedicated program coordinator role, two Australian programs share responsibility for donor liaison, including answering queries about registration, across staff within their individual anatomy laboratories.

## Donor registration
There is no “standard” donor registration form across either Australia or New Zealand, and thus the descriptive information about donors collected varies between programs. All donor programs collect basic demographic information such as sex, age, and the minimum information required for a death certificate. Religion is noted in many forms, but not all. Compared to the standard information collected on donors by other countries, for example, the United States, , information is limited. Information such as ethnicity may be discerned from death certificates, which detail parents' country of birth. However, this information is seldom compiled for research or reporting. Forms used by a minority of Australian programs include a question relating to Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander descent. Beyond this information, no Australian program routinely collects information about the ethnic and cultural background of donors, including whether the donor is Aboriginal Australian, Torres Strait Islander, or of other First Nations origin.
One of the two New Zealand programs routinely collects information on ethnicity from all donors. Otherwise, only basic demographic information is collected. The New Zealand programs reported that in the rare occurrence a person of Māori heritage seeks to be a donor, the support of family is sought for the donation to proceed. This reflects the requirements of Clause 6 (a) of the New Zealand Human Tissue Act 2008, which defines “immediate family” to mean “members of the individual's family, whānau, or other culturally recognised family group, who (i) were in a close relationship with the individual; or (ii) had, in accordance with customs or traditions of the community of which the individual was part, responsibility for the individual's welfare and best interests.”
The New Zealand programs report that they communicate very closely with community elders about the donation program. The integration of Māori rituals and customs into the academic program and ceremonies has enhanced both student and staff understanding of these practices, and the acceptability of the program to the local community. 

In some Australian jurisdictions, notably Queensland (Part 1, clause 4 of the Transplantation and Anatomy Act 1979) and Tasmania (Part 1, clause 3 (b)(v) of the Human Tissue Act 1985), consent provisions also include explicit accommodation of the cultural beliefs of Indigenous peoples and other cultural groups, in relation to the concept of family and next of kin. These provisions broaden the scope of who should be consulted, and who is legally able to determine whether the donation of their family member is acceptable. They also recognize that concepts of family may reflect cultural differences.
Some Australian programs located in areas with larger First Nations communities reported that they do not accept Aboriginal Australian donors as they feel that to do so is likely to cause distress to a donor's family and community, due to sensitivities around end‐of‐life issues for Aboriginal Australians. , Other programs stated that their practice was that all donors should be considered based on eligibility and exclusion conditions. Thus, if a donor meets those conditions, they would be accepted as a registered donor, and their suitability assessed at death, as occurs with all other donors. Such suitability includes consideration of next‐of‐kin support of, and consent for the donation.
Registration or donation by Aboriginal Australians or Torres Strait Islander peoples was a very rare occurrence in all Australian programs interviewed. Only two programs reported receiving applications to register as donors from individuals who identified themselves as such, and only one had accepted an Aboriginal Australian donor up to the time of interview, although both had Aboriginal Australian donors on their registers. Other programs noted that there might be donors of First Nations descent on their registers, but unless the donor had indicated this as part of the registration process, this would not be known.

## Donor motivation
There have been no published studies, of which we are aware, that examine the motivations of Australian body donors. The New Zealand studies of the motivation and characteristics of donors found that most registered to donate in their late middle age to old age and that women were more likely to be single (unmarried, widowed, or divorced) than men. , They also reported that knowing someone who had donated was a motivation for registration as was the desire to contribute to medical research. A recent United Kingdom study reported that approximately 40% of donors knew, or had, family members who had donated or were registered to do so. In their 1995 study of potential donors, Richardson and Hurwitz reported that 25% knew other donors. 

Many of the larger Australian and New Zealand programs noted that they have family members, including spouses, siblings, parents, children, cousins, and in‐laws who register because of a previous registration or donation of a family member (legacy donations). A study conducted on Hawaiian donors reported simultaneous co‐donation in 38% of married donors. They suggested that programs should consider the value of raising co‐donation with potential donors.
There is no financial payment associated with donation in Australia or New Zealand, reflecting the legal prohibition on commercial trade in human tissue in both countries. , 

In the New Zealand studies, the main motivation for donation for many registered donors was altruistic; donors saw value in donating their bodies for use in research and education and as a “gift.” Many also hoped that their personal medical history might be of additional educational or research value. , , , These motivations were also reported in studies in the United Kingdom , and in countries as diverse as Denmark, the Netherlands, Sri Lanka, Hong Kong, and China. , 

All interviewed Australian body donor program coordinators reported similar sentiments in their communications with potential donors, although they also reported that a small, but growing proportion of donors sought to avoid the high costs of funeral and burial arrangements, and thus imposition of a financial burden on their families. Further, program coordinators reported that the opportunity to spare families the trouble and cost of funeral arrangements was more often mentioned by donors when seeking to register than it had been in years prior. This trend was also observed by the New Zealand programs. It could be argued therefore that, given the high cost of funeral and burial expenses, , the fact that most programs cover these costs may be seen to constitute a financial incentive for some donors. , , , , , This is an area that merits future consideration.
Programs in both Australia and New Zealand noted that a small number of donors were isolated or disenfranchised from their family and hence saw no purpose in funeral rites or burial. The expectation of avoiding the costs associated with funeral and burial rites (or cremation arrangements), which are considerable, has also created challenges for the programs in managing disappointment and anger if a donor's body is not accepted into the program. All programs have very explicit information for potential donors on the exclusion criteria and the possibility that a body may not be accepted. Many programs communicate closely with potential donors and their families to ensure that this is understood. Nevertheless, programs reported that at an already difficult and distressing time, rejection of a donation can and has caused considerable angst. In addition, the longest‐established body donor programs have thousands of registered donors and are often challenged to manage donor expectations. Their capacity to accept all registered donors at the time of death, especially during holiday periods, is limited and some donations will be rejected. The program with the largest acceptance area also has the highest acceptance rate; it advised that it rarely rejects a donation.

## Donor anonymity
All programs in this study reported that they do not reveal the identity of bodies to students (or staff), with most interpreting their relevant privacy laws as prohibiting such sharing of personal information. This is consistent with the historical approach advocated by ethicists. However, some Australian anatomy schools are exploring initiatives to personalize, rather than anonymize, donors. To date, none of the programs have implemented the kind of approach that has been adopted in parts of Asia and North America , , where students are introduced to donor families and provided with extensive information about donors and their lives. There is no absolute legal impediment to such initiatives occurring in most Australian jurisdictions, provided that donors consent to having their identity shared and that the family is also comfortable. However, most programs saw maintaining donor anonymity as part of their responsibilities in caring for the donor after death, the exception being identification of donors (with their consent) in thanksgiving ceremonies (discussed below) and referenced the applicable law when explaining this approach.

## Community engagement
Most of the longer‐standing and statewide programs relied on word of mouth and occasional media coverage to promote their program, while several of the newer programs had promotional material in the form of pamphlets placed in primary care facilities, including general practice and allied health clinics, nursing homes, and other aged care facilities. No program placed material in a hospice. The University of Otago program introduced a pamphlet to be made available via solicitors to persons seeking to make their wills in the 1960s—at the time of the transition from using unclaimed bodies to consenting donors—and this practice continues. The University of Western Australia conducted an outreach program several years ago, where anatomy staff visited aged care facilities to speak to residents and staff about body donation. At the time, the staff leading the sessions were surprised both at the strong interest and support for body donation, and at the level of misinformation about what it entailed. Many programs reported very strong community support with their registered donors and their families highly committed to the program. All noted that donors valued their connection to the university, and some recounted that donors saw their donation as an opportunity to attend the university which was not available to them previously. A number of donor programs have participated in media productions, either created in‐house (as occurred at The University of Otago) or via public or commercial media. However, in the latter case, the institution had been approached to participate rather than seeking such publicity itself.

## Program operations
Table  summarizes the operational characteristics and geographical location of all nineteen body donor programs. Australian programs are presented in geographical jurisdiction arranged in alphabetical order, followed by the two New Zealand Programs.
 

## Acceptance area
The geographical area in which Australian donors must live and/or die to be accepted by the programs (the “acceptance area”) varies across programs. Five programs located in major capital cities (Sydney (2 programs), Melbourne, Adelaide and Canberra) limit acceptance to donors who die within 50 kms from the program's location. Programs in Sydney and Melbourne have narrowed their acceptance area as they cannot accommodate the number of potential donors. Four programs, also based in metropolitan areas, accept donors who die within 100–150 km of the program location. Four rural‐based programs have acceptance areas of 300–400 km, reflecting their more isolated geographical location. Four programs have acceptance areas ranging from several hundred kilometers from the program's site to the whole of the state and across state borders.
The two New Zealand programs have different approaches to the acceptance area. The University of Auckland program accepts donors based on the time taken to transport the deceased to the University with a three‐hour limit determining acceptance. The University of Otago has four collection areas, based around the location of funeral services with morticians trained by the program to embalm donors (see Table  ). The embalmed donors are then transferred to the anatomy facilities in either Dunedin or Christchurch. 

Only one program routinely required next‐of‐kin or the donor's estate to pay transportation costs; transportation cost was otherwise covered by the institutions so long as the donor died within the acceptance area. Several programs would share the cost of transportation to the institution if a donor died outside the acceptance area; this was most common in rural areas.

## Program characteristics
There are quite marked differences across Australia in the number and size of body donor programs in each state (Table  ). Information about the number of donors received annually is presented categorically. The category reflects the “average” number of donors over the five preceding years:

Category 1 (Cat. 1) are programs receiving fewer than 50 donors annually;
Category 2 (Cat. 2) are programs receiving between 50 and 100 donors annually; and,
Category 3 (Cat. 3) are programs receiving more than 100 donors annually.
One program did not provide information on the number of donors received annually. Otherwise, the number of donors received ranged from 1 to more than 150 per annum. Half (9/18) of the programs reported receiving 50 or less donors annually. One‐third (6/18) received between 50 and 100 donors each year, and three programs more than 100. The programs that received the largest number of donors per annum are the University of Melbourne and the University of Western Australia, both of which operate as statewide central mortuaries. The University of Technology, Sydney, and the University of Queensland programs also received large numbers of donors. Both have dedicated institutional facilities for surgical and other postgraduate and clinical training.
The overall number of donors received annually across Australia and New Zealand is in the range of 1000–1500. The annual variation is mostly due to the demand for postgraduate training using frozen unembalmed donors, which is becoming a more common practice in Australia and New Zealand. Most programs reported stable demand for undergraduate and graduate teaching using embalmed tissue. The numbers of medical students and donors received are relatively stable. Smith et al. reported that in 2019, 34/39 Medical Schools in the United Kingdom and Ireland used 1363 donors to provide anatomical education to some 10,000 medical students, suggesting an allocation of around 7 students per donor. Programs in this study delivering gross dissection courses reported quite different ratios of students to donors across the programs, ranging from 4 to 60 students per donor.
Approximately two‐thirds to three‐quarters of the donors received annually across Australia and New Zealand are directed towards education, predominantly of medical, dentistry, biomedical, allied health, science, and health sciences students. The remainder of donors are used for postgraduate training, professional education, contracted workshops, research, and evaluation. A small number of donors are used for skeletal preparations, and for anthropological, forensic, neuroscience, pathology, and other research. Two Australian and both New Zealand programs have plastination facilities, although all reported this occurs on a very limited basis. Donor tissue is also used for museum and teaching collections.
The adequacy of the number of donors received annually is denoted using the phrases:

“Receipt = requirements,” where the number of donors received annually is generally adequate to meet educational and research needs;
“Receipt < requirements,” where the annual receipt of donors does not generally meet the institutional educational and research needs and additional donors would be welcome;
“Receipt > requirements,” where the annual receipt of donors generally exceeds the capacity of the institution to use donors.
Three programs advised that there was a shortfall in the number of donors received annually and their recent/current needs; all were in NSW. Four of the nineteen programs indicated that they received more donors than they required annually, and the remaining twelve programs indicated that the current number of donors met or sometimes exceeded their needs. The statewide central mortuaries all reported that in general, the number of donors available to them each year in the past 5–10 years (or longer) had exceeded their needs and that therefore they had reduced their acceptance area, mostly to within 10–50 km of their city‐center or university mortuary (depending on the location and transportation restrictions). The University of Sydney has also substantially reduced its acceptance area, as has the Australian National University. Programs geographically located near state borders had arrangements in place to direct donor families to other body donor programs when their acceptance of donors was closed due to capacity. While most Australian programs will supply tissue or donors to other programs on request, such supply is determined on a case‐by‐case basis unless there is a standing arrangement. For example, the University of Adelaide has an annual arrangement to supply donors to the University of Technology, Sydney. Programs determine their own capacity for acceptance of donors and there are no a priori arrangements for “smoothing” of supply across multiple institutions, even those located within close geographical proximity as is the case in Sydney (NSW) where five programs are located. As noted previously, the two programs in New Zealand operate independently and do not transfer outside their respective jurisdictions. Both report adequate numbers of donors.

## Preservation techniques
All except one program used embalmment as the preservation technique. Twelve programs also freeze donors, although four reported very limited freezing capacity. There is very limited freezing capacity in NSW and none at the time of this study on the South Island of New Zealand. Embalmed tissue was used for undergraduate and graduate medical, science, allied health, medical sciences, and biomedical sciences education. Dissection is conducted by medical students at both New Zealand programs, but many Australian institutions primarily use prosections for undergraduate and graduate medical anatomy education. One‐third of the Australian programs maintain dissection courses of longer than one semester in duration, with dissection offered to medical students as a shorter intensive, or elective course by the remainder. Postgraduate dissection intensives or longer courses using embalmed tissue are offered by all Australian universities. Frozen tissue was used by one program for medical education, but all other programs reported such tissue as predominantly being used in postgraduate and continuing education, in medical device testing and training, and in contracted workshops.

## Retention period
The permitted retention period varies across jurisdictions in Australia (Table  ). NSW has a four‐plus‐four retention period, where the standard retention is four years, and upon application, with the written consent of the donor and the permission of the Anatomy Inspector, the donor may be retained for up to an additional four years. In contrast, Queensland and Victoria have a three‐year retention period; South Australia, Western Australia, and Tasmania have five years; the ACT has six years, and the New Zealand programs may retain donors for up to three years.
Both New Zealand body donor programs seek consent for indefinite retention from all registered donors and from next of kin at the time of registration (of the donation). All Australian programs have a process for seeking consent for retention for an indefinite period from donors and/or their families, although this too varies across jurisdictions. Some also include different retention period options, ranging from 2 to 5 years, in their consent form, while others have different categories of consent, which encompass different retention periods and different uses of the donor (e.g., embalmed for medical education, frozen for surgical training). In practice, the majority of donor bodies are returned for disposition within 3 years.

## Transfer
All programs seek donor and next‐of‐kin consent for the transfer of donors between licensed facilities. Those programs operating as a statewide mortuary have embedded consent to transfer as a condition of registration as a donor. Similarly, Queensland programs that are licensed as loan facilities seek approval for transfer at the time of donor registration. Other programs seek consent for transfer in accordance with their program practices. Donors are not transferred from the program that accepted their donation without consent. In some jurisdictions, for example, NSW, the approval of the Inspector of Anatomy is required for a transfer to occur, with that approval predicated on consent from the donor and their next of kin. Likewise, consent is required if the disposition of the donor is to occur at the transfer site.

## Disposition
When Australian and New Zealand body donor programs first commenced registering donors in the mid‐20th century, all donors were buried unless the deceased or their next of kin specifically requested cremation. Those who requested special burial arrangements, for example, particular coffins, or burial in a denominational section of the cemetery, were also accommodated. In the latter situation, the donor often also provided some funds to offset the cost of these arrangements, and the introduction of burial payments to all pensioners by the Australian Commonwealth Government in 1943 also resulted in the interment of more deceased in denominational and marked graves rather than pauper burials, which was previously standard practice in both Australia and New Zealand. , 

Currently, all body donor programs in this study have cremation as their standard means of disposition of donor remains once they are returned to the mortuary. Programs reunite tissue for disposition onsite at the mortuary, with donor remains identified and tracked from receipt through to their collection and disposition in a separate coffin. A number of programs noted that an important aspect of their paying final respects to donors was the reunion and respectful arrangement of the donor in the coffin. Seven programs offer burial as an option, with four of these returning the donor in a coffin to the next of kin (or police in New Zealand) for a closed casket service at the recipients' expense. Two programs will bury donors if the next of kin or estate pay for the burial. The University of Sydney will conduct a simple burial at institutional expense and has also made special arrangements to accommodate the religious beliefs and practices of a small number of donors and their families, through a simple religious burial.
All Australian programs offer donors and their families the opportunity to elect to take receipt of cremated remains, although the methods of achieving this vary. Some programs organize private couriers for door‐to‐door transportation to family/executors, to ensure that they can guarantee safe delivery. In Queensland, legal possession of the cremated remains passes to the crematorium, which is responsible for contacting family and/or scattering cremated remains in accordance with donor or next‐of‐kin wishes. The provision in the Queensland legislation is akin to that which exists in countries such as Sweden and Germany where cremated remains are not routinely returned to family members, but are the property of the burial authority, and are disposed of by the authority. Special permission is required to dispose of cremated remains in these countries. A similar situation exists in Tasmania where the local crematorium is responsible for contacting relatives to organize collection and scattering or interment if the cremated remains are uncollected. Both New Zealand programs will return cremated remains to families on request. One Australian and one New Zealand program levy a small charge on donor families for the return of the cremated remains.
Australian programs will retain, or require crematoriums to retain, cremated remains for at least 12 months (and up to five years in one case), if the donor and/or their next of kin indicated that they were to be collected. This is reportedly because sometimes family members find it difficult to collect the cremated remains, either practically or emotionally. No donor program that holds responsibility for the cremated remains will dispose of remains identified to be returned to next of kin without trying (repeatedly) to contact the designated next of kin and notify them of their availability for collection. Programs reported, however, that many donors elect not to have their cremated remains returned to the family. The donor election is given priority in decision‐making about disposition and return of cremated remains.

## Acceptance of donor registrations and donors
Factors affecting the availability and acceptance of donors, including the requirements for consent, and the exclusion criteria for donors, are summarized in Table  . The first three columns summarize whose consent is required for a donation to be effective, and when (at registration or death), while the remaining columns detail the routine circumstances in which a donor may not be accepted at the time of death. As is apparent from this table, there is again considerable variation in the practice across all programs.
 Australian legislation permits the donation of a child with the consent of parents/guardians (but not if the child is under guardianship as a ward of the State/Territory). Some programs reported that they had received requests from parents to accept their children. However, currently, no Australian program will accept the donation of a child; all require donors to be aged eighteen or older. The legal age of consent to donate in New Zealand is sixteen, and both New Zealand programs only accept donor registrations for those aged sixteen or over. Programs in both countries reported that young donors are extremely rare. The youngest donor recalled by any program was aged twenty‐three. No program has an upper age limit, and centenarian donors are not unusual.

## Consent at registration and donation
In both Australia and New Zealand, a formal (written) consent is required for a donor to be accepted into a body donor program. Twelve programs limit donation exclusively to donors who registered their intention to donate before to death. Five Australian and one New Zealand program will accept a donor who has willed their body to the program rather than registered before death, although the New Zealand program requires concurrent next‐of‐kin consent. Five Australian programs will accept a body donated by the next of kin or executor after death.
Next‐of‐kin or executor consent is required to make the donation effective at the time of death in eighteen of the nineteen of programs. The two New Zealand programs operate on a “dual‐consent” policy where the senior next of kin of the deceased is asked to consent to the donation at the time of donor registration. That person is taken to have consulted with family about the acceptability of the donation, and the programs then accept the donor in good faith, reliant on the next‐of‐kin declaration. All except one Australian program require next‐of‐kin acceptance at the time of death for the donation to be effective. In addition, two Australian programs will accept public trustee consent if the deceased has no next of kin. In practice, most Australian programs will not take a body where there is disagreement amongst family about donation, irrespective of whether the senior next of kin has consented (as is legally required), and despite the predeath election of the deceased.

## Screening
Medical history screening is conducted by all programs in both countries prior to the acceptance of a donor after death. Details of conditions that may preclude acceptance of a donation are clearly listed on all program websites and include infectious diseases, cancer, rapidly progressive neurological disorders, and recent surgery. Some programs advised that they also seek explicit predeath consent from registered donors for access to their medical records and contact with their treating doctor, although this does not always occur even when consent has been given.
Eleven programs also conduct post‐mortem screening using serological and/or nucleic acid testing once the body has been received into the mortuary. Many programs emphasize that until this screening is completed, the acceptance of the donation is pending. A minority of programs seek pre‐death consent from donors for the release to next of kin of information about the results of pre‐acceptance serological and other testing. However, other programs advised that they would not routinely inform next of kin of a positive test result that precluded use of the donation, instead taking the view that once a body has been received by the mortuary it has been “accepted”. In this latter case, procedures also vary in terms of whether next of kin are advised if a donor is sent for immediate cremation as a result of infectious disease detection after a body has been accepted. This is an area where there appears to be no standard practice, and one which raises ethical issues relating to the donor's privacy, and regarding transparent communication with donors and their families about the procedures for screening donors, acceptance into the program, and disposition of donors whose bodies are deemed unsuitable.
Other conditions that preclude the acceptance of a donation include obesity and emaciation, with all programs having (upper and lower) weight or BMI requirements (Table  ). Most Australian programs lack the infrastructure required to handle bodies that are excessively obese and thus will not accept these donors. There are some differences, however, in the size and condition of donors accepted by programs. In the main, these differences arise because of the use to which donor bodies are directed; programs that freeze donors or use them for forensic or osteological studies accept donors of a greater weight range. Programs that run taphonomy programs accept donors with osteoporosis, peripheral vascular disease, amputation, and emaciation. Most programs will not accept donors who have had recent surgery, amputation, or a postmortem (autopsy). Again, there are exceptions with two Australian programs accepting such donors on a case‐by‐case basis. All programs permit corneal donation, and some work in concert with their local brain bank to facilitate simultaneous body and brain donation. Two Australian programs will accept donors who have had other organs removed; for all other programs, organ donation precludes body donation.
Other practical considerations such as facility capacity, staff availability, and closure during holiday periods can also limit the acceptance of donors. Donors and their next of kin are also advised that if there is a substantial delay in receipt of the donor at the anatomy facility, they may not be able to be accepted. In most cases, the upper limit is 72 h, which generally precludes the holding of a funeral with the deceased present, and some programs require the donor to be delivered within 24 h. Western Australia accepts donors up to five days after death, later than all other programs.

## Recognition of donors and families
Table  describes how the programs recognize and thank donors and their families. All programs have implemented some form of recognition with many having multiple ways in which donors and their families are acknowledged and thanked.
 

## Ceremonies
Most (15/19) body donor programs in Australia and New Zealand conduct a ceremony to recognize, commemorate, and/or thank donors and their families (Table  ). Some programs also conduct funeral services when the cremated remains of donors are interred. The ceremonies are quite varied in their frequency (ranging from annual to triennial), formality, scope, and content. Most, however, reflect the community from which donors are drawn with rural and smaller programs more inclined towards informal gatherings. Institutions reported that the planning of ceremonies was labor‐intensive and focused on ensuring that the ceremony was respectful, tasteful, and appropriate. The cost of the ceremonies varied from around AUD$2500 to over AUD$10,000, with most body donor programs reporting institutional funding (separate from their operating budgets). Attendance numbers varied from 100 through to 500–600, and the ceremonies lasted from 30–40 min to 1–2 h. Some institutions record ceremonies and upload them to their website.
Some ceremonies are hosted by the statewide central programs, for example, the University of Melbourne and University of Adelaide, on behalf of all schools of anatomy in their jurisdiction. Others are exclusive to the institution or are shared across facilities that transfer donors between each other and/or share teaching or other facilities.

## Ceremony attendees
All programs invite donor families and next of kin to the ceremony, and some extend the invitation to friends and the broader community. Program size is the major determinant of whether the families of all donors are invited, or it is restricted to the family of the most recent one to two years of donors. Several programs noted that they had “regulars”—family or friends of the deceased who attended each year, perhaps as a means of personal memorial and perhaps because the ceremony brought them comfort, reinforcing the value and purpose of their loved one's donation. Two programs also invite registered (living) donors.
All programs invite anatomy departmental staff and students. Many also extend the invitation to other staff in their School or Faculty, and to senior university leadership, with the Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, Dean, Head of School, and others attending, and often leading the formal proceedings. Most programs do not open the ceremony to the general public, although many do include it in their institutional calendar, thus extending an invitation to all staff and students in their community. In practice, attendance is dominated by those who have a connection to the body donor program and/or the anatomy department.
Some institutions either nominated students or student groups to attend, while others issued an open invitation to all students. Most programs selected students to deliver speeches but offered all students the opportunity to participate, whether by writing notes, performing music or choral pieces, participating in the ceremony formalities, or attendance at the reception.
Many ceremonies are held on university campuses although some are at commercial venues such as local function centers. The University of Otago program alternates the location of its ceremony each year to enable donors and members of the university community to attend biennially at Christchurch or Dunedin.

## Ceremonial form
Some programs hold very formal ceremonies with an academic procession and pomp and ceremony. All ceremonies featured speeches, including from students, staff, and researchers who have benefitted from the donation. The student speeches, whether in the form of a formal speech, a series of reflections or notes, or poems, were extremely well received by the donor family and next of kin, with almost every institution noting that this component of the ceremony was the most remarked upon and valued. A number of institutions included formal speeches delivered by the University or Faculty Leadership, and most included music and sometimes choral performances. Many of the programs drew on their student cohorts for musical and choral performances, although some hired professional musicians. Although all ceremonies were secular, many included prayers led by the institutional chaplain and other ministers of religion.
All ceremonies concluded with some sort of reception, whether a morning or afternoon tea or supper with opportunities for attendees to mingle. This opportunity for staff and students to speak with families afterward over refreshments was highly regarded. Donor families particularly appreciate the chance to interact with students. Overall, the form of the ceremonies reflected the characteristics of the local community. For example, the University of Otago includes its local Māori community in the ceremony, both as invited attendees and as formal participants in the proceedings; the ceremony is opened by a Māori elder, and invitees include local Māori community members and elders. The rural ceremonies at the University of New England and the University of Tasmania tend to be held during the day to enable families who live further away to attend the ceremony without incurring the cost of overnight accommodation.

## Donor and family recognition
In addition to their invitation to participate in ceremonies, family members were often recognized individually throughout the ceremonial proceedings. This was noted as an important component of most ceremonies although the form of such recognition varied. Family members were often gifted with a flower, seeds, candle, and/or card by students, during or at the end of ceremonies, and these were often personalized with students reflecting on their experiences in the anatomy laboratory and the value of the donor. Sometimes the notes or family memories are compiled into a booklet which was given out at the ceremony and sent to all donor families from that year.
The names of donors are called out, recorded as part of the ceremony, or recorded in a “Book of Remembrance,”, or “Book of Names.” Some programs have their book on permanent display as a constant reminder of those whose generosity underpins their educational and research programs. In some jurisdictions, privacy requirements prevent the naming of donors in the public ceremony, and in others explicit consent is sought for the names to be publicly announced. This consent is either sought at the time of registration of donors, or later from the next of kin. Donor families were provided with the opportunity to record memories or thoughts about the donors in conjunction with some ceremonies, and students and donor families both valued this; students because it gave them a sense of the “living” donor prior to death, and families because it allowed them to reflect on their love for, and shared memories of, the donor.

## Motivation for, and value, of ceremony
Body donor programs consistently reported that ceremonies were instigated by staff who felt it important to publicly recognize and thank donors and their families. The need to emphasize the importance of body donation to education, training, and research in the medical, health, and scientific fields was also a common factor in the ceremony ethos. Most reported that institutional leaders shared these views and viewed the ceremony as an important event on the university calendar and an opportunity to promote the university and its work. Most saw the ceremonies as offering an opportunity to provide closure to donor families, who often had forgone a funeral or memorial service, because of the necessity of expeditious delivery of the donor to the university. Families valued the opportunity to gain a better understanding of how their family member's gift had been used, and of its value and importance to the University. Overall, there was a sense that a ceremony was of value to all involved in body donation and the anatomical sciences, and that it provided institutions with an opportunity to offer donor families closure, engagement, and express gratitude that perhaps otherwise would not be readily or so intimately communicated.
The inclusion of students in the ceremony was seen as integral to its success, and to the development of student understanding of altruism and respect for the capacity of donors to consent to donation. Students and families mutually recognized the importance and impact of each other's participation.

## Other forms of recognition
Almost all programs have some form of memorial, often placed at the cemetery where remains are scattered or interred and/or within the institution. Such memorials serve to provide a permanent reminder of the donation and its value, and to enable contemplation and recollection. Some Australian programs have commissioned sculptures or memorial walls to reflect the significance of the donation and its importance. The motivations for these memorials mirror the motivation to hold ceremonies; recognition of donors and their families, and a desire to honor their gift.
Programs may also conduct regular formal funeral ceremonies for the remains of those donors who are being interred. Staff voluntarily attend such ceremonies; their presence a tangible reminder of their commitment to their donors and their families, and recognition of their humanity.

## DISCUSSION
The findings of this study demonstrate that body donation for the purposes of education and training continues to be well supported by the local Australian and New Zealand communities in which body donation programs are embedded. The majority of programs have more potential donors than they can accommodate. Thus, programs have to manage community, donor, and family expectations around acceptance of a donation, rather than engaging with their communities to secure support for their programs, as is the case in other countries. Whilst this support should be celebrated and the generosity of local communities recognized, there are other consequences. Programs do not need to promote body donation and may perceive that there is no need to review existing practices or consider where improvements could be made. Best practice in the use of human tissue in anatomy requires constant review of practices and active efforts in community engagement. , , At the very least annual national reporting on the operations of body donor programs and their contribution to education and research would reinforce to the public the value of the donor's gift and the reliance of health education and research on public altruism. Statistics on organ donation are published annually by the Australia & New Zealand Organ Donor Registry (https://www.anzdata.org.au/anzod/); the same standards of transparency and public access to information should apply to body donation. Transparency and openness would also assist programs in their stated endeavor to ensure their practices remain of high standards and meet public expectations. National collection and reporting of information about body donation would also assist governments to understand and recognize the substantial contribution of the public to education and research via body donation, and its value to students, academic staff, and the community.
Donor recognition in the form of ceremonies and memorials are important examples of donor respect and engagement with the broader donor “family”. , , , , , , , , These ceremonies and other forms of recognition are fundamental components of ethical practice. However, as a form of community engagement or public outreach, they are somewhat limited. The ceremonies are (rightly) targeted towards the community of donors and their families, who are already invested in body donation. Programs do, therefore, need to consider other forms of community engagement, such as those suggested by Bagian et al. 

Body donation programs prefer to stay out of the public view in contrast to the active engagement of the public in organ donation. Arguably, this approach reinforces the sense that there is something undesirable about body donation and the use of donors in the anatomical study. It is well established through international research that the public and donors have a limited understanding of the processes for donating their body and may also be mistaken in their understanding of how the body is used after donation. , , , , , Research has also found that ignorance may inhibit the capacity of health professionals to effectively counsel family members about body and organ donation, , and to inform potential body donors of the implications of donation, including the possibility of permanent retention of body parts, and/or the likelihood that their body will be used for education and not research, or other purposes. , , , , 

Historically, there has been a tendency to assume that the public find the detail associated with anatomical examination gruesome and unpalatable. However, evidence suggests that donors who are fully informed are supportive and accepting of the range of uses to which their body may be deployed. , Furthermore, the oversubscription of the majority of body donor programs in Australia and New Zealand suggests that members of the local community are not so delicate in their sensibilities. Their desire to be donors and to support education and research encompasses an understanding that it will involve procedures that would otherwise not occur. Studies undertaken by Olejaz and Hoeyer and Smith et al. reported that motivated and informed donors had a clear understanding of what donation entailed and were willing to have their bodies subjected to dissection, use and storage of body parts separately, and used as frozen or embalmed tissues for education, training, and research. Open and ongoing communication between programs, donors, their families, and users of donated tissue is essential. It is the most effective way to ensure transparency and enables a dialogue which will promote donor understanding of what donation entails, and thus enables fully informed consent. Such two‐way communication will also inform users about donors' wishes, and thus how best a donation may be used to honor the gift that is respectful to the donor.
Maintenance of the status quo in these programs also obviates addressing issues, such as the lack of ethnic and cultural diversity in donors. Both Australia and New Zealand have ethnically diverse populations, including First Nations populations. , Staff and students of anatomy are also from diverse backgrounds. New Zealand programs actively engage with their local Māori communities, but there is little to no engagement by Australian programs with First Nations people. As noted, little information is formally collected about donors' ethnicity and background. However, programs reported that the majority of donors are of a similar age and are of European or Caucasian origins. This accords with previous research. , , , 

Cultural and ethnic diversity is uncommon in body donors across many countries, despite the growing ethnic and cultural diversity of their populations. However, it may also be under‐reported. The lack of diversity is often related to religious and cultural beliefs, , , , , particularly those concerned with death, rituals around the preparation of the body, the afterlife, burial and cremation. , Many such beliefs are longstanding, with a Canadian study reporting that the objection of the Catholic Church to the use of bodies for dissection resulted in a dearth of bodies supplied to McGill University between 1883 and 1908 from Catholic‐run hospitals, asylums, and other public institutions. In contrast the Anglican‐run public hospitals sent unclaimed bodies to McGill during this period. Misconceptions about dissection and the use of the body also constitute barriers to donation for many. , Religious beliefs also influence attitudes to body donation with people who identify as non‐religious more likely to register as donors. , , There is evidence that community engagement increases the support for body donation, irrespective of ethnicity or cultural and religious beliefs. , , , There is also evidence that presumptions about donor characteristics may lead programs to overlook subgroups such as single women and second‐generation migrants who may be more supportive of donation than assumed. , This is an area where Australian programs in particular could review existing practices. The lack of information about donors, their backgrounds, and their motivations for donating should be addressed. The absence of need to recruit potential donors should not serve to justify disengagement nor a complete absence of effort to enhance diversity in donor programs.
The three programs which experience a shortfall in their donor numbers all run more active community engagement programs to inform the public about body donation, and hopefully to secure more donors. As noted previously, clear mechanisms to enable sharing of donors to ensure the needs of all programs are met are not in place. The absence of reporting is a barrier to enabling such sharing as all initiatives are ad hoc, driven by individual programs. While there are a range of factors which prevent programs from accepting more donors each year, current practices deny many community members and indeed registered donors, the opportunity to donate. Many Australian programs close to new acceptances in the second half of the academic year because their internal needs have been met. It is also the case that human tissue is imported into Australia and New Zealand for post‐graduate training and medical device testing. It is well documented that there are significant ethical issues associated with the procurement of this tissue from so‐called “body brokers”. , , Competition between institutions and parochialism may serve to limit collaboration and may also limit the optimal use of the valuable resource of the donated body. It has been noted that the most effective way to honor the gift of the donated body is to ensure it is used effectively and optimally. , , A broader, and hopefully more diverse section of the community, would be able to participate in body donation if programs implemented strategies to collaborate and share resources so that all programs received sufficient donors to meet their needs. Open reporting would serve to inform such endeavors.
The findings from this study highlight the strong commitment programs have to protecting the dignity of donors and respecting their and their families wishes. Programs are extensively invested in ensuring that their programs interact positively with donors and minimize distress to families. However, the absence of national or regional standards for body donation and the use of human tissue has resulted in very localized practices which do not necessarily reflect the “gold” standards promoted by organizations such as the International Federation of the Association of Anatomists or the American Association for Anatomy. There are a number of examples where current practice falls short of recommended standards: (1) There is no universal jurisdictional requirement for ethical review of body donation programs and their operations. A number of programs have supervisory boards or committees, but this is not a requirement under the regulatory framework. (2) The variation in information provided to donors and their families. (3) The capacity of next of kin to donate a deceased without any pre‐death election, and to override such an election. (4) Infectious disease screening.
An anatomy association—the Australian and New Zealand Association of Clinical Anatomists (ANZACA)—operates across the region. However, to date, it has not issued guidelines or operating standards for body donation programs, and is not a member of IFAA, although such an affiliation is one of its stated aims. Individual anatomists and programs subscribe to IFAA and/or the American Association for Clinical Anatomists (AACA) and/or the American Association for Anatomy membership and seek to uphold the standards of these associations. However, practically each program has its own operating system which, provided it adheres to the applicable laws and policies, is determined by the institution. This means that programs can and do implement policies which are legal, but which may not reflect best practice internationally. In addition, ethical review of program operations and/or the implementation of a governance structure, including independent members and community members, is determined by each institution. Again, the strong support programs receive from their local communities may also reinforce the sense that their operations are successful and therefore change is not required (the “if it is not broken why fix it approach”). Ethically, however, the privilege of enjoying strong support for donations should be accompanied by continuous striving to improve operations and uphold the highest ethical standards. , , , 

A full examination of consent processes used by Australian and New Zealand programs was outside the remit of this study. Consent is the cornerstone of ethical body donation. However, the variation in consent practices operating under the same legal and policy framework highlights the shortcomings of a lack of national/regional guidelines and gold standards. For example, in NSW, where there are eight programs, all of which are subject to the same regulation, some accept next‐of‐kin donations, and some do not. Variation in instruments of consent and information provided to donors has been noted by international authors. , Many instruments in the United States were found not to meet the standards espoused by the American Association for Clinical Anatomists, the American Association for Anatomists and IFAA. The variation in information may contribute to donor and family misunderstandings about what donation entails.
The lack of regional standards for body donation registration and information should be addressed. Australian and New Zealand processes and information for donors and their families should include consensus derived, uniform core information across all programs and in all jurisdictions. At a minimum, programs within the same jurisdiction, again for example NSW, should operate using a core set of common content items and standard processes. This would improve both the consistency and quality of donor and next‐of‐kin understanding of their election to donate. It would also remove possible ambiguity in their understanding of the use and retention of donors, as was reported in the New Zealand studies of donor motivation. , It would also facilitate the transfer of donors across programs as all would subscribe to the same set of standards.
Standardization of consent items is also important in clarifying how donated tissue is used. While commercial trade in human tissue is prohibited in Australia and New Zealand, there is no explicit regulation of whether donated human tissue may be used for secondary commercial gain, including in the development of devices or expertise which will be deployed commercially. Examples of such uses include contracted workshops and training, the generation of online anatomy atlases which are made available through paid subscription services or on‐sold; and the generation of 3D images of donated tissue which are also on‐sold. These activities are undertaken by anatomy programs in both countries. Donors should be able to elect whether they consent to their tissue being used in such ways, and institutions must be transparent in describing how donated tissue is used and how any income gained is used. This transparency is integral to ethical operation of body donor programs. , , , 

Five of the Australian programs accept donations by next of kin after death, a practice permitted under their applicable legislation. In addition, all Australian programs will not accept a body irrespective of the deceased's pre‐death election if the next‐of‐kin object, or there is broader family discomfort with the donation. These practices (which occur internationally ) have been criticized for their inherent failure to uphold the deceased's autonomy and right to determine what happens to their body after death. , , , The Australian Law Reform Commission Report (ALRC), which informed the introduction of “uniform” human tissue legislation across Australia in the early‐mid 1980s, recommended that next‐of‐kin consent should not be required for effective donation. This recommendation was not taken up in the drafting of the uniform legislation, and although body donor programs recommend potential donors discuss their intentions with family, and some, as occurs in New Zealand, ask for next‐of‐kin consent at the time of registration of intent to donate, the donor's election may be overridden by family.
The participants in this study reported that their motivation for prioritizing next‐of‐kin wishes was to minimize distress to family, and because of the possibility of generating adverse publicity for their program. Commentary suggests that next‐of‐kin consent is one of the barriers to effective organ donation , , which remains at a low level in Australia and New Zealand when compared to other countries. Other studies have shown that next‐of‐kin involvement in post‐death decisions about organ donation are prioritized in most countries, irrespective of whether there is presumed or explicit pre‐death consent. The findings from this study suggest that also occurs with body donation. A revisit of the issues raised by the ALRC and other commentators , , is overdue; members of the public rightly expect that they can exert control over their body and its fate. Many would feel that it is not acceptable that their wishes are overruled, nor that their next of kin can decide to donate their body without them having agreed to do so.
Pre‐acceptance screening of donors is another area where the lack of national standards has led to a variety of practices. Several programs have introduced serological or nucleic acid screening for infectious diseases, alongside the move to freeze, rather than embalm some donors. The infection risk associated with gross anatomical procedures is thought to be lower for embalmed tissue than for frozen tissue, which may also be defrosted more than once. , , There does not appear to be published research regarding how uniform such screening is across body donation programs internationally. At the time the interviews were conducted, none of the local regulations in Australia and New Zealand mandated a standard for infectious diseases screening, suggesting that developments in the use of frozen human tissue in teaching and training had yet to be reflected in the operational standards. However, a new anatomy policy directive which was recently released by the NSW Ministry of Health (partially reflecting issues associated with the COVID‐19 pandemic) requires such testing. This would seem to be an area amenable to the implementation of national evidence‐based standards.

## STUDY LIMITATIONS
The findings of this study are limited by reliance on information self‐reported by those who are responsible for the body donor programs described. As noted, government data on body donation is not published. It is possible that the information is biased because of programs' vested interest in presenting their programs in a positive light. However, all information was verified where possible using available public sources, and the findings are broadly consistent with those reported from other body donor programs internationally. The study findings are descriptive and are specific to the body donor programs in Australia and New Zealand at the time the study was conducted. The study did not have access to all information and consent materials provided to potential donors and their families and thus the findings about consent processes are limited.

## CONCLUSIONS
This study provides evidence for the enduring contribution of body donation and anatomical examination to education, training, and research in medicine, health, and science in Australia and New Zealand. The nineteen body donation programs operating across both countries have significant commitments to their local communities and are in turn supported and sustained by their generosity and loyalty. Contemporary practices in anatomical examination in Australia and New Zealand appear to be conducted overall in accordance with high ethical standards and with genuine regard for the generosity and dignity of the donors who enable them. However, the absence of national or regional guidelines or standards is reflected in the varied practices and operations of programs. Further, the complete absence of government reporting on body donation represents a missed opportunity to engage with the public about the valuable contribution of body donation to medical education and research. In the interests of transparency and accountability, at least annual reporting on body donation should occur as it does with organ donation. Such reporting might also encourage collaboration between programs and enable the acceptance of more donors. Similarly, more active community engagement would serve to enhance public understanding of body donation and how donated tissue is used. International examples of community engagement exist and should be considered for implementation across Australian and New Zealand programs. Active review of current practice will ensure that programs in both countries reflect the highest standards of ethical practice in their operations.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Rebekah A. Jenkin: Conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis; investigation; methodology; project administration; writing – original draft; writing – review and editing. Kevin A. Keay: Conceptualization; funding acquisition; investigation; methodology; supervision; writing – review and editing.

## Supporting information

Data S1.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank the donors and their families whose altruism enables the continuation of anatomy education and research including this study. The generous support of staff of the body donor programs and anatomy facilities across Australia and New Zealand and their willingness to participate in this study is gratefully acknowledged. The conduct of this study was supported by funds from the NWG Macintosh Memorial Fund. Open access publishing facilitated by The University of Sydney, as part of the Wiley ‐ The University of Sydney agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.

## Biographies

Rebekah A. Jenkin, B.Sc. (Hons), M.Sc., Ph.D., Ph.D., Dip Law is an affiliate researcher in Anatomy & Histology in the School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. Her research is focused on the historic and contemporary use of human tissue in education and research, and on attitudes to body and organ donation. She works as a policy and ethics consultant and academic in public health and health services.

Kevin A. Keay, B.Sc. (Hons), GradDipSciMed (Pain Medicine)., Ph.D., is a Professor, Academic Lead for Anatomy & Histology, and the Director of Neuroscience in the School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. He teaches neuroanatomy and neuroscience to medical, dental, and science students, as well as to postgraduate students and specialist college members. His research interests include: the neurological basis of the transition from acute injury to chronic pain; the neuroanatomy of injury, blood loss and pain; and pedagogical innovation in pre‐mortem imaging, augmented reality and virtual reality, to enhance neuroanatomical education. He is located at the Brain and Mind Centre of the University of Sydney.

Jenkin RA, Keay KA. Body donor programs in Australia and New Zealand: Current status and future opportunities. Anat Sci Educ. 2025;18:301–328. 10.1002/ase.70004

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

Data S1.