3814phenaturepgPublic ChoicePublic ChoicePMC1011130910111309101113093736098810.1007/s11127-023-01054-zHow price-gouging regulation undermined COVID-19 mitigation: county-level evidence of unintended consequences
ChakrabortiRik RobertsGavin 1Department of Economics, Christopher Newport University, Newport News, USA 2Department of Economics, Weber State University, Ogden, USA ✉Corresponding author.
184202311–332042023© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023, Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.

## Abstract
Despite long-standing criticisms, restrictions on price increases during emergencies remain widespread in the US. Criticisms most often cite the social costs of the shortages, but, we have found another, as yet unknown, cost: price-gouging regulations increased social contact during the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. During the pandemic, thirty-four US states declared emergencies, which activated their preexisting price-gouging regulations, and eight others introduced new regulation along with their emergency declarations. Because these states border eight others that also declared emergencies, but had no price-gouging regulations, this created a unique natural experiment. Exploiting the pandemic-induced variation in regulation, and cellphone mobility data, we find that price controls increased visits to, and social contact in, commercial spaces, presumably because the regulation-induced shortages forced consumers to visit more stores and come in contact with more people as they struggled to find what they needed. This, of course, undermines social distancing efforts.

## Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s11127-023-01054-z.

Keywords: Price gouging, Regulation, Shortages, Social contact, Search, COVID-19

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfyesis-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Oct 17; Accepted 2023 Mar 27.

## Introduction
Long-standing concerns about price-gouging regulation—government-mandated limits on price increases—focus on the private costs of resulting shortages such as increased time waiting and searching. But, during a pandemic, the total costs of price-gouging regulations can be more severe than shelves lying bare and people struggling to find what they need. The resulting shortages may lead to more social contact in crowded stores at the worst possible time; at a time when social contact spreads a dangerous pathogen. In short, activating price-gouging laws during pandemics may aggravate contagion. We test this concerning possibility. Specifically, we examine whether activating price-gouging regulation increased social contact in commercial spaces in the early phases of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The pandemic’s abrupt emergence triggered a variety of public policy responses in Spring 2020. Many US states implemented mitigation policies such as “stay-at-home orders” to discourage social contact and slow the spread by encouraging “social distancing.” Many US states also activated price-gouging regulation to discourage sellers from increasing prices during the emerging crisis. For instance, Governor Northam of Virginia issued a statewide “stay-at-home” order for state residents on Monday, March 30, 2020, to help contain the pandemic’s outbreak. The very next day, the VA attorney general issued a statement announcing stronger crackdowns on price-gouging. While mitigation policies aimed to decrease social contact and flatten the infection curve, simultaneously activating price-gouging regulation, our proposed mechanism suggests, undermined this goal.
Prior work indicates price-gouging regulation creates shortages (Brewer, ; Chakraborti & Roberts, , , ; Deacon & Sonstelie, ), and shortages result in increased consumer searches (Barzel, ; Chakraborti & Roberts, , ; Deacon & Sonstelie, , ; Weitzman, ). Motivated by the toilet paper stockpiling consumers engaged in during the early days of the pandemic, Klumpp ( ) establishes a feedback loop between fixed-price-induced shortages and consumer searches and stockpiling behavior. Our work extends this literature by proposing and testing a new cost associated with price-gouging regulation.
Using county-level daily data on social contact and mobility, we find evidence consistent with the impact of price-gouging regulation we hypothesize. The results demonstrate price regulation-induced increases in social contact more than offset the stay-at-home-order-induced decreases. Exploiting the pandemic-induced variation in price-gouging regulation, standard two-way fixed effects difference-in-differences (TWFE DiD) estimates uncover a strong association between price-gouging law activation and more visits to, and interpersonal contacts in, commercial spaces, even after accounting for the influence of observed and unobserved county-level and daily heterogeneity in a variety of ways. Given recent concerns about the TWFE DiD methodology, e.g., Goodman-Bacon ( ), in the presence of treatment-effect heterogeneity, we also present event studies based on estimators robust to these concerns, and find further support for these results.
Our results contribute to existing literature in two important ways. First, our work identifies a severe, but yet unnoticed, external cost associated with activating price-gouging regulation during pandemics. The new cost we identify will be relevant for the vigorous policy debate surrounding the impacts of price-gouging laws (e.g., Brewer, ; Culpepper & Block, ; Fleck, ; Montgomery et al., ; Niles, ; Pan, ; Snyder, ; Zwolinski, ). The discovery of this new cost of price-gouging regulation during pandemics adds to the emerging but still scarce literature on price-gouging specific to the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g., Boshoff, ; Cabral & Xu, ; Chakraborti & Roberts, , ).
Second, our results offer an explanation for recent unanticipated findings regarding mitigation strategies. Recent studies find lower-than-anticipated effectiveness of mitigation policies like stay-at-home orders in curbing the pandemic’s spread (e.g., Herby et al., ; Bendavid et al., ; Reinbold ; Gupta et al., ). Our results suggest an unnoticed role of price-gouging regulations—increasing social contact and undermining mitigation—behind these surprising findings.
Our results should concern policymakers. Recent studies find strong connections between lower community-level mobility and lower COVID-19 case growth (Wellenius et al., ), or higher incidence of people staying at home and lower COVID-19 case growth (Guo et al., ). These connections, paired with our findings, indicate price-gouging regulation may well have increased COVID-19 case growth during the critical early stages of the pandemic.

## Background
Figure  shows state-level price-gouging regulations by type and activation date during the pandemic in the US. Forty-two states activated preexisting or new price-gouging regulation during the COVID-19 pandemic. While preexisting regulations are activated the instant a state declares an emergency or a crisis situation, new regulations introduced during the pandemic were activated at the time of announcement.
 Thirty-four US states had preexisting price-gouging regulation enacted through legislation long before the pandemic began. Many of these states had enacted these regulations based on their past experience with natural disasters. For example, Louisiana most recently revised its price-gouging regulation in 2011 (Tarrant, ). These preexisting price-gouging regulations switched on to “active” status when these states officially declared the emerging COVID-19 pandemic as a statewide emergency; and all US states declared a state of emergency during the pandemic including those without any form of price-gouging regulation. Eight out of the sixteen remaining states that did not have preexisting price-gouging regulations enacted new price-gouging regulations after their COVID-19 emergency declarations. Eight states neither had regulatory restrictions on price-gouging before the pandemic nor enacted any in response to the pandemic. 
The specifics of price-gouging regulation vary across states. Some states impose criminal penalties for price-gouging while others only allow for civil actions. We assume that price-gouging regulations had similar effects on sellers’ propensity to change quantities and prices regardless of these differences.
Tarrant ( ) provides detailed historical background related to price-gouging laws in states susceptible to hurricanes and emphasizes that many of these states passed laws in reaction to natural disasters that led to large price increases for certain goods like retail gasoline. The eight states that introduced new price-gouging regulation in response to the pandemic followed a similar trend.
Economists have pointed out that price-gouging regulation could lead to binding price ceilings causing shortages, consumer waiting, and increased consumer search (Barzel, ; Brewer, ; Culpepper & Block, ; Montgomery et al., ; Weitzman, ). Causal evidence, though, is relatively rare due to lack of natural experiments allowing measurement of price-gouging regulation effects. Montgomery et al. ( ) estimates that price ceilings resulting from price-gouging regulation would lead economic damages in the two-month period following hurricanes Rita and Katrina to increase by $1.5–2.9 billion. Tarrant ( ) finds that price gouging regulations decreased economic growth after hurricanes, but states quickly recovered after emergency declarations expired.
Recently, Chakraborti and Roberts ( ) show that online searches, measured by Google Shopping Trends, for hand sanitizer and toilet paper were significantly larger in states with price-gouging legislation compared to states without regulation during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, which indicates such goods may have experienced larger shortages in states with anti-gouging regulation. In a related paper, Chakraborti and Roberts ( ) distinguish between the impacts of preexisting price-gouging regulation and new regulation on searches, and attribute the differences to individuals’ experience with and anticipation of price-gouging regulation effects in preexisting-regulation states. To our knowledge, Cabral and Xu ( ) is the only other study that investigates price gouging in the US in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Using consumer reviews as a measure of seller reputation on Amazon, they find evidence reflecting seller reputation has a moderating effect on a seller’s propensity to increase prices substantially following a demand shock.
Recent studies also demonstrate that individuals in the US and around the world decreased mobility and social contact in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in a variety of ways, and for a variety of reasons. For instance, Gupta et al. ( ) decompose private reductions in mobility and reductions in mobility resulting from public “non-pharmaceutical interventions” (NPIs) like state emergency declarations, school closures, and public announcements. Using cellphone data, this study shows that 45% of increases in staying-at-home result from private actions while the remaining 55% results from public policy. Engle et al. ( ) show that COVID-19 infection prevalence, official stay-at-home orders, larger over-65 populations, and lower shares of Republican voters were all associated with reduced mobility during the COVID-19 pandemic. We also find that population density interacts with emergency declarations in a manner that results in larger reductions in mobility and social contact indicating how private actions might interact with public policies and other factors.
Other research indicates that reductions in mobility resulted in fewer COVID-19 cases and that NPIs played a role in reducing infections and mortality. Wellenius et al. ( ) show reduced mobility had a strong association with reduced growth in COVID-19 cases two to four weeks later. Amuedo-Dorantes et al. ( ) find that adopting NPIs earlier decreased the COVID-19 death rate by almost 2%.
We hypothesize that price-gouging regulation could also have impacted individuals’ social contact by causing shortages that led to increased in-store searches for goods. These increased in-store searches undermine mitigation strategies adopted by most states and are of concern to effective public policy in managing pandemic risk; they may exacerbate the spread of an infectious disease by increasing interpersonal contacts.

## Conceptual framework
Figure  presents the conceptual framework demonstrating the causal pathway (solid red arrow) this paper proposes. The starting point is the well-known shortage-inducing potential of price-gouging regulation which, acting as binding price ceilings during emergencies, lead to excess demand. The second piece is the robust body of theoretical analysis (e.g., Barzel, ; Deacon & Sonstelie, ; Klumpp, ; Weitzman, ) and empirical evidence (e.g., Chakraborti & Roberts, , ; Deacon & Sonstelie, ) documenting the resulting increases in consumer search. Recently, Klumpp ( ) develops a model demonstrating fixed prices can lead to a self-reinforcing behavioral circuit: from shortages to consumer searches and stockpiling, and, in turn, to further aggravated shortages inciting further searches and stockpiling, and so on. Combining these two pieces—shortages from price-gouging regulation, and searches resulting from shortages—results in the pathway we hypothesize: price-gouging regulation causes more social contact via shortage-induced consumer searches in commercial venues.
 

## Methods

## General strategy
The number of states in the US without price-gouging regulation has been on a steady decline, and states that implemented price-regulation suddenly in the past have tended to pass longer term measures later (see Tarrant, ). Furthermore, price-gouging regulation during emergency events in the past have tended to be localized to a small number of states like Louisiana and Texas during hurricanes. In contrast, COVID-19 affected all US states and all US states declared emergencies. But not all states operated under active price-gouging regulation: the emergency conditions induced by the pandemic triggered the activation of preexisting price-gouging in thirty-four US states, the introduction of new price-gouging regulation in eight more states, and declarations of emergencies but no price-gouging regulation in the remaining states. This unexpected pandemic-induced state-level variation to price-gouging regulation offers a rare opportunity to analyze the effects of such regulation: as displayed in Fig.  , the state-level implementation of price-gouging regulation was staggered through time. Pooling county-level daily observations on social contact under states with preexisting or new price-gouging regulation—the “treatment” group—and those under states without any price-gouging regulation—the “control” group—before and after state-level emergency declarations that triggered price-gouging regulations in treatment states, our research design exploits this rare spatial and temporal variation to estimate the impacts of price-gouging regulation on social contact.
States also differ in the severity of price-gouging regulation (see Fig.  ). We exploit this variation to directly test the mechanism we propose: restricting the sample to only counties with price-gouging regulations, we examine the impact of stringency of these regulations on mobility and social contact.
 Gupta et al. ( ) shows individual mobility choices responded more to perceptions of private infection risk than stay-at-home policy stances, or social risk. If so, greater infection risk in crowded spaces will act to mitigate the shortage-induced store visits. Emergency declarations, which inform the public about a growing risk, then, may have different effects in more densely populated areas than less densely populated areas. While consumers in more dense areas may try harder to avoid in-store shopping during an active emergency, consumers in less dense areas may be less responsive to such emergency declarations. Our empirical strategy accounts for this possible population-density-driven heterogeneity in responses to emergency declarations. We also control for variation in other pandemic-related influences including infection risk, presence and stringency of state-level stay-at-home mandates, unobserved time-invariant county-level heterogeneity, and unobserved daily nationwide shocks. The following sections detail the data and empirical strategy.

## Data
Our primary outcome variable of interest is social contact by county and day, measured using the device exposure index (DEX) constructed from smartphone location data by Couture et al. ( ). DEX measures county-level “average exposure of smartphones to each other within commercial venues” (Couture et al., ). Couture et al. ( ) construct the county-level DEX series from individual smartphone location data (PlaceIQ) to answer the following question: How many distinct devices does the average device in county i encounter at close proximity during simultaneous visits to commercial venues on day d? The DEX series only aggregates over a subset of commercial venues that “are sufficiently small that visiting devices would be exposed to each other.” We use the “adjusted” version of DEX (Dexa) which Couture et al. ( ) construct to adjust for a potential sample selection issue that may otherwise arise: devices sheltering in place may drop out of the sample if they do not generate any pings, which, in turn, may lead to an underestimation of the drop in average exposure during the onset of the pandemic. Couture et al. ( ) implement this adjustment by multiplying the raw DEX value by the ratio of pinging devices on a given day to the maximum number of devices in a county that pinged on any day between January 20, 2020 and February 14, 2020; before any significant changes in social contact related to COVID-19 occurred. For our purposes, this adjustment can only bias the estimates downwards: The adjusted index may overestimate the reduction in exposure, implying in turn any estimated increases in exposure our analysis finds will be lower bounds of the true effect. Our empirical model, detailed below, only relies on within county variation in DEX over time, as suggested by Couture et al. ( ), which helps alleviate these and related sample selection issues.
Some counties are missing from the DEX data as Couture et al. ( ) note many counties in the US have very few residents. This dataset only includes counties that have at least 1000 unique devices pinging everyday between January 6 and 12, 2020 (Couture et al., ). We further limit our main sample by removing counties with population densities greater than 4000 per square mile. This restriction ensures comparability across treatment and control counties. The control county with the largest population density is Denver, Colorado with a density of 3923 per square mile, while some treatment counties have much higher population densities. For example, the highest density county is New York County with a density of 69,468 per square mile. Limiting our sample to counties with a maximum density of 4000 per square mile amounts to removing 20 counties at the 99th percentile of the treatment sample to make the control and treatment samples more comparable. Imposing these restrictions leaves at total of 1997 counties in our main estimation sample, representing 90.31% of the total US population. Figure  displays the included counties by law type. Some counties are missing new cases and new deaths data, which we use as control variables, on some days in the sample which restricts the sample further. This leaves between 139 and 155 daily observations per county.
 A remark is in order about our strategy of restricting the sample to counties only with population densities less than 4000 per square mile. Since the most densely populated counties in the treatment group do not have suitable comparison groups, this strategy ensures a higher degree of internal validity. But that comes at the expense of leaving out the most populous cities in the US, in which, if our hypothesized mechanism is correct, the effects should be most pronounced. If so, our estimated treatment effect can be thought of as a lower bound for the true effect (Fig. ).
DEX’s focus on interactions rather than aggregated individual mobility is ideal for our goal of measuring the impact of price-gouging regulation on social contact. Regulation-induced shortages we are concerned with will, if at all, increase search-induced in-store interactions precisely in the type of commercial establishments spanned by DEX. We also apply our analyses to Google’s county-level aggregated individual mobility data on visits to grocery and pharmacies to check whether price-gouging regulation is increasing visits to those types of establishments as our theory implies.
Mobility changes in visits to groceries and pharmacies—measured by the ‘Grocery & Pharmacy’ category in Google’s COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports (Google, )—is the second dependent variable of interest. We also use changes to visits in the ‘Parks’ category from the same reports in a falsification test. 
These reports provide “aggregated and anonymized” community-level mobility changes—tracked from individual devices with location histories turned on —relative to an initial pre-pandemic baseline (detail below). The start date for our Google Mobility sample is February 15, 2020, and we restrict the end date to June 24, 2020. This end date is 100 days after the last state-level emergency declaration was activated (in Alaska), and coincides with the end date for our DEX social contact variable.
The various category-specific mobility measures capture “how visits and length of stay at different places change compared to a baseline.” The baseline is calculated using mobility data from January 3 to February 6, 2020 (Google, ). The sample is further restricted because the number of individuals with location data turned on needs to be large enough to surpass Google’s “privacy threshold.” These restrictions, depending on empirical specifications discussed below, result in a sample size between 172,000 and 195,000 county-day observations for grocery store and pharmacy visits, and a sample size of between 63,000 and 73,000 for park visits. The counties included in the Grocery & Pharmacy sample account for 89.98% of the total US population, and the counties included in the Parks sample account for 70.89%.
Table provides a quick summary for ease of reference.
 The main independent variable of interest throughout our analysis is the interaction of an indicator for price-gouging regulation with active/inactive status of the emergency declaration that switches on the regulation to active status in treatment states. Information on states with preexisting price-gouging legislation comes from Time Magazine’s Summary of State “Price Gouging” Statutes and Regulations, and information on newly introduced price-gouging regulation comes from the state government websites. Using this information, we code the following binary treatment-type indicator variables:
Lawi=1countyiisinstatewithprice-gougingregulation;0otherwise.We also source the dates of emergency declarations that activate preexisting price-gouging regulation, and dates of new price-gouging regulation activation from state government websites. We use this information to code “ ” which equals one if county i is in a state that is under an emergency declaration on day d, and zero otherwise:
Activeid=1countyiisunderstate-declaredemergencyondayd;0otherwise.Since all US states declared an emergency during the pandemic, the variable turns on from 0 to 1 on the day of the emergency declaration for all states—it acts as the standard “post-treatment” variable in traditional DiD studies. The coding follows the specific dates summarized in Fig.  . The key independent variable of interest, then, is the interaction term .
Table summarizes the resulting DiD design.
 To account for heterogeneity in social contact or mobility driven by population density, we include population density data for each county from the US Census Bureau COVID-19 website. Our estimation strategy accounts for density-driven heterogeneity to emergency conditions by including an interaction term between population density and the “Active” indicator of whether a county is under a state-declared emergency or not. Population density has a severely skewed distribution, and to circumvent this skewness from affecting our results we apply the standard transformation of classifying the exact county population densities into quartiles.
We also collect daily county-level COVID-19 cases and deaths from the COVID-19 Data Repository by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University, and use these data to construct county-level daily changes, or new, cases and deaths.
Finally, we source information on the introduction and stringency of state-level “stay-at- home” mandates from Ritchie et al. ( ). This dataset differentiates between the strictness of stay-at-home orders by coding them as in Table .
 

## Estimation strategy
We apply non-parametric as well as parametric estimation strategies. The non-parametric strategy compares locally smoothed polynomials fitted to the dependent variables in treatment and control counties. The non-parametric estimates offer two features that are useful for our purpose. First, non-parametric estimates do not impose restrictive functional forms on the relationship of interest (Racine, ). Second, the estimates offer smoothed visual comparisons of trends before and after treatment, permitting us to infer pre-treatment differences between control and treatment counties. 
The parametric strategy applies a standard two-way fixed effects difference-in-differences (TWFE DiD) estimator on pooled county-level daily data. Appendix supplements the analysis with panel event studies to evaluate dynamic treatment effects. Overlapping and parallel time series of pre-treatment social contact across control and treatment counties in Fig.  , the presence of pure-control counties—counties in states that do activate emergencies, but not price-gouging regulations—and, finally, the unbalanced nature of our panel, make the TWFE DiD our preferred approach. As recent literature makes clear (see Goodman-Bacon ( )), suitability is conditional on similar treatment effects across groups and over time. Section  addresses this caveat.
 We apply ordinary least squares (OLS) to estimate Eq. ( ):
1yid=αi+αd+βLawi×Activeid+ηDensityQuartilei×Activeid+∑kγkXk,id+∈id.In the first specification, the outcome variable, , measures social contact in commercial spaces using Couture et al. ( )’s device-exposure index (DEX) (columns 1 and 4 in Table ). In the second specification, measures changes to grocery and pharmacy visits compared to a pre-pandemic baseline (columns 2 and 5 in Table ). Finally, in the third specification—a falsification test— measures changes to park visits compared to a pre-pandemic baseline (columns 3 and 6 in Table ).
 All three of these independent variables in our sample vary by county, i, and day, d. The first two parameters on the right-hand side of Eq. ( ), and are fixed effects that control for time-invariant county-specific idiosyncrasies and nation-wide daily shocks. The coefficient of interest, , represents the impact of activating price-gouging regulations on DEX or (Google) Mobility. The variable, recall, equals one if county i is in a state that activated an emergency declaration before day d, and is otherwise equal to zero. The variable, recall, equals one for counties in states with preexisting or new price-gouging regulation, and zero otherwise.
Specification (1) accounts for potential heterogeneity in social contact arising from variation in population density by interacting a county’s time-invariant population density quartile with the emergency declaration variable to create . The parameter quantifies the average degree to which social contact changes during the emergency declaration differently across population density quartiles. The are a set of k time- and space- varying pandemic-related control variables that may have impacted social contact, and the are their coefficients. These controls include new cases and deaths in county i on date d, and whether a “stay-at-home” order was in effect in county i on day d.
Given the staggered treatment timing, the key identifying assumption embedded in our empirical strategy is the conditional exogeneity of activation dates. If satisfied, this assumption ensures consistent point estimation (Athey & Imbens, ). Since the pandemic’s spread led to emergency declarations that triggered preexisting price-gouging regulation to active status, conditional exogeneity of activation dates is a reasonable assumption. However, such conditional exogeneity may be suspect for the new-law states: if these states introduced and activated new price-gouging regulation and declared emergencies in response to pandemic-driven scarcity, our design may generate inconsistent estimates of the effects of new laws. To address this concern, Sect.  estimates Eq. ( ) using a subsample that excludes counties from new-law states leaving only observations from preexisting-law states (treatment) and from no-law states (control). Section  also estimates an expanded specification that features an explicit distinction between treatment by preexisting or new laws. Section  further accounts for endogeneity of treatment dates across all counties by replacing actual activation dates with one modal date.
If price-gouging regulation indeed led to more social contact due to increased shortage- induced in-store consumer searches, as per our hypothesis, then the estimates of the parameter should be positive for DEX and the Grocery & Pharmacy specifications, but not positive for the Parks specification.
Even though our unit of observation is a county, state-level unobserved random shocks potentially cause county-level observations under the same states to be correlated. To circumvent these correlations from biasing standard errors, we follow Abadie et al. ( )’s advice and cluster standard errors at the treatment-unit level, i.e., the state level, in all regressions.
Parametric cluster-robust standard errors account for clustered treatment assignment, provided the design employs “enough” clusters (Cameron & Miller, ). But in presence of heterogeneity in cluster size, lack of clarity surrounds what satisfies the “enough” criterion. Recent work demonstrates heterogeneity in cluster size, even with large numbers of clusters, can cause cluster-robust inference to fail (MacKinnon & Webb, ; MacKinnon et al., ). In our case, the limited number of clusters, especially within our sample of control counties (only eight), and variability in number of counties within each cluster, can trigger these concerns. We follow the advice from recent literature and augment our parametric cluster-robust inference by implementing two alternatives: the restricted wild cluster bootstrap approach recommended by MacKinnon and Webb ( ), and the randomization inference approach recommended by Hagemann ( ). 

## Main result
Our results support price-gouging regulation-driven increases in visits to, and social contact in, commercial spaces. We start by presenting non-parametric estimates which provide clear visual evidence.

## Non-parametric estimates
Panel 1 in Fig.  provides non-parametric estimates of the DEX index across US counties with (black line) and without (grey line) price-gouging regulations, along with 95% confidence intervals. Panel 2 provides estimates of Grocery & Pharmacy Visits and Panel 3 provides estimates of Park Visits. The figure obtains the estimated trends using weighted least squares to fit locally smoothed polynomials to the raw data. 
Panel 1 in Fig.  shows that trends (and levels) in social contact stay similar, with mostly overlapping confidence intervals, before emergency declarations, but then diverge almost im- mediately after declarations. Panel 2 shows that this pattern of pre-treatment similarity and post-treatment divergence holds also for changes in grocery and pharmacy visits. Since activation of emergency declarations “turns on” price-gouging regulations in regulation states, Panel 1 and 2’s visible growing divergence between black and grey provides strong visual evidence consistent with our hypothesis.
Consistent with prior research (e.g., Wellenius et al., ), Fig.  finds an initial phase of steadily declining social contact and mobility post emergency declarations across both types of counties. But, consistent with our hypothesis, the initial fall is sharper, and the subsequent rise gentler, in counties without active price-gouging regulations (grey lines). In contrast, Panel 3 displays no clear divergence across control- and treatment-county park visits pre- and post-treatment. Values are higher in treatment counties both pre- and post-treatment until about 50 days post treatment, after which the values exhibit a converging trend, and confidence intervals around the estimates exhibit frequent overlaps. Together, these three panels indicate counties with price-gouging laws, post-activation, observed more social contact in commercial spaces, and visits to grocery and pharmacies, but not more visits to parks.
The comparative inspection of trends, by distance from activation date, permitted by these non-parametric estimates is a key advantage over parametric estimates. A shortcoming, though, is the lack of accounting for potential confounders. Our parametric estimates respond to this problem.

## Parametric estimates
Table presents our OLS estimates of Eq. ( ) with DEX, Grocery & Pharmacy Visits, and Park Visits (Placebo) as dependent variables. The first three columns present results without the pandemic-related controls—new cases, new deaths, and stay-at-home requirements—and the last three columns results with these controls included.
The treatment effect estimates displayed in the first row of Table support the patterns Fig.  displays. Estimated impacts of price-gouging laws on DEX and Grocery & Pharmacy visits are positive, and statistically significant at the 1% level, while the estimated impact on Park visits is negative and statistically insignificant. The estimates are similar across specifications with and without pandemic-related controls, indicating the stability of the estimated treatment effects. Estimates in the subsequent rows demonstrate that the control variables all have the expected signs for all three dependent variables. The second row indicates that emergency declarations reduce social contact and grocery/pharmacy visits more, but increase visits to parks, in counties with higher population densities.
These effects confirm the heterogeneity in impacts of emergency declarations across counties with different population densities. The estimates suggest emergency declarations cause people to avoid crowds in commercial venues and instead inspire more visits to open spaces like parks, especially in more population-dense areas, which is consistent with stronger individual responses to perceptions of private risks as identified by Gupta et al. ( ).
The third row shows that stricter stay-at-home requirements also haves a negative point estimate for all three dependent variables, but the effect is statistically significant only for Grocery & Pharmacy visits. The fourth and fifth rows show that a faster-spreading pandemic— more new cases and new deaths—reduces DEX and Grocery & Pharmacy Visits. Increases in new cases also reduces park visits, but new deaths has no significant impact.
These estimated impacts of our control variables align with what we would expect and do not contradict findings in related literature. For instance, the significant impact of emergency declarations and insignificant impact of stay-at-home orders on reducing social contact or mobility in our design supports the findings in Gupta et al. ( ), which is reassuring for our design.
Columns 1 and 4 in Table show the effect of either type of price-gouging regulation, a preexisting regulation activated at the emergency declaration or a new regulation introduced via the emergency declaration associated with the COVID-19 pandemic on DEX. The first column without our pandemic-related control variables indicates that social contact was higher by about 38 more contacts per device per day in the average county with price-gouging regulation. The fourth column with pandemic controls shows a slightly smaller estimated treatment effect of about 37 contacts per device per day.
Columns 2 and 5 show the effect of either type of regulation on the Google Mobility measure of Grocery & Pharmacy Visits. The second column, without the pandemic-related controls, indicates that relative to the pre-pandemic baseline, grocery and pharmacy visits were higher by 6.7% per day in the average county with either type of price-gouging regulation. The fifth column with pandemic controls shows a slightly smaller estimated treatment effect of a 6.5%.
To summarize, in addition to being statistically significant, our estimates reveal economically meaningful impacts of price-gouging regulation. The emergency-induced activation of preexisting or new regulation caused about 38 more contacts per device per day in counties under states with preexisting or new regulation. Relative to pre-pandemic baseline visits, post-activation visits to spaces classified under Google’s Grocery and Pharmacy category increased by 6.5% to − 6.7% more in counties under either type of price-gouging regulation.

## Falsification test: park visits
Columns 3 and 6 in Table present parametric estimates that further support the absence of any positive effect of price-gouging laws on park visits. Column 3 presents the treatment effect estimate without accounting for pandemic-related controls, and column 6 presents the estimate with these controls accounted for. Neither estimate is statistically significant, and moreover, both have a negative sign. While the other columns in Table indicate, consistent with our theory, activating price-gouging laws had positive treatment effects on social contact in commercial spaces and visits to grocery and pharmacies, a non-positive treatment effect on park visits indicates, reassuringly, the estimated effects are not a mere reflection of an underlying increase in overall mobility in treated counties.
These empirical results provide strong evidence that price-gouging regulation led to increased visits to grocery stores and pharmacies and led to increased social contact in commercial spaces. The following subsection provides further evidence of the mechanism we propose by investigating the relationship between stringency of price-gouging regulations and social contact in commercial spaces.

## Mechanism test: impact of stricter price-gouging regulation
Do price-gouging regulations cause more social contact or mobility, or is some other time- varying source of unobserved variation in treated counties responsible for the results? To get at this question we focus only on treated counties—those under states with price-gouging laws—and exploit the variation in stringency of price-gouging regulation. As Prokauser ( )’s report makes clear, the thresholds for permitted price increases under price-gouging laws vary by state. Figure  summarizes this information. Recall our proposed mechanism: regulation-induced shortages drive more in-store searches resulting in more social contact. If this mechanism is indeed behind our results, stricter laws, which permit lower thresholds for price increases, should translate to larger shortages thereby inducing more searches.
We test the merits of the mechanism by estimating the following Two-way Fixed Effects model in a sample that restricts observations only toreated counties, those under states with preexisting or new price-gouging laws:
2yid=αi+αd+βSStringencyi×Activeid+ηDensityQuartilei×Activeid+∑kγkXk,id+∈id.In ( ), replaces the Law-Active interaction; all other terms remain the same as in Eq.  . We use the term “Stringency” to capture the strictness of the price-gouging laws: for county i with laws permitting a threshold of an X% price increase, Stringencyi equals (100 − X) %.
Converting a clear numerical threshold to our measure of stringency is trivial. But, as Fig.  shows, most states’ laws use unclear thresholds muddling the stringency of these laws.
These laws do not mention any clear ceilings for permissible price increases; instead the language prohibits, for instance, “unconscionable,” or “excessive” increases. This lack of clarity makes any price increase subject to potential claims of violation. For estimation purposes, this perspective suggests treating counties under such ambiguous laws as operating under the strictest threshold of zero. Previous research also indicates that ambiguous punishments are more likely to lead to compliance than certain ones (Barnum & Nagin, ). This result is consistent with the well-established finding in behavioral economics that individuals tend to exhibit ambiguity aversion in decision making (see, for example, Machina and Siniscalchi ( )).
Another alternative is to drop counties with ambiguous thresholds. But, as Fig.  shows, states with ambiguous thresholds are the largest group, and dropping these results in a loss of more than half of our treatment counties. We apply both of these strategies in dealing with counties under unclear laws.
All else equal, stricter thresholds—price ceilings that bind at lower values—should create larger shortages. If our proposed mechanism is correct, we should then see larger impacts from more stringent laws, which translates to the hypothesis that .
The first two columns in Tables and present results with the full sample of treated counties with ambiguous laws treated as zero threshold laws. The other two columns present results from the reduced sample that drops counties under ambiguous laws.
 Table shows large, positive, and significant ( ) impacts of stringency on social contact in the full sample of treated counties (columns 1 & 2), which stacks ambiguous-threshold counties with zero-threshold counties. The estimated impacts, though positive, are smaller in size and no longer statistically significant if we remove the ambiguous-threshold counties from the sample (columns 3 & 4). Included controls have impacts similar to what our main specification found: the density-active interaction term again has a large negative impact ( ), stay-at-home-requirements have a statistically insignificant impact, and new cases and new deaths both have negative impacts, on social contact in commercial spaces as measured by DEX.
Table shows large, positive, and significant ( ) impacts of stringency on grocery and pharmacy visits relative to the pre-pandemic baseline (Google Mobility) in the full sample of treated counties (columns 1 & 2). The estimated impacts are slightly smaller in size and only weakly significant ( ) in the specification without pandemic controls if we remove the ambiguous-threshold counties from the sample (columns 3 & 4). Included controls again have impacts similar to what our main specification found: the density-active interaction term has a large negative impact ( ), stay-at-home-requirements again have a statistically insignificant impact, and new cases and new deaths both again have negative impacts, on changes to grocery and pharmacy visits relative to the pre-pandemic baseline, as measured by Google Mobility.
These results support our proposed mechanism: within the sample of counties with price- gouging laws, stricter price-gouging laws have larger impacts. One caveat, though: the results are strong in the full-sample of treated counties, but weak if we drop the counties with ambiguous thresholds.

## Other robustness checks
This section presents four robustness checks to address remaining potential concerns with our general methodology. First, an investigation of the treatment effects by treatment type—specifications that exclude new law counties from the sample, and specifications that feature an explicit distinction between preexisting law and new law treatment effects—addresses concerns relating to endogeneity of new laws, and checks against surprises (e.g., opposite signs) across the two treatment types. Second, a replication of our analysis with real activation dates substituted by a single modal activation date for all counties addresses three concerns: (1) results reflecting duration of exposure to emergency declarations rather than exposure to price-gouging regulation, (2) treatment endogeneity resulting from policymakers choosing activation dates in response to pandemic-driven scarcity, and (3) unreliability of two-way fixed-effects DiD estimators due to staggered activation of price-gouging regulation. Third, a Goodman-Bacon ( ) decomposition of our main results and an inspection of dynamic effects in panel event studies—OLS as well as two different heterogeneity-robust DiD approaches—to further address concerns with the two-way fixed effects DiD estimator highlighted by Goodman-Bacon ( ), Callaway & Sant’Anna (2021), de Chaisemartin and D’Haultfœuille ( ), and others. Fourth, diagnostics from applying the restricted wild cluster bootstrap (WCR) and randomization inference (RI) to address the concerns surrounding validity of cluster robust variance estimators in our sample.

## Impacts by law type
This section presents estimates of Eq. ( ) with observations from all new-law states dropped (columns 1 and 2, and columns 5 and 6, Table ), and estimates of Eq. ( ) (columns 3 and 4, and columns 7 and 8, Table ), an expanded version of Eq. ( ), that explicitly differentiates treatment effect estimates between counties from states with preexisting price-gouging regulation, like Louisiana, and counties from states that adopted new price-gouging regulation for the first time during the COVID-19 pandemic, like Minnesota. We implement this differentiation by using OLS to estimate
3yid=αi+αd+βPreLawiPre×Activeid+βNewLawiNew×Activeid+ηDensityQuartilei×Activeid+∑kγkXk,id+∈id,where is equal to one if county i belongs to a state with pre-existing price-gouging regulation, and zero otherwise, while is equal to one if county i is in a state that adopted new price-gouging regulation for the first time during the pandemic, and zero otherwise. The dependent variable again represents social contact in commercial spaces (DEX), or visits to commercial spaces (Google Mobility Grocery & Pharmacy Visits).
 The odd-numbered columns in Table present estimates of Eq. ( ) with DEX as the dependent variable, and the even-numbered columns present estimates with ‘Grocery & Pharmacy’ visit changes (Google Mobility) as the dependent variable. The first four columns do not include the pandemic-related controls, the last four do.
None of the treatment effects estimated by applying either strategy of dropping the new-law counties, or distinguishing them from preexisting law counties raise any concerns about our main results. Though the point estimates of preexisting and new-law impacts are different, the estimated standard errors imply these point estimates share overlapping 95% confidence intervals. The point estimates from the main specification, which did not distinguish between law types, also lie within these confidence intervals.
This section’s results offer two key implications. First, strategies of either dropping the new-law counties or distinguishing between preexisting and new-law counties result in estimated treatment impacts similar to our main specifications. Second, the signs and significance of estimated treatment effects remain stable across law types for both dependent variables.

## Treatment by single activation date
Appendix re-estimates (1), but with a single modal activation date replacing the true activation dates. Figure  in Appendix A presents estimates for four alternative modal dates: March 10, 13, 20, and 25. 
 Figure  shows for both DEX, and Grocery and Pharmacy mobility, point estimates are positive and quite close to those from our main specification in Table . Replacing the true activation dates with artificial modal dates does, though, reduce the precision of estimated treatment effects visible from larger confidence intervals. The estimated impacts still remain statistically significant at the 5% level for the DEX specifications, and at the 1% level for the Google Mobility specifications. Moreover, the estimated impacts of our pandemic control variables also remain similar to estimates from our main specifications.
These results further indicate our treatment effect estimates are driven by exposure to the laws, not duration of exposure only. Further, they mitigate concerns regarding endogeneity of emergency declarations in the new-law states. Finally, by moving away from the staggered adoption, and still finding similar results, the modal date approach indicates that the staggered adoption does not hinder our analysis in any meaningful way. We address this final concern in much more detail in the following section.

## Dynamic effects and heterogeneity-robust estimation
The two-way fixed-effects estimator we have employed performs well under two assumptions: conditional common trends, and treatment-effect similarity by unit and time (Athey & Imbens, ). Under these conditions, the two-way fixed-effects estimator utilizes all the information available,and delivers to most efficient and consistent estimator. While the visual representations in Fig.  indicate common pre-treatment trends, we have no evidence to support similar treatment-effects across units or time. An emerging literature shows, given the sequential activation of price-gouging regulation across different states, which translates to a staggered treatment design, the violation of this second assumption of treatment-effect similarity may bias our estimates (de Chaisemartin & D’Haultfœuille, ; Goodman-Bacon, ).
Put simply, TWFE DiD regressions generate “clean” comparisons—between treated and never-treated units or between treated and not-yet-treated units—but also “problematic” comparisons—between already treated units. Goodman-Bacon ( ) demonstrates two key issues with the TWFE DiD approach when treatment timing is staggered and the treatment effects vary.
We address this concern in two ways: first, Appendix presents Goodman-Bacon ( ) decompositions demonstrating our design attaches most of the weight to the “clean” comparisons relative to “problematic comparisons.” Second, we present event-study results based on the Callaway and Sant’Anna ( ) non-parametric DiD estimator, and the Cengiz et al. ( ) “stacked DiD” estimator, both of which ensure, in different ways, estimates based on only the “clean” comparisons. Finally, recall that our modal date regressions also circumvent these issues by imposing a single treatment date rather than a staggered design.
Figure  decomposes the TWFE DiD estimators into all possible 2-group 2-period DiD comparisons in the sample and plots these 2 × 2 estimators against the weights each receives in the TWFE DiD estimation procedure. The top row presents Goodman-Bacon ( ) decompositions for DEX regressions, and the bottom row for Grocery & Pharmacy regressions. Following Goodman-Bacon ( )’s advice, the figure includes specifications with no controls (first column), as well as with just the density-quartile and active interaction as a control (second column), and with the full set of controls (third column). All three panels confirm that the presence of pure controls—never treated counties—alleviates much of the standard concerns. The figure makes clear that the TWFE estimator assigns much larger individual weights to the “cleanest” comparisons, to those between treated and never-treated units (the triangles in the figure), and near-zero weights individually to the potentially problematic “timing group” comparisons between later and earlier treated units (small x’s in the first column, hollow circles in the other two). The decomposition also demonstrates the utility of including the density-active interaction term as a control variable: this “within” source of identifying variation in potential treatment status accounts for a significant portion of the estimated treatment effects, which, in turn, implies that configurations ignores the influence of this term will result in biased estimates. Figure  presents event study estimates that evaluate dynamic treatment effects.

 These models expand Eq. ( ) to include dynamic leads and lags for the treatment effects. We apply the specification displayed in Eq. ( ), which accounts for price-gouging law activation affecting the outcome up to M days before and G days after activation. We set M and G to the maximal limits permitted by our data: M is 50 for the DEX sample, and 25 for the Google Mobility samples. G is 100 for both samples. Avoiding perfect multicollinearity requires omitting one of these terms. Following standard operating procedure, we omit the last day before treatment activation. This omission implies all treatment effect estimates represent the effects relative to the day immediately before treatment activation.
4yid=αi+αd+∑m=-GMβmLawi×Activei,d-m+ηDensityQuartilei×Activeid+∑kγkXk,id+∈id.The first column in each panel in Fig.  presents OLS estimates of ( ) for each of the three dependent variables: DEX (Panel 1), Grocery & Pharmacy Visits (Panel 2), and Parks Visits (Panel 3). Unlike our main specification which assumes stable treatment effects, between and within units, explicit incorporation of dynamic effects in ( ) results in consistent and efficient OLS estimators even if treatment effects vary over time (Clarke & Tapia-Schythe, ). However, if the treatment effects also vary across units, the OLS estimators no longer remain consistent (Sun & Abraham, ). Reverting back to consistency requires strategies to explicitly handle the problematic comparisons, flagged by Goodman-Bacon ( ), that treat earlier treated units as controls. The second and third columns in Fig.  present event studies resulting from two such strategies. The second column adopts Callaway and Sant’Anna ( )’s semi-parametric DiD estimation strategy (CSDiD), and the third column adopts the “stacked” DiD estimation strategy, applied by Cengiz et al. ( ), both of which remain robust even to between-unit treatment-effect heterogeneity. Both of these approaches tame the issue by dropping potentially problematic comparisons, and restricting the estimation only to clean ones. However, the differences in methodology lead to one key difference relevant for our case: Callaway and Sant’Anna ( ) estimator’s semi- parametric approach does not incorporate the influence of time-varying covariates. Estimates resulting from this strategy do not account for the effect of the interaction between the emergency declarations and population density which, Fig.  ’s Goodman-Bacon ( ) decompositions show, provide an important source of identifying variation in the treatment probability.
All three estimation strategies indicate significant post-treatment increases in DEX and Grocery & Pharmacy visits, but not in Parks visits. However, the dynamic impacts uncovered by the TWFE DiD and Stacked DiD estimators reflect more similarity. The ability to include the effect of the time-varying density-active interaction as a control variable in these two approaches, something the CSDiD specification is not able to do, we suspect, best explains this similarity.
Figure  ’s top panel shows steady increases in social contact (DEX) in treated counties in the post activation stage. The TWFE DiD (column 1) and Stacked DiD (column 3) strategies find evidence of large discrete jumps immediately after activation; the CSDiD strategy finds a smaller initial rise, but a stable increase thereon. Figure  ’s middle panel shows steady increases also in Grocery & Pharmacy visits (Google Mobility) in treated counties in the post activation stage. All three estimators find similar post-treatment effects for the most part. The CSDiD estimates of impacts immediately following activation, again, exhibit slight differences from the other two strategies. Finally, Fig.  ’s bottom panel—the dynamic version of our falsification test—supports the conclusion from our main results: none of the three strategies show any evidence of more park visits, post-treatment, in treated counties. On the contrary, consistent with Table ’s results, we find negative estimates of the treatment effects, but with most of the confidence intervals overlapping zero.
In summary, despite the methodological differences, all three panels in Fig.  support the effects of price-gouging laws from our main results in Fig.  and Table . This finding is also consistent with key message from the Goodman-Bacon ( ) decompositions (Fig.  ) and modal-date results (Fig.  ): Despite the staggered treatment timing in our setting, the consistency of findings across all these different approaches indicates that the presence of enough never-treated and not-yet-treated counties, to serve as comparisons for a substantial number of treated counties on or after their treatment dates, allows our static TWFE treatment-effect estimates to give more weight to the “clean” comparisons.

## WCR and RI diagnostics
We implement the parametric Cluster-Robust Variance Estimator (CRVE) in our main specifications for statistical inference. Developed independently by Liang and Zeger ( ) and Arellano ( ), this “cluster sandwich” estimator has since become the default parametric approach to cluster-robust inference. While the CRVE method produces asymptotically valid t-statistics, recent work makes clear that in presence of a small number of heterogenous clusters this method can lead to unreliable inference (Hagemann, ; MacKinnon et al., ). To address this concern, we follow MacKinnon et al. ( )’s advice and confirm the validity of our CRVE-based inference by demonstrating similar inference results from two alternative methods known to be more reliable for inference under these conditions: the wild cluster restricted bootstrap (WCR), and randomization inference (RI). 
In contrast to the parametric CRVE which relies on asymptotic theory for critical values, the WCR method relies on re-sampling from the original sample, whereas RI relies on re-randomizing treatment assignment. WCR creates each bootstrap sample by reassigning modified versions of the fitted error terms to each observation, cluster by cluster, with the null hypothesis—zero treatment effect in our case—imposed. RI, on the other hand, creates placebo samples by permuting all possible treatment assignments, cluster-by-cluster, holding the ratio of treated and untreated clusters unchanged, with the null hypothesis imposed. Both approaches then calculate the test statistic of interest—the Wald “t-statistic” under the null of no treatment effect in our case—for each sample. Replicating this procedure a large number of times produces the empirical distribution of interest for WCR, and the hypothetical distribution of interest for RI. Both methods then rely on these distributions, rather than asymptotic normality, for inference: the P-values capture the incidence of more extreme t-statistics than the actual one from the original sample (Heß, ; MacKinnon & Webb, ; Roodman et al., ).
The top half of Table compares CRVE and WCR confidence intervals for our key parameter of interest, the coefficient on the Law × Active interaction from the main specifications. The lower half compares CRVE, WCR, and RI P-values. The column numbers follow the order of presentation of main results in Table : columns (1)–(3) estimate specifications with only the Density × Active interaction as a control, columns (4)–(6) also include the full set of pandemic controls. Table offers two key takeaways.
 First, comparing rows one and two reveals that the WCR method results in a minor widening of the confidence intervals; for the most part the CRVE and WCR confidence intervals overlap. Second, comparing rows three and four reveals identical P-values up to two decimal places for the DEX and Grocery specifications in columns (1), (2), and columns (4) and (5), and negligible differences between the P-values for the Parks specifications in columns (3) and (6). Crucially, for our purposes, the CRVE and WCR P-values yield identical inferences at all standard levels of statistical significance. Finally, as the last row in the table makes clear, at the 5% level, inferences drawn based on the RI P-values remain consistent with those drawn based on the CRVE and WCR P-values.
To summarize, we find that statistical inference based on WCR and RI, two approaches more reliable in cases with fewer, and size-varying clusters, remain consistent with statistical inference based on the standard CRVE approach.

## Conclusion
The increasing popularity of price regulation as a policy lever among politicians and the public makes uncovering their unintended consequences important. As Fig.  shows, eight states enacted price-gouging regulations for the first time during the onset of COVID-19. The US federal government, under the Trump administration, eventually implemented national price-gouging regulations during the pandemic. The Biden administration regulated gasoline price-gouging when the Colonial Pipeline experienced a ransom attack, and European policymakers continue capping consumer energy bills in response to rising energy prices from the war between Ukraine and Russia. To the extent that these examples of price regulation bind, they will lead to shortages and change human behavior; not always in ways that policy makers intend.
Furthermore, responses by a panel of economists on a survey makes clear that the academic debate about price-gouging regulation is alive and well, and that uncertainty and disagreements about the effects persist. Our paper highlights a so-far-unnoticed consequence of price-gouging regulation in the context of a pandemic that could help inform this debate and should worry policymakers: price-gouging regulations lead to more crowding in commercial spaces. With a pandemic in the background, such regulation-induced crowding works against social distancing goals aimed at curbing disease spread.
Panels A and B in Fig.  demonstrate a clear divergence in confirmed new daily cases and new daily deaths between US counties with and without price-gouging regulations during the pandemic. Notably, the beginning of the divergence coincides with activation dates of price-gouging regulation, or emergency declarations in the no-regulation counties. This coincidence suggests that our results, which show that price-gouging regulation led to more social contact in commercial spaces, may explain part of this divergence. If true, this connection suggests much higher unintended costs of price-gouging regulation during a deadly pandemic. Costs that can be measured in human lives in addition to wasteful waiting and search.
 

## Electronic supplementary material
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Supplementary file1 (DOCX 372 kb)

## Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the editor and two anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Dr. Ian McDonough and other scholars associated with the Center for Growth and Opportunity at Utah State University who provided helpful comments on the working paper.

## Appendix A: modal date regressions
See Fig.  .

## Appendix B: Goodman-Bacon decompositions & event study estimates
We use the “Bacondecomp” program in Stata (See Goodman-Bacon et al. ( )). This procedure only works for a balanced panel. For each run, we satisfy this requirement by dropping all observations for any days that have a missing value for any of the included counties. This results in some minor, statistically insignificant, differences between our estimated average treatment effects in Tables and Fig. . For Fig.  , we use Clarke and Tapia-Schythe ( )’s “eventdd” program to generate the column 1 figures, Rios-Avila et al. ( )’s “csdid” program to generate the column 2 figures, and Bleiberg ( )’s “stackedev” program to generate the column 3 figures.

## Footnotes
1The order’s full text is available here: https://www.vdh.virginia.gov/northwestmrc/2020/03/30/governor-northam-issues-statewide-stay-at-home-order/. Date accessed: July 14, 2022.
2The statement’s full text is no longer available, but an NBC news report on the statement is available at: https://www.nbc12.com/2020/03/31/attorney-general-herring-letters-businesses-cracking-down-price-gouging/. Date accessed: October 6, 2022.
3See LA Rev Stat § 29:732: http://legis.la.gov/legis/Law.aspx?d=85680. Date accessed: July 14, 2020.
4See Findlaw’s compilation of price-gouging laws by state: https://www.findlaw.com/consumer/consumer-transactions/price-gouging-laws-by-state.html. Date accessed: July 21, 2020.
5Alaska, Delaware, Maryland, Minnesota, Montana, New Mexico, Ohio, and Washington. See Fig.  .
6Arizona, Colorado, North Dakota, Nebraska, New Hampshire, Nevada, South Dakota, and Wyoming. See Fig.  .
7Couture et al. ( ) explain that “When measuring potential social contact by the DEX […], we restrict attention to venue categories in which most venues are sufficiently small that visiting devices would be exposed to each other. In particular, we omit the categories ‘Residential’, ‘Nature and Outdoor’, ‘Theme Parks’, ‘Airports’, ‘Universities’, as well as venues without a category identified by PlaceIQ. Finally, note that PlaceIQ excludes certain venue categories for privacy reasons, such as hospitals, schools, and places of worship.”
8For robustness we run our analysis using the unadjusted index as well and find very similar effects.
9We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.
10The ‘Grocery & Pharmacy’ category contains “[m]obility trends for places like grocery markets, food warehouses, farmers markets, specialty food shops, drug stores, and pharmacies.”
11The ‘Parks’ category contains “[m]obility trends for places like local parks, national parks, public beaches, marinas, dog parks, plazas, and public gardens.”
12Location History: a Google Account–level setting that saves where a user goes with every mobile device they own, as long as three conditions are met: the user is signed in to their Google account, the user has turned on the ‘Location History’ setting on account, and the device has turned on the ‘Location Reporting’ setting (Google, ). See https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/3118687.
13https://time.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/price-gouging-statutes.pdf. Date accessed: July 21, 2020.
14Findlaw has compiled summaries here: https://www.findlaw.com/consumer/consumer-transactions/price-gouging-laws-by-state.html. Date accessed: July 21, 2020.
15See https://covid19.census.gov/datasets/USCensus::average-household-size-and-population-density-county/about. Date accessed: August 15, 2021.
16https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19. Date accessed: August 2, 2021.
17See Gutierrez et al. ( ) for a discussion on the advantages of using these locally smoothed polynomials instead of standard mean plots.
18The results are robust to using population density in levels.
19See MacKinnon et al. ( ) for an excellent summary of the related issues and clear guidance for empirical practice.
20As opposed to localized mean plots, these higher-order polynomial fits have better statistical properties (see Gutierrez et al. ( )). Appendix C presents standard mean plots and confidence intervals for each of the local polynomial fits from this figure.
21See Baker et al. ( ) for a summary.
22As Fig.  shows, the largest cluster of states declared emergencies and activated their price gouging regulation within the range of March 10–March 13, justifying the choice of the first two of the modal dates we apply. We also include the two later dates to address sensitivity concerns regarding these estimates. By March 20, only four states are yet to activate, and by March 25 only two remain.
23See Eq. (26) in Goodman-Bacon ( ), and the surrounding discussion.
24We borrow Freyaldenhoven et al. ( )’s notation to specify the estimating equation. See Clarke and Tapia-Schythe ( ) for equivalent alternatives.
25Applying the Jacknife cluster method recommended in MacKinnon et al. ( ) produces confidence intervals and P-values very similar to WCR.
26These modified errors result from multiplying the fitted error in the original sample with random draws from the Rademacher distribution, see MacKinnon and Webb ( ) for details.
27See The Initiative on Global Markets, Chicago Booth. See The Initiative on Global Markets, Chicago Booth. https://www.igmchicago.org/surveys/price-gouging-2/.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Contributor Information
Rik Chakraborti, Email: rik.chakraborti@cnu.edu.
Gavin Roberts, Email: gavinroberts@weber.edu.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Supplementary file1 (DOCX 372 kb)