pmcPLoS BiolPLoS Biol212plosbiolplosPLOS Biology1544-91731545-7885PLOSPMC12629446PMC12629446.112629446126294464121806110.1371/journal.pbio.3003482PBIOLOGY-D-25-003851Research ArticleBiology and life sciencesGeneticsEpigeneticsRNA interferenceBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionRNA interferenceBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGenetic interferenceRNA interferenceBiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNARNA interferenceBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsEukaryotaAnimalsInvertebratesFlatwormsPlanariansBiology and Life SciencesZoologyAnimalsInvertebratesFlatwormsPlanariansBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyMorphogenesisRegenerationBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyOrganism DevelopmentRegenerationBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyMorphogenesisRegenerationHead RegenerationBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyOrganism DevelopmentRegenerationHead RegenerationBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyPhysiological ProcessesHomeostasisBiology and life sciencesCell biologySignal transductionCell signalingBMP signalingMedicine and Health SciencesSurgical and Invasive Medical ProceduresSurgical AmputationThe planarian dorsal–ventral boundary regulates anterior–posterior axis growth and patterning
The planarian dorsal–ventral axis organizes regeneration along the anterior–posterior axisMaybrunChloe L.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing OderbergIsaac M.ConceptualizationInvestigationWriting – review & editing GaviñoMichael A.ConceptualizationInvestigation CookeThomas F.Methodology ChoiKyungyongMethodology HanJongyoonMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5569-333XReddienPeter W.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America2
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America3
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America4
Research Laboratory of Electronics and Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America5
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of AmericaBaslerKonradAcademic Editor , ]. During regeneration, tissues must be formed in the correct position within the body and properly oriented relative to remaining tissues. This attribute of regeneration poses a unique patterning challenge in biology. How positional information is integrated across the axes of new and pre-existing, adult tissues is therefore a central and understudied question in the field of regeneration.
Planarians can regenerate from a large array of injuries, including from small fragments of the body [ ]. The planarian body plan is organized along three axes: anterior–posterior (AP), dorsal–ventral (DV), and medial–lateral (ML). Positional information refers to factors that influence the regional identity and organization of cell types, organs, and appendages [ ]. Positional information across body axes, such as during animal development, promotes organization of the body plan [ – ]. Positional information in adult planarians includes the products of genes referred to as position control genes (PCGs). PCGs are constitutively and regionally expressed along one or more body axes and either have an abnormal patterning phenotype when inhibited or are predicted to be part of planarian patterning pathways by homology [ ]. Most PCGs show constitutive regional expression predominantly in planarian muscle [ ].
In development, most animals utilize canonical Wnt signaling to control pattern formation on the AP axis, whereas Bmp signaling is used to pattern the DV axis [ – ]. The planarian AP axis is patterned largely by canonical Wnt signaling [ ]. A system of posteriorly expressed Wnt ligands and anteriorly expressed Wnt inhibitors establishes a posterior-to-anterior gradient of β-catenin-1 signaling activity that is required for the establishment and maintenance of regional tissue identity [ – ]. RNAi of β-catenin-1 causes heads to regenerate in place of tails after transverse amputation and induces the formation of ectopic heads in uninjured animals [ – ]. Two FGFRL-Wnt modules and Src regulate planarian head and trunk patterning [ – ]. Bmp signaling controls planarian DV patterning [ ]. The expression of the Bmp ligand-encoding bmp4 gene is restricted to dorsal muscle in a medial-to-lateral gradient [ , – ]. RNAi of bmp4 or the downstream pathway component smad1 results in progressive ventralization in uninjured animals [ – ]. During normal regeneration, major regions of body axes are generated with the correct orientation relative to each other in the blastema (regenerative outgrowth) and to pre-existing patterns within the amputated fragment, suggesting the existence of mechanisms to coordinate axial regeneration.
bmp4 is required for regeneration of pattern along the AP axis [ ]. The possibility that DV pattern informs the location of AP axis establishment was proposed in theoretical models of planarian patterning [ , ] and is supported by the following observations. The anterior pole, a cluster of specialized muscle cells that organizes pattern during head regeneration [ – ], forms at the DV median plane [ ]. This region of the animal, sometimes called the dorsal–ventral boundary (DVB), is defined by a zone of epidermal and sub-epidermal gene expression at the lateral edge of the animal, where the dorsal and ventral sides meet. This DVB location is set by a patterning process on the DV axis involving dorsal Bmp signaling [ – ]. We also note that ectopic head formation after β-catenin-1 RNAi occurs only at the animal lateral edge (body margin) [ – ]. DV confrontation can promote axis formation in certain patterning contexts in other organisms. In Drosophila, for instance, interactions between dorsal and ventral cells in the wing imaginal disc drive wing growth [ , ]. Genetic manipulations that create an ectopic boundary between dorsal and ventral cells in Drosophila can lead to formation of an ectopic outgrowth of the wing blade. DV contact during wound closure has been proposed to promote planarian blastema formation [ , ]. Whether diverse organisms across the animal kingdom such as those capable of whole-body regeneration have a DVB present in the adult stage that regulates regeneration, and the mechanistic roles of any such adult DVBs in regenerative contexts remain poorly addressed. The presence of a region at the planarian DV median plane with a candidate regulatory role in regeneration therefore makes planarians an attractive venue for studying the regenerative role and nature of an adult DVB.
In this work, we find that the DVB is sufficient and necessary for planarian head formation in a low Wnt environment. By manipulating the pattern of the DVB, it is possible to induce heads to grow out of the dorsal side of the animal or to block head positional information expression from either the lateral animal edge in a Wnt-low environment or at anterior-facing wounds (AFWs). Our findings support a hierarchical model of pattern integration across body axes in regeneration, with the lateral DV median plane orchestrating growth and patterning of large AP axis regions.

## Results

## The AP and DV axes maintain pattern largely independently in homeostasis
The maintenance of adult positional information in planarians is important for tissue turnover and for regeneration after injury [ ]. To maintain positional information with suitable spatial relationships between axes during homeostatic tissue maintenance, positional information along one axis could, in principle, require input from another axis. Inhibition of β-catenin-1 results in homeostatic anteriorization [ – ] ( ). However, DV asymmetric tissues [ ] and both dorsally biased (bmp4, nlg-8) and ventrally biased (admp, nlg-7) PCG expression remained unchanged after β-catenin-1 RNAi ( , , and ), suggesting that Wnt signaling is not overtly required for the maintenance of DV pattern during adult tissue turnover. bmp4, the inhibition of which leads to homeostatic ventralization [ – ] ( ), has been proposed to integrate patterning of the DV and AP axes by suppressing Wnt [ ]. In agreement with findings in Clark (2023) [ ], we found that the domain of wnt1+ cells (the posterior pole) was expanded after 45 days of bmp4 RNAi ( and ). The fz4-1 expression domain was similarly lengthened in bmp4 RNAi animals. However, no overt changes in the wntP-2 or ndl-3 expression domains were apparent ( ). The anterior pole, labeled by notum, was expanded, albeit to a lesser extent than the posterior pole ( , , and ). However, no dramatic changes in anterior PCG expression domains (sFRP-1, ndl-5) were observed ( and ), as previously reported [ ]. Furthermore, the relative order of PCG expression domains along the AP axis remained largely unchanged after bmp4 RNAi, suggesting that Bmp signaling is not strictly required for the maintenance of broad AP pattern, but might limit the extent of the posterior-most patterning domain of the AP axis. These results point towards the possibility that axis integration might predominantly be accomplished during regeneration or during ectopic head formation in a low Wnt environment, with pattern thereafter largely stably maintained by each axis independently during cell turnover.
 

## Organization of PCG expression at the DVB in regeneration
During head regeneration, anterior pole cells labeled by notum transcripts form a focus at the DVB [ ]. We used epidermal cells expressing laminB, which mark the lateral DV median plane [ , ], as a reference point for the DVB. At 96 hours post-amputation (hpa), this DVB location was positioned ventral to the dorsally high bmp4 domain in muscle and was coincident with the known location of admp expression in muscle [ , , ] at the lateral DV median plane ( and ). Expression of the anterior PCGs sFRP-1, ndl-4, and ndl-5 was centered around the DVB ( and ) and showed peaked behavior on the dorsal and ventral sides that juxtapose the laminB+ DVB location ( and ). The mature posterior pole labeled by wnt1 is dorsally biased [ , , ] but formed a cluster near the DVB at 96 hpa during tail regeneration ( and ). Expression of the posterior PCGs wnt11-1 and fz4-1 was centered around the laminB+ DVB ( and ) and showed peaked behavior on the dorsal and ventral sides juxtaposing the DVB ( and ), similar to the case of anterior PCGs. These results connect patterning processes involving PCG expression at the head and tail tips to the location of the DVB and support a potential mechanism for axis integration [ ] wherein the DVB serves as a critical landmark to guide proper regeneration along the AP axis.

## Ectopic heads form at the DVB after β-catenin-1 RNAi
Ectopic heads form at the animal periphery after β-catenin-1 RNAi, with the occasional exception of a head near the planarian pharynx, during a process of homeostatic tissue turnover [ – ]. β-catenin-1 RNAi resulted in ectopic focal expression of the anterior PCGs sFRP-1 and ndl-4 laterally, centered at the laminB+ DVB ( and ). Anterior PCGs showed peaked ectopic expression on the dorsal and ventral sides juxtaposing the DVB in some regions ( ). Ectopic anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4) expression occurred in multiple muscle subtypes present near the DVB [ , ], including in longitudinal muscle (muscle that is oriented along the AP axis), circular muscle (muscle that is oriented along the ML axis), and lateral DV muscle (muscle that is oriented along the DV axis at the body margin) ( and ). Ectopic anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4) expression in β-catenin-1 RNAi animals occurred in a large fraction (62.0%) of muscle cells expressing the DVB PCG admp [ , , ] ( ). Ectopic anterior PCGs (sFRP-1, ndl-4) were co-expressed with additional muscle-enriched genes at the DVB, including lactadherin (dd_5463, identified below) and netrin-1 [ , ] ( ). Although anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4) expression was concentrated in foci at the DVB after β-catenin-1 RNAi, sporadic cells expressing anterior PCGs were also detected dispersed (not in foci) in the animal ( ). Hereafter, we analyze specifically the anterior PCG expression that occurred in a concentrated manner at the DVB in β-catenin-1 RNAi animals.

## A spatial atlas of gene expression, including genes encoding cell surface and signaling molecules, in muscle at the DVB
Given the potential significance of the planarian DVB in patterning, and the fact that its molecular determinants are poorly understood, we sought to define a spatial atlas of gene expression for muscle at the DVB. We performed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of the lateral edges of animals to enrich for DVB cells ( and ). All major muscle subtypes at the DVB were represented in our data ( ). Known markers of the body margin from prior literature (admp [ , ], egf-6 [ ], wnt-5 [ , ], unc5-B [ ], ephR-2 [ ], netrin-1 [ , ], follistatin [ , ], noggin-1 [ , ], and netrin-3 [ , , ]) displayed expression predominantly in longitudinal muscle at the DVB ( ). Some DVB markers also displayed expression in lateral DV muscle (nk4+) and/or circular muscle (nkx1-1+) ( ), but subclustering data from circular muscle did not separate cells by their DV position of origin ( ).
Subclustering scRNA-seq data from longitudinal muscle cells identified four total subclusters. Transcripts known to be expressed at the DVB were enriched in subcluster 1 ( , , and ), suggesting genes with enriched expression in this subcluster could represent DVB-expressed genes. Thirty-two total genes had significantly enriched expression in subcluster 1; nine of these genes were previously characterized as being expressed at the body margin, with 23 new DVB genes. We assessed the expression of these 32 genes by FISH, together with laminB as a common spatial reference marker. This generated a spatial atlas of gene expression in muscle at the DVB ( – , , and ). Previously identified DVB markers were expressed in either dorsal (admp, egf-6, wnt-5, unc5-B, ephR-2), ventral (netrin-1, follistatin), overlapping (noggin-1), or both dorsal and ventral (netrin-3) domains of the DV axis relative to laminB ( —2D). In addition to these known DVB markers, nine additional genes (lactadherin (dd_5463), ephR-3 (dd_27668, dd_39545), troponin-2 (dd_7974), frem-1 (dd_5187), netR, dd_30210, delta-3, coupTF-1 (dd_33286), and zfp-4 (dd_29263, dd_21349)) were also expressed in particular domains relative to laminB at the DVB ( —2D, , and ). Lactadherin is a secreted protein that can bind anionic phospholipids [ ]. Ephrin receptors mediate the effects of Ephrins, a family of membrane-bound signaling ligands that promote a variety of cellular responses including attraction, repulsion, and migration [ ]. frem-1 encodes an extracellular matrix protein that contributes to epithelial-mesenchymal integrity in development [ ]. Netrin receptors mediate the attractant and repellent properties of secreted Netrins that guide cell and axon migration in development [ ]. dd_30210 encodes a novel protein with no characterized PFAM domains. delta-3 encodes a membrane-bound Notch signaling ligand. Notch signaling regulates diverse developmental processes, including cell fate determination [ ]. COUP transcription factors encode orphan nuclear receptors that regulate diverse cellular processes in development [ ]. zfp-4 encodes a novel zinc finger protein. Using our scRNA-seq data, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient for all pairwise comparisons of the 18 genes in the DVB atlas with expression detected by FISH. Within longitudinal muscle cells at the DVB, the expression of many genes showed a high degree of correlation (r > 0.5) ( ), indicating that individual muscle cells co-express multiple markers of the DVB. There were 14 genes with transcripts enriched in longitudinal muscle subcluster 1 ( and ) that did not display clear DVB-restricted expression by FISH, either because expression was broad or not detected.
 Taken together, the molecular data indicate that the DVB, often defined anatomically, can be viewed as an intricately patterned domain of gene expression that in muscle includes a large array of genes encoding signaling factors, cell-surface molecules, and transcription regulators ( , , and ). DVB muscle is thus a prominent but poorly understood pattern element of the planarian body plan.

## Ectopic DVB is permissive for the formation of an anterior region of the AP axis after β-catenin-1 RNAi
To determine whether the DVB is sufficient to promote the formation of an anterior region of the AP axis after β-catenin-1 RNAi, we endeavored to generate animals with ectopic DVB. Transplantation of tissue with reversed DV polarity has been shown to induce ectopic DVB, labeled by epidermal expression of laminB, in goblet-shaped outgrowths [ , ]. By contrast, similar tissue transplantation without DV reversal leads to tissue integration without DVB formation. We used this approach to generate outgrowths with ectopic DVB in the post-pharyngeal region of the animal ( and ). These outgrowths contained DVB muscle gene expression signatures, including for genes encoding the secreted molecules admp, lactadherin, and frem-1, indicating that both epidermis and underlying muscle acquire an ectopic DVB identity in outgrowths ( and ). These outgrowths had AP character typical of the location of the transplant [ ] ( ) and lacked anterior identity ( ). After allowing dorsal-to-ventral (D-V) transplant outgrowths to form, we initiated β-catenin-1 RNAi. Whereas head structures are normally constrained to the periphery of β-catenin-1 RNAi animals, D-V transplant outgrowths developed into goblet-shaped head-like structures marked by the presence of eyes in the middle of the animal ( ). These outgrowths (both dorsal and ventral outgrowths), after β-catenin-1 RNAi, expressed anterior PCGs (sFRP-1, ndl-4) and contained opsin+ photoreceptor cells ( and ). By contrast, dorsal-to-dorsal (D-D) transplant animals simply healed the wound (n = 13/13) and these transplantation sites did not express anterior PCGs or transform into heads following β-catenin-1 RNAi ( and ).
 To complement the use of transplantation to generate ectopic DVB, we next transplanted the DVB region itself. Transplantation of a small posterior DVB-containing segment of the animal margin to the midline of a recipient animal induced the formation of a dorsal outgrowth in the recipient. These outgrowths expressed anterior PCGs (sFRP-1, ndl-4) and contained opsin+ photoreceptor cells after β-catenin-1 RNAi ( ), indicating that ectopically positioned DVB is competent to promote anterior patterning after Wnt inhibition.
As an independent method to generate ectopic DVB, we utilized smad1 RNAi. smad1 encodes a downstream mediator of Bmp signaling and has a prominent role in planarian DV patterning [ ]. Inhibition of bmp4 or smad1 leads to homeostatic ventralization [ – ], with the appearance of ectopic laminB+ DVB cells on the dorsal surface of animals, in some cases in organized stripes ( ). After allowing smad1 RNAi animals to develop ectopic DVB, we inhibited β-catenin-1 with RNAi. These smad1; β-catenin-1 double RNAi animals expressed anterior PCGs (sFRP-1, ndl-4) and developed opsin+ photoreceptor cells at sites of ectopic DVB, indicative of head patterning ( and ). The ectopic anterior PCG expression observed traced the variable and irregular pattern of the ectopic DVB on the dorsal side of these animals ( ). smad1; β-catenin-1 double RNAi animals ultimately formed heads that emerged from the dorsal surface of the animal ( ).
 We realized it could be possible to use smad1 RNAi to induce head formation by design in a desired location. We performed a dorsal injury in the pre-pharyngeal region three days after initiating smad1 RNAi, triggering outgrowth formation at the injury site that displayed ectopic laminB+ DVB gene expression. After subsequent β-catenin-1 inhibition, the outgrowths were converted to head-like structures ( and ). Together, these results are consistent with a model in which muscle at the planarian DVB is competent to activate anterior PCGs and support formation of an anterior region of the AP axis in a low Wnt environment. By combining methods to generate ectopic DVB at designated locations with Wnt pathway inhibition, head location and shape can be controlled to yield a large array of body plans.

## The DVB region is required to promote anterior PCG expression in a low Wnt environment
To test whether the DVB is required to initiate head formation in the context of β-catenin-1 RNAi, we inflicted either a lateral or internal injury after RNAi ( and ). Anteriorization after β-catenin-1 RNAi requires new cell production [ , ], and loss of tissue elicits a localized increase in mitoses at the wound site [ , ]. However, only tissue removal at the lateral edge of β-catenin-1 RNAi animals was sufficient to reliably induce anterior PCG expression at the wound ( ). An internal hole-punch that removed tissue did not cause anterior PCG expression in most cases (n = 51/59) ( and ), suggesting that signals at the DVB are necessary to robustly initiate anterior patterning.
 We next surgically removed the DVB (parasagittal amputation) and blocked its regeneration by inhibiting Erk signaling using PD0325901 (PD) ( , , and ). Erk signaling is required to promote wound-induced signaling that culminates in a regenerative response [ ]. Erk signaling was not required, however, for the homeostatic outgrowth that accompanies ectopic head formation after β-catenin-1 RNAi ( ). DMSO-treated β-catenin-1 RNAi animals regenerated the DVB, labeled by laminB, and expressed anterior PCGs (sFRP-1, ndl-4) in large foci on the side that was regenerating, whereas PD-treated β-catenin-1 RNAi animals did not regenerate the DVB and little anterior PCG expression was detected on this side in most cases (n = 12/22) ( ). In some cases (n = 9/22), anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4) expression was detected on the injured side of PD-treated β-catenin-1 RNAi animals, despite no regeneration of epidermal DVB (laminB) ( ) or muscle DVB (lactadherin, frem-1) gene expression ( ). However, this expression did not form foci or local outgrowths indicative of head formation ( ). It is possible that anterior PCG expression can be initiated at low levels in the absence of the DVB, and that the DVB acts to promote elevated and sustained anterior PCG expression that culminates in strong foci. Importantly, anterior PCGs were expressed on the uninjured side of both DMSO- and PD-treated animals, where they could form foci, demonstrating that Erk signaling is not generally required for anteriorization during homeostatic turnover ( ). Together, these results suggest that the DVB is required for robust promotion of anterior patterning and head formation after β-catenin-1 RNAi.
To further determine whether the DVB is required to promote anterior patterning, we utilized the independent context of head regeneration. Anterior PCGs can become expressed during head regeneration between 24 and 48 hpa [ , ]. Muscle DVB genes became expressed at the edge of head blastemas in a patterned manner by 36 hpa, similar in time to the appearance of anterior PCG foci at the wound ( ). We utilized inhibition of Bmp signaling to prevent DVB regeneration after transverse amputation. Bmp signaling is required for DV patterning and pathway inhibition can prevent regeneration of the DVB [ – ]. Short-term bmp4 RNAi tail fragments can express wound-induced genes and rescale positional information despite no DVB regeneration or blastema outgrowth [ ]. Interestingly, bmp4 RNAi has been observed to result in asymmetric poles, displaced laterally [ ]. We generated control or bmp4; smad1 RNAi post-pharyngeal fragments. Control post-pharyngeal fragments expressed anterior PCGs (sFRP-1, ndl-4) at the midline of the AFW near the regenerated DVB (laminB) ( ). By contrast, bmp4; smad1 RNAi post-pharyngeal fragments did not regenerate the DVB at their wounds, leaving the fragments with only lateral domains of DVB (pre-existing prior to injury). Anterior PCGs were expressed at the AFW of these bmp4; smad1 RNAi fragments, but this expression only occurred at the lateral fragment edge near the pre-existing, intact DVB in all cases (n = 26/26) ( ). In some cases, anterior PCGs were expressed on only one side of the fragment at the DVB (left side (n = 10/26) or right side (n = 8/26)). In other cases, two foci of anterior PCG expression were observed, with one near the left DVB and one near the right DVB (n = 8/26).
We next generated bmp4; smad1 RNAi post-pharyngeal fragments and also removed one side of lateral DVB. Anterior PCGs were expressed at the AFW in most cases (n = 31/34; n = 3/34, anterior PCGs were not detected). Notably, in these 31 animals, anterior PCG expression was restricted to the lateral edge only, exclusively near the side with remaining DVB (n = 25/25, right DVB removal and n = 6/6, left DVB removal) ( ). These results suggest that the DVB is required for sustained anterior PCG expression in regeneration. To assess this possibility, we generated post-pharyngeal bmp4; smad1 RNAi fragments that also had both sides of the lateral DVB removed. In most cases, bmp4; smad1 RNAi fragments without any DVB contained few (n = 7/15) or no detectable (n = 6/15) anterior PCG-expressing cells at 7 days post-amputation (dpa) (n = 3/15 had detectable levels of sFRP-1, ndl-4). These findings support the hypothesis that the DVB is needed for anterior PCG expression in regeneration.

## The DVB has an anterior pole-independent role in the promotion of anterior positional information expression after Wnt inhibition
The planarian anterior pole coalesces at the DVB [ ] and is required to promote sustained anterior PCG expression during head regeneration [ – ]. Perturbations that affect the distribution of DVB cells also alter the location of anterior pole formation [ ], suggesting that the DVB plays an active role in its positioning.
In head regeneration, anterior pole formation and anterior PCG expression occur on similar timescales [ , , ]. However, after β-catenin-1 RNAi, anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4) expression was detected at the DVB prior to anterior pole transcripts being apparent by FISH ( ). By 7 days of β-catenin-1 RNAi, 37 ectopic anterior PCG foci were detected across 9 animals. Thirty-three foci across 7 animals and 41 foci across 8 animals were detected at 14 days and 21 days of RNAi, respectively. FoxD encodes a Forkhead-family transcription factor that is expressed in a subpopulation of neoblasts (stem cells) during head regeneration and is required for the specification of neoblasts to form anterior pole progenitors [ , ]. Mature anterior pole cells also express FoxD [ , ]. Ectopic FoxD expression was not reliably detected until day 14 (n = 10 foci across 7 animals) to day 21 (n = 11 foci across 7 animals) after the initiation of β-catenin-1 RNAi ( ). We verified these results using an RNA probe to notum, which encodes a secreted Wnt inhibitor expressed in the anterior pole [ , ]. notum expression at wounds requires β-catenin-1 [ ]. However, notum transcripts could still be detected in the anterior pole after β-catenin-1 RNAi [ ] ( ). In agreement with the FoxD results, ectopic notum expression was not detected until day 14 (n = 1 focus across 6 animals) to day 21 (n = 7 foci across 9 animals) after initiation of β-catenin-1 RNAi ( ). Although transcript detection could be limited by FISH sensitivity, this order of events suggests that it is the expression of anterior PCGs at the DVB that is first associated with head formation, and that pole formation might follow and facilitate pattern resolution during head formation.
 To test whether the anterior pole is required for anterior PCG expression during homeostatic transformation following β-catenin-1 RNAi, we inhibited pole formation by FoxD RNAi, then fed animals β-catenin-1 double-stranded RNA ( and ). FoxD inhibition did not dramatically affect anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4, ndl-5) gradients in control animals ( ) and FoxD; β-catenin-1 double RNAi animals still induced expression of anterior PCGs at the DVB ( ), suggesting that the DVB plays an anterior pole-independent role in the promotion of anterior positional information expression after Wnt inhibition.

## Discussion
Positional information along adult planarian body axes is controlled by two largely independent signaling pathways: Wnt for the AP axis and Bmp for the DV axis [ ]. This feature is reminiscent of Drosophila development, where AP and DV axes are established by largely autonomous, orthogonal patterning systems [ ]. Utilization of mechanistically separate molecular pathways to pattern orthogonal tissue axes might represent a common strategy to achieve stable patterns in biology. The planarian AP and DV axes maintain pattern largely independently during homeostatic cell turnover. At the same time, some mechanism of coordination between axes could be deployed in diverse animal contexts to ensure a suitable spatial relationship. Understanding how coordination of tissue axes is achieved is thus fundamental to problems of animal development and regeneration.
We propose that orthogonal coordination of AP and DV patterns in adult planarians occurs primarily during outgrowth formation, such as during head regeneration or homeostatic head formation after Wnt inhibition, as opposed to during pattern maintenance in tissue turnover. Bmp signaling does restrict the posterior extent of Wnt gene expression domains in planarians during tissue turnover [ ]. However, we suggest that the primary linkage between patterning of distinct planarian body axis regions during regeneration involves DV-patterning processes that form the DVB at the lateral edge of the DV median plane, or body margin. The DVB then regulates AP-axis growth and patterning, restricting growth and anterior positional information expression to the DVB in a Wnt-low environment ( – ). The linkage of AP-axis patterning processes to the position of the DVB is also intimately connected to the ML axis. The anterior pole coalesces specifically at the intersection of three landmarks (the DVB, the midline, and at AFWs) during head regeneration [ ]. Transplantation of tissue with reversed DV polarity can lead to the formation of an ectopic head and/or tail in resultant outgrowths [ , ]. Rojo-Laguna (2019) shows that in AP polarized outgrowths the midline marker slit becomes patterned along the emergent ML axis, whereas outgrowths that lack AP polarity display aberrant expression of slit [ ]. It has been proposed that a PAK family kinase coordinates pattern regeneration along the planarian AP and ML axes [ ]. After β-catenin-1 RNAi, ectopic midlines are established in ectopic heads that emerge from the animal lateral edge [ ]. Although the role of the DVB in promoting anterior PCG expression after β-catenin-1 RNAi is independent of the anterior pole, the anterior pole can subsequently coalesce at the DVB, where it likely acts to refine anterior pattern. It is possible that focal anterior PCG expression at the DVB influences the emergence of an anterior pole at the DVB.
Early embryonic patterning can involve influence of one body axis on another. However, border-like signaling centers that are spatially restricted along one axis (such as a planarian DVB-like border) and that influence growth and patterning of another axis are typically not present during initial embryonic axis pattern establishment across animals (e.g., in Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila, zebrafish, Xenopus, and mouse). Instead, early pattern-initiating factors (e.g., asymmetric maternal factors, sperm entry location, cortical rotation) lead to patterning processes (such as morphogen gradient formation or organizer formation) that establish axial patterns [ , ]. In Xenopus embryos, as in adult planarians, Wnt and Bmp signaling pattern orthogonal AP and DV axes [ – ]. The organizer in Xenopus is formed on the prospective dorsal-posterior side of the embryo, following cortical rotation after fertilization, by nuclear β-catenin and vegetal factors (Xnr proteins) [ , ]. There, the organizer controls DV mesoderm patterning and marks the site of gastrulation. This location thereafter expresses Wnt ligands that promote posterior patterning of the AP axis (e.g., AP neuroectoderm patterning) [ ]. It has been suggested that integration of Wnt and Bmp signaling can involve Smad1 phosphorylation by GSK3 [ ]. Bmp signaling, which regulates DV axis pattern, can also influence convergent extension that promotes lengthening of the AP axis in zebrafish [ ].
Patterning centers formed at the midpoint of a tissue axis, however, do have prominent roles in certain later stages of development. For example, the DV boundary in the Drosophila wing disc is involved in coordinating growth along the proximodistal axis [ ]. In vertebrate limb development, the apical ectodermal ridge resides at the boundary between the dorsal and ventral ectoderm where it promotes proximodistal outgrowth and patterning [ – ]. One possibility is that outgrowths with patterned axes that emerge later in development, such as in appendage formation, or in adulthood, such as during regeneration, are predominant contexts where boundary-like signaling centers have axis-organizing roles. Because these outgrowths need to establish and coordinate axial pattern, they might rely on boundary-like signaling centers with positions determined by embryonic patterning, thereby harnessing existing tissue positional cues to direct new growth. The capacity for whole-body regeneration (ability to form large body axis regions after amputation) is widespread in the Bilateria, including in platyhelminthes, annelids, molluscs, nemertean worms, echinoderms, hemichordates, and urochordates [ ]. Whether DVB-like regions exist and promote regeneration in other animals with whole-body regeneration, similar to the case of the planarian DVB, is unknown and will be important to assess. Adult cues, like the DVB, might prove to be fundamental to growth and coordination of axial patterning in regenerative outgrowths broadly in animals.
In addition to DVB-like signaling centers, conflict between dorsal and ventral tissue regions can lead to outgrowth in certain experimental contexts. For instance, DV misalignment, or conflict, generated by transplantation can lead to supernumerary limbs during development [ ] and during regeneration [ , ]. Transplantations generating positional conflicts of varied types can lead to regenerative outgrowths in diverse organisms, from crickets [ ] to salamanders [ ] to planarians [ ]. Various models have been proposed to account for these observations, such as those involving intercalation of positional values between juxtaposed positions combined with distalization in the case of certain appendages [ , ] and a boundary model for limbs involving production of distalizing factors at the intersection of AP and DV boundaries [ ].
Because of the experimental capacity to induce ectopic DVB and to generate a Wnt-low environment in planarians, unprecedented control over an adult animal body plan can be experimentally achieved. Ectopic heads can be induced to form at desired locations by experimental design. Head shape can also be influenced by the pattern of ectopic DVB, such as being induced to form in goblet-like shapes at DVB rings or along dorsal ridges of DVB. Utilizing a pattern element from one axis to determine the patterning outcome on another axis provides one solution to the substantial challenge in regeneration of replacing tissues with a spatial organization that integrates new tissues with pre-existing patterns in the remaining body.

## Methods

## Animal husbandry
Asexual Schmidtea mediterranea strain CIW4 animals were cultured in 1× Montjuic water (1.6 mmol/l NaCl, 1.0 mmol/l CaCl2, 1.0 mmol/l MgSO4, 0.1 mmol/l MgCl2, 0.1 mmol/l KCl, and 1.2 mmol/l NaHCO3 prepared in Milli-Q water) at 20°C in the dark. Animals were fed homogenized beef liver and starved at least 7 days prior to experiments.

## 10× single-cell mRNA sequencing and analysis
Tissue fragments from the lateral edges of ~20 large animals were amputated using a scalpel and collected in 1× Montjuic water. Montjuic water was replaced with 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA (1×) and tissue fragments were incubated for 6 min with vigorous pipetting to allow for cell dissociation. The sample was then centrifuged at 500g for 5 min, resuspended in ice-cold CMFB [calcium–magnesium free solution with 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) (400 mg/L NaH2PO4, 800 mg/L NaCl, 1,200 mg/L KCl, 800 mg/L NaHCO3, 240 mg/L glucose, 0.1% BSA, 15 mM HEPES, pH7.3)], and passed through a 40 μm filter. Debris was removed from the dissociated cells with a spiral microfluidic device. The device was a gift from Kyungyong Choi and Jongyoon Han at MIT. It was used as described in [ ]. Briefly, the cells were suspended in 20 mL of CMFB and circulated through the device at 16 mL/min in closed-loop separation mode, returning the output of the inner wall outlet to the sample tube, and discarding the output from the outer wall outlet. Once the volume in the sample tube was reduced to approximately 5 mL, the sample was washed at the same pump rate with an additional 40 mL of CMFB, which was added 1 mL at a time to the sample tube so as to keep the sample volume at approximately 5 mL. After washing, the sample was concentrated by further pumping until the input tube was nearly empty. The sample input tube was then disconnected and the sample (approximately 3 mL) was collected by directing both the outer and inner outlet tubes to a sample collection tube and pumping at 1 mL/min until the device was empty. After sorting, the sample was stained with trypan blue to count viable cells for the 10× single-cell mRNA sequencing procedure. Cells were processed by the Whitehead Institute Genome Technology Core (WIGTC) using 10× Genomics Chromium Controller and Chromium Single Cell 3′ Library & Gel Bead Kit following standard manufacturer’s protocol. The sample was sequenced on a NovaSeqSP (100 × 100 paired-end reads). Sequencing reads were mapped using a GTF file of Smed_v6 (https://planmine.mpinat.mpg.de/planmine/model/bulkdata/dd_Smed_v6.pcf.contigs.fasta.zip) genes in the context of the Smes_g4 (https://planmine.mpinat.mpg.de/planmine/model/bulkdata/dd_Smes_g4.fasta.zip) genome. This GTF file was generated by using BLAT to map all Smed_v6 transcripts to the Smes_g4 genome and each transcript was assigned to a single genome location based on the best alignment score. Transcripts were then collapsed using genome location prior to mapping using the Cell Ranger 7.2.0 pipeline. Cells were assessed for nUMI, nGene, and percent mitochondrial transcript content, which were represented in violin plots. Percent mitochondrial content was based on mitochondrial genes reported in [ ] which are represented in v_6 of the Dresden transcriptome (dd_Smed_v6_258_0_1, dd_Smed_v6_289_0_1, dd_Smed_v6_292_0_1, dd_Smed_v6_297_0_1, dd_Smed_v6_344_0_1, dd_Smed_v6_505_0_1, dd_Smed_v6_753_0_1, dd_Smed_v6_957_0_1) and on the highly abundant mitochondrial transcripts (mtRNA_1, mtRNA_2) from [ ]. Any cells with nFeature_RNA < 500 or nFeature_RNA > 4,000, or nCount_RNA < 1,000 or nCount_RNA > 10,000, were removed from the dataset prior to analysis. Doublets were identified using scDblFinder (https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/scDblFinder.html) and removed after basic QC filtering. 10× analysis was performed using Seurat 5.1.0 where cells were visualized using the uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) algorithm. The number of dimensions used with RunPCA, RunUMAP, and FindNeighbors was determined using JackStraw with a p-value cutoff of 0.05. Clusters were determined via FindClusters using the Leiden algorithm. UMAP plots of identities were created using Seurat’s DimPlot function. UMAP plots of gene expression were created using Seurat’s FeaturePlot function. Positively enriched genes were identified using Seurat’s FindMarkers function. Human best BLASTx hits were identified using the Human GENCODE Gene Set v39.

## RNAi
For RNAi experiments, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) was synthesized by in vitro transcription reactions (Promega) using PCR-generated templates with flanking T7 promoters, followed by ethanol precipitation, and annealed after resuspension in water. The concentration of dsRNA varied in each prep between 4 and 7 μg/ml. dsRNA was mixed in a 1:2 ratio with liver and 1−2 μl of this mixture (liver containing dsRNA) per animal was used for feedings. C. elegans unc-22 was used as the control condition. Homeostatic β-catenin-1 RNAi animals were fed three times in 2 weeks and fixed at 21 days ( , , and ). For , β-catenin-1 RNAi animals were fed twice and fixed after 7 days. Homeostatic bmp4 RNAi animals were fed six times in 3 weeks, then once per week until fixation at 45 days ( and – ). For epidermal DVB FISH, muscle fiber type FISH, and muscle DVB FISH, β-catenin-1 RNAi animals were fed three times and fixed at 14−21 days ( —1G and – ). Transplant animals were fed β-catenin-1 dsRNA once 10−14 days after surgery and fixed 10−14 days later ( —3E and ). smad1 RNAi animals were fed 1-part smad1 dsRNA mixed with 1-part control dsRNA. After 2−3 weeks, when animals had developed dorsal DVB ridges, animals were fed β-catenin-1 dsRNA once and fixed 10 days later ( and ). For panel 4B, RNAi was administered as described in [ ] and animals were fixed after 77d of smad1 RNAi and 21d of β-catenin-1 RNAi. For smad1 RNAi dorsal injury experiments, animals were fed 1-part smad1 dsRNA mixed with 1-part control dsRNA and injured 3 days later. Animals were fed β-catenin-1 dsRNA 10 days following injury and fixed 12 days after that ( and ). For lateral versus internal injury experiments, β-catenin-1 RNAi animals were fed once, injured 3 days later, and fixed 3 days after injury ( , , and ). For most Erk inhibition experiments, β-catenin-1 RNAi animals were fed once, injured 3 days later, and fixed 7 days after injury ( , , , and ). For the muscle DVB FISH of β-catenin-1 RNAi, PD-treated animals, animals were fed with β-catenin-1 dsRNA twice, injured 5 days after the initiation of RNAi, and fixed 5 days after injury ( ). For the homeostatic Erk inhibition experiment, animals were fed β-catenin-1 dsRNA twice, incubated in PD immediately following the first feeding, and fixed 10 days after the initiation of RNAi ( ). bmp4; smad1 RNAi animals were fed four times in 2 weeks. Animals were amputated 7 days after the last feeding and fragments were fixed 7 days after amputation ( ). For timecourse experiments, homeostatic β-catenin-1 animals were fed two (7 days) to three (14 days, 21 days) times and fixed 5−14 days after the last feeding ( and ). FoxD RNAi animals were fed six times in 3 weeks. β-catenin-1 dsRNA was then fed two times in 1 week and animals were fixed after 21 days ( , S6B, and S6C).

## Transplantation procedures
Animals were soaked in 0.2% chloretone for 2 min and placed on moist WhatmanTM filter paper (GE Healthcare, Life Sciences) on a cold block to limit movement. A ~250 µm piece of tissue at the midline posterior to the pharynx was excised from a recipient animal, and the animal was allowed to recover in Holtfreter’s solution for 2 min. For D-V transplants, after a second incubation in chloretone, donor tissue (from a matched AP and ML location) was transplanted into the recipient with reversed DV polarity. For DVB transplants, a ~250 µm piece of tissue from the donor animal lateral edge (at a matched AP location) was transplanted into the midline posterior to the pharynx of a recipient. The recipient animal was then covered with cigarette rolling paper soaked in Holtfreter’s solution and placed at 10°C in the dark. After 24 hours, animals were placed in planarian water and returned to 20°C.

## Erk signaling inhibition
PD0325901 (in short, PD) was dissolved in DMSO, used at 10 μM, and replaced daily. Animals were fed β-catenin-1 dsRNA, incubated in PD immediately following feeding, and amputated 3–5 days later. Animals were fixed for further analysis 5–7 days after parasagittal amputation.

## Fluorescence in situ hybridizations
RNA probes were synthesized in vitro and whole-mount FISH was performed. Briefly, animals were killed in 5% NAC and treated with proteinase K (2 μg/ml). Following overnight hybridizations, samples were washed twice in pre-hybridization buffer, 1:1 pre-hybridization-2 × SSC, 2 × SSC, 0.2 × SSC, PBS with Triton-X (PBST). Subsequently, blocking was performed in a 10% Western Blocking Reagent (Roche, 11921673001) PBST solution for DIG and DNP probes, or in a 5% Western Blocking Reagent and 5% Horse serum PBST solution for FITC probes. Samples were incubated overnight at 4°C in antibody. Antibody washes were then performed for one hour, followed by tyramide development. Peroxidase inactivation with 1% sodium azide was done for 90 min at room temperature.

## Microscopy and image analysis
Brightfield images were taken with a Zeiss Discovery Microscope. Fluorescent images were taken with a Leica SP8 or Leica Stellaris confocal microscope. Fiji/ImageJ and Adobe Photoshop were used to perform brightness and contrast adjustments. All FISH images shown are representative of all images taken in each condition and are maximum intensity projections. PCG domain lengths were quantified in a condition-blind manner using FIJI/ImageJ. A line was drawn at the posterior or anterior boundary of prominent PCG signal and the distance from this line to the head or tail tip was measured and normalized to animal length. To generate line plots of signal intensity, fluorescence intensity was measured along a line of width 100 pixels drawn through the midline from the dorsal to ventral side of the animal using FIJI/ImageJ. Raw data was smoothed using a Gaussian filter.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Validation of β-catenin-1 and bmp4 RNAi phenotypes.
A) Posterior-lateral expression of anterior PCGs (sFRP-1, ndl-4) following β-catenin-1 RNAi (18–21d). Foci containing multiple anterior PCG+ cells were apparent at the DVB (foci typically had >10 cells). Scattered anterior PCG+ cells were also present in the animal. B) Ventrally biased (admp, nlg-7) PCG expression at the DVB after β-catenin-1 RNAi (7d). C) Dorsally biased (bmp4, nlg-8) and ventrally biased (admp, nlg-7) PCG expression in tails after β-catenin-1 RNAi (21d). D) Dorsal expression of the ventral neural marker eye53-1 following bmp4 RNAi (45d). E, F) PCG expression domains in bmp4 RNAi animals (45d). Blue arrow denotes anterior (posterior PCG) or posterior (anterior PCG) boundary of PCG expression domain. G) The posterior expansion of notum signal on the dorsal surface after bmp4 RNAi is because of expansion of the anterior pole (notum+ChAT−). H) Fluorescence intensity of the PCGs bmp4 and admp and the epidermal DVB marker laminB along a line is plotted. Smoothed data is represented with a thick stroke. Individual data points are listed in . I) Anterior and posterior PCG expression is concentrated near the DVB during regeneration (96 hpa). Single-channel images of the merged images in are presented. J, K) Fluorescence intensity of anterior and posterior PCGs and the epidermal DVB marker laminB along a line is plotted. Smoothed data is represented with a thick stroke. Individual data points are listed in . L) Ectopic anterior PCG (ndl-4) expression near the DVB after β-catenin-1 RNAi (14d). D, dorsal; V, ventral. Fluorescence intensity along a line is plotted and individual data points are listed in . M) Ectopic anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4) expression after β-catenin-1 RNAi (18d) is detected in longitudinal (myoD+), circular (nkx1-1+), and lateral DV (nk4+) muscle at the lateral animal edge. Single-channel images of the merged images in are presented. N) Co-expression of anterior PCGs (sFRP-1, ndl-4) and the secreted molecules lactadherin and netrin-1 in muscle at the DVB after β-catenin-1 RNAi (18d). Colored boxes, area depicted in photos. Scale bars, 100 μm (A, C–G), 50 μm (B, I, L–N), 25 μm (G, inset).
(PDF)
S2 Fig

## Identification of novel DVB marker genes.
A) Cartoon shows region of the animal isolated for scRNA-seq. Violin plots show the number of UMIs (left) and genes (center) per cell. Individual data points are listed in . Table (right) shows the total number of cells after quality control (QC), mean reads, and mean genes detected per cell. B) Violin plot shows the percentage of reads mapped to mitochondrial genes. Individual data points are listed in . C) Subclustering of muscle cells, labeled by colF-2, reveals the muscle subtype composition at the DVB. UMAP plots show the overlapping expression of DVB marker genes in longitudinal muscle cells, labeled by myoD. Novel markers of the DVB are labeled in black. Genes with DVB expression verified by FISH are separated by dotted lines. D) UMAP plots show the expression of DVB marker genes in circular muscle cells. E) Heatmap shows the expression of FISH-screened subcluster 1-enriched genes across myoD+ longitudinal muscle subclusters. F) UMAP plots show DVB-enriched gene expression. G) Table of 32 longitudinal muscle subcluster 1-enriched genes categorized by the type of protein each gene encodes. Genes labeled in bold font have DVB expression patterns verified by FISH. H) Table of 11 unnamed DVB-enriched genes listed by dd_ID. The PFAM domains comprising proteins encoded by these genes are listed. I) Protein domain structure of novel DVB markers. J) Whole-body expression of novel DVB marker genes by FISH. K) Plot shows the Pearson correlation coefficients for pairwise comparisons between DVB-enriched genes in longitudinal muscle subcluster 1. Scale bars, 100 μm (J).
(PDF)
S3 Fig

## Controls for ectopic DVB experiments.
A) D-V transplant animals one day post-transplant (dpt). B) D-V transplant outgrowths show muscle DVB gene expression (lactadherin, frem-1). C) Post-pharyngeal D-V transplant outgrowths express wntP-2, indicative of posterior identity. D) Ventral outgrowths that result from D-V transplant are anteriorized (sFRP-1 ndl-4+) after β-catenin-1 RNAi (10–14d). E)
smad1 RNAi animals retain their original DVB (laminB), which is anteriorized (sFRP-1 ndl-4+) after β-catenin-1 RNAi (10d). Yellow arrowhead, anterior PCG focus. Scale bars, 250 μm (A), 100 μm (B–E).
(PDF)
S4 Fig

## Controls for DVB injury and removal experiments.
A) Lateral wedge and internal hole punch animals one day post-injury (dpi). B) β-catenin-1 RNAi animals after internal hole punch. In rare cases (n = 7/59), a focus of anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4) expression develops at the wound. β-catenin-1 RNAi, hole punch animals that do not ectopically express anterior PCGs at the wound (n = 51/59) are shown for comparison and the image from is presented. C)
β-catenin-1 RNAi animals incubated in PD one dpa. D) PD treatment blocks regeneration of the DVB (laminB) following parasagittal amputation (n = 18/21). In 3/21 animals, a patch of laminB+ DVB was present after parasagittal amputation and PD treatment, indicating incomplete DVB removal or partial DVB regeneration. E) PD treatment does not prevent homeostatic outgrowth associated with ectopic head formation after β-catenin-1 RNAi (10d). F)
β-catenin-1 RNAi animals incubated in PD after parasagittal amputation. In some animals (n = 9/22), anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4) expression is detected at the wound, though these animals lack PCG foci formation and apparent homeostatic outgrowth. β-catenin-1 RNAi, PD-treated animals that lack anterior PCG expression at the wound (n = 12/22) are shown for comparison and the image from is presented. One animal had a patch of laminB+ DVB present at the wound (n = 1/22), indicating incomplete DVB removal or partial DVB regeneration. G) PD treatment after DVB removal blocks regeneration of muscle DVB (lactadherin, frem-1) cells. Despite no DVB regeneration, low levels of anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4) expression can be detected at the wound (n = 9/10). Colored boxes, area depicted in photos. Scale bars, 250 μm (A, C, E), 100 μm (B, D, F, G), 50 μm (F, inset), 25 μm (G, inset).
(PDF)
S5 Fig

## Muscle DVB gene expression regeneration.
A) Regeneration of anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4) and muscle DVB (lactadherin, frem-1, dd_30210, egf-6) gene expression domains 0–72 hpa. Patterned muscle DVB gene expression is detected in the blastema by 36 hpa, along with a focus of sFRP-1 ndl-4 expression. Colored box, area depicted in photos. Scale bars, 50 μm (A).
(PDF)
S6 Fig

## FoxD RNAi blocks anterior pole formation.
A) Detection of anterior pole transcripts (FoxD, notum) after β-catenin-1 RNAi (7–21d). B)
FoxD expression in the anterior pole is significantly reduced (n = 6/12) or absent (n = 6/12) after FoxD; control RNAi and absent (n = 12/12) after FoxD; β-catenin-1 RNAi. C) Anterior PCG (sFRP-1, ndl-4, ndl-5) gradients are not grossly affected by FoxD RNAi. Colored boxes, area depicted in photos. Scale bars, 50 μm (A, B), 100 μm (C).
(PDF)
S1 Table

## Subcluster-enriched genes identified by DVB scRNA-seq data.
(XLSX)
S2 Table

## Contig annotation of genes used in figures.
(XLSX)
S1 Data

## Data used to generate plots.
(XLSX)

The authors thank members of the Reddien lab for helpful comments and discussion. We thank Conor McMann for measuring PCG gradient lengths in bmp4 RNAi animals and Patrick Aoude for 10× mapping and computational support.

## Abbreviations:
AFWanterior-facing wound
APanterior–posterior
BSAbovine serum albumin
dsRNAdouble-stranded RNA
DVdorsal–ventral
DVBdorsal–ventral boundary
PCGsposition control genes
scRNA-seqsingle-cell RNA sequencing
UMAPuniform manifold approximation and projection
 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003482.r001Decision Letter 0
HodgeRichardSenior Editor© 2025 Richard Hodge2025Richard Hodgehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
11 Feb 2025

Dear Dr Reddien,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "The dorsal-ventral boundary influences anterior-posterior axis formation in planarians" for consideration as a Short Report by PLOS Biology.
Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editorial staff, as well as by an academic editor with relevant expertise, and I am writing to let you know that we would like to send your submission out for external peer review.
However, before we can send your manuscript to reviewers, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks in preparation for peer review. After your manuscript has passed the checks it will be sent out for review. To provide the metadata for your submission, please Login to Editorial Manager (https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology) within two working days, i.e. by Feb 13 2025 11:59PM.
If your manuscript has been previously peer-reviewed at another journal, PLOS Biology is willing to work with those reviews in order to avoid re-starting the process. Submission of the previous reviews is entirely optional and our ability to use them effectively will depend on the willingness of the previous journal to confirm the content of the reports and share the reviewer identities. Please note that we reserve the right to invite additional reviewers if we consider that additional/independent reviewers are needed, although we aim to avoid this as far as possible. In our experience, working with previous reviews does save time.
If you would like us to consider previous reviewer reports, please edit your cover letter to let us know and include the name of the journal where the work was previously considered and the manuscript ID it was given. In addition, please upload a response to the reviews as a 'Prior Peer Review' file type, which should include the reports in full and a point-by-point reply detailing how you have or plan to address the reviewers' concerns.
During the process of completing your manuscript submission, you will be invited to opt-in to posting your pre-review manuscript as a bioRxiv preprint. Visit http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/preprints for full details. If you consent to posting your current manuscript as a preprint, please upload a single Preprint PDF.
Feel free to email us at plosbiology@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Richard
Richard Hodge, PhD
Senior Editor, PLOS Biology
rhodge@plos.org
PLOS
Empowering researchers to transform science
Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge, CB4 3DN, United Kingdom
California (U.S.) corporation #C2354500, based in San Francisco
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003482.r002Decision Letter 1
HodgeRichardSenior Editor© 2025 Richard Hodge2025Richard Hodgehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
8 Apr 2025

Dear Dr Reddien,
Thank you for your patience while your manuscript "The dorsal-ventral boundary influences anterior-posterior axis formation in planarians" was peer-reviewed at PLOS Biology as a Short Report. Please accept my sincere apologies for the delays that you have experienced during the peer review process. Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, an Academic Editor with relevant expertise, and by three independent reviewers.
In light of the reviews, which you will find at the end of this email, we would like to invite you to revise the work to thoroughly address the reviewers' reports.
As you will see, the reviewers are generally positive about your study and think it is well done and presented. Reviewer #1 raises concerns with the conceptual framing of the study and notes that the manuscript should be refocused on the role of the DV border as a signaling center. The reviewer also notes several cases where the conclusions are not adequately supported by the data. In addition, Reviewer’s #1 and #2 note that the DVB markers identified in the scRNA-seq dataset were not used to provide a more in depth analysis of their signaling roles at the DV border. After discussions with the Academic Editor, we encourage you to strengthen the study along these lines and use the gene expression dataset to provide some preliminary insights into their roles in DVB formation or maintenance.
Given the extent of revision needed, we cannot make a decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is likely to be sent for further evaluation by all or a subset of the reviewers.
In addition to these revisions, you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests shortly.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within 3 months. Please email us (plosbiology@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns, or would like to request an extension.
At this stage, your manuscript remains formally under active consideration at our journal; please notify us by email if you do not intend to submit a revision so that we may withdraw it.
**IMPORTANT - SUBMITTING YOUR REVISION**
Your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. Please submit the following files along with your revised manuscript:
1. A 'Response to Reviewers' file - this should detail your responses to the editorial requests, present a point-by-point response to all of the reviewers' comments, and indicate the changes made to the manuscript.
*NOTE: In your point-by-point response to the reviewers, please provide the full context of each review. Do not selectively quote paragraphs or sentences to reply to. The entire set of reviewer comments should be present in full and each specific point should be responded to individually, point by point.
You should also cite any additional relevant literature that has been published since the original submission and mention any additional citations in your response.
2. In addition to a clean copy of the manuscript, please also upload a 'track-changes' version of your manuscript that specifies the edits made. This should be uploaded as a "Revised Article with Changes Highlighted" file type.
*Re-submission Checklist*
When you are ready to resubmit your revised manuscript, please refer to this re-submission checklist: https://plos.io/Biology_Checklist
To submit a revised version of your manuscript, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' where you will find your submission record.
Please make sure to read the following important policies and guidelines while preparing your revision:
*Published Peer Review*
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/

*PLOS Data Policy*
Please note that as a condition of publication PLOS' data policy (http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability) requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions arrived at in your manuscript. If you have not already done so, you must include any data used in your manuscript either in appropriate repositories, within the body of the manuscript, or as supporting information (N.B. this includes any numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.). For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5
*Blot and Gel Data Policy*
We require the original, uncropped and minimally adjusted images supporting all blot and gel results reported in an article's figures or Supporting Information files. We will require these files before a manuscript can be accepted so please prepare them now, if you have not already uploaded them. Please carefully read our guidelines for how to prepare and upload this data: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive thus far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Richard
Richard Hodge, PhD
Senior Editor, PLOS Biology
rhodge@plos.org
------------------------------------
REVIEWS:
Reviewer #1: In the manuscript entitled 'The dorsal-ventral boundary influences anterior-posterior axis formation in planarians' Maybrun et al. study the role that the DV border could have in allowing the emergence of the AP axis. For doing that they promote the induction of ectopic DV borders, or supress its formation, and they observe a correlation between the existence of a DV border and the expression of anterior markers (anterior PCGs). The authors also analyse at single cell level the DV border and identify different cell clusters. The authors conclude that there is a temporal and hierarchical relationship between the appearance of the DV border and the formation of the AP axis.
The study demonstrates the importance of the DV border in promoting the growth of a new axis. The essential role of the DV border as a region with the competence to sustain the emergence of a new axis is not new. However, its demonstration in the specific context of planarians and whole-body regeneration—through such an original approach (inducing ectopic DV borders in combination with bcatenin1 inhibition)—is elegant, novel, and highly informative. Additionally, the SC-seq analysis of this specific region provides valuable data for the field.
However, there are major issues regarding some sections of the manuscript and the conclusions that need to be addressed.
Major concerns
1) The more important and general concern is that the requirement of a DV confrontation to promote the growth of a new axis is a well-established mechanism in the field of developmental biology. For instances, the experiments in cricket or axolotl limbs in which grafting a rotated limb promotes the growth of ectopic limbs are well known. The fact that to trigger the regenerative response in planarians it is required the close of the wound and thus the contact between the D and the V domains is also well established. For this reason, 1) this background should be included in the introduction and also in the discussion, and 2) all the data presented which refers to the DV axis is in fact related to the DV border (generated by the confrontation of the D and V domain). So, it does not refer to an axis but to a specific domain that acts as a signalling center (in all metazoans).
Focusing in planarians, after an amputation, the D and V domains get in touch in the wounded area, and this confrontation of signals triggers the regenerative response, which includes the expression of wound response genes, and PCGs (AP, DV and ML). It is true that the first event is the DV confrontation and thus the emergence of the DV border, but the DV axis was already present in this first stage, when new tissue is still not present. Even more, in the current study the process of regeneration in a wt is not studied, but only the expression of A PCGs in ectopic DB borders (which already have an established DV axis). For this reason, the conclusion illustrated in figure 5E is confusing. In this study it is not demonstrated that there is a hierarchical relationship between both axes, but that A identity (not an AP axis, because to define an axis 2 poles are required) can only be generated in a DV border region. Furthermore, that 'this mechanism enables coordination of orthogonal positional information in the context of regeneration' cannot be concluded in this study, since the orthogonal relationship between bot axis is not studied at all.
In summary, the conceptual framework of the study is not the establishment and coordination of the DV and AP axes but rather the role of the DV border as a signaling center or a permissive context in which a second axis can grow. This requires a refocusing of all sections in the manuscript.
2) The results and conclusion of the first section are not supported and furthermore they are not relevant for the rest of the findings of the manuscript. Even the meaning of the title is confusing ('Positional information along the AP and DV axes is largely independently maintained'). If the message of this section is that during homeostasis the PCGs are stably maintained, in particular the DV genes in bcatenin1 RNAi animals, this is not observed in Figure 1A. In this figure, bmp4 and ngl-7 expression in the DV border of bcatenin1 RNAi animals is different than in controls. In bcatenin1 RNAi animals bmp4 it's seen in the V view and in controls in the D view. ngl-7 expression in the DV border is not seen in bcatenin1 RNAi animals, but it is in controls.
3) While the experiments in which an ectopic DV border is induced do show that A PCGs only appear in these regions, the conclusions after ERK and DV border suppression are not so informative. It is reported in several studies that ERK inhibition blocks the wound response and subsequently any regenerative response. Thus, in the context of ERK inhibition no DV border is generated, because as explained few lines above, the appearance of the DV border signalling center is linked to the regenerative response in general (wound response genes, PCGs of all axis).
In any case, it is very surprising that even when ERK is not signalling, 9/22 animals show A PCGs expression (see a further comment below). And then in line 239, it is indicated that those regions positive for A PCG do not form overgrowths. This is not indicating that the DV border is required for the growth of an axis, but that ERK blocks any regenerative response, so an overgrowth cannot occur in these conditions.
The conclusion that 'Removal of the DVB region blocks anteriorization caused by Wnt inhibition or anterior positional information activation in the Wnt-low environment of head regeneration', although it is true, it is misleading, because removal of ERK and the DV border blocks any regenerative signal.
4) The relevance of the information obtained after the SC-seq analysis of the DV border is not clear. The different cell populations and the markers identified could be used to analyse more in deep the signalling properties of the DV border. For instances, even when ERK is not signalling, 9/22 animals show A PCGs expression. This result contradicts authors hypothesis, and deserved more attention. Here it is an opportunity to check if in these animals, despite not having laminb, they show expression of other DV markers that could be indicating the presence of a functional DV border.
5) Last section 'The DVB has an anterior pole-independent role in the induction of anterior positional information expression after Wnt inhibition' is very confusing. It is published by the same authors of this manuscript that notum expression is downstream of bcatenin1. So, bcatenin1 RNAi animals do not show expression of notum although they regenerate heads. Some days after the RNAi inhibition of bcatenin1 expression of notum can appear, since the dsRNA is not present anymore. This is what could be happening in the animals in Figure 5A.
So, the conclusion that the 'DV border plays an anterior pole-independent role in the induction of anterior positional information expression' could be replaced by 'bcatenin1 plays an anterior pole-independent role in the induction of anterior positional information expression', which is another way of saying what was already published by the same authors, that a head can be formed in absence of notum (anterior pole) if bcatenin1 is silenced.
It could be that notum is required to inhibit bcatenin1 when an A pole must be specified, but in a very low Wnt environment this is not necessary anymore, and a head is formed, in the absence of the anteror-pole determinant notum. The role of the DV border in this process is not known. May be silencing of specific markers of the DV border (from the SC-seq data for instances) could be useful to identify specific factors of the DV border which confer properties as a competent region to promote A PCGs expression.
Minor concerns
1) In the SC-seq analysis, laminB was used to assign a D or V position. Why laminB is considered the reference of the DV border? Could it be that laminB is in fact in the D or V domain and other genes of the atlas are located in the physical position of the cells in the DV border?
2)The existence of 2 axis is linked to the appearance of the midline. If the study aims to analyse the relationship between the DV and the AP axis (which is not the current form), considering the midline is essential. Not only during regeneration of a wt animal (Oderberg et al. 2017), also in bcatenin1 RNAi animals each ectopic head always show expression of slit in the midline (Stückemann et al. 2017). Rojo-Laguna et al. 2019 (a missing reference) also show that all overgrowths have DV border (if-b) but they only have AP identity when they recover the midline (slit).
Another context that demonstrates the requirement of the midline in addition to the DV border is that when a wound is generated near the head of a wt animal, which has already a low Wnt environment, it does not promote the expression of A PCGs and the formation of an ectopic head. In wt animals it only occurs in the DV border that crosses the midline region.
The analysis or at least a in deep discussion on the role of the midline is required.
3) When performing grafts that induce new DV confrontations there appear overgrowths, which can have different shapes and identities. For instances, Rojo-Laguna et al. 2019 show that the inclusion/exclusion of the VNCs gives rise to different overgrowths shape and identities. It is not clear in the present manuscript how the grafts were performed (a more detailed procedure is required) neither the identity of the outgrowths in the different contexts.
In lines 184-185- the authors describe that the outgrowths in Figure 3 have the AP character typical of the location of the transplant. Does it mean that if they are posterior to the pharynx, they are P, and if they are in the prepharyngeal region they are A? Then, the overgrowth in Figure 3C has P identity? This should be demonstrated with the corresponding markers if it is stated in the text. In addition, the outgrowths produced after the DV confrontation in control and bcatenin1 RNAi animals appear in D and in V regions. Only the D ones have A identity in bcatenin1 RNAi animals? What about the identity of the V outgrowths? The A and P identities of the outgrowths should be clarified with markers when required as well as a better explanation of the procedures and results.
4) The analysis of the expression of DV and AP (and ML) PCGs in controls compared to different RNAi conditions would be very informative in regenerating animals if the purpose is to understand the hierarchy of the body axis during regeneration. For instances, do DV or DV border genes appear earlier than AP genes? How does the RNAi of DV genes affects the expression of AP genes? And the other way around?
Reviewer #2: The manuscript provides novel evidence that the dorsoventral boundary (DVB) in planarians is necessary and sufficient for the expression of anterior genes and subsequent head formation, especially under conditions that elicit the formation of ectopic heads via reduced canonical Wnt signaling. The authors use both surgical and molecular manipulations to create or eliminate DVBs and show that these can act as foci for anterior gene expression. They further provide evidence that anterior gene expression does not rely upon the formation of anterior pole cells. While the study does not investigate the molecular mechanisms linking the DVB to anterior gene expression, the data is largely sound and well-presented.
The authors also uncover new genes expressed along the DVB which will be valuable for future studies. But the new DVB genes were not utilized as markers in this study, and their roles in DVB formation or maintenance were not tested.
I do have a few concerns on specific results, or on the presentation of results, that I would like to see addressed.
1) Anterior markers after beta-catenin-RNAi. The authors suggest throughout the manuscript that there is a tight correlation between the DVB and the ectopic expression of anterior makers after knockdown of canonical Wnt signaling by beta-catenin-RNAi. However, in Figure S1A the ectopic sFRP-1 induced by the RNAi was not limited to the DVB. Although it was stronger in foci near the DVB, there was also scattered ectopic expression throughout the animal that appears every bit as strong as that near the head. I think this needs to be briefly discussed, and the authors need to be clear on what level and concentration of expression they are referring to elsewhere in the manuscript.
2) "111 In agreement with findings in Clark, 2023 [26], we found that the domain of
112 wnt1+ cells (the posterior pole) was expanded after 45 days of bmp4 RNAi (Figure 1B,
113 Figure S1D)."
To my eye the expression looks ectopic rather than expanded, as it is largely limited to a mid-posterior region that does not extend to the domain of normal expression at the posterior pole. However, this statement, and the bars in Fig. 1B, imply continuous expression from the posterior to mid-posterior.
3) "236 In some cases (n=9/22), reduced anterior PCG
237 (sFRP-1 and ndl-4) expression was detected on the injured side of PD-treated β-
238 catenin-1 RNAi animals, despite no regeneration of laminB cells at the DVB."
The statement is confusing: "reduced" compared with what? I think the authors mean "low-level expression was detected".
4) Fluorescence images and PD treatment- The authors show multicolor fluorescence images that are, on my screen, rather dark, and the overlapping domains of expression are never presented as single-channel images. This makes it very difficult to judge the purple channel anterior marker data, either when it is low or when it overlaps strong green staining. I think it is important to show the single channel data on its own.
The issue is especially critical for the PD treatment data of Figures 4B and S5D-E. First, when viewed without the green channel Fig S5D shows that MEK inhibition via PD treatment alone greatly increases anterior gene expression in all the remaining DVB cells. If this is not a mistake with the authors' image processing this is an important (and confounding) result that the authors need to address. The authors are using DB treatment as way of blocking regeneration of the DVB after surgical removal, and in 4B and S5E say this largely blocks expression of anterior genes after beta-catenin-RNAi in the region where the DVB was removed. However, if DB treatment on its own causes anterior-gene expression along the DVB, then the RNAi experiment seems superfluous.
Additionally, the authors claim to see two different classes of results in S5E, but the differences in intensity of the anterior genes on the left DVB of each figure are not that obvious when viewed without the green channel.
Minor note: placing the 12/22 over the yellow detail box in 4D, and then having the magnified version of the box say 22/22, is confusing.
5) The section about the bmp4;smad-1 RNAi experiments could be clarified. The 3/9 vs 6/9 of Fig. 4C is never referred to in the text or legend. The "By contrast" sentence about the lack of regeneration of the DVB from the RNAi-treated fragments seems out of place, as the next two sentences refer to fragments that had their DVBs intact. And for:
"In bmp4;smad-1 RNAi fragments with
262 one DVB side removed, anterior PCGs were expressed at the AFW in most cases
263 (n=9/10). However, anterior PCG expression was restricted to the lateral edge only near
264 the remaining DVB in all cases (n=9/9) (Figure 4C). "
the authors do not say what happens in the 1/10 fragment; no PCG expression? And is the last sentence referring to the 9 of that 10 that had the DVB removed, or to the 9 with the DVB intact?
Reviewer #3: This is a very nice report that advances our understanding of the relationship between D/V patterning and A/P specification in Planaria. It builds on previously published work from the Agata lab from a quarter of a century ago, as well as more recent work indicating a central role for BMP/SMAD signaling in controlling the D/V axis. While it was known previously that ectopic head formation caused by RNAi of beta-catenin occurs at the lateral periphery of these Planaria, the authors use scRNAseq to define these cells at the D/V boundary (DVB). They go on to show through a combination of grafting (ala Agata and colleagues) and compound RNAi experiments (making very nice use of the temporal control of administering the dsRNA - a feature that might be unique to Planaria) that the DVB cells are sufficient and necessary for ectopic head formation. They also do a careful temporal analysis to support a model where DVB expression at the site of ectopic heads precedes that of the anterior pole.
I can't identify any significant weakness in this story. Also, I believe this is a significant enough advance in our understanding of how two axes coordinate during regeneration to merit publication in PLOS Biology.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003482.r003Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
6 Aug 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: AP-DV Review_reply.docx
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003482.r004Decision Letter 2
HodgeRichardSenior Editor© 2025 Richard Hodge2025Richard Hodgehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
25 Sep 2025

Dear Dr Reddien,
Thank you for your patience while we considered your revised manuscript "The planarian dorsal-ventral boundary regulates anterior-posterior axis growth and patterning" for publication as a Short Report at PLOS Biology. Please accept my sincere apologies for the delays that you have experienced during this round of the peer review process. This revised version of your manuscript has been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, the Academic Editor and two of the original reviewers.
Based on the reviews, I am pleased to say that we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, provided you satisfactorily address the remaining points raised by the reviewers. Please also make sure to address the following data and other policy-related requests that I have provided below (A-H):
(A) Your manuscript is being considered as a Short Report article type, which has a maximum of 4 main figures (https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/what-we-publish#loc-short-reports). At this stage, we ask that you please reduce the number of main figures down to 4, either by combining main figures or moving a couple of figures to the Supplementary Information. I appreciate this may represent a significant amount of re-formatting so I have extended the revision timeframe by a week. Please do feel free to contact me if you would like to further discuss how best to reformat the figures.
(B) You may be aware of the PLOS Data Policy, which requires that all data be made available without restriction: http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability. For more information, please also see this editorial: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001797
Note that we do not require all raw data. Rather, we ask that all individual quantitative observations that underlie the data summarized in the figures and results of your paper be made available in one of the following forms:
-Supplementary files (e.g., excel). Please ensure that all data files are uploaded as 'Supporting Information' and are invariably referred to (in the manuscript, figure legends, and the Description field when uploading your files) using the following format verbatim: S1 Data, S2 Data, etc. Multiple panels of a single or even several figures can be included as multiple sheets in one excel file that is saved using exactly the following convention: S1_Data.xlsx (using an underscore).
-Deposition in a publicly available repository. Please also provide the accession code or a reviewer link so that we may view your data before publication.
Regardless of the method selected, please ensure that you provide the individual numerical values that underlie the summary data displayed in the following figure panels as they are essential for readers to assess your analysis and to reproduce it:
Figure 1B, 1D, S1H, S1J-K, S1L, S2A-B
NOTE: the numerical data provided should include all replicates AND the way in which the plotted mean and errors were derived (it should not present only the mean/average values).
(C) Thank you for providing the scRNA-seq-data in the SRA database (PRJNA1299474). However, I could not find the data when searching for it, so I would be grateful if you could check whether the accession number is correct or ensure that the data is publicly released.
(D) Please note that we cannot accept deposition of data in a Google drive. If you would like to provide data in a separate deposition, we ask that you use a public data repository (https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/recommended-repositories).
(E) Please also ensure that each of the relevant figure legends in your manuscript include information on *WHERE THE UNDERLYING DATA CAN BE FOUND*, and ensure your supplemental data file/s has a legend.
(F) Please ensure that your Data Statement in the submission system accurately describes where your data can be found and is in final format, as it will be published as written there.
(G) Per journal policy, if you have generated any custom code during the course of this investigation, please make it available without restrictions. Please ensure that the code is sufficiently well documented and reusable, and that your Data Statement in the Editorial Manager submission system accurately describes where your code can be found.
Please note that we cannot accept sole deposition of code in GitHub, as this could be changed after publication. However, you can archive this version of your publicly available GitHub code to Zenodo. Once you do this, it will generate a DOI number, which you will need to provide in the Data Accessibility Statement (you are welcome to also provide the GitHub access information). See the process for doing this here: https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/archiving-a-github-repository/referencing-and-citing-content
(H) Please ensure that you are using best practice for statistical reporting and data presentation. These are our guidelines https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/best-practices-in-research-reporting#loc-statistical-reporting and a useful resource on data presentation https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.1002128
- If you are reporting experiments where n ≤ 5, please plot each individual data point.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
As you address these items, please take this last chance to review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the cover letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.
In addition to these revisions, you may need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests shortly. If you do not receive a separate email within a few days, please assume that checks have been completed, and no additional changes are required.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within three weeks.
To submit your revision, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' to find your submission record. Your revised submission must include the following:
- a cover letter that should detail your responses to any editorial requests, if applicable, and whether changes have been made to the reference list
- a Response to Reviewers file that provides a detailed response to the reviewers' comments (if applicable, if not applicable please do not delete your existing 'Response to Reviewers' file.)
- a track-changes file indicating any changes that you have made to the manuscript.
NOTE: If Supporting Information files are included with your article, note that these are not copyedited and will be published as they are submitted. Please ensure that these files are legible and of high quality (at least 300 dpi) in an easily accessible file format. For this reason, please be aware that any references listed in an SI file will not be indexed. For more information, see our Supporting Information guidelines:

https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/supporting-information

*Published Peer Review History*
Please note that you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://plos.org/published-peer-review-history/

*Press*
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, please ensure you have opted out of Early Article Posting on the submission form. We ask that you notify us as soon as possible if you or your institution is planning to press release the article.
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please do not hesitate to contact me should you have any questions.
Best regards,
Richard
Richard Hodge, PhD
Senior Editor, PLOS Biology
rhodge@plos.org
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reviewer remarks:
Reviewer #1: In the revised version of the manuscript, now entitled "The planarian dorsal-ventral boundary regulates anterior-posterior axis growth and patterning", Maybrun et al. have addressed most of the main concerns. However, the SC-seq data of the DVB remain disconnected from the rest of the experiments. These data could potentially serve as the basis for functional studies in future work.
Before publication, the authors should carefully review the numbering of the figures cited in the text, as some of them are incorrect.
Reviewer #2: Many thanks the authors, the manuscript has been improved, and my difficulties have been largely dealt with. I think this should be published, although I have a couple minor points I'd like the authors to consider.
1) There are now two places in the manuscript where the authors distinguish between scattered "sporadic" expression of anterior makers and true anterior foci. The first is in their added language about the results of bcat-RNAi. The second is in their 9/22 outcomes with less focused anterior maker expression after cutting, bcat-RNAi and PD treatment to block DVB regeneration. In the latter, the authors give a fuller possible explanation, low level anterior induction that does not rise to the level or organizing foci. It might be helpful to have some of that language in the first discussion of the simple bcat-RNAi result, and try and define their criteria a bit.
2) A couple remaining clarifications about numbers:
Does the 18/21 in Figure S4D mean that in 3/21 cases the DVB still formed after cutting and PD treatment?
In the Fig. 5B/S4F data, if 12/22 don't have and 9/22 do have anterior gene expression after cutting, bcat-RNAi and PD treatment, what did the remaining 1/21 do?
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003482.r005Author response to Decision Letter 3
Submission Version3
20 Oct 2025

AttachmentSubmitted filename: AP-DV_Reviews_Final.docx
10.1371/journal.pbio.3003482.r006Decision Letter 3
HodgeRichardSenior Editor© 2025 Richard Hodge2025Richard Hodgehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
22 Oct 2025

Dear Dr Reddien,
On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Konrad Basler, I am pleased to say that we can accept your manuscript for publication, provided you address any remaining formatting and reporting issues. These will be detailed in an email you should receive within 2-3 business days from our colleagues in the journal operations team; no action is required from you until then. Please note that we will not be able to formally accept your manuscript and schedule it for publication until you have completed any requested changes.
Please take a minute to log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process.
PRESS
We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with biologypress@plos.org. If you have previously opted in to the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may opt out on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
Thank you again for choosing PLOS Biology for publication and supporting Open Access publishing. We look forward to publishing your study. 
Best wishes, 
Richard
Richard Hodge, PhD
Senior Editor, PLOS Biology
rhodge@plos.org
PLOS
Empowering researchers to transform science
Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge, CB4 3DN, United Kingdom
California (U.S.) corporation #C2354500, based in San Francisco