pmcProg OceanogrProg Oceanogr3046epapa0115534Progress in oceanography0079-6611pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleEPA Author ManuscriptsPMC10805246PMC10805246.30461080524610805246NIHMS19443123826925910.1016/j.pocean.2023.103110NIHMS1944312EPAPA19443123046ArticleBuilding an inclusive wave in marine science: Sense of belonging and Society for Women in Marine Science symposia
CanfieldKatherine N. SterlingAlexa R. HernándezChristina M. ChuSophie N. EdwardsBethanie R. FontaineDiana N. FreeseJillian M. GirouxMarissa S. JonesAubree E. McCartyAlexandra J. MorrissetteHannah K. PalevskyHilary I. RakerCatherine E. RobuckAnna R. Serrato MarksGabriela ThibodeauPatricia S. WindleAnna E. aU.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, Center for Environmental Measurement and Modeling, Atlantic Coastal Environmental Sciences Division, Narragansett, RI 02882, USAbU.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 1, Water Division, Boston, MA 02109, USAcCornell University, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Ithaca, NY 14850, USAdWoods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Biology Department, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USAeCaptura Corporation, Pasadena, CA 91101, USAfUniversity of California Berkeley, Earth and Planetary Science Department, Berkeley, CA 94720, USAgUniversity of Rhode Island, Graduate School of Oceanography, Narragansett, RI 02882, USAhJ. Craig Venter Institute, Infectious Diseases, La Jolla, CA 92037, USAiOak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, c/o U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, Center for Environmental Measurement and Modeling, Atlantic Coastal Environmental Sciences Division, Narragansett, RI 02882, USAjUniversity of Rhode Island, Biological and Environmental Sciences, Kingston, RI 02881, USAkVirginia Institute of Marine Science, College of William & Mary, Marine Advisory Program, Gloucester Point, VA 23062, USAlSmithsonian Environmental Research Center, Marine Conservation Lab, Edgewater, MD 21037, USAmBoston College, Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Chestnut Hill, MA 02467, USAnStellate Communications, New York, NY 10007, USAoUniversity of New England, School of Marine and Environmental Programs, Biddeford, MA 04005, USApUniversity of Maryland Center for Environmental Science, Horn Point Laboratory, Cambridge, MD 21613, USA*Corresponding author at: 27 Tarzwell Drive, Narragansett, RI 02882, USA. canfield.katherine@epa.gov (K.N. Canfield)011120232184539601151311202301112024011120242701202416042026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Achieving gender equity is a long-standing and ubiquitous challenge in marine science. Creating equitable experiences for all genders in marine science requires recognizing scientists’ intersectional identities, and how this leads to unique lived experiences of privilege and marginalization. One approach to increase equitable experiences for women in marine science is to create affinity groups where women can learn from each other, share their experiences, and provide support and mentorship. The Society for Women in Marine Science (SWMS) is one such organization, founded to amplify the work of early career women in marine science and create community, through events such as full-day symposium events. This study investigates the experiences of symposium attendees for four events held from 2018 through 2020, as reported in pre- and post-symposium surveys. We used quantitative analysis of the open-ended survey questions to examine the demographics of attendees and their fields of study. Qualitative thematic analysis identified the most effective aspects of the symposia, areas of logistical and content improvement for future symposia, and emphasized the unique challenges women in marine science experience. The majority of symposium attendees were white graduate students. Nearly all attendees identified as women, with a small number of men and non-binary individuals. Symposia attendees enjoyed opportunities for professional development and interactions with colleagues across career stages. We present recommendations for continuing to foster a sense of belonging in marine science and STEM more broadly, both specific to SWMS and transferable actions that can be applied for other affinity groups. These suggestions include empathetic event logistics, continual democratic evaluation, identity reflexivity among group leaders, and professional development activities targeted towards the unique needs of the affinity group. The positive responses received from SWMS’s adaptive integration of survey results into symposia demonstrate that incorporating these recommendations and findings will help create an inclusive wave in marine science.

Affinity groupsDiversityEquityEarly careerSymposium eventsGender identityUSA, Massachusetts, Woods HoleUSA, Rhode Island, NarragansettUSA, Maryland, Cambridgepmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1.

## Introduction
We all move through this world as our own kaleidoscope of identities. Intersectionality is the recognition that rather than existing independently, we experience all of our identities simultaneously, and together they influence how we face the world and how others perceive us ( ). Intersectionality was originally coined to describe the experiences of Black women, in how they experience layered marginalizations based on both their race and gender identities ( ). Our kaleidoscope of identities is formed through intersectionality, which creates a distinct set of privileges and marginalizations for each of us ( ). For example, all of the authors on this paper share the identities of being scientists and women, but our other identities are varied and go well beyond these two identities. It is vital for us to acknowledge that women are not a monolithic set.
The underrepresentation of women in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields is not equal for all women. Separated by gender, women earn on average 30% of science and engineering doctorates, but only 5% of all science and engineering doctorates are awarded to women of color ( ). When referring to women throughout this study, we are including both transgender and cisgender women, and further acknowledge the increased marginalizations of transgender women relative to cisgender women ( ; ). Looking solely at gender, rather than the intersectionality of race and gender, leads to an inadequate characterization of the range of experiences in STEM for women across varied social, racial, and ethnic groups, especially as data about some group identities are not collected (e.g., sexual orientation or other queer identities; ; ; ; ; ). For women with multiple marginalized identities, advancing in STEM may include confronting challenges such as sexism, racism, homophobia, classism, ageism, and ableism. Initiatives that increase awareness of potential biases, provide support for all identities, and demonstrably make scientific fields more inclusive and welcoming will reduce the chances for these “-isms” to push Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC), disabled, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) persons out of their degree programs and STEM overall ( ; ; ; ).
Numerically speaking, women in STEM experience significant gender inequalities and inequities that become more extreme as they advance through their education and careers. Inequality refers to unequal access to resources or opportunities, while inequity refers to avoidable and unfair systematic differences in opportunities observed between populations ( ). Enrollment of women in undergraduate and graduate marine science programs is increasing, but the proportion of women declines with career level (i.e., decreasing proportion moving up the career ladder) ( ; ). This imbalance in gender representation in tenure-track and research positions reflects the white, patriarchal structure of scientific research careers and education that creates barriers by not considering the lifeways and responsibilities of women in STEM ( ; ). Several factors contribute to perpetual underrepresentation and higher rates of attrition of women in STEM. Compared to men, women are less likely to publish ( ; ), less likely to be considered competent ( ; ), less likely to have a widespread professional network ( ; ), likely to be paid substantially less than a man in the same position ( ; ), and at least three times more likely than men to leave a position due to family responsibilities ( ). The issues facing women in STEM are not unique to the United States, with similar biases reported globally ( ; ; ). A global survey of 42 countries found that in institutions and nations with a fairly even distribution of men and women in early career marine science positions, only 13% to 24% of senior positions were occupied by women, a metric mirrored in publishing and funding rates ( ). Limited mentorship opportunities can lead to increased attrition in the field, especially as early career scientists lack representation of themselves and the support network necessary to succeed as they advance to higher positions ( ). Mentor representation includes, but is not limited to, role models that provide sense of belonging through their visible identities (race and ethnicity, gender, age, etc.), have shared experiences (e.g., parenthood, gendered expectations in society and parenting, gendered harassment, etc.), and have lived experience that allows for providing advice in challenging situations ( ; ). Continued development of networking and mentoring opportunities for women in marine science is essential for their continued progress in the field ( ).
Over the last few decades, efforts to support women and other people with marginalized identities in STEM have increased within universities and funding institutions ( ). Targeted programs, like the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) ADVANCE and the U.K. Athena SWAN, have worked to increase the number of women in more senior positions ( ; ; ). These targeted efforts focused on practical ways to address unconscious and conscious gender biases and provided more structured networking and support groups to retain women in these positions ( , ; ).
In this paper, we look specifically to the field of marine science, which extends across disciplines and can be difficult to define as the research performed is diverse and includes all aspects of STEM. Our definition of marine science includes marine-focused sciences of biology, communication, ecology, education, engineering, geology, oceanography, public policy, and social sciences. Marine science is not immune from the sexism observed in other STEM fields. Until the 1960s, women were prohibited from oceanographic research cruises because women were considered bad luck at sea ( ). The first widespread attempts to understand and provide solutions to the obstacles facing women in marine science began in earnest two decades ago ( ; ; ; ; ). These surveys and community-building efforts have led to increased women’s participation at all levels within marine science. Looking at marine science comprehensively, women have begun to outnumber men at the undergraduate and graduate levels ( ). In more advanced career levels of postdoctoral, non-faculty researcher, and tenure-track positions, however, the increase with time in proportion of women at advanced career stages has not yet matched the increased proportion of PhD-level women scientists with time. ( ). Women continue to be underrepresented as leaders and invited speakers in oceanography ( ). Therefore, retention is a major challenge to gender equity for the marine science community.
One way to increase retention is to improve support and sense of belonging. The Society for Women in Marine Science (SWMS) was founded in 2014 through the first symposium. The SWMS mission is to increase the visibility of women marine scientists, create a space for women in marine science to network, and provide professional development opportunities at all career levels. Symposia and other community events hosted by SWMS are important to build support networks and to increase the visibility of women in marine science at all career stages. Since 2014, eight symposia have been thoughtfully organized, with a total of approximately 900 registrants. Attendees have included undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, early-career faculty, and tenured faculty as well as technicians, engineers, government scientists, funding program officers, industry executives, and administrators. Outside of symposia, SWMS events offer networking opportunities, professional development panels, webinars, and outreach events to the broader public. In this paper, we evaluate the value of affinity organization symposia through observational data and participant surveys of SWMS symposia from 2018 to 2020 and share the learning opportunities we have faced. We have synthesized these experiences and shared paths forward for our organization and other affinity groups to improve equity and diversity in marine sciences and other areas of STEM.
1.1.

## SWMS background
Since its establishment, SWMS leadership has been composed of volunteer, early-career women (primarily graduate students and postdoctoral researchers), making it a fundamentally collaborative and bottom-up organization. While the original intent of SWMS was to increase the retention of women in academia, we found a growing need in our community to support women across all marine science sectors. Currently, SWMS has over 380 members across academia, industry, government, non-profit, museum, and consulting fields.
The first SWMS symposium was organized by graduate students and postdoctoral researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI). Since then, SWMS has expanded to 19 chapters along the U.S. East and West Coasts, and internationally through two chapters in Africa and one in Brazil. Town hall meetings and informal networking events held at international conferences (e.g., Ocean Sciences Meeting and Aquatic Sciences Meeting) directly led to the establishment of new chapters and increased membership. Chapters are primarily associated either with universities (e.g., University of Rhode Island) or regions (e.g., Seattle SWMS and Oregon SWMS), designed with the flexibility to meet the needs of local communities whether that be more student-oriented or more geared towards broader participation.
Annual symposia have been the SWMS events with most engagement overall. Symposia have typically been structured with an overarching theme that features a distinguished keynote speaker who describes her career path and particular obstacles that she overcame as a woman in marine science. Early symposia themes included: “Challenges and Solutions for Women in Marine Science” (2014), “Innovating the Oceans: Women Pushing Boundaries in Marine Science” (2016), and “Swimming in Confidence: Declaring Your Scientific Authority” (2017). Symposium panel discussions have also focused on challenges and solutions to issues faced by women in marine science, policies to improve diversity, and interrogating the “leaky pipeline” of women leaving STEM fields disproportionately more than men due to family responsibilities and gender expectations ( ). Invited speakers and research poster sessions have been included to highlight the experiences and research of women in all career stages. Participant feedback has driven the symposia to evolve from a showcase of women in science presenting their research through talks, posters, and panels, into a forum for small-group discussions on specific topics that are relevant to the daily lives of SWMS members.

1.2.

## Study symposia overview
Attendee surveys were collected at four SWMS symposia from 2018 to 2020 ( ). These symposia were organized by chapters on the east coast of the United States and covered a variety of topics relevant to professional development for women in marine science. Symposium formats included keynote speakers, discussion panels, breakout groups, and workshops. Symposia agendas are included in the .
The first symposium to collect attendee information and recommendations through pre- and post-event surveys was the 2018 spring symposium held at the University of Rhode Island (URI). As the first SWMS chapter that formed as an offshoot of the primary group at MIT/WHOI, URI was able to integrate a large population of undergraduate members into SWMS. The 2018 spring symposium focused on career development and professional options available in marine science with panels and networking opportunities designed to help attendees “navigate” their potential career paths. With a significant graduate and undergraduate population involved in SWMS at URI, symposia organizers planned workshops and breakout sessions specifically targeted for various career stages.
In the fall of 2018, the flagship SWMS group at MIT/WHOI held a symposium focused on diversity, broadly defined. The planning committee included graduate students and postdoctoral researchers from several Boston-area institutions who were specifically recruited to broaden the identities represented by SWMS leadership. The morning keynote, panel discussion, and breakout sessions focused on diverse career paths in marine science, while the afternoon keynote, panel discussion, and breakout sessions focused on diverse identities and building inclusive marine science communities.
After several successful SWMS symposiums hosted in the northeast region of the U.S., three Mid-Atlantic regional chapters located at Horn Point Laboratory (MD), the Virginia Institute of Marine Sciences (VA), and the University of Delaware (DE) recognized the importance of expanding these efforts to more southern chapters to increase the accessibility and participation of more women scientists. After in-depth polling and discussions of current needs and which topics would most benefit participants, the theme of scientific communication was chosen. The 2019 symposium was an overnight event. To approach the theme in informative yet entertaining ways, the event hosted a collaborative panel, an interactive science communication workshop with breakout sessions, and an outreach event for local 6–12th grade students, with time built in for networking and socialization.
The 2020 symposium, hosted by the URI chapter, was held virtually and highlighted the research of several women leaders in the field of marine science, hosted interactive workshops and panels on professional development topics for all educational levels, and facilitated mentorship and networking opportunities through breakout sessions. The 2020 symposium was originally planned to be held in-person in March 2020, but was rescheduled as a virtual event which allowed increased registration capacity (up to 400 participants), and explains the large increase in registrants over past years.

2.

## Methods
This study used survey responses from online registrants of four SWMS symposia ( ). Registered attendees were invited to participate in pre- and post-event surveys hosted on online on Survey-Monkey (Momentive Inc., San Mateo, CA, USA) or Qualtrics XM (Seattle, WA, USA) through emails before and after the events as well as QR codes in the agendas to encourage post-survey responses. In the interest of preserving confidentiality, participants responded to pre- and post-symposium surveys with unique links, so it was not possible to connect the pre- and post-symposium responses of any one participant. All questions were optional, and responses anonymous. The survey design was determined to be exempt by the URI Institutional Review Board (IRB), and the pre- and post-symposium questionnaires are included in the .
Pre-symposium surveys collected demographic information, participants’ experiences with support for women in marine science, and the value of symposia for participants with diverse identities. The survey utilized multiple choice and fill-in questions regarding demographic characteristics. Additional questions clarified registrants’ familiarity with SWMS, expectations for attending the symposium, and perspectives on gendered obstacles in the field of marine science. Questions in the post-symposium survey included demographic characteristics, how the different components of the agenda compared to expectations, what people liked best about the symposium, what should happen differently at future symposia, if their perception about women in marine science has changed, and if they are planning on doing anything differently as a result of the symposium. One question about what topic challenged attendees the most during the symposium was added for the 2018 WHOI Symposium and beyond. All surveys had open-ended opportunities for additional comments.
Survey responses were retained from respondents who responded to more than one question. In the case of duplicate responses (i.e., entries with the same demographic responses and IP address), the more complete entry was retained. Again, due to the lack of required response for all questions, the number of analyzed responses for many of the qualitative questions varied.
Survey responses were imported into Excel, where responses were coded by theme. Thematic analysis included categorical codes for multiple choice and demographic questions and inductive qualitative coding of open-ended questions ( ). Inductive coding involves identifying similarities among responses and identifying the shared themes for each survey question. After initial coding identifies high-level themes, additional rounds of coding refine themes, identifying the key points and perspectives in the results ( ). This was primarily the analysis method for questions on the distinct experiences of women in marine science, desired changes for future events, and favorite aspects of the symposia.
Categorical coding was used for demographic data. Demographic information was used from pre-survey responses because of the higher response rate than in post-surveys, and incomplete responses that only completed demographic questions were retained since all questions were optional and this allowed for a more accurate demographic view of symposia registrants. Coding for racial and ethnic groups used categories established by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget ( ), and results were compared to the U.S. census findings in 2020 which were summed across all 50 states and Puerto Rico in R ( ). For open-ended responses to the field of work/study/research, each response was categorized as up to three codes. Any response of “marine science” was categorized as oceanography, and any response which described a living organism or ecology was considered biology. Biology or oceanography responses then potentially received up to two codes for sub-field. Individuals that were coded with more than one field of study were also classified as “more than one field.” Figures to display the quantitative, categorical, and qualitative data were created in R version 4.2.1 ( ), using base graphics and the inclusive colorbar package “viridis” ( ).
Additional data included participant observation from attendees and organizers of each symposium. Organizers of all the symposia included in this analysis provided their experience in designing their symposium, how survey results from previous symposia did (or did not) affect their theme and priorities, and lessons learned both during and following the symposium. These experiences were discussed among all co-authors, as many were organizers and attendees at the symposia analyzed here. This allowed for validity of survey findings and provided ground truthing of organizer observations and experiences.
2.1.

## Limitations
As with any study, there were limitations to the methods chosen for data collection. One major limitation was the trade-off between having predefined answers for survey respondents (e.g., multiple choice), requiring less interpretation in analysis, and open-ended responses that allowed participants to most accurately describe their own identities, experiences, and perspectives. Since these surveys largely used open-ended responses, it meant data analysis required the authors to interpret the themes and meanings of these descriptive responses based on their own experiences and knowledge. This is a typical tradeoff social scientists consider in research design ( ). An additional limitation was the inability to connect multiple survey responses to a single participant. While this approach precluded the ability to track personal experience over time with SWMS symposia, this allowed for greater participant confidentiality and encouraged honest feedback (ibid.). As surveys were exclusively administered online, this could present a digital bias, however as all conference registration also occurred online without challenges, a basic fluency in using online form softwares was assumed. Overall, data were analyzed considering these limitations, and analysis was verified through continuous conversation of findings among co-authors who were organizers and attendees.

3.

## Results & discussion
Together the survey results provide significant data to understand the lasting challenges of women in marine science ( ), and give explicit recommendations for how affinity groups like SWMS can continue to grow to better meet community needs. Just as identity and belonging are central to the mission of SWMS, many of the lessons learned as the organization and symposia evolve are also closely tied to identity. Connecting the experiences of the various symposia organizing teams with survey feedback and current literature, we provide guidelines to improve inclusive practices in marine science.
3.1.

## Survey responses
Total number of responses used in the analysis are provided in , and the number of responses for each analyzed question are provided in results descriptions for transparency. Survey response rates ranged from 14% for the post-survey for the 2020 symposium to 63% for the pre-survey for the fall 2018 symposium. Most response rates were at least 40% of participants, which is in line with expected online survey response rates ( ) and higher than the required 20% rate that is needed to provide reliable estimates of perspectives for smaller sample sizes (i.e., less than 500 possible participants; ). Post-survey response rates were consistently lower than pre-survey rates. This could be due to registrants not attending the symposium and thus not completing the post-survey, and also potential survey fatigue as the same group was asked to participate in two surveys within a short period of time. The 2020 symposium was online and relatively early in pandemic online events, with a maximum of 150 participants logged into the 2020 online platform at any time. This suggests the response rate of actual attendees would be significantly higher than 14% as many registrants did not attend the symposium synchronously.

3.2.

## Demographics of attendees
There were 355 pre-survey and 222 post-survey responses analyzed ( ). Because of the geographic proximity of the spring and fall 2018 symposia (in Narragansett, RI and Woods Hole, MA, respectively), it is likely that the spike in individuals who had attended one previous symposium for the fall 2018 event were individuals who attended in spring 2018 ( ). On the other hand, most attendees at the 2019 Delmarva and 2020 virtual meetings were first-time attendees, indicating expansion in the reach of SWMS. There were four respondents who attended four symposia total, 19 attended three symposia, and 44 attended two symposia ( ).
The average age of respondents across all symposia was 27 with a range of 18 to 68 years old. Respondents were concentrated in ages 20–30 ( ). The distribution of ages among pre-survey respondents was quite similar to the post-survey responses ( vs. ), suggesting that both surveys represent the same population of attendees. We found that job titles of respondents aligned with expected age categories: undergraduate students concentrated in the 17–22 age group; graduate students were primarily in the 22–30 age group; 30–35 represented a transitional career stage comprised of graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and professionals; and most of the individuals in the 35–45 and 45–70 age groups were professors or professionals ( ).
Nearly all attendees identified as women, with a small number of men and non-binary individuals ( ). To investigate if men from certain age groups or career stages were more likely to attend, we binned the gender data by age groups corresponding to career stages. We found that the small number of respondents that identify as men were spread across age groups ( ). On the other hand, the small number of non-binary respondents were all in the 22–30 age group ( ).
Survey respondents were mostly students ( ). The 2019 symposium had the fewest responses from undergraduate students, most likely due to the hosting institution being a graduate-only research laboratory. In more recent years, the proportion of respondents categorized as “professionals” decreased. The virtual 2020 symposium had a large increase in responses from postdoctoral researchers. This could indicate that the virtual symposium increased ease of access for that group, that the offered sessions were more appealing, or that the original cohort of SWMS graduate students had aged into the postdoctoral career stage and continued to attend events. However, annual distributions of age do not show a clear pattern of cohort aging ( ).
The fields of work or study for the majority of respondents were biology and oceanography, with biological oceanography as the dominant sub-field ( ). The relatively low number of respondents from other oceanography sub-fields and other STEM fields suggest that SWMS may be filling a gap for those who do not have access to other field-specific programs for women (e.g., Mentoring Physical Oceanography Women to Increase Retention [MPOWIR] and Earth Science Women’s Network [ESWN]). The 2019 symposium focused on science communication and education, but few of the respondents in 2019 identified as working in that field. This suggests that attendees used the 2019 symposium to expand their skills, rather than viewing themselves as experts on the theme. The large proportion of individuals who included more than one field in their responses (12–21%), and the spread of individuals across oceanography subfields, underscores the highly interdisciplinary nature of marine science.
The vast majority (79%) of respondents fit the U.S. census definition of white ( ). Individuals who identified as Asian made up 5% of respondents, and 4% of respondents identified as more than one race. Out of 355 responses, 3% of individuals were Black or African American, 3 % were Hispanic or Latino, and 1 % were American Indian or Alaska Native. Further, 4.8% of respondents declined to self-identify their race and/or ethnicity ( ). We examined whether the diversity of respondents increased across symposia over time, but we did not detect a strong signal (numbers were too low to publish those figures while maintaining confidentiality). Race and ethnicity across SWMS symposia were similar to data reported by NSF that showed that out of 269 doctoral recipients in the fields of ocean and marine sciences in 2019, 79% identified as white, 7% as Hispanic or Latino, 5% as Asian or Asian American, 1.5% as Black or African American, less than 1 % as American Indian or Alaska Native, and 6% as more than one race ( ). Approximately half (52%) of the 2019 doctoral recipients in ocean and marine sciences who responded with their sex (n = 415) identified as female ( ); the NSF data only provide binary sex options (male or female).

3.3.

## Value of SWMS symposia for women in marine science
Expectations of SWMS symposia differed from most scientific conferences by prioritizing networking and professional development over learning about the current state of science ( , , ). Participants could identify as many expectations as they wished. Across all pre-symposia surveys with expectations stated (n = 235), access to networking opportunities was most common (n = 141). The next most common expectation was to have access to professional and career development opportunities (n = 93), followed by sharing experiences of being a woman in marine science (n = 64). Less common expectations were to learn about marine science (i.e., research updates), how to build inclusive communities in this field (e.g., diversity conversations and about SWMS as an organization), how to show support to colleagues (e.g., allyship and mentorship), and personal development (i.e., working on self-confidence and women’s empowerment).
Survey responses and participant observation notes show SWMS symposia met expectations and provide a unique environment of belonging. Responses to “What elements did you like best about the symposium?” were also open-ended (n = 140, ). Just as networking was the most common expectation, it was also the most common favorite element of the symposia (n = 40). The next most-liked elements were the small group discussions (n = 33), the supportive environment (n = 29), and conversations about careers in marine science (n = 28). Other elements mentioned included efficient organization of the event; exceptional quality of the keynote addresses; relevance of topics discussed to attendees; the focus on diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI); and focus on science communication.
At the virtual symposium in 2020, attendees were asked to identify anything that made the virtual experience particularly positive or negative (n = 39, ). The benefits of the virtual summit, in descending frequency, were: sense of community (n = 13), increased accessibility (n = 7), use of Slack for communicating (n = 3), and access to recordings (n = 2). Arguably, the use of Slack and availability of recordings were also accessibility improvements, making clear that increased accessibility, both based on location and disability needs, was a big bonus of the virtual symposium. Drawbacks listed were, from most to least cited, challenges communicating compared to in-person events (n = 9), Zoom fatigue (n = 7), and lack of sufficient breaks and poor event timing (n = 5). Thus, while some found the virtual structure more accessible, there were still tradeoffs that kept the symposium from being optimally accessible. It’s important to note that at this point in 2020, virtual events were relatively new as society pivoted and explored virtual event possibilities. Recent studies document that these events provide valuable opportunities for networking and connection when people are not able to meet in person, while others may experience “screen fatigue” from the constant online meetings ( ; ; ). Data from these surveys can inform future virtual event design to maximize the benefits of online settings while being conscious of potential drawbacks.

3.4.

## Perspectives on improving symposia for women in marine science
Along with the positive feedback on sense of belonging that the symposia provided, surveys also informed how SWMS symposia can evolve to better support women in marine science. Post-symposia survey questions asked for recommendations about logistics (What do you think we should do differently at future SWMS Symposiums?, n = 132), content (Were there any topics you would like to learn more about or that you felt were missing from the discussion?, n = 141), and attendees’ personal growth (What challenged you the most in this symposium? Why?, n = 142) ( ).
When asked how future symposia should be different, responses ranged from topic foci to specific event logistics ( ). Most common recommendations were on timing of events (n = 35). These recommendations included expanding the symposium across multiple days, reducing the number of concurrent sessions so that attendees would not have to choose between sessions, earlier starting times, requests for both shorter and longer sessions, and longer breaks between sessions. Additional recommendations addressed general event and agenda logistics (n = 32) including venue organization, improving lunch line efficiency, and schedule recommendations. While many attendees positively commented on networking opportunities and small discussion groups, 20 respondents asked for improved networking opportunities, and 16 suggested more breakout discussion sessions. The other categories of recommendations that were not as common included having more of marine research focus; greater variety in race, career stage, and gender of attendees; more professional development opportunities and gender-focused panels; and improved sustainability considerations. Preference for in-person symposia was also mentioned here.
While some of the responses discussed above tackled content that attendees would like in future symposia, one question directly asked if there were any topics that should be a greater focus in the future ( ). Of the 141 responses, 18 responded that there was nothing they felt was missing from the symposium topics. The most common topic people would like to discuss more was how to be an ally to BIPOC and LGBTQ+ people in marine science (n = 27). Other common requested topics of focus included discussion of career paths (n = 15), how to network (n = 15), and how to be an ally to women in the field (n = 14). There were 12 requests each for more of a research focus and more science communication topics. The less common topics requested, in descending frequency, included work-life balance, mental health, different career stages, and interactive sessions. These recommendations for focus align with past findings of needs for early career support in marine science ( ; ).
Attendees’ descriptions of what was most challenging about the symposium included both specific topics discussed at the symposium they attended and consistent challenges with the overall experience of participation ( ). Of the 142 responses, the most common challenge noted was discussing diversity, with 45 attendees mentioning this aspect. Many of those who mentioned this attended the 2020 symposium which had multiple speakers and sessions dedicated to diversity in marine science. The societal context of increased confrontation of white supremacy and racial injustice in the United States in 2020 likely influenced this perceived challenge in discussing diversity ( ). While diversity was already a planned focus based on past survey data, this cultural moment also encouraged a greater focus on diversity specific to marine science during the 2020 event. Other common challenges were how the event was organized (n = 21), social anxieties in large groups and networking (n = 20), and sharing personal experiences and processing tough conversations (n = 18). The other event topic that challenged attendees was the science communication focus of the 2019 symposium (n = 15), which they stated was largely due to it being difficult for attendees to learn quickly and apply to their own research. The other noted challenge was the lack of diverse attendee and presenter representation across race, gender, and sexuality (n = 14). There were also eight respondents who said nothing challenged them.
Particularly relevant in informing ways to continue to support women in marine science was the pre-symposium survey question about what the perceived unique obstacles are for women in marine science ( ). We had a total of 259 responses to this open-ended question, with many respondents specifying multiple obstacles that are unique to women in marine science. Sexism was the most common obstacle, noted by 55% of respondents (n = 143), including mentions of sexism, bias, harassment, and intragender challenges. Gendered performance expectations and lack of respect were each mentioned 94 times (36%). Gendered performance expectations included field work logistics and expectations of gendered work performance. The lack of respect category includes mentions of lack of respect from colleagues or superiors and imposter syndrome. Gendered life expectations were the next most common obstacle with 68 mentions (26%). This included work-life balance, reproductive realities, and family care responsibilities. Funding and promotion was mentioned 57 times (22%), and included mentions of pay, promotion, and the glass ceiling women face. Representation was mentioned 53 times (20%), and included references to lack of representation and role models in the field. The last obstacle, mentioned 9 times (3%), was lack of diversity in the field, referring to ableism and limited racial diversity in marine science.
3.4.1.

## Synthesizing perspectives
One of the major themes of what challenged attendees and an area for increased topic area focus was around topics of diversity and equity in marine science ( ). This contrasts with the small number of respondents naming limited diversity as a major obstacle ( ), which likely reflects the minimal diversity reflected in survey participants. SWMS has succeeded at providing a welcoming place for some women in marine science, but there was a distinct overlap of attendees who mentioned that discussions of diversity were challenging and also asked for more discussion on how to be an ally. This message clearly indicates that there is a desire and a need to improve skills among SWMS members of dominant identities (i.e., white women, straight cisgender women, able-bodied women) to better support women in marine science with marginalized identities (i.e., women of color, queer women, disabled women, first-generation students, etc.). The need for greater representation of women of diverse identities in the speakers and attendees was also noted, making diversifying the organization an area for improvement.

3.5.

## Camaraderie and intersectional identities
Sense of camaraderie and shared experience was a major theme reflected across all data collected from symposia. Participants shared that the symposia were unique conference experiences in the way gender was explicitly centered in conversations, enjoying the ability to relate to others based on shared experiences as women in marine science. Some attendees asked for a further centricity on women’s experience in marine science. The specificity of SWMS allows for members to relate to each other about the unique experiences of being marine scientists, especially related to working on boats and the sexist and gendered challenges this type of work presents. While these challenges are not positive shared experiences to bond over, they provided attendees a sense of belonging. This sense of empathetic camaraderie among members and symposia attendees has developed into long-term networks and friendships.
While affinity groups serve as important resources that provide belonging for people along one axis of identity, leaders of affinity groups need to remember that all members possess a multitude of identities and experiences. As has become a common saying in inclusion-focused spaces, “you have to meet people where they are.” Based on experiences with symposia and organizational evolution, we would suggest adding to the adage that there is a diversity of such places when your organization is made up of diverse groups of people. With members across career sectors and stages that practice marine science, creating opportunities for exchange of knowledge can help bridge the differences that exist within affinity groups. This includes exchanges of peer-to-peer knowledge, junior to senior knowledge, and senior to junior knowledge. SWMS has fostered knowledge sharing across career stages when early-career speakers shared their knowledge on DEI with members at a more senior career stage, while those more senior members shared their recommendations on navigating work-life balance. This cross sectional knowledge sharing strategy is an asset-based approach, recognizing that the experiences and ways of knowing that all members bring to the group are helpful in building organizational strength and intersectional understanding ( ). Affinity groups can also benefit from encouraging knowledge sharing between members and executive board leadership to broaden leadership perspectives ( ), such as through the surveys and analyses presented here.

3.6.

## Organizational identity
Relatedly, shifting organizational identity over time to stay up to date with the needs of women in marine science was another major theme. Providing a sense of intersectional belonging is a challenge SWMS is currently confronting as we work to be even more inclusive, especially for people who do not simultaneously hold the identities of being cisgender, heterosexual, and white women. Importantly, this includes more explicitly defining what is meant by both “women” and “marine science.” Further, it requires intentional terminology to make clear to all potential SWMS members and symposium attendees that SWMS is explicitly trans-inclusive, nonbinary welcoming, and invites ally attendance at symposia. This also includes a focus on providing belonging for people with “invisible” identities: members that may appear to others as if they are of dominant social groups despite actually identifying as disabled, queer, or another non-apparent identity. To continue to be an affinity group for women in marine science will require continued evolution and reflection to support potential members’ intersectional identities.
SWMS defines marine science holistically, including people working across many scientific disciplines and subfields related to oceans. We recognize that this holistic definition of potential members leads SWMS to overlap with other organizations focused on the experience of women in STEM. Results from our question on obstacles women face in marine science make clear there are indeed unique experiences that marine scientists can experience that are distinct from STEM more largely. We seek to collaborate across groups with shared interests that have long-existed (Women in Science and Engineering [WiSE]) or developed in the recent past (e.g., 500 Women Scientists, Black in Marine Science [BIMS], Women’s Aquatic Network [WAN]). Collaborating with such organizations can help SWMS to exchange knowledge and resources, and provide better intersectional support for people of genders, races, and sexualities that are marginalized.
A challenge for SWMS leadership has been articulating organizational diversity. Despite being founded by a diverse group of graduate students in 2014 with identities featuring “multiple aspects of religion, ethnicity, motherhood, immigrant generation, and career stage,” there has been a perception among symposia attendees that there is limited diversity in organizational leadership ( ). This perception has led leaders to navigate “status management,” sharing their non-apparent identity statuses because of societal presumptions of what diversity looks like ( ). This focus points to a need for greater understanding of intersectional identity among organizational members in affinity groups, recognizing that diversity may not always be visible while acknowledging that visible representation is a challenge noted by women in STEM more broadly.

3.7.

## Change over time
We saw event content and organizational programs adapting to survey requests. While there were some requests for increased focus on sharing research, this is likely a relic of the early SWMS symposia before surveys were conducted, as the goal of these events was to provide a venue for early career women in marine science to share their work. Over time, leaders realized the value of SWMS was primarily in the experiences, skillbuilding, and networking that have since become the focus of symposia and central to SWMS mission overall. When surveys began with the spring 2018 symposium, there were extensive discussions about the value of mentoring opportunities for people at different career stages in SWMS. This discussion led to development of a mentoring program in the organization. From 2018 to 2020, we saw the evolution from requests for greater diversity to gratitude for a focus on diversity, especially racial and LGBTQ+ diversity. It is important to note that while there was increased desire for, and presence of, a diversity focus, and the racial and queer diversity-centric topics were well-received, they were also perceived as particularly challenging. The increased societal awareness of racial inequity in 2020 likely influenced the perceived difficulty in diversity conversations and putting racial equity into practice ( ; ). This dichotomy demonstrates that the attendees welcomed this challenging and important discussion topic and appreciated that content shifted in alignment with survey feedback. It also points to the need for SWMS to potentially provide more training to get people to similar levels of understanding about DEI in marine science, as well as bolster familiarity with the diversity that exists within SWMS. These efforts will help ensure that educating people about DEI does not land on the BIPOC and queer symposium attendees to speak for their identity group as a whole or homogenous entity.

4.

## Recommendations based on lessons learned and literature on effective inclusive engagement
The adaptive design of symposia and continued evaluation of events helps SWMS refine programming thematically and operationally to meet the evolving needs and interests of membership. This section seeks to provide evidence-backed practices to improve belonging and inclusion for symposium attendees ( ; ). Providing multiple formats for attendees to provide feedback creates democratic and accessible evaluation ( ; ). Here, we demonstrate an inclusive approach to science communication and evaluation ( ; ). The transferable lessons from this work are largely centered around creating a welcoming and equitable culture where all voices are heard ( ).
Building on the positive feedback for creating a positive environment, one area we can continue to foster inclusion for attendees of SWMS symposia is through empathetic event logistics. Some attendees noted challenges with hearing personal challenges and social anxiety. Transparency in what will be discussed in panels can help attendees choose if they have the capacity to attend sessions on mental health, sexual harassment, or other difficult topics. Additionally, having professional facilitators rather than an open discussion for these difficult topics can help keep the sessions productive, engaging, and informative ( ; ) rather than becoming a space for “trauma dumping” ( ). SWMS has had counselors from university women’s centers on-site in the past to help in navigating the hard feelings that come up. Additionally, setting ground rules and group expectations at the beginning of the symposium can help ensure attendees feel safe to share their experiences and that they are not involuntarily hearing about potentially triggering experiences. Providing spaces for processing difficult conversations, having reduced sensory inputs, and/or simply allowing people to take some time away from the group would help to create a more accessible space for highly sensitive attendees, as well as for those who are neurodivergent ( ).
Providing sufficient time for processing is also an important component of empathetic event logistics. When hosting both in-person and virtual symposia, it is important to provide breaks between sessions that allow for meeting physiological and psychological needs ( ). Being thoughtful about physical accessibility of spaces can improve both the ability for disabled members to attend and to feel welcomed to the community. The increased number of virtual symposia since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic has drawn attention to the improved accessibility of virtual events for immunocompromised and otherwise disabled people ( ; ; ). Continuing to provide virtual options can both increase the reach of an organization and demonstrate a continued commitment to disabled members. To that point, the 2020 virtual SWMS symposium had international attendees and attendees from across the United States. The use of recorded sessions allowed for attendees to take breaks if needed, or watch sessions when it was appropriate for their time zones or family care obligations.
Moving to more skills-focused professional development is another recommendation. This came up largely in the experience of attendees with social anxiety. At the 2020 symposium, Dr. Alycia Mosley Austin addressed building confidence and approaches to networking in large social gatherings, specifically responding to this request from past symposia attendees. Future symposia could address this topic with sessions specifically focused on teaching socially anxious attendees how to network, and skills for protecting one’s energy at large academic gatherings. Additionally, providing some sessions that are capped at a lower number of participants could also help reduce the social anxiety of large conference events. Another desired session related to navigating the challenges of internalized sexism and “intragender bias” (i.e., women being biased against other women). Considering that this was an event focused on supporting women in marine science, and most attendees were women, this example demonstrates that it should not be assumed that people of minoritized genders know actionable ways to support people facing their same struggles in marine science. Relatedly, there were significant asks for how to be a better ally to LGBTQ+ and BIPOC community members. This request points to the importance of emphasizing intersectional experience along axes of identity that are not the specific focus of identify-specific affinity groups. Together, these recommendations highlight topics for future events for SWMS and affinity organizations with similar goals to SWMS.
Another recommendation for improving symposia is how the organizers’ identities bias event promotion and speaker selection. To fairly ask for speakers’ time, organizers need to be able to compensate them for their labor and expertise ( ), especially when asking for the labor of people of marginalized identities and/or speakers on DEI topics for the emotional labor involved ( ). Along with funding for equitable support of speakers, organizers also must recognize that DEI speakers are often oversaturated with requests and unpaid labor ( ). Recruiting speakers on DEI and of marginalized identities equitably can be a challenge when graduate students are organizing a symposium with limited funding and limited professional networks. Faculty and other later-career professionals can help here, utilizing their connections and resources to attract more diverse speakers, and supporting diverse marine scientists by providing the opportunity to speak. The 2020 SWMS Symposium was able to offer honorariums to their speakers, as the organizers recognized this was especially important to implement with the topics on which they were asking the speakers to present.
Review of attendees shows that young professionals and early career professors (ages 28–40) are significantly underrepresented in our attendees. Advertisements focused especially on the benefits of attendance to graduate students, the same career stage of the event organizers. Future advertising should look to promote the continuous community care that SWMS provides for members of all career stages and engage with platforms used outside of academia (e.g., LinkedIn, networking/professional organizations at a local level). Connecting with other affinity groups in the marine science space (e.g., MPOWIR, WAN, BIMS, and computer science groups) could help to find additional attendees that could provide more disciplinary diversity to the organization. Using more varied promotion mechanisms, such as outreach to minority-serving institutions and historically Black colleges and universities, can also help in reaching more diverse attendees across other identities that have been underrepresented at past symposia.
There were numerous requests for career panels and speakers throughout the symposia that consider careers outside of academia and research science and more diverse identities. For a marine science organization, additional career paths to present at future symposia include social science, science communication, science policy, science in industry, and government research, among others. The overrepresentation of academia in career and other panels was likely the result of organizers mostly being graduate students deeply invested in research. Organizers put heavy emphasis on panelists in varied sectors, educational levels, diverse identities, and career paths for the 2020 symposium, in response to this comment from past symposia. To further address feedback from symposia surveys requesting more non-academic career discussions, SWMS leadership organized a webinar on how to apply to federal jobs in September 2022 which had about 150 attendees (350 registrants). Additionally, this webinar is available as a recording, fulfilling previous recommendations for non-synchronous event resources. Addressing all these aspects of diverse attendance and speakers points to the need to consider who expected attendees are, and for organizers to consider how attendees’ career paths and interests may differ from their own. This is an inclusive approach to public engagement with science, inviting intentional consideration and reflection on the part of organizers to ensure the most welcoming conference environment.

5.

## Conclusion
Based on participatory observation and survey results from four symposia hosted by the Society for Women in Marine Science (SWMS), we have demonstrated the effectiveness and importance of adaptive affinity-focused groups and events in ocean sciences. This women-focused group provides camaraderie for people who experience discrimination in their field. At an organizational level, being adaptive is essential to meet the evolving needs of group members, especially as the discipline and society shift. In SWMS, this has meant continually assessing terminology and ensuring that equity across multiple forms of identity is explicitly centered in our goals.
We have emphasized the experiences of women in this field, as well as the importance of active intersectional inclusivity. The data reveal unique challenges women experience in marine science in field-based research, as well as the prevalence of gender-based harassment and discrimination in marine science that also exists across disciplines and sectors. While results largely point to the sense of belonging fostered by a women-focused organization, surveys from the 2018 symposia also pointed to the limited success integrating additional axes of diversity. Symposia attendees shifted from observing the lack of diversity to commenting on the difficult conversations at symposia related to racial identities. Learning from these data, SWMS will continue to actively consider diversity across sexualities, racial/ethnic identities, socioeconomic status, and disability status.
For other organizations focused on building more equitable STEM fields through affinity groups, we provided a number of data-backed recommendations specific to inclusive event planning. Creating a leadership team that reflects the diversity of the organization and event attendees is essential to best consider unique experiences and needs of all members and increase representation of attendees from underrepresented identities. This approach will help create more accessible and equitable spaces that allow for sufficient space and support for group members to process difficult conversations. Democratic methods of evaluation, including pre- and post-surveys and other anonymous methods for in-situ feedback during the event, allow attendees to shape future events’ structure and content. One such piece of feedback for SWMS has been the importance of not simply providing opportunities for practicing professional development, but also creating more training-based professional development opportunities to help members develop skills and comfort in networking. The positive responses received from adaptive integration of survey results into symposia demonstrates that incorporating these recommendations and findings will help create an inclusive wave of marine science.

## Supplementary Material
Supplement1

## Acknowledgements
SWMS is a not-for-profit charity in Massachusetts with 501(c)3 status. The authors would like to thank the symposia organizers, volunteers, speakers, and the institutions who provided us space to meet at no cost: Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, University of Rhode Island (URI) Graduate School of Oceanography, and Horn Point Lab, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science. Thank you to the NSF Ocean Science Postdoctoral Fellowship Program and MIT Office of the Dean of Graduate Education for funding the first SWMS Symposium. We thank Drs. Tracey Dalton and Jessica Frazier (URI) for guidance and institutional support during conceptualization and methods development. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors, and we would like to acknowledge that symposia were funded through donations from individuals, organizations, and businesses that support the goals of increasing equity in marine science. Those sponsors can be found in symposia programs in the . The research presented was not performed or funded by EPA and was not subject to EPA’s quality system requirements. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views or policies of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. This contribution is identified by tracking number ORD-053366 of the Atlantic Coastal Environmental Sciences Division, Center for Environmental Measurement and Modeling, Office of Research and Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Katherine N. Canfield: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft. Alexa R. Sterling: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Writing – original draft, Project administration. Christina M. Hernández: Resources, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Visualization. Sophie N. Chu: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing, Visualization. Bethanie R. Edwards: Resources, Writing – review & editing. Diana N. Fontaine: Resources, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Jillian M. Freese: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Resources, Investigation. Marissa S. Giroux: Resources, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Aubree E. Jones: Resources, Investigation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Alexandra J. McCarty: Resources, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Hannah K. Morrissette: Resources, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Hilary I. Palevsky: Resources, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Catherine E. Raker: Resources, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Anna R. Robuck: Resources, Investigation, Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing. Gabriela Serrato Marks: Resources, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Patricia S. Thibodeau: Resources, Writing – review & editing. Anna E. Windle: Resources, Investigation, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
1In the Survey of Earned Doctorates data, NSF reports race and ethnicity for U.S. citizens and permanent residents only. In 2019, there were an additional 142 doctorates awarded to temporary visa holders, and another 5 individuals for whom no data on citizenship, race, or ethnicity were reported.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pocean.2023.103110.

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.