pmcPLOS Glob Public HealthPLOS Glob Public Health4390plosgph9918283779606676plosPLOS Global Public Health2767-3375PLOSPMC11620361PMC11620361.111620361116203613963689210.1371/journal.pgph.0003807PGPH-D-24-013291Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineProphylaxisPost-Exposure ProphylaxisMedicine and Health SciencesPharmacologyDrugsAntimicrobialsAntibioticsBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMicrobial ControlAntimicrobialsAntibioticsMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsMedicine and health sciencesMedical conditionsInfectious diseasesInfectious disease controlVaccinesViral vaccinesHIV vaccinesBiology and life sciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral vaccinesHIV vaccinesResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchSurveysResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchSurveysHealth SurveysBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesImmunodeficiency VirusesHIVBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesRNA virusesRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensRetrovirusesLentivirusHIVMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPreventive MedicineKnowledge, uptake and intention to use antibiotic post-exposure prophylaxis and meningococcal B vaccine (4CMenB) for gonorrhoea among a large, online community sample of men and gender-diverse individuals who have sex with men in the UK
Knowledge, uptake and intention to use novel STI prevention interventions in the UKhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1900-8892OgazDanaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0003-9920-1848EdneyJessicaConceptualizationData curationValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0001-1508-1697PhillipsDawnConceptualizationProject administrationWriting – review & editing MullenDoloresConceptualizationMethodologyValidationWriting – review & editing ReidDavidConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – review & editing WilkieRuthConceptualizationData curationMethodologyWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4612-7408BuitendamErnaConceptualizationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2265-1205BellJamesConceptualizationWriting – review & editing LowndesCatherine M.ConceptualizationWriting – review & editing HughesGwendaConceptualizationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7756-403XFiferHelenSupervisionWriting – review & editing MercerCatherine H.ConceptualizationData curationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3020-9916SaundersJohnConceptualizationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing MohammedHamishConceptualizationData curationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Blood Safety, Hepatitis, STI & HIV Division, UK Health Security Agency, London, United Kingdom2
The National Institute for Health Research Health Protection Research Unit in Blood Borne and Sexually Transmitted Infections at University College London in Partnership with the UK Health Security Agency, London, United Kingdom3
Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom4
UK Public Health Rapid Support Team, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United KingdomKwanTsz HoEditor , ]. While there has been sustained progress towards HIV elimination through combination prevention interventions, including HIV-PrEP, HIV testing, and Treatment as Prevention (TasP) [ ], controlling transmission of other STIs remains challenging. Novel STI prevention interventions have been increasingly considered to aid STI control in key populations, but advocacy for the use of biomedical interventions, including antibiotic prophylaxis and meningococcal B vaccination (4CMenB) for GBMSM, has been mixed. Concerns with widespread implementation include the potential effects on selection of antimicrobial resistant bacteria as well as individual sexual risk perception and resultant behavioural risk compensation [ – ]. In the UK, elimination of the 2022 mpox clade IIb outbreak was jointly achieved with co-produced community messaging and individual-level behavioural change, alongside a targeted vaccination programme. This underlined the importance of a community supported response [ ] and rapid deployment of interventions as part of a cadre of combination prevention tools [ ]. However, similar approaches for bacterial STI control have been less effective [ ], which highlights a need to consider new and novel prevention interventions as part of modern control measures.
The use of self-sourced antibiotics as pre- and post-exposure prophylaxis for STI prevention has been reported in UK GBMSM from as early as 2019 [ , ], with uptake estimates of 3.6% across a community sample of GBMSM in 2020/2021 [ ]. Recent studies have shown a reduction in bacterial STI incidence in GBMSM using doxycycline post-exposure prophylaxis (doxyPEP) [ – ], and a guideline for doxyPEP use in the UK is under development.
Observational studies of 4CMenB vaccination for Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B bacteria have shown cross-protection against Neisseria gonorrhoeae (gonorrhoea) [ ]. Modelling suggests vaccination for GBMSM at risk can be a cost-effective strategy with significant impact on gonorrhoea incidence, while also conferring community-level benefits that could curb incidence, even within conservative efficacy estimates [ ]. Real-world effectiveness of 4CMenB has shown a reduction in gonorrhoea incidence of between 22%-47% [ , – ]. More recently, recommendations of a gonorrhoea vaccination programme using 4CMenB vaccine, primarily (not exclusively) targeting GBMSM, have been made by the UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) [ ].
At the time of writing this article, doxyPEP and 4CMenB vaccination are not yet recommended for STI prevention in the UK. However, in preparation for potential availability of these novel STI interventions across SHS, we explored data from the most recent round of a serial, cross-sectional survey of men and gender-diverse individuals having sex with men in the UK to examine self-reported knowledge, uptake, and regimens used as antibiotic post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for STI prevention. To gauge community interest in these novel STI preventative interventions, we also explored the intention to use doxyPEP and 4CMenB vaccine assuming efficacy and availability in the UK.

## Methods

## Study population and data collection
We conducted a cross-sectional study and analysis of the most recent round (November/December 2023) of the ‘Reducing inequalities in Sexual Health’ (RiiSH) surveys, a series of cross-sectional surveys examining the sexual health and well-being of a community sample of men and gender-diverse individuals having sex with men in the UK. Methods for RiiSH 2023 were adapted from previous study rounds [ , ]. Stakeholder engagement with UK community groups prior to implementation was undertaken to review core questions and inform question additions for the 2023 round.
Participants were recruited from 7th November-6th December 2023 through social networking sites (Facebook, Instagram, X) and a geospatial dating application (Grindr). Advertisements hosted by participating recruitment sites directed users to the online survey. Users who met inclusion criteria were asked to take part. An additional survey link was created for dissemination by voluntary and community networks which was cascaded via social networking sites (hereafter, community-cascaded link). Due to survey hosting limitations, we were unable to systematically capture the number of individuals who accessed this survey without participating.
Participants eligible to take part and included in analyses were self-identifying men (cisgender/transgender), transgender women, or gender-diverse individuals assigned male at birth (AMAB), aged ≥16 years, resident in the UK and reporting sex with a man in the last year (hereafter, men and gender-diverse individuals who have sex with men). Gender identity and sex at birth was derived from responses from a two-step question ( ). We obtained online consent and there was no incentive to participate.
Data was collected using the Snap Surveys platform (www.snapsurveys.com). Data management and analysis was conducted using Stata 17.0 (StataCorp LLC). Ethical approval for this study was granted by the UKHSA Research and Ethics Governance Group (REGG; ref: R&D 524) and all methods were performed in accordance with guidelines and regulations set by that group. Young people aged 16–17 years were eligible to participant in this survey as this group represent a key population at risk of STI acquisition in the UK and are important to include this research. Parental consent of participants aged 18 or younger was not sought. Ethical guidelines produced by the British Psychological Society and General Medical Council suggest consent from parents should be sought for those under age 16 and those aged 16 and over may be presumed to be able to reach informed consent if the information on the study, and the way that data is collected, stored, and used is clear. This information was included for all potential participants at the beginning of the survey.

## Knowledge and use of antibiotic post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for STI prevention
We calculated the percentage (%) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) of participants having ever heard of using antibiotic PEP (‘Before taking this survey, had you heard about using antibiotics immediately after sex to prevent STIs other than HIV [e.g., doxy PEP]?’) and those that reported use (‘Have you ever used antibiotics in this way?’).
Among those reporting the use of antibiotic PEP, we examined recency of use (‘When did you last use antibiotics in this way?’) and antibiotics ever used. In those who had never used antibiotic PEP, we calculated the percentage (%) and 95% CI of those who had considered use (‘Have you ever considered taking antibiotics in this way?’) (see for questions).

## Correlates of ever using antibiotic post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for STI prevention
We examined bivariate associations to ever using antibiotic PEP. These included sociodemographic characteristics (age-group, gender identity and sex a birth, sexual orientation, ethnic group, country of birth, employment status, educational qualifications, household composition, financial situation), clinical and behavioural characteristics (HIV status and PrEP use history [in last three months], chemsex in the last year, bacterial STI diagnosis in the last three months, SHS visit in the last year, mpox vaccination history), sexual partnerships since August 2023 (e.g. new partnerships, number of partners, meeting location), personal well-being and sexual satisfaction measures. We used mental health and personal well-being indicators derived from the UK ONS that were dichotomised, as per ONS harmonisation standards [ ], for measures of low life satisfaction, low life worthwhileness, low happiness, and high anxiety. Agreement (agree/strongly agree) with the statement, ‘I feel satisfied with my sex life’ was used as a measure of sexual satisfaction in line with questions in Great Britain’s National Surveys of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal, a national probability sample of sexual behaviour) [ ].
We also considered a composite marker of sexual risk as a covariable in analyses. This marker was defined as reporting (in the last three months): ≥5 condomless anal sex partners, bacterial STI diagnosis, chemsex, and/or meeting partners at sex-on-premises venues, sex parties, or cruising locations. We used this marker in multivariable analyses to minimise collinearity in adjusted models. This composite was structured as a binary indicator (i.e., yes/no markers of sexual risk in the last three months) and was comprised of individual markers of sexual risk examined in bivariate analyses and previously described as predictors of STI prophylaxis use [ , ].
Due to small numbers, we grouped categories for sexual orientation (bisexual, straight, or another way), ethnicity (Black, Asian, Mixed, and other), gender minority groups (transgender and nonbinary). Evidence of association was considered where p <0.05. Bivariate (unadjusted) odds ratios (uORs), 95% CIs, and associated p-values derived from the likelihood ratio test (LRT) were calculated.
We next performed sequential, multivariable modelling to examine adjusted associations to ever using antibiotic PEP. Our initial multivariable model included inclusion of all sociodemographic characteristics with bivariate association to ever using antibiotic PEP and based on a priori knowledge, our composite marker of sexual risk to minimise collinearity given correlation among individual markers of sexual risk. Adjustments for these sociodemographic characteristics and our composite measure of sexual risk were carried forward to subsequent models assessing associations to select clinical and behavioural characteristics (excluding individual markers of sexual risk included in [or as a subgroup of] our composite measure), personal well-being and sexual satisfaction measures with evidence of bivariate association to ever using antibiotic PEP. Age-group was selected a priori for inclusion in all multivariable models. While ethnicity was also considered for inclusion, adjustment was not carried forward where p>0.05 to limit model sparsity given the low number of observations in subgroups outside of White ethnicities. Adjusted odds ratios (aORs), 95% CIs, and (LRT) p-values are presented.

## Correlates of self-reported intention to use doxycycline post-exposure prophylaxis (doxyPEP) and 4CMenB
All participants were asked about their likelihood (‘Very unlikely’, ‘Somewhat unlikely’, ‘Somewhat likely’, ‘Very likely’, ‘I don’t know’) of doxyPEP uptake, if available and considered safe and effective, and about their likelihood of 4CMenB uptake (referred to as Bexsero in survey questions), if available and with 30–50% effectiveness against gonorrhoea (see for questions).
We initially aimed to use ordinal logistic regression to assess correlates of ordinal uptake outcomes; however, given heavy skew to the highest positive responses for each intervention, outcome measures were dichotomised (‘Very likely’ vs all else), where intention to use (ITU) was defined as those ‘very likely’ to consider intervention uptake. As per methodology above, we examined correlates of doxyPEP and 4CMenB ITU, respectively, using bivariate and sequential, multivariable logistic regression.

## Results
There were 1,322 participants who completed the RiiSH 2023 survey, of whom, 1,106 met participation criteria and were included in analyses ( ). Half of all participants were recruited from Grindr (50%), followed by Instagram (23%), Facebook (19%), and community-cascaded links (7%).
Participants primarily resided in England (85% 941/1,106), were of White ethnicity (89% 984/1,106), cisgender male (95% 1,051/1,106) and were UK-born (78% 860/1,106). The median age of participants was 44 years (interquartile range: 34–54), with two-thirds reporting degree-level education (62% 691/1,106). Over three-quarters of participants were employed (78% 868/1,106), while less than half (41% 454/1,106) reported being financially comfortable.
Since August 2023 (i.e., 3-month lookback period), one in five participants had ≥5 male condomless anal sex (CAS) partners (21% 231/1,106) and 8.7% (96/1,106) reported at least one positive bacterial STI test. Additional characteristics are described in .
 

## Knowledge and use of antibiotic post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for STI prevention
Over a third (34% [95% CI: 30%-37%], 373/1,106) of all participants had ever heard about using antibiotics after sex for STI prevention; 8% (95% CI: 6%-10%, 87/1,106) reported ever having used antibiotic PEP ( ). Among the latter, 84% (73/87) had done so in the last year, where most reported ever using doxycycline (80%, 68/87) and 69% (60/87) specified its exclusive use. One in ten participants were uncertain of which antibiotics they had used previously (11% 10/87), and few reported exclusive azithromycin (2% 2/87) or amoxicillin use (8% 8/87) ( ). In the two-thirds (65% 717/1,106) of participants who had never used antibiotic PEP, nearly one in five (18% [95% CI: 16%-21%], 186/1,019) had ever considered use.
 

## Correlates of ever using antibiotic post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for STI prevention
In bivariate analyses, sociodemographic characteristics associated with the use of antibiotic PEP included country of birth (uOR: 1.74 [95% CI: 1.09–2.80]) born outside the UK vs in the UK) and educational qualifications (uOR: 0.50 [95% CI: 0.30–0.84] below degree-level vs degree-level) and were carried forward to multivariable analyses. Those with our composite marker of sexual risk were more likely to report ever using antibiotic PEP (uOR: 3.08 [95% CI: 1.97–4.80]) yes vs no). We also found positive bivariate associations among those reporting recent PrEP use or those living with HIV (PLWHIV), recent SHS use, an mpox vaccination history, 4CMenB ITU, sexual satisfaction as well as individual markers of risk (composing our composite marker) ( ).
 In our initial multivariable model which included sociodemographic characteristics with evidence of bivariate association to antibiotic PEP use (age-group [a priori inclusion], country of birth, educational qualifications) and our composite marker of sexual risk, participants with lower education levels (aOR: 0.58 [95% CI: 0.34–0.97] below degree-level vs degree-level) were less likely to report use, while those born outside the UK (aOR: 1.65 [95% CI: 1.01–2.70]) and with our composite marker of risk (aOR: 2.84 [95% CI: 1.81–4.47] yes vs no) were more likely to report use.
In subsequent multivariable analyses adjusted for age-group, country of birth, educational qualifications, and our composite of sexual risk, participants reporting or considering other preventative interventions (e.g., mpox vaccination), were more likely to report STI prophylaxis use. Recent HIV-PrEP users (in the last three months) and people living with HIV (PLWHIV) were more likely to report antibiotic PEP use than HIV-negative participants not reporting recent HIV-PrEP use (in the last three months).

## Correlates of intention to use doxycycline post-exposure prophylaxis (doxyPEP ITU)
Among all participants, 51% (95% CI: 47%-56%, 568/1,106) reported doxyPEP ITU, reaching 58% (95% CI: 51%-67%, 211/361) among those with our composite marker of sexual risk ( ).
 In bivariate analyses, sociodemographic characteristics associated with the use of doxyPEP ITU included age-group (uOR: 0.66 [95% CI: 0.46–0.95] aged 16–29 vs ≥45), which was carried forward to multivariable analyses. Those with our composite marker of sexual risk were more likely to report doxyPEP ITU (uOR: 1.53 [95% CI: 1.19–1.97] yes vs no). There were positive bivariate associations with doxyPEP ITU among those reporting recent PrEP use, PLWHIV, recent SHS use, mpox vaccination history, 4CMenB ITU, as well as individual markers of risk. While there was weak evidence supporting an association to doxyPEP ITU in those reporting high anxiety (uOR: 0.78 [95% CI: 0.61–1.00] yes vs no), we carried anxiety measures forward to multivariable modelling given previously described associations to prevention intervention uptake [ ].
Those with our composite marker of sexual risk were more likely to report doxyPEP ITU (aOR: 1.50 [95% CI: 1.16–1.94]) in our initial multivariable model which included sociodemographic characteristics with evidence of bivariate association to doxyPEP ITU (age-group) and our composite marker of sexual risk. While we found no statistically significant association with age-group, there was weak evidence of decreased doxyPEP ITU in younger age-groups (aOR 0.71 [95% CI: 0.49–1.03] aged 16–29 vs ≥45 years).
In subsequent multivariable analyses adjusted for age-group and our composite marker of sexual risk, we found associations to a range of clinical and behavioural characteristics and personal well-being measures. Compared to HIV-negative, participants without recent PrEP use, PLWHIV (aOR 1.74 [95% CI: 1.28–2.57]) and HIV-negative recent PrEP users (aOR 1.40 [95% CI: 1.17–1.84]) were more likely to report doxyPEP ITU. Participants who had an SHS visit in the last year were also more likely to report doxyPEP ITU (aOR: 1.66 [95% CI: 1.29–2.14]) while those reporting high anxiety were less likely (aOR 0.77 [95% CI: 0.80–0.99]). 4CMenB ITU was highly correlated with doxyPEP ITU (aOR 8.82 [95% CI: 6.62–11.9]) ( ).

## Correlates of intention to use 4CMenB (4CMenB ITU)
Over two-thirds of all participants (64% [95% CI: 60%-69%], 713/1,106) reported 4CMenB ITU, increasing to 75% (95% CI: 66%-84%, 270/361) among those with markers of sexual risk in the last three months ( ).
 In bivariate analyses, sociodemographic characteristics associated with 4CMenB ITU included age-group (uOR: 1.60 [95% CI: 1.09–2.35] aged 16–29 vs ≥45), sexual orientation (uOR: 0.62 [95% CI: 0.45–0.85] bisexual, straight, another way vs gay/homosexual), employment (0.74 [95% CI: 0.55–0.99] yes vs no), and educational qualifications (uOR: 0.54 [95% CI: 0.42–0.69] below degree-level vs degree-level) and were carried forward to multivariable analyses. There were positive bivariate associations with 4CMenB ITU among those reporting recent PrEP use, PLWHIV, recent SHS use, mpox vaccination history, antibiotic PEP use, doxyPEP ITU, as well as individual markers of risk.
In our initial multivariable model which included all sociodemographic characteristics with evidence of bivariate association to 4CMenB ITU (age-group, sexual orientation, employment, educational qualifications) and our composite marker of sexual risk, younger participants were more likely to report 4CMenB ITU (aOR 2.16 [95% CI: 1.44–3.25] aged 16–29 vs ≥45 years), while bisexual or straight-identifying participants (aOR 0.62 [95% CI: 0.45–0.86]) and those with lower educational qualifications (aOR 0.57 [95% CI: 0.44–0.73]) were less likely to report 4CMenB ITU. Participants with our composite marker of sexual risk were more than twice as likely to report ITU (aOR 2.09 [95% CI: 1.56–2.79]).
In subsequent multivariable analyses, adjusted for age-group, sexual orientation, employment, educational qualifications, and our composite marker of sexual risk, PLWHIV (aOR: 1.96 [95% CI: 1.28–2.99]) and recent HIV-negative PrEP users (aOR: 2.26 [95% CI: 1.67–3.05]) were about twice as likely to report 4CMenB ITU compared to HIV-negative participants not reporting recent HIV-PrEP use. Sexual health service use in the last year (aOR 2.45 [95% CI: 1.87–3.21]) and uptake of preventative interventions were positively associated with 4CMenB ITU, and there was high correlation with doxyPEP ITU (aOR 10.1 [95% CI: 7.33–13.8]). Those who ever used antibiotic PEP were twice as likely to report 4CMenB ITU (aOR: 1.99 [95% CI: 1.13–3.50]) ( ).

## Discussion
We show that the majority of men and gender-diverse individuals having sex with men in our community sample would choose to access doxyPEP and the 4CMenB vaccine were they available for use in the UK at SHS, and that intention to use is greater in those potentially most likely to benefit. Over half of participants (51%) expressed an intention to use doxyPEP, with even greater levels (64%) reporting intention to use 4CMenB. While findings demonstrate substantial interest in the use of doxyPEP, fewer than one in ten (8%) participants who responded to this survey reported use of antibiotic PEP, with usage more common among those at greater risk of STIs. These findings, however, are based on small absolute numbers, but update previous estimates of the extent of antibiotic PEP use in men and gender-diverse individuals having sex with men prior to the publication of the first UK guidelines.
Among those using antibiotic PEP, most reported use of appropriate, evidence-based antibiotics for use as post-exposure STI prophylaxis (i.e., doxycycline). However, there were indications of unknown and inappropriate antibiotic use, which is concerning given this may drive antimicrobial resistance (AMR) as well as cause individual harm, possibly to a greater extent than doxyPEP use. Over a third of all participants reported knowledge of antibiotic PEP for STI prevention, and while few reported uptake, one in five participants who had not reported use had ever considered taking antibiotics to prevent STIs.
Consistent with previous studies [ – ], we found higher uptake of STI prophylaxis in PLWHIV (15%), HIV-PrEP users (12%), and participants at greater risk of STIs as indicated by recent markers of sexual risk (14%). Participants with lower levels of education were less likely to report antibiotic PEP use, while prior mpox vaccination uptake was positively associated with use. Compared with a recent study in Germany which estimated doxyPEP uptake in around 20% of GBMSM [ ], our sample estimates were lower but this may reflect the wider availability of other STI preventative interventions in the UK through free and confidential SHS [ , ]. Differing uptake could also reflect unavailability of doxyPEP in UK SHS. Given the current evidence base, we framed uptake of prophylactic antibiotics around post-exposure use. Questions across behavioural surveys, including prior RiiSH rounds, have included questions about both pre- and post-exposure use. This may limit comparisons with estimates in previous literature and underestimate overall use of STI prophylaxis as STI prevention. Future research, monitoring and evaluation would benefit from a consistent definition, which will itself be facilitated by the upcoming national UK guidelines.
Over half of participants indicated doxyPEP ITU. While there was a high correlation between doxyPEP and 4CMenB ITU, a higher proportion of participants—approximately two-thirds—reported 4CMenB ITU. AMR concerns, consistently highlighted in contemporary health settings as part of antimicrobial stewardship initiatives [ ], could explain lower doxyPEP ITU. Those reporting high anxiety were less likely to report doxyPEP ITU, which may signal hesitancy arising from AMR worries and reluctance to use antibiotics prophylactically. Similar views were found in a qualitative study of SHS attendees, where there was greater acceptability and support of vaccinations for STI prevention as alternatives to antibiotic prophylaxis use given concerns about side effects and safety [ ]. We found levels of 4CMenB ITU were similar to the high self-reported uptake of opportunistically offered Hepatitis A, Hepatitis B and human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination in SHS in similar online community samples [ ], which may influence greater 4CMenB uptake acceptability.
As with antibiotic PEP uptake, PLWHIV, recent HIV-PrEP users, those accessing SHS, and those at greater sexual risk were more likely to report 4CMenB ITU. However, we also found further associations with age and sexual orientation. Younger age-groups were more likely to report 4CMenB ITU, which may present opportunities for further prevention intervention education and uptake in groups with known STI outcome inequalities [ ]. Like recent vaccination uptake examinations in prior RiiSH surveys [ , ], we found differences by socioeconomic characteristics, with lower 4CMenB ITU in those reporting educational qualifications below degree-level, as well as lower ITU among sexual minorities (i.e., bisexual and straight-identifying participants). Inclusive and accessible health promotion and patient education surrounding novel STI prevention interventions, especially considering self-sourcing of antibiotics, will be imperative to minimise knowledge and uptake inequalities and to clearly inform potential, though yet unclear, risks in balance of benefits to STI prophylaxis use.

## Limitations
This cross-sectional study is subject to limitations. Compared to the most recent Natsal survey (Natsal-3), a national probability survey representative of Great Britain, our survey participants report higher educational attainment and levels of employment, potentially indicating higher health literacy relative to the general GBMSM population [ ]. Participants likely experience higher levels of sexual risk relative to the wider population in the UK, as GBMSM taking part in targeted behavioural surveys consistently reported more sexual risk behaviours relative to nationally representative samples [ ]; alongside, the use of the internet and social networking in finding sexual partners has been associated with the report of markers of sexual risk [ ]. While we aimed to recruit from a broader spectrum of men and gender-diverse individuals having sex with men who likely have differing sexual risk relative to clinic recruited samples, participants likely represent key populations targeted for HIV and STI prevention interventions. Aggregate census data available by sexual orientation and gender identity, respectively, limit comparisons of our participants to the wider population of men and gender-diverse individuals having sex with men in the UK [ , ].
ITU measures may not equate to uptake in practice but help gauge interest and acceptability among participants who would likely comprise targeted groups for these interventions. Dichotomising outcome measures limits interpretation and could have led to conservative ITU estimates. While we posited that sexual satisfaction could be influenced by actual or intended uptake of STI prevention interventions, we found no evidence of association, though larger studies are needed to examine the role of uptake on more holistic measures of sexual satisfaction and well-being. We collected no personal identifiers to facilitate the reporting of sensitive data on sexual behaviours; however, survey responses may be subject to social acceptability bias. Sample selection could be subject to digital exclusion, and we do not know how representative our study sample is of men and gender-diverse individuals having sex with men using social networking and dating applications. However, consistent methodology and community-partnered implementation are strengths of this long-running survey series and consistently aid the characterisation of behavioural risk, currently absent from available national STI surveillance, as well as actual and intended preventative intervention uptake among key populations in the UK.

## Implications
Findings from this study illustrate a community sample of men and gender-diverse individuals having sex with men with considerable interest in the use of novel biomedical STI interventions, which is not dissimilar to the high uptake seen of HIV-PrEP and other STI and viral hepatitis vaccination in UK among key groups. As seen in the PrEP Impact Trial, an implementation trial assessing HIV-PrEP eligibility and uptake in the UK from 2017–2020 [ ], eligibility for trial places quickly outstripped availability at the onset of the trial (10,000, increasing to 26,000), largely attributable to early knowledge and engagement facilitated by community organisations [ , ]. A significant proportion of our community sample indicated likely uptake of these preventative interventions with high correlation of ITU for both, signalling the benefit of shared education and offer of prevention interventions within SHS or outreach settings. Participants at greater risk of STIs were more likely to report ever using STI prophylaxis as well as doxyPEP and 4CMenB ITU, suggesting an appropriate assessment of personal sexual risk, however, we did find potential sociodemographic and SHS engagement-based uptake differences common in uptake of other preventative interventions such as mpox vaccination and HIV-PrEP.
Given limited empirical evidence [ , ], it is unclear whether doxyPEP will increase the development of AMR in STIs and non-STI bacteria. However, this is a key area of concern, and a focus for surveillance and research. While there is no recommendation for the use of doxyPEP as STI prevention in the UK at the time of writing, there are early indications of knowledge of antibiotic PEP, as well as uptake through private or off-license purchasing. Community-led knowledge mobilisation efforts [ ] have likely boosted awareness of evidence-based uptake regimens associated with STI incidence declines in GBMSM, now recommended in the United States [ , ]. At present, the upcoming UK doxyPEP guidelines will likely influence the decision of implementation across SHS. Also, the JCVI recommendation for a targeted opportunistic gonorrhoea vaccination programme using 4CMenB is awaiting approval by health ministers in the UK. As we found few studies exploring acceptability of both doxyPEP or 4CMenB among men and gender-diverse individuals having sex with men, we suggest further studies investigating preferred prevention interventions to identify knowledge gaps and health concerns that may influence uptake. While implementation of both doxyPEP and 4CMenB vaccination would likely be through free and confidential SHS in the UK, this may not be the case in other countries. Given the considerable interest in doxyPEP and 4CMenB in the UK, packaging education and outreach that includes a range of preventative interventions will be key in optimising sexual health related contacts and ensuring informed use in key populations.

## Conclusion
While regular testing, condom promotion, and treatment as prevention remain an integral foundation to STI prevention in the UK, these approaches have not curbed rapid increases in STI diagnoses among GBMSM and other key populations in the last decade. Novel prevention interventions should be considered to supplement existing control strategies. As adoption of doxyPEP, 4CMenB vaccination and other interventions across SHS is considered in the UK, future guidelines and health promotion messaging must be carefully crafted alongside clinical experts and community partners given intervention complexity, implications to sexual behaviour and AMR, and the risk of presenting conflicting public health messages regarding antibiotic stewardship. Robust monitoring and evaluation will be crucial to understand the impact of doxyPEP and 4CMenB use on AMR and STI incidence in key populations if rolled out across SHS. Given lessons learned from the implementation of HIV prevention interventions, the magnitude of community interest and uptake must not be underestimated and there will be a need to ensure equitable access to these interventions to those in greatest need [ ]. There will be a similar need for equity considerations in health promotion, patient education, and uptake across different service models, including those delivered primarily online, depending on local need. Minimising knowledge and potential accessibility barriers for those who may benefit from future STI preventative interventions must be considered from the outset of planning and embedded in implementation and monitoring to limit health inequalities and to facilitate empowered decision-making that benefits individual-level sexual wellbeing and autonomy.

## Supporting information
S1 Appendix

## Excerpt of RiiSH 2023 survey questions and preambles used for study outcome measures.
(DOCX)
S2 Appendix

## RiiSH 2023 participant flowchart.
(DOCX)
S3 Appendix

## Antibiotic regimens ever used as antibiotic post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) among RiiSH 2023 participants.
(DOCX)
S4 Appendix

## Age and ethnic group among RiiSH 2023 participants by recruitment site.
(DOCX)

We thank Elizabeth Fearon (University College London), Takudzwa Mukiwa (Terrence Higgins Trust), Will Nutland (The Love Tank) and Benjamin Weil (The Love Tank) for their review and contributions to the RiiSH 2023 survey. We thank Emmanuel Musah for review of our draft manuscript.
We acknowledge members of the National Institute for Health and Care Research Health Protection Research Unit (NIHR HPRU) in Blood Borne and Sexually Transmitted Infections (BBSTI) Steering Committee: Caroline Sabin, John Saunders, Catherine H. Mercer, Hamish Mohammed (previously Gwenda Hughes), Greta Rait, Ruth Simmons, William Rosenberg, Tamyo Mbisa, Rosalind Raine, Sema Mandal, Rosamund Yu, Samreen Ijaz, Fabiana Lorencatto, Rachel Hunter, Kirsty Foster and Mamooma Tahir.
 10.1371/journal.pgph.0003807.r001Decision Letter 0
KwanTsz HoAcademic Editor© 2024 Tsz Ho Kwan2024Tsz Ho Kwanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0

## Transfer Alert
This paper was transferred from another journal. As a result, its full editorial history (including decision letters, peer reviews and author responses) may not be present.

11 Jul 2024

PGPH-D-24-01329
Knowledge, uptake and intention to use antibiotic post-exposure prophylaxis and meningococcal B vaccine (4CMenB) for gonorrhoea among a large, online community sample of gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men in the UK
PLOS Global Public Health
Dear Dr. Ogaz,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Global Public Health. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
This paper addresses an important topic in shaping the future of biomedical STI prevention. While it is in general well-written, the reviewers provided valuable inputs for improving the manuscript. 
Please submit your revised manuscript by Aug 10 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at globalpubhealth@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pgph/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:

A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Tsz Ho Kwan, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS Global Public Health
Journal Requirements:
1. In your Methods section, please include additional information about your dataset and ensure that you have included a statement specifying whether the collection and analysis method complied with the terms and conditions for the source of the data.
2. Please amend your detailed Financial Disclosure statement. This is published with the article. It must therefore be completed in full sentences and contain the exact wording you wish to be published.
a. Please clarify all sources of funding (financial or material support) for your study. List the grants (with grant number) or organizations (with url) that supported your study, including funding received from your institution. 
b. State the initials, alongside each funding source, of each author to receive each grant.
c. State what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role in your study, please state: “The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.”
If you did not receive any funding for this study, please simply state: “The authors received no specific funding for this work.”"
3. In the online submission form you indicate that your data is not available for proprietary reasons and have provided a contact point for accessing this data. Please note that your current contact point is a co-author on this manuscript. According to our Data Policy, the contact point must not be an author on the manuscript and must be an institutional contact, ideally not an individual. Please revise your data statement to a non-author institutional point of contact, such as a data access or ethics committee, and send this to us via return email. Please also include contact information for the third party organization, and please include the full citation of where the data can be found.
4. Please provide separate figure files in .tif or .eps format.
For more information about figure files please see our guidelines: 
https://journals.plos.org/globalpublichealth/s/figures 
https://journals.plos.org/globalpublichealth/s/figures#loc-file-requirements 
5. Tables should not be uploaded as individual files. Please remove these files and include the Tables in your manuscript file as editable, cell-based objects. For more information about how to format tables, see our guidelines: 

https://journals.plos.org/globalpublichealth/s/tables

Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Does this manuscript meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria? Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions? The manuscript must describe methodologically and ethically rigorous research with conclusions that are appropriately drawn based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception. The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS Global Public Health does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This is a clearly written manuscript with compelling findings. However I have several comments and suggestions regarding the generalizability of the findings to the overall target population.
Overall
1) While the authors do mention limitations of the recruitment method, particularly the possibility of digital exclusion, this is a major concern with regard to potential generalizability of these findings. It would be helpful to provide some context for how representative this sample is of what is known about GBMSM in the UK, for example with regard to education level, race, etc.
2) Additionally, were demographics of the participants recruited through the community-cascaded link different from the remainder of the sample?
3) In addition to concerns about AMR mentioned in the discussion, are there other potential reasons why doxyPEP ITU may be lower than 4CMenB ITU? Eg, concerns about side effects, need for adherence to dosing/timing recommendations, etc.
4) This manuscript is understandably heavily focused on the UK, which does have a unique national health system that may influence both the findings and their immedicate implications. However are there implications of these findings that can be extrapolated to doxyPEP and 4CMenB public health messaging and programming outside the UK? This would be helpful for readers of a global public health journal.
Minor text comments:
Lines 107-108 “online click-throughs were not captured” – please explain this for readers not familiar with data collection through online surveys
Lines 198-199: “reaching 68% among those with markers of sexual risk” – in the table this appears to be 58%
Reviewer #2: In their manuscript, Ogaz et al. examine the knowledge, uptake and intention to use antibiotic post-exposure prophylaxis and meningococcal B vaccine for N. gonorrhoea infection among GBMSM in the UK. They observed that nearly half of respondents were highly likely to take up either strategy. The research question is of interest; however, there are certain issues that need to be considered.
There are three outcomes studied and the link between the three are not entirely obvious. One involves the actual use of antibiotics for PEP (which is not exclusively doxyPEP). The others involve intent to use two very different preventative strategies: doxyPEP and one-time vaccination to reduce infection:
- From the theory of planned behavior, intent is the single most important driver of using a given preventative measure. Why would half of respondents have intent to use doxyPEP, but only a small proportion have ever used it? The analysis could focus on the differences in determinants of those who have intent versus actual use, given the limitation that doxyPEP is not (yet) recommended in the UK and the questions were not asked on the same prevention strategy (i.e., “any antibiotic” for use versus “doxycycline” specifically for intent).
- Alternatively, GBMSM are confronted with two prevention strategies: doxyPEP or vaccination. What are the determinants of intending to use only doxyPEP, only vaccination or both versus none? This multinomial outcome could be more helpful in planning provisions or tailoring needs.
I would suggest that the authors focus on one of these research questions above.
It also seems that transgender women were included in the population (ln 109), but this could be a mistake. This key population is completely different than GBMSM and should either be considered separately (i.e., stratified) or not included in analysis.
Minor comments:
- ln 32. “Emerging evidence”? There were several RCT that confirmed this. Not sure if this evidence is still emerging.
- ln 49. What were the numbers and % of individuals responding with intention?
- ln 53. How are the authors defining “high levels”?
- ln 55-57. This sentence is ambiguous and cannot be concluded from the data provided. Please omit.
- ln 59. “unprecedented”? Were such increases not observed in the 1970s?
- ln 67. Should be “selection of AMR bacteria.”
- ln 69-74. Although important, it is unclear how these sentences relate to the research objective. Consider removing.
- ln 90. “… in preparation for potential use…” What does this mean?
- General comments in the methods: It would be helpful to state which questions were asked and how your definitions were made. Then have a separate section for the statistical analysis.
- Statistical analysis. It is unclear how the multivariable model was constructed. It seems that there was an a priori selection of covariables. Then the authors added all covariables with a p-value <0.05 in univariable analysis? Was there further selection (i.e., backwards stepwise selection) to create the final model? And how were issues such as collinearity or model fit assessed? (I am guessing that collinearity was the reason why the association between markers of sexual risk and doxyPEP ITU in the multivariable model, ln 214-215). From the information provided, I cannot replicate these analyses.
- ln 155. I would consider using a flow diagram of participant selection for the main manuscript.
- ln 162. I would plainly state, “the period from August 2023 to questionnaire” as “lookback period” is somewhat ambiguous.
- ln 172. Curious if there were any questions on how these individuals procured doxycycline (formally or informally)?
- Tables 2-4. It gives the covariables on which models were adjusted, but are these correct? Are these in addition to all other covariables listed in the column for the multivariable model?
- ln 208. What is the “age-adjusted model”?
- ln 240. Was “recommended for use in the UK” a part of the question in the questionnaire? If not, please omit.
- ln 250. Is there empirical evidence that doxyPEP could drive AMR?
- ln 259. “… but this may reflect the wider availability of STI testing in the UK”. Not sure I follow this argument.
- ln 287. How can we inform on the risks when we do not completely know what they are? This uncertainty might need to be highlighted.
- ln 305-326. HIV-PrEP is a very different in many respects to doxyPEP and the comparison is difficult to make. Moreover, doxyPEP is part of the CDC guidance in the United States (not just in “some US cities.”, ln 323). It is unclear how these data will be used to plan provisions (and this can be the focus point of an entirely new manuscript). Many of the policy recommendations are already stated in the conclusion paragraph. The paragraph needs to be removed.
Reviewer #3: Thank you to the authors for conducting this work. These estimates are highly informative for both research and policy development on novel biomedical interventions for bacterial STI preventions. I have a few comments regarding some of the language used in the article as well the clarifying some of the variables and modelling strategy.
1. These results are presented as among “gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men” but the inclusion criteria states that transgender women and other gender diverse individuals were included in the study. Is it possible to include further details on recruitment in the methods section (e.g., was the survey advertised as for gbMSM and some trans women ended up participating?) and clarify the language used in the article? In addition, please clarify how gender was measured (e.g., two step method vs single question).
2. Similarly, I understand the need to dichotomize the sexual orientation variable for the analyses, but it would be helpful to specify in the methods that the “bisexual” category is really an “other” category, and it may be worth considering re-labelling it.
3. Can you include more details in the methods section on how variables were selected for the multivariable modelling? Why were only sociodemographic variables that were statistically significant at p<0.05 used in the adjusted model? It appears as though only variables significant at p<0.05 in the bivariable models were then moved to an adjusted estimate, is that correct?
4. Please mention in the methods that the composite of sexual risk behaviour was a binary indicator (rather than a continuous or ordinal one).
5. Can you clarify the modelling strategy – is this one multivariable model per outcome or one adjusted model per predictor? It appears as though these are separate, adjusted models for each exposure-outcome association, but this would be helpful to clarify in the methods.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pgph.0003807.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
22 Aug 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers_RiiSH2023.docx
10.1371/journal.pgph.0003807.r003Decision Letter 1
KwanTsz HoAcademic Editor© 2024 Tsz Ho Kwan2024Tsz Ho Kwanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
26 Sep 2024

Knowledge, uptake and intention to use antibiotic post-exposure prophylaxis and meningococcal B vaccine (4CMenB) for gonorrhoea among a large, online community sample of men and gender-diverse individuals who have sex with men in the UK
PGPH-D-24-01329R1
Dear Ms Ogaz,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Knowledge, uptake and intention to use antibiotic post-exposure prophylaxis and meningococcal B vaccine (4CMenB) for gonorrhoea among a large, online community sample of men and gender-diverse individuals who have sex with men in the UK' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Global Public Health.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact globalpubhealth@plos.org.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Global Public Health.
Best regards,
Tsz Ho Kwan, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS Global Public Health
***********************************************************
The reviewer comments have been adequately addressed.
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Does this manuscript meet PLOS Global Public Health’s publication criteria? Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions? The manuscript must describe methodologically and ethically rigorous research with conclusions that are appropriately drawn based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception. The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS Global Public Health does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Please proofread as the edited text contains a few minor typos (eg, line 122 "sex a birth")
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********