pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10994280PMC10994280.110994280109942803857392110.1371/journal.pone.0298266PONE-D-23-364751Research ArticlePhysical SciencesChemistryChemical ReactionsCorrosionPhysical SciencesMaterials ScienceMetallurgyAlloysSteelEngineering and TechnologyEquipmentOptical EquipmentLasersPhysical SciencesChemistryElectrochemistryElectrolytesPhysical SciencesChemistryChemical ElementsZincPhysical SciencesChemistryElectrochemistryPhysical SciencesPhysicsClassical MechanicsContinuum MechanicsFluid MechanicsFluid DynamicsFluid FlowPhysical SciencesChemistryElectrochemistryElectrode PotentialsAccelerated corrosion of low carbon steel by oscillatory acidic streams generated with a bio-inspired claw device
Accelerated corrosion of low carbon steel by oscillatory acidic streamshttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0905-3945GodínezFrancisco A.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSoftwareSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing Montoya-RangelMarvinConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyResourcesSoftwareValidationWriting – original draft https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5529-9167MontoyaRodrigoConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSoftwareSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 
1
Instituto de Ingeniería, Unidad de Investigación y Tecnología Aplicadas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apodaca, Nuevo León, México

2
Facultad de Química, Unidad de Investigación y Tecnología Aplicadas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apodaca, Nuevo León, México
OsórioWislei RiuperEditor ]. Within this last category, where reciprocating flows play a predominant role, we can highlight applications such as oil well drilling [ ], heat exchangers in Stirling motors, pulse-tube cryocoolers and gas turbines [ – ]. On the other hand, among the most notable advances in the medical/health field include artificial hearts and ventricular assist devices whose design involves the utilization of different types of pumps (diaphragm, pusher-plate, peristaltic, centrifugal and axial flow) to produce pulsatile blood flow [ , ]. Further significant developments in the medical area are the microfluidic systems in which oscillatory and electroosmotic pumps or pneumatic micropumps are used to produce pulsatile flows for mimicking physiological systems, to alter or enhance cell cultures and for the automation of bioassays [ ]. In this research, a different and less conventional technique than the pumping technologies mentioned above was employed to produce oscillatory flows. The proposed technology consists of a mechanical device inspired by the snapping-claw mechanism of pistol shrimps to create high-speed liquid jets [ ]. The first version of the device was designed to be manually triggered to produce the sudden closure (by the contraction of rubber bands) of a pivoting claw and, consequently, a jet of cavitating fluid at a time, this was useful for studying the synergy between corrosion/cavitation/erosion in metallic samples immersed in a saline electrolyte [ ]. A redesign of the apparatus used in this work also includes a mobile claw but actuated with a four-bar mechanism driven in turn with an electric motor whose angular speed is adjustable, in this way it is possible to generate a reciprocating motion of the claw and thus an oscillatory flow together with the production of jets and the shedding of vortices at a controlled frequency. It was first thought to follow up on the research reported in [ ] and consequently employ saline electrolytes to experimentally study the accelerated corrosion of low-carbon steel samples. Nevertheless, the highly complex nature of the oxide layers that form on the iron surface, particularly in corrosive environments containing NaCl [ – ], and the exceptional adherence of some of these layers to the surface, even withstanding oscillatory streams, led to the decision of eliminating this variable by employing an acidic environment. Acid solutions are commonly used in different areas of industry as pickling, cleaning, descaling, and oil-well acidizing. Acidic solutions are often employed to eliminate unwanted scale and rust in various industrial processes. Although acid solutions find widespread use in industry, they pose a significant challenge for steel due to its severe corrosion in acidic environments. During the acidizing stimulation process, hydrochloric, hydrofluoric, acetic, or formic acids are introduced into the well, leading to serious corrosion problems. Without corrosion inhibitors, the overall corrosion rate (CR) can be remarkably high (≥100 mm/year) and may escalate exponentially with rising temperatures and acid concentrations [ ]. Oil-well acidizing, for example, entails injecting acids into well systems, which are composed of steel tubes. The choice of acids used depends on the characteristics of the underground reservoir, and the treatment typically involves injecting acids at various concentrations. The most frequently utilized conventional acids are HCl, HF, acetic, and formic acids. However, numerous different combinations of these acids have also been employed in various scenarios [ ]. The majority of acidizing treatments utilize HCl at concentrations ranging from 5% to 28% [ ]. HCl offers an advantage over other mineral acids in acidizing operations because it forms metal chlorides, which exhibit high solubility in the aqueous phase [ ]. Due to the aforementioned issues, the acidizing process necessitates a high level of corrosion protection for tubular materials and other equipment used. However, prior to implementing any protective measures, it is imperative to thoroughly assess the corrosion rate of the equipment under these chemical conditions. The experiments in this study aimed to investigate the accelerated corrosion of thin low-carbon steel specimens immersed in an oscillating acidic stream. The exposed surface of each specimen to the flow remained as bare steel, while the opposite side was coated with a zinc layer. The corrosion-erosion process was electrochemically monitored from the beginning of each test until the steel was perforated and the zinc was detected, providing the average dissolution rate in the most relevant pit on the metal surface. To complement the electrochemical measurements, a laser was employed to shine on the hidden face where the zinc was deposited, and a video camera was installed to continuously observe the surface of the sample exposed to the flow until the first light spot was identified, thus indicating the time and location of the material puncture. The electrochemical monitoring and the illumination method yield pitting ocurrence times with a maximum difference of one hour, which is acceptable considering the stochastic and complex nature of the synergistic process between corrosion and erosion caused by flow. These findings promise a substantial leap forward in localized corrosion detection. They pave the way for the creation of sensors utilizing the interaction between two metals, introducing an innovative technology capable of efficiently detecting the impact of electrolyte flows in diverse regimes.

## Materials and methods

## Mechanical device

 illustrates the mechanical apparatus used for accelerated corrosion tests. The cyclic opening and closing motion of the mobile claw is achieved by means of a conventional four-bar mechanism driven by an electric motor. The oscillating up and down motion of the output link (ol), indicated by the arrow (14), is transmitted to the mobile claw by means of the link (7). Of course, the opening and closing speeds of the mobile claw are controlled by the speed of rotation of the motor shaft, whose direction of rotation is shown by the arrow (15), and also by the arrangement and dimensions of the bars that make up the mechanism.
 
 shows in its upper part a sequence of movements of the mobile claw; the starting position is when it is closed at θ = 5.4°. The claw gradually opens counterclockwise until it reaches the maximum opening when θ = 34.3°. After this point, the claw begins its closing motion in the clockwise direction, an intermediate position when it rotates in this orientation is θ = 22.1°, in the final state the claw is closed reaching the same starting position when θ = 5.4°, thus ending a complete cycle of motion. On the other hand, the continuous curve in blue represents the angular displacement as a function of time θ(t). This curve was obtained using the Tracker software [ ] by analyzing a total of 3 videos of the angular motion of the claw for a motor rotation speed of about 150 rpm. The angular velocity curve ω(t) was obtained by numerically differentiating (using central differences) the curve representing θ(t). The angular velocities that characterize the motion of the claw with the proposed device reach maximum values in the order of 6 rad/s. This value contrasts sharply with the 180 rad/s developed by a claw system designed to produce cavitating flows [ – ], which is used to study the damage in metallic samples due to synergistic effects between corrosion-erosion-cavitation [ ]. depicts the flow velocity (induced by the mobile claw) versus time curve. This line was estimated from a video analysis by calculating the filling/emptying volume V(t) of the socket formed by the fixed and mobile claws as well as the two supporting side plates, as shown in and S1A Fig in . Also in the analysis it was necessary to calculate the volumetric flow , as well as the area of the mouthpiece A(t) through which the fluid is sucked and expelled, depending on whether the socket is filled or emptied, respectively. A more detailed explanation of the approach employed is given in . The inset at the lower left of shows a snapshot of the opening motion of the claw as it moves counterclockwise as indicated by the arrow in blue. The red arrow points to streaklines drawn with red dye injected at port (E); clearly the flow develops to the left (black arrow) filling the back of the socket and the dye streaks show a wavy fluctuating type of motion suggesting the possibility of dealing with a transitional or even turbulent flow [ ]. The average flow velocity during the filling of the socket is 0.321m/s (represented by a dotted line, see ), thus a Reynolds number of Re ≈ 1920 can be estimated (assuming a characteristic length ϵ = 6mm, please refer to ), which rules out a turbulent flow indicating a transient regime. On the other hand, the inset at the upper right of shows a snapshot of the flow characteristics as the socket volume empties while the claw closes in a clockwise direction, as indicated by the blue arrow. In this case, a green dye was released from port (F). Now the flow develops to the right (black arrow), and downstream vorticities (indicated by the green arrows) are observed just outside the mouthpiece, something similar has been reported with other claw systems [ , , ]. Likewise, the streaklines show the typical fluctuations that suggest a transient or even turbulent flow regime. To discern between these two possibilities, the average flow velocity was also estimated giving a value of 0.394m/s and thus a Re ≈ 2356. This result indicates a transitional flow. It is important to note that the calculation of Reynolds numbers was made considering the properties of water under constant laboratory conditions, T = 20°C and P = 101.2 kPa. This does not lead to considerable errors in our estimations since the solution used for the experiments was prepared with a low concentration of HCl, so the properties of the solution are very close to those of water [ ]. The findings described above clearly show the capability of the mechanical device to produce oscillating flows defined by a period of T = 0.4s. In terms of a Strouhal number (St), which represents the ratio of inertial forces due to the local acceleration of the flow to the inertial forces due to the convective acceleration, one has that [ , ]
 St=fAv=0.32
(1)
where A = is the amplitude of claw oscillation (A ≈ 50mm, see ), f = claw oscillation frequency (f = T−1 = 2.5Hz), and v = flow rate (v = 0.394m/s).
 Also in the present context, f represents the vortex shedding frequency. This detachment of vortical structures is a characteristic phenomenon at intermediate Strouhal numbers [ , ] such as that estimated with .
Another important dimensionless parameter to describe the oscillatory flow generated with the apparatus is the Womersley number (Wo), which compares the transient inertial effects to viscous forces. Wo can be defined in terms of the St and Re numbers as [ ]
 Wo=ReSt2≈19
(2)
this Womersley number value indicates that the oscillatory inertial force dominates the dynamics and strongly modifies the mean flow profile. In this regime, when the pressure gradient is reversed, it takes some time before the pressure gradient can change the direction of flow, leading to a phase change between the fluid flow and the pressure gradient.
It is worthy of note that the design of the mechanical apparatus allows working at much lower angular velocities to produce laminar flows. Nevertheless, it was decided to conduct the experiments in transient regimes, since the shear stresses on the exposed surface of the samples (and therefore the erosive-corrosive effects) are expected to be more accentuated than in laminar streams [ ]. On the other hand, it is also important to mention that when the motor is operated at speeds above 250 rpm, mechanical vibrations are induced throughout the device that can hinder both electrochemical and optical sensing.

## Electrodeposition of zinc
The electrodeposition of zinc onto steel was conducted within a two-electrode cell, as illustrated in . For the anode, a high-purity GoodFellowTM zinc wire (containing 99.99 wt. % Zn, 5 PPM Cd, 7 PPM Si, less than 1 PPM Cu, 5 PPM Mn, and 15 PPM Pb with 25 PPM Fe) was utilized. Meanwhile, a 25 μ m-thick AISI 1010 shim stock steel served as the cathode (substrate). Before the zinc plating process, the steel surface underwent polishing using 800-grit SiC emery paper, followed by a 15-second immersion in a 15 wt. % hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution at 25°C. The deposition area was standardized at 1 cm2, by masking the remaining area of one side of the electrode and the entirety of the opposite side with 3MTM electroplating tape, with a 1.5 cm separation between the zinc electrode and the steel shim. The electrolyte comprised a 1:1 volume ratio of 15 wt. % HCl acid solution and deionized water. The total volume of electrolyte in the system was 60 cm3, and the electrodeposition procedure was conducted within a 100 cm3 glass beaker. Zinc was electrodeposited onto the steel surface utilizing an external power source (BK-Precision 9104), which supplied a direct current density of 0.7 A·cm−2 at 5 V for a duration of 15 minutes at 25°C. Subsequent to deposition, the samples underwent rinsing with acetone and deionized water, followed by air-drying at room temperature. It is worth noting that we have assumed that Zn coating results in a homogeneous layer of constant thickness and no pores. This of course, may not be entirely true and may affect the detection.
 

## The electrochemical cell and the OCP measurements
The metallic sample (AISI 1010 steel shim stock with one side coated with zinc) was attached on the mechanical device’s fixed claw, verifying that the steel side was exposed to the electrolyte and the Zn side was insulated and glued to the to the acrylic material (PMMA) from which the components of the device were manufactured. The metallic sample served as the working electrode, a silver/silver chloride reference-electrode (RE) (Sigma-Aldrich) was placed adjacent to the lower claw and a graphite rod was used as the counter electrode. The electric connections, to measure the steel Open Circuit Potential (OCP), were mounted as depicted in .
It is important to note that a waterproof-coated copper wire (refer to ) was employed to connect the sample to the potentiostat. A rectangular tab on the sample was welded to the wire and this joint was insulated with epoxy resin to prevent any liquid filtrations that might impact the electrochemical measurements.
 The exposed area (circular shape, see ) of the working electrode was about 0.126 cm2, while the global volume of a 2 wt. % HCl solution was 19 L. Before exposing the working electrode to the corrosive medium, the area was ground using 800 grit silicon carbide paper, cleaned with soapy water, rinsed with distilled water, and degreased with acetone. The OCP of the steel surface was measured at a scan rate of 12 dates/min by using a Bio-Logic SP-300 potentiostat.
The OCP measurements were performed both in static and dynamic environments (oscillating streams). At the beginning of the test, the sample was immersed in a static solution to obtain the initial OCP for 20 minutes and subsequently, the sample was exposed to oscillatory streams. The duration of the tests was sufficient to allow for the complete perforation of steel (25 μm thickness) by initial pits. Additionally, extra hours were allocated to study any potentially interesting behaviors.

## Optical configuration and visual tracking of the metallic surface
A description of the optical system is shown in . The circular cross-sectional face of the first tip of an optical fiber was placed in direct contact with a green laser beam (532 nm), while the second tip of the fiber was passed through a borehole in the fixed claw. In this way, the circular cross face (through which the laser light is transmitted) of the second tip matched and entered in contact with the back face of the sample where the zinc was electrochemically deposited, see .
Clear cyanoacrylate glue was employed to uphold and secure contact between the fiber face and the Zn-coated sample face. This method also facilitated a strong fixation of the metal sample to an inner acrylic surface of the fixed claw, preventing fluid penetration around the sample edges. As a result, the Zn was exposed to laser light while remaining isolated from the external flow.
A Full HD webcam with a resolution of 1080p and a frame rate of 30 fps was used in the tests. The distance between the camera lens and the exposed sample surface was set at L1 = 12 cm, see . A USB cable was used to connect the camera to a PC and visualize the sample surface. In addition, the sample surface was illuminated with a 100 W LED lamp. This was placed at about L2 = 40 cm from the sample in a position close to one of the tank walls. The webcam was controlled through the specialized SkyStudio Pro software [ ] to take pictures every 10 minutes over the course of each experiment. The laser, lamp and electric motor (see ) were connected to an Arduino UNO board to control the switching on and off of each of these elements (more details on the electrical connections can be found in ).
This allowed the application of duty cycles that included intervals of oscillatory flows (when neither the lamp nor the laser were active), alternating with periods of no flow (static conditions, during which the laser and lamp were alternately switched on and off).
In more detail, each test began with the motor running and thus with the device continuously generating oscillatory flow for three uninterrupted hours. The motor was then turned off for one hour during which no flow was generated, then the motor was turned back on and so on till “m” number of flow/no-flow cycles were completed until perforation of the sample was observed. Note that for the test corresponding to , m = 12 cycles were completed. During each hour of motor rest, the laser was activated for 60 s, followed by deactivation. Subsequently, the lamp was switched on for 540 s, after which it was turned off, initiating a new cycle by reactivating the laser. This was done six times to cover each hour where no flow is generated. The above configurations and settings allowed to follow the time evolution of corrosion/erosion damage on the samples and to identify over time the laser light spots passing through the specimens.
 

## Image processing
The images were digitally processed using the Python programming language to determine both the number of pits and the area of the laser spots at different times during the experiment. The digital processing consisted of a series of steps:
i) Converting the photos into monochrome images,
ii) Performing image segmentation using the thresholding method, which involved dividing the image pixels based on an intensity threshold related to image discontinuities,
iii) Applying a filtering process with various masks [ ] to define the study area while avoiding edges (a mask was created for each processed image at a specific time due to the displacement induced by the mechanical vibrations of the device), and
iv) Edge detection, which entailed identifying discontinuities in the segmented image (white pixels) and enclosing them with lines related to the laser dots representing pits.

## Determination of the corrosion rate under activation control and no flow conditions
While the primary focus of this research pertains to localized corrosion under oscillatory acidic streams, this section elucidates the methodology for calculating corrosion rates under non-flow conditions, assuming uniform corrosion. This is undertaken to establish a theoretical framework for comparison with the steel dissolution rate in actual operating conditions, providing insights into the potential aggressiveness of the conditions generated with the mechanical device.
Both the polarization resistance Rp and the Tafel extrapolation methods were utilized to determine the corrosion rate of ISI 1010 shim stock steel at room temperature in a 2.0% wt HCl solution. This was done using a three-electrode arrangement and a Bio-logic potentiostat (SP-300). A graphite rod served as counter electrode, while an Ag/AgCl electrode was used as reference electrode. For the anodic and cathodic polarizations in the Rp method, the conditions involved a polarization of ± 0.025 V starting from the potential of corrosion, with a scan rate of 0.001 V/min. The instantaneous corrosion current density, denoted as icorr, was determined using [ , ], where βa and βc represent the anodic and cathodic Tafel slopes (commented below in the Tafel extrapolated method), respectively, while Rp stands for Polarization Resistance in ohms. This resistance is defined as the ratio between the applied voltage and the variation in current i when the metal experiences slight polarization (0.020–0.05 V).
 icorr=βaβc2.3(βa+βb)Rp
(3)
Regarding the Tafel extrapolation method, icorr is graphically obtained by extrapolating the linear segments of both anodic and cathodic reactions up to the corrosion potential on the E vs. log(i) plane. Such linear segments have βa and βc slopes, respectively, which were calculated with a polarization of 0.3 V and 0.6 V from the corrosion potential in both cathodic and anodic directions, under a scan rate of 0.006 V/min.
In order to calculate the corrosion rate (CR), Faraday’s law of electrolysis was used as expressed in [ ]. Here, M represents the atomic mass of iron (58.845), n denotes the valence change, F is Faraday’s constant, and ρ is the density of iron (7.874 g/cm³).
 CR=icorrMnFρ
(4)
At this point, it is important to bear in mind that, while Rp and Tafel extrapolation tests provide swift and effective corrosion rate assessments under static conditions, there exist additional electrochemical techniques such as Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) that furnish valuable insights into corrosion dynamics. EIS accomplishes this by scrutinizing intricate impedance characteristics across a spectrum of frequencies, promising to unveil nuanced insights into the electrochemical dynamics of such systems. The establishment of an equivalent circuit further refines the interpretative framework, providing a comprehensive understanding of corrosion phenomena, even in dynamic environments and non-aqueous electrolytes [ , ]. However, while electrochemical methods provide valuable insights into corrosion behavior, the extrapolation of these results to real-world conditions requires careful consideration of the differences between laboratory setups and actual application environments. Many real-world applications involve dynamic conditions, such as cyclic loading, temperature fluctuations, pulsatile flows, etc. These dynamic factors can influence corrosion mechanisms and rates differently than static laboratory conditions. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there is no existing corrosion test conducted under oscillatory streams. Nonetheless, it is important to mention that while intermittent Rotatory Disc Electrode tests could potentially be compared with the current device performance, it is anticipated that distinct results may arise due to the inherent differences in the nature of each device.

## Results and discussion

## Corrosion rate under activation control
In relation to the Rp analysis, the corrosion rate was calculated as 0.6771 , while employing the Tafel extrapolation method resulted in a corrosion rate of 0.7582 . As is well known, each method presented its own set of advantages and disadvantages. For instance, the Rp method offers a trend of the corrosion rate at each moment during an experiment. Theoretically, it is not necessary to polarize the sample beyond ±0.020 V from the corrosion potential, whether in the anodic or cathodic direction. Nevertheless, as indicated by , in order to calculate CR also the Tafel slopes are necessary, requiring broader polarization values. On the other hand, the Tafel extrapolation method necessitated the extrapolation of the linear portions of both anodic and cathodic reactions up to the corrosion potential to determine icorr. Subsequently, the corrosion rate was computed using Faraday’s law ( ). The average corrosion rate obtained was 0.7177 , which is lower than the corrosion rate reported by Kousar et al. [ ] (3.75 ± 0.07 ) in 1 M HCl. It is important to note that our experiments were conducted in a 2.0 wt% HCl solution, which is approximately half the concentration used by Kousar [ ]. This difference in acid concentration may account for the observed variation in the corrosion rate. In fact, Alzahrani et al. [ ] reported that the corrosion rate of low carbon steel in HCl media is directly proportional to the acid concentration. However, when compared to results obtained in neutral electrolytes such as 3 wt% NaCl (0.0135 [ ]), the corrosion rate was much higher. Notably, it is essential to highlight that the corrosion rate in acidic solutions is approximately 50 times faster than in neutral conditions. In summary, within such a stagnant acidic solution, the sample, with a thickness of 25 microns, would experience perforation in less than 15 days (precisely 12.5 days), aligning with existing literature. Nonetheless, it is important to bear in mind that these results have been obtained under two very particular considerations: zero-flow conditions and uniform corrosion. It is evident that the expected outcomes under oscillatory streams and in the presence of localized corrosion will be much more aggressive. However, having a benchmark is always crucial for conducting a proper evaluation of such results.

## Electrochemical behavior under oscillatory acidic streams

 illustrates the evolution of the open circuit potential (OCP) of the iron surface concerning immersion time under flow and no-flow conditions. In both scenarios, distinct regions emerge characterized by two different potentials as shown in . During the period subjected to flow conditions the potential exhibits a relatively higher value (Pf), while during the period subjected to static conditions (no-flow) the potential displays a comparatively lower value (Pnf).
 As indicated in , in the initial moments of the OCP measurement, the potential remains consistent around -0.499 V (point A). However, as the mechanical device is activated and the flow interacts with the steel surface of the sample, the potential goes to -0.4518 V (point B). This shift could be attributed to a reduction in the resistance of the cathodic reaction, stemmed from an increased dissolved oxidizing agent within the electrolyte surrounding the steel sample [ ]. Over time, such potential experiences a temporary recovery, eventually stabilizing at an average potential of -0.4683 V during the initial three-hour period.
In contrast, under static conditions, the potential suffers an abrupt drop to -0.5530 V (point C). This alternating behavior persisted until point D, where the potential drops suddenly below -0.6222 V (point E) due to the appearance and growth of pits that penetrated the 25-micron thickness of the steel. In fact, the occurrence of localized corrosion in shim steel indicates that the electrolyte has reached and dissolved a certain amount of Zn content. During the initial localized dissolutions, only a small amount of Zn is reached by the electrolyte ( at 26 hours). Therefore, the OCP does not decrease. However, as the steel dissolution increases (around an hour), more electrolyte reaches the Zn, causing the OCP to decrease to a value between the potential of the steel and Zn. Consequently, the galvanic couple is consolidated at a potential around -0.6222 V [ ]. It is essential to note that previously, a steel shim (pre-coated with Zn) underwent perforation using a tiny pin, exposing only a small area of Zn. The resulting open circuit potential was -0.565 V, progressively decreasing to -1.0 V as the Zn area expanded with an increasing number of perforations (once the Zn is exhausted the potential slowly shifts towards less negative values).
 This highlights the accuracy of the electrochemical design in detecting with acceptable precision the time at which the steel undergoes complete perforation due to localized corrosion phenomena. In other words, these results affirm the ability of the electrochemical sensor (steel-Zn system) to accurately determine the average rate of pitting progression, which is corroborated by the optical observations discussed in the following section.
As is well known, the behavior of the OCP provides information about the thermodynamic stability of the sample surface in corrosive media. Therefore, the trend and the high-frequency spikes in the potential signal represent changes in the oxidation tendency of the surface due to the instability of thousands of chemical reactions at the interface of steel and electrolyte. In reference to (zoom of ), it can be observed that the potential Pf remains nearly unchanged on average during flow, in contrast to the Pnf potential. According to Gou et al. [ ], the OCP remains constant over time due to two situations: either the anodic and cathodic reactions are unaffected by the conditions of OCP measurement, or both reactions influence each other, resulting in a constant OCP. Rapid flow on the sample surface enhances the rate of oxidizing agent mass transfer to the electrode surface and reduces the thickness of the diffusion boundary layer [ ]. As a result, flow increases the rate of reduction reaction on the surface, as well as enhances the anodic reaction leading, under some conditions, to the growth of a passive film. Consequently, in theory, only insignificant changes in potential can be observed [ ]. This suggests that the electrolyte flow should not alter the OCP obtained under static conditions. Despite the present findings indicating a clear difference (Δp) between both Pf and Pnf, such a difference significantly decreases over time. Both Pf and Pnf progressively approach the initial open circuit potential (-0.499 V) as the steel shim undergoes significant dissolution.
Additionally, high-frequency spikes are present and visually similar in both static and dynamic conditions of OCP measurements. However, the potential data of the no-flow signal has a higher standard deviation (0.00281) compared to the signal under flow (0.00186). It has been reported that frequent and continuous spikes in the potential signal can be attributed to the uniform corrosion process occurring on the surface of the carbon steel electrodes in acidic media [ ]. This indicates a highly unstable electrochemical process on the steel surface when the standard deviation value is high [ ]. In a certain sense, this explains why the sample under no-flow conditions exhibits a higher tendency to uniform corrosion (early corrosion stage). However, as the experimental evolved, a high susceptibility to localized corrosion was present, as shown in Figs and . In these instances, the acid flow on the steel surface plays an important role in this type of corrosion, due to defects inherent to the steel shim (such phases in the metal matrix and surface scratches [ ]) and defects generated by the experimental set-up. These factors likely alter the shear stresses and contribute to the occurrence of localized corrosion.
 

## Corrosion behavior by image analysis
Top views of the metallic samples under the electrolyte are presented in with and without white illumination in order to better appreciate the green laser light located beneath the metallic sample. As anticipated, during the initial hours of experimentation, it was not possible to discern any laser spot, indicating that the steel sample remained free from perforations generated by pits. Nonetheless, as the exposure time in the electrolyte continued, small laser spots were registered after 26 hours. What is interesting to note is that the first pits were observed in areas close to the edges of the sample. As previously mentioned, cyanoacrylate was successfully used to fix the sample and prevent leakage of the electrolyte. It is worth stressing that no filtrations of electrolyte were detected at the metal/coating interface of the work electrodes. Otherwise, the electrochemical potential would change abruptly before the generation of pits could occur. However, we recognize the possibility of having left unevenly sized resin edges around the samples, which may affect electrolyte flow and shear stresses on the exposed metal. The lack of symmetry in these imperfections suggests non-uniform corrosion at the edges and in the area exposed to flow. Sample geometry and size may also contribute to corrosion near the boundaries. Future research will certainly need to investigate the flow velocity near the sample, using techniques such as PIV, and complement with CFD simulations to better understand the impact of geometry and edges as well as the corrosion mechanisms that give rise to pitting in these zones. Beyond 26 hours, the number of pits increased, becoming more discernible from the surrounding non-corroded areas. On the other hand, images captured by using white illumination revealed (from the 13 hours) the generation of H2 (red circles in ) resulted from the reduction of the H+ ions present in the acidic electrolyte. Such a cathodic reaction indicates that its counterpart (the steel dissolution) has already started. In short, previous remarks prove the complementarity of both kinds of images. On the one hand, images with white illumination are not able to reveal the first pits but the first hydrogen bubbles, whereas dark images (with the green laser activated) certainly provide quantitative information of the generation of consolidated pits but nothing about the cathodic reaction.
To achieve satisfactory detection results for hidden pitting, the images underwent digital processing, as depicted in . Thresholding was used as the segmentation process by assigning a binary value to each pixel on the studied area. As is well known, such a process is based on pixel intensities and a limit value determined by the intensity of light (passing through the sample in this work). This process aimed to create a sharp contrast between foreground objects (active points) and the background. It is worth noting that the white area represents the laser spot allowed by pitting corrosion, stemming from a rapid localized corrosion mechanism that led to substantial material loss (both in steel and Zn) in very confined regions. Such a non-uniform corrosion, manifested as pits, arises from the non-homogeneous nature of the electrode surface and the accumulation of stress induced by repeated mechanical load cycling. Upon comparing both Fig (Figs and ), it becomes evident that counting the number of pits through visualizing the green spots becomes unfeasible even at 34 hours due to light saturation issues. Nevertheless, employing digital image processing allows for pit counting even at 35 hours, albeit with a certain degree of uncertainty.

 illustrates the progression of both the number of pits and the area of active zones over time. Starting from 34 hours, the results obtained from the quantification analysis exhibit a high degree of uncertainty due to the extensive overlap of different contributions from active points (active zones). This is attributed to the saturation of the laser spot, wherein the brightness exceeds the camera sensor capacity. Consequently, the region of laser spot saturation was delineated as an area where associating the number of pits with the laser spot becomes unfeasible. Below such a saturation region, the quantification was much clearer.
 The pitting appearance rate represented by the 1st derivative of the number of pitting curve are presented in the inset of . The value of each horizontal red line in the inset corresponds to the slope of each black line in the main image. Although there is no a clear correlation between the occurrence rate of pits and the duration of exposure, it is possible to establish an average rate of 0.61 pits per hour before reaching the saturation threshold. This number increases significantly when accounting for uncertainty and considering 45 hours of exposure (2.73 pits per hour). In light of the fact that the laser intensity remained constant throughout the entire experimental duration, the spot area in pixels ( ) stands as a parameter with reduced measurement uncertainty, given that the saturation area is sufficiently low (approximately 6%). As a matter of fact, it has been documented [ ] that the method of laser detection through image saturation (employed in this study) relies on a predetermined threshold that is fine-tuned until the method yields a binary image with fewer than 10% white pixels.

## Conclusion
The most important findings of this research are summarized below:
The significant disparity (26 hours vs. 12.5 days, respectively) found when comparing the experimental perforation time under acidic flow-induced corrosion with the time under no-flow conditions (assuming homogeneous corrosion) vividly illustrates the aggressiveness of the conditions induced by the mechanical device.
The bio-inspired claw device, coupled with an innovative electrochemical cell design, enables Open Circuit Potential (OCP) tracking during acidic streams. This approach offers quantitative data on perforation points and pit growth rate approximations.
The formed galvanic couple between the steel surface and zinc coating exhibits a distinctive potential, providing a clear differentiation from the corrosion potential of the steel, even with initial pits.
Both electrochemical tracking and optical methods demonstrate reliability, with a one-hour maximum discrepancy in occurrence times. This reliability is crucial in understanding the complex and stochastic nature of flow-induced corrosion and erosion processes.
The illumination method not only verifies perforations but also precisely pinpoints pit locations on the sample.
The amalgamation of electrochemical tracking, optical setup, and image processing provides a powerful tool for corrosion detection and assessment.
In order to improve on and refine the methods presented here, it would be interesting to investigate the following important subjects in the future: different approaches to sample fixing and sealing; alternative metal deposition techniques and galvanic couples to guarantee constant coating thicknesses and homogeneity; application of microscopes for early pitting detection; and a thorough examination of the light spots to correlate their properties with the dimensions and configuration of the material perforations. In conclusion, this research opens exciting possibilities for effective corrosion monitoring and prevention across various industrial and research sectors, with potential applications in turbulent flows and biomedical fields, just to name a few.

## Supporting information
S1 Appendix

## Calculation of flow rate.
(PDF)
S2 Appendix

## Circuit to control the duty cycles of the motor-laser-lamp system.
(PDF)
S1 Figa) Mouthpiece area vs. time. b) Different opening positions of the mobile claw to show how the surface A (represented by the blue surface) varies as a function of the angular position and therefore of time. In position (1) the claw is in its initial condition with the smallest mouthpiece area, in position (2) the maximum opening is shown and consequently also A is maximum. c) Volume of the socket formed by the internal side walls of the two support plates (6), as shown in , the internal side walls of both the fixed and mobile claws and of course the area A of the mouthpiece. d) Two opening positions of the mobile claw to indicate the area A1 (shown in purple color), as well as the internal volume of the socket, the latter corresponding to the intermediate position (3). Clearly, the volume of the socket changes with the theta angle and also with time. The symbols on the A(t) and V(t) curves correspond to data obtained from area and volume measurements at different angular positions, respectively; the solid lines in both plots represent interpolations using cubic splines to smooth their appearance.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## Connections and components of the circuit used to control the switching on and off of the devices.
Relays to control the a) motor, b) laser, and c) lamp. d) Arduino UNO microcontroller, e) 532 nm (50 mW) laser, f) DC-DC boost converter to power the laser, g) 3mm diameter PMMA fiber optic cable.
(TIF)

 10.1371/journal.pone.0298266.r001Decision Letter 0
OsórioWislei RiuperAcademic Editor© 2024 Wislei Riuper Osório2024Wislei Riuper Osóriohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
21 Nov 2023

PONE-D-23-36475Accelerated corrosion of low carbon steel by oscillatory acidic streams generated with a bio-inspired claw devicePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Montoya,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
ACADEMIC EDITOR: Please, the Reviewers have suggested to a REVISION. Although, it seems that the manuscript deserves its publication, before a rebuttal letter detailing/commenting all suggestions should be provided.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 05 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Wislei Riuper Osório
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Please note that PLOS ONE has specific guidelines on code sharing for submissions in which author-generated code underpins the findings in the manuscript. In these cases, all author-generated code must be made available without restrictions upon publication of the work. Please review our guidelines at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/materials-and-software-sharing#loc-sharing-code and ensure that your code is shared in a way that follows best practice and facilitates reproducibility and reuse.
3. Please expand the acronym “UNAM-DGAPA” (as indicated in your financial disclosure) so that it states the name of your funders in full.
This information should be included in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: "UNAM-DGAPA-PAPIIT IG100623 program has financed this work. MMR
thanks UNAM-DGAPA for the postdoctoral fellowship throughout the program POSDOC."
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed.
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
5. Thank you for stating the following in the Acknowledgments Section of your manuscript: "UNAM-DGAPA-PAPIIT IG100623 program has financed this work. Montoya-Rangel thanks UNAM-DGAPA for the postdoctoral fellowship throughout the program POSDOC"
We note that you have provided funding information that is not currently declared in your Funding Statement. However, funding information should not appear in the Acknowledgments section or other areas of your manuscript. We will only publish funding information present in the Funding Statement section of the online submission form.
Please remove any funding-related text from the manuscript and let us know how you would like to update your Funding Statement. Currently, your Funding Statement reads as follows: "UNAM-DGAPA-PAPIIT IG100623 program has financed this work. MMR
thanks UNAM-DGAPA for the postdoctoral fellowship throughout the program POSDOC."
Please include your amended statements within your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
6. We note that you have stated that you will provide repository information for your data at acceptance. Should your manuscript be accepted for publication, we will hold it until you provide the relevant accession numbers or DOIs necessary to access your data. If you wish to make changes to your Data Availability statement, please describe these changes in your cover letter and we will update your Data Availability statement to reflect the information you provide.
7. Please upload a copy of Supporting Information Figure/Table/etc. Supporting Information S1 Appendix and S2 Appendix which you refer to in your text on page 12.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Dear authors, the manuscript is overall well written and the results are well discussed. However, I have some questions and suggestions before it is published in PLOS ONE. Below I present my points:
- The manuscript is appropriate for the subject matter. However, some sections could be simplified for better readability without sacrificing technical accuracy. Consider rephrasing complex sentences for clarity, particularly in the methodology section. A thorough proofreading for punctuation (such as comma usage) and sentence structure is recommended to enhance readability.
- The use of a webcam and lamp for visualization is mentioned, but additional information on the exact setup, calibration, and limitations of this approach would strengthen this section.
- In the results section, you've presented corrosion rates obtained through different methods (Rp analysis and Tafel extrapolation). How do these rates compare with those observed in real-world conditions, and what might be the reasons for any discrepancies? Can you provide more insights into how the performance of this device compares with existing corrosion testing methods? Additionally, could you elaborate on the implications of these findings for the practical application of your device?
- Establishing a theoretical framework for comparison is a good approach, but the manuscript might benefit from a more detailed explanation of this framework, including any assumptions or limitations.
- The paper would be better with a stronger conclusion section, succinctly summarizing the findings, following discussions of implications in the broader context of corrosion research and practical applications.
Reviewer #2: INTEREST:
Dear Editor,
I am writing to express my interest in the manuscript titled "Accelerated corrosion of low carbon steel by oscillatory acidic streams generated with a bio-inspired claw device" by Francisco A. Godínez and colleagues. The research discusses a mechanical device inspired by the pistol shrimp's claw, designed to create oscillating flows for studying corrosion rates in carbon steel. It details an innovative method using thin steel samples coated with zinc for electrochemical detection of corrosion, complemented by laser illumination and imaging to locate and count corrosion pits. I believe that the PLOS ONE Journal would be an appropriate venue for this work. However, to meet the exacting standards of this journal, there are key areas in which the manuscript could benefit from further refinement, especially in its presentation and analysis of results. I advocate for a thorough revision, taking into account the detailed feedback provided below.
COMMENTS:
Please consider the following specific recommendations for revision:
a) Why did the authors choose to use an electrolyte composed of a 1:1 volume ratio of 15 wt% HCl acid solution and deionized water for Zn electrodeposition on 1010 steel? Why didn't they use other baths that have much higher current efficiency?
b) The corrosion science literature shows that for a material to undergo localized pitting corrosion, it must be in a passive state. And, as I read the manuscript, I became a little confused, as the authors at some points in the manuscript talk about localized corrosion, metastable pits, repassivation, and at others about generalized corrosion. Here are some questions: (i) Is 1010 carbon steel in the passive state in a 2 wt. % HCl solution???; (ii) For such an explanation, it would be extremely important for the authors to present both the potentiodynamic polarization curves and the linear polarization curves (used to determine the Rp values, in the 2 wt. % HCl solution. Given the answer presented by the authors, perhaps it would be important to review the following statement contained in the manuscript “...It has been reported that spikes in the potential signal can be related to the occurrence of metastable pits and rapid repassivation in an electrochemical process [38] [39] [40], indicating a highly unstable electrochemical process on the steel surface when the standard deviation value is high [41]. This, in a way, elucidates why the sample under flow conditions exhibits reduced susceptibility to repassivation and a greater propensity for the pitting process...".
c) Before the exposure to the corrosive medium, how were the samples prepared? Were they polished, cleaned, or treated in any way? Surface conditions can significantly influence degradation behaviors.
d) When looking at Figure 7 of the manuscript, I get the impression that there are crevices forming at the metal/coating interface of work electrodes. Was there any special care taken to avoid this type of problem when isolating the area to be exposed to the corrosive environment? It would be important for the authors to make some mention of this and say what type of error this could lead to in the measurements.
e) When discussing Figure 5, the authors make the following comment: “...In contrast, under static conditions, the potential suffers an abrupt drop to -0.5530 V (point C). This alternating behavior persisted until point D, where the potential drops abruptly below -0.6222 V (point E) due to the appearance and growth of pits that penetrated the 25-micron thickness of the steel, exposing tiny surfaces of Zn. Subsequently, the signal converges towards potentials very close to OCP of the steel/Zn galvanic couple…”. To support this statement, why don't the authors perform potentiodynamic polarization measurements for the Zn coating and then superimpose these measurements on the steel polarization measurements? This way, the authors could empirically prove the value of the Zn/steel galvanic couple.
g) In my opinion, the conclusion must be more objective, reflecting the outcome of the work. Please be more concise and critical, highlighting the key findings. Additionally, it would be beneficial to offer suggestions for subsequent research and potential advancements in this domain.
Reviewer #3: Dear author,
The paper is interesting. In my frank opinion, it deserves to be published after minor revisions:
Minor revision of English is necessary.
The images are not in good resolution.
Viscosity can be changed with pressure, temperature and concentration. In formula 2, wouldn't it be necessary to take these variables into account within viscosity?
Why exactly use the green laser? Wouldn't it be more interesting to use a laser in the UV region? The UV laser simulates sunlight.
“The images were digitally processed using Python Programming Language to determine”. It would be interesting if you provided, as an attachment, the programming used.
“the polarization resistance Rp and the Tafel extrapolation methods were utilized to determine the corrosion rate”. How the externally induced mechanical oscillation affects the charge transfer of the system: In the Tafel extrapolation, the frequency of the electric current through the material is taken into account.
Example: formula 6:

https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9717/11/3/721

The study you did is very interesting and important. To emphasize the importance of this study, I suggest mentioning, for example in the introduction, other techniques for studying corrosion (currently used in static media, such as Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy), fuels such as electrolytes and different material manufacturing routes. Below are examples of articles that illustrate these points.

https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/00219983211029352

https://meridian.allenpress.com/corrosion/article-abstract/76/12/1109/447822/Silicon-Content-Affecting-Corrosion-Behavior-of

Reviewer #4: Dear authors, below are some comments and suggestions that I consider relevant to the work and doubts that may not have been clarified in the text:
1. It is known that the central objective is not to be the result of the corrosion test but there is a focus on this area as well. It is believed to be interesting to think about applying an equivalent circuit to obtain relevant information regarding corrosion parameters. Below is an indication of reading the articles: GARCIA, A. et al (2009) Electrochemical corrosion response of a low carbon heat treated steel in a NaCl solution. and GARCIA, A. et al. (2010) Electrochemical corrosion behaviour of a Ti-IF steel and a SAE 1020 steel in a 0.5M NaCl solution., where corrosion in steel is discussed.
2. I believe the explanation for the galvanic couple formation after the first pit appearance occurs is vague. Something expected did not happen.
3. The analysis of the formation of pits was never discussed regarding their appearance on the edges of the samples. Is there any influence on the sample preparation or its dimensions?
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Carlos Alberto Della Rovere
Reviewer #3: Yes: Prof. Dr. Yuri Alexandre Meyer
Reviewer #4: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0298266.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
20 Dec 2023

Reviewer #1: Dear authors, the manuscript is overall well written and the results are well discussed. However, I have some questions and suggestions before it is published in PLOS ONE. Below I present my points:
- The manuscript is appropriate for the subject matter. However, some sections could be simplified for better readability without sacrificing technical accuracy. Consider rephrasing complex sentences for clarity, particularly in the methodology section. A thorough proofreading for punctuation (such as comma usage) and sentence structure is recommended to enhance readability.
Thanks a lot for the comments, the authors appreciate the time and effort put in reviewing our work.
Some paragraphs in the methodology section were rephrased to make them more precise. They are listed below for better location in the revised manuscript.
A) It is important to note that a waterproof-coated copper wire (refer to Figure 4b) was employed to connect the sample to the potentiostat. A rectangular tab on the sample was welded to the wire and this joint was insulated with epoxy resin to prevent any liquid filtrations that might impact the electrochemical measurements.
B) Clear cyanoacrylate glue was employed to uphold and secure contact between the fiber face and the Zn-coated sample face. This method also facilitated a strong fixation of the metal sample to an inner acrylic surface of the fixed claw, preventing fluid penetration around the sample edges. As a result, the Zn was exposed to laser light while remaining isolated from the external flow.
C) This allowed the application of duty cycles that included intervals of oscillatory flows (when neither the lamp nor the laser were active), alternating with periods of no flow (static conditions, during which the laser and lamp were alternately switched on and off).
D) During each hour of motor rest, the laser was activated for 60 s, followed by deactivation. Subsequently, the lamp was switched on for 540 s, after which it was turned off, initiating a new cycle by reactivating the laser.
E) The deposition area was standardized at 1 cm2, by masking the remaining area of one side of the electrode and the entirety of the opposite side with 3MTM electroplating tape, with a 1.5 cm separation between the zinc electrode and the steel shim.
D) The images were digitally processed using the Python programming language to determine both the number of pits and the area of the laser spots at different times during the experiment. The digital processing consisted of a series of steps:
i) Converting the photos into monochrome images,
ii) Performing image segmentation using the thresholding method, which involved dividing the image pixels based on an intensity threshold related to image discontinuities,
iii) Applying a filtering process with various masks [29] to define the study area while avoiding edges (a mask was created for each processed image at a specific time due to the displacement induced by the mechanical vibrations of the device), and
iv) Edge detection, which entailed identifying discontinuities in the segmented image (white pixels) and enclosing them with lines related to the laser dots representing pits.
- The use of a webcam and lamp for visualization is mentioned, but additional information on the exact setup, calibration, and limitations of this approach would strengthen this section.
We welcome this suggestion. In response, we have added the following paragraphs to the revised manuscript:
“A Full HD webcam with a resolution of 1080p and a frame rate of 30 fps was used in the tests. The distance between the camera lens and the exposed sample surface was set at L1=12 cm. A USB cable was used to connect the camera to a PC and visualize the sample surface. In addition, the sample surface was illuminated with a 100 W LED lamp. This was placed at about L2= 40 cm from the sample in a position close to one of the tank walls.”
Note that figure 4 has been slightly modified to indicate with arrows the distances L1 and L2.
- In the results section, you've presented corrosion rates obtained through different methods (Rp analysis and Tafel extrapolation). How do these rates compare with those observed in real-world conditions, and what might be the reasons for any discrepancies?
Corrosion rates obtained through different methods, such as Rp analysis and Tafel extrapolation, may not always directly correlate with the corrosion rates observed in real-world conditions. There are several reasons for discrepancies between laboratory measurements and real-world scenarios:
Laboratory experiments often use controlled and simplified conditions that may not fully represent the complexity of real-world environments. Real-world conditions can involve various factors like temperature variations, impurities, microbial activity, and flow dynamics, which may influence corrosion differently than controlled laboratory conditions.
Surface preparation in laboratory studies may differ from real-world surfaces. The presence of contaminants, oxides, or passive layers on real-world surfaces can impact the corrosion resistance differently than clean and polished surfaces used in controlled experiments.
Corrosion rates obtained in laboratory experiments are often measured over relatively short periods. In real-world conditions, corrosion can occur over extended periods, and long-term exposure may lead to different corrosion mechanisms or rates.
Many real-world applications involve dynamic conditions, such as cyclic loading, temperature fluctuations, and variations in humidity. These dynamic factors can influence corrosion mechanisms and rates differently than static laboratory conditions.
In summary, while laboratory methods like Rp analysis and Tafel extrapolation provide valuable insights into corrosion behavior, the extrapolation of these results to real-world conditions requires careful consideration of the differences between laboratory setups and actual application environments. Conducting field tests or using advanced modeling techniques that account for a broader range of environmental variables can help improve the accuracy of corrosion rate predictions in practical applications.
 Can you provide more insights into how the performance of this device compares with existing corrosion testing methods? 
To the best of the authors' knowledge, there is no existing corrosion test conducted under oscillatory streams. However, it is noteworthy that the Rotating Disc Electrode (RDE) serves as a specialized electrochemical tool designed for the study of electrochemical reactions, particularly those occurring at the interface between an electrode and a solution under continuous flow conditions. This technique is highly valuable for investigating reaction kinetics, mass transport, and electrode processes. The rotating disc enhances mass transport, thereby mitigating concentration polarization effects, making it particularly instrumental in comprehending processes involving mass transport limitations or complex reaction mechanisms. So, while intermittent RDE tests could potentially be compared with the current device performance, it is anticipated that distinct results may arise due to the inherent differences in the nature of each device.
Additionally, could you elaborate on the implications of these findings for the practical application of your device?
On one hand, the combination of two original and independent methodologies—electrochemical and optical—has been developed to detect the exact moment when a metallic sample (of specific thickness) is fully perforated due to corrosion. The fact that both methodologies have recorded very similar results provides corrosion specialists with a powerful tool applicable in diverse settings for estimating the actual expected life of specific systems, such as pipelines.
On the other hand, as outlined in the introductory section, acid solutions find common usage in various industrial processes, including pickling, cleaning, descaling, and oil-well acidizing. Therefore, the practical application of both methodologies presented in this research is perfectly suited for such areas.
Concerning the mechanical device, as demonstrated previously [10, 18-20], by varying its closure rate it could even induce cavitation, offering a robust tool to generate different types of flows that can replicate various phenomena present in numerous industrial applications.
In summary, the aforementioned reasons pave the way for the development of corrosion rate sensors that register galvanic interactions between two metals (alongside optical laser detection). This introduces an innovative technology capable of efficiently detecting the impact of electrolyte flows under diverse regimes.
- Establishing a theoretical framework for comparison is a good approach, but the manuscript might benefit from a more detailed explanation of this framework, including any assumptions or limitations.
Thank you for this recommendation. The assumptions and limitations that in our opinion are the most important for this work are listed below:
Assumptions
1) Zn deposition gives rise to a homogeneous layer of constant thickness and no pores.
2) The glue used to firmly fix the sample also prevents fluid leakage (through the edges of the sample) underneath the sample into the Zn coating.
3) The glue used to fix the sample does not leave edges on its periphery that could affect the flow characteristics in this area and therefore the corrosive effects.
Limitations
1) The optical technique does not give an exact idea of the size of the pits, since what is detected are spots of light that are not necessarily the same size as the pits.
2) The developed technique does not allow detecting pitting in early stages of formation, only when the material has been perforated. 
3) When the motor is operated at speeds above 250 rpm, mechanical vibrations are induced throughout the device that can hinder both electrochemical and optical sensing.
Please note that the assumptions and limitations were paraphrased, and they were not added as a bullet list but were interspersed throughout the text as best suited.
- The paper would be better with a stronger conclusion section, succinctly summarizing the findings, following discussions of implications in the broader context of corrosion research and practical applications.
We agree with your assessment. In the new version of the manuscript we shortened the conclusions to make them more concise and clear. In order to enhance the suggested methods, we have highlighted a few topics that we think should be further investigated. Possible applications were also briefly mentioned.
Reviewer #2: 
INTEREST:
Dear Editor,
I am writing to express my interest in the manuscript titled "Accelerated corrosion of low carbon steel by oscillatory acidic streams generated with a bio-inspired claw device" by Francisco A. Godínez and colleagues. The research discusses a mechanical device inspired by the pistol shrimp's claw, designed to create oscillating flows for studying corrosion rates in carbon steel. It details an innovative method using thin steel samples coated with zinc for electrochemical detection of corrosion, complemented by laser illumination and imaging to locate and count corrosion pits. I believe that the PLOS ONE Journal would be an appropriate venue for this work. However, to meet the exacting standards of this journal, there are key areas in which the manuscript could benefit from further refinement, specially in its presentation and analysis of results. I advocate for a thorough revision, taking into account the detailed feedback provided below.
First of all thanks a lot for the comments, the authors appreciate the time and effort put in reviewing our work.
COMMENTS:
Please consider the following specific recommendations for revision:
a) Why did the authors choose to use an electrolyte composed of a 1:1 volume ratio of 15 wt% HCl acid solution and deionized water for Zn electrodeposition on 1010 steel? Why didn't they use other baths that have much higher current efficiency?
Increasing the concentration of HCl in a solution increases the number of ions and conductivity, allowing for efficient charge transfer. However, high concentrations can lead to the dominance of the hydrogen evolution reaction, decreasing the efficiency of the Zn electrodeposition process, as Reviewer mentions. Although it is possible to optimize the efficiency of Zn electrodeposition using ZnSO4 or ZnCl2, the presence of HCl only slightly inhibits charge transfer [1]. Regarding our research, the use of HCl solution for the deposition of Zn on steel allowed for the formation of a uniform and dense coating, which was visible to the naked eye. This subsequently facilitated the decrease in Open Circuit Potential (OCP) as the steel underwent dissolution. Consequently, we consider that the electrochemical sensor (steel-Zn system) developed in this research fulfills the initial requirements for our application. Nevertheless, if future research is conducted using this electrochemical sensor, we will consider using solutions with higher current efficiency for Zn deposition.
[1] J.-R. Park, H.-T. Kim, Mechanism of Zinc Electrodeposition in a Chloride Solution, (n.d.).
b) The corrosion science literature shows that for a material to undergo localized pitting corrosion, it must be in a passive state. And, as I read the manuscript, I became a little confused, as the authors at some points in the manuscript talk about localized corrosion, metastable pits, repassivation, and at others about generalized corrosion. Here are some questions: (i) Is 1010 carbon steel in the passive state in a 2 wt. % HCl solution???; (ii) For
such an explanation, it would be extremely important for the authors to resent both the potentiodynamic polarization curves and the linear polarization curves (used to determine the Rp values, in the 2 wt. % HCl solution. Given the answer presented by the authors, perhaps it would be important to review the following statement contained in the manuscript
“...It has been reported that spikes in the potential signal can be related to the occurrence of metastable pits and rapid repassivation in an electrochemical process [38] [39] [40], indicating a highly unstable electrochemical process on the steel surface when the standard
deviation value is high [41]. This, in a way, elucidates why the sample under flow conditions exhibits reduced susceptibility to repassivation and a greater propensity for the pitting process...".
Thank you very much for this observation. Authors believe that the explanation provided in the manuscript now clarifies this apparent contradictory situation:
As is well known in corrosion science, iron (and iron alloys) can be passivated under specific conditions of acidity and potential. Anodic protection has indeed been suggested as a technique to prevent corrosion in such materials and there are works proving the passivation of the carbon steel in acidic media [Mohammed, H. K., Jafar, S. A., Humadi, J. I., Sehgal, S., Saxena, K. K., Abdullah, G. H., ... & Abdullah, W. S. (2023). Investigation of carbon steel corrosion rate in different acidic environments. Materials Today: Proceedings.].
In the present case, as indicated by both the potentiostatic measurements (see figure below) and optical observations, when our samples were in contact with the acidic solution under static conditions, there were no pits, and therefore, no conditions for the generation of passive films. However, conditions changed under flow state. On the one hand, in the central part of the sample, there is a generalized type of corrosion, as in non-flow conditions. On the other hand, pitting corrosion occurs on the surface next to the borders, indicating that in such a place, there are conditions to grow a passive film.
The only reason found to explain such different behavior (in the central part of the sample and on the borders) is a different potential in both regions. As the Nernst equation and the theoretical principles of anodic protection state: by increasing the concentration of the oxidant agent, it is possible to increase the equilibrium potential of the reduction reaction, shifting the open circuit potential of the system.
In short, there is both generalized and pitting corrosion in the same sample due to the fact that the flow of the electrolyte is different in the central part than on the borders of the sample. This is because the topography of the sample on the borders is not completely flat, as it was used to fix the sample to the mechanical device.
The authors believe that the flow on such an irregular surface produces enough agitation to considerably increase the concentration of the oxidant species. For example, it has already been proven that under turbulent regimens, the oxygen concentration in the electrolyte is much larger than under laminar regimes [Chatelain, M., & Guizien, K. (2010). Modelling coupled turbulence–Dissolved oxygen dynamics near the sediment–water interface under wind waves and sea swell. Water Research, 44(5), 1361-1372.].
As the reviewer can appreciate, this is an extremely interesting topic that the authors are dealing with. However, the scope of this work cannot be extended so far. Nonetheless, it is already one of the core topics in progress in our research group. 
Figure 1. a) Potentiodynamic Polarization and b) Linear Polarization curves of 1010 carbon steel in 2 wt. % HCl solution. 
c) Before the exposure to the corrosive medium, how were the samples prepared? Were they polished, cleaned, or treated in any way? 
“Before the exposure to the corrosive medium the working area of the sample was ground with 800 grit silicon carbide paper, cleaned with soapy water, rinsed with distilled water and degreased with acetone”. This information has been added in the Experimental section. 
Surface conditions can significantly influence degradation behaviors? 
Upon the initial exposure to acid media, some observations were made on the surface of the samples. These include, i) the presence of scratches that were associated with the polishing procedure (marked with red arrows in Figure 1), and mainly ii) parallel scratches that were perpendicular to the flow on the clean, polished surface of the substrate (indicated by blue arrows). These parallel scratches were attributed to the manufacturing process (see Figure 1). Over time, the polishing scratches gradually disappeared, indicating a uniform surface dissolution during the initial stage of corrosion. This behavior is consistent with the Open Circuit Potential (OCP) signal analysis discussed in the previous question. However, tracking the manufacturing scratches over time could potentially have an impact on degradation behaviors. According to Popoola and Fayomi [1], low carbon steel showed a high susceptibility to intergranular corrosion in HCl due to the presence of various phases in the metal matrix and surface scratches. These imperfections in the steel matrix can affect the initiation and acceleration of localized corrosion in low carbon steel, as reported by Wei et al [2]. Therefore, the uniform dissolution of the steel in an acid medium begins with the activation process, as indicated by the OCP signal and potentiodynamic polarization curve. Furthermore, the influence of acid flow on the steel surface may have an impact on localized corrosion (as explained in answer to comment B) during the final dissolution stage, as depicted in Figure 7 and 8 of manuscript. In fact, the surface defects inherent to the steel, such as scratches, along with the defects caused by the optical fiber beneath the shim steel (defects due experimental set-up), could potentially influence this type of corrosion. This could be attributed to changes in shear stresses caused by both inherent and induced defects generating preferential sites for corrosion, accelerating localized dissolution. This information has been discussed in the manuscript. 
Figure 1. Tracking over time of change in morphology of 1010 carbon steel in 2 wt. % HCl solution.
[1] A.P.I. Popoola, O.S.I. Fayomi, ZnO as corrosion inhibitor for dissolution of zinc electrodeposited mild steel in varying HCl concentration, International Journal of the Physical Sciences. 6 (2011) 2447–2454. https://doi.org/10.5897/IJPS11.548.
[2] J. Wei, J.H. Dong, W. Ke, X.Y. He, Influence of Inclusions on Early Corrosion Development of Ultra-Low Carbon Bainitic Steel in NaCl Solution, Corrosion. 71 (2015) 1467–1480. https://doi.org/10.5006/1837.
d) When looking at Figure 7 of the manuscript, I get the impression that there are crevices forming at the metal/coating interface of work electrodes. Was there any special care taken to avoid this type of problem when isolating the area to be exposed to the corrosive environment? It would be important for the authors to make some mention of this and say what type of error this could lead to in the measurements.
Thank you very much for this comment. In the revised version of the article we have added a paragraph in which we discuss the possible defects generated by using glue to fix and seal the specimens. This is an issue that we will need to address in more detail in future research. 
However, it is crucial to note that no filtrations of electrolyte were detected at the metal/coating interface of the work electrodes. Otherwise, the electrochemical potential would change abruptly before the generation of pits could occur. 
The following paragraph was added to the revised version of the article:
“What is interesting to note is that the first pits were observed in areas close to the edges of the sample. As previously mentioned, cyanoacrylate was successfully used to fix the sample and prevent leakage of the electrolyte. It is worth stressing that no filtrations of electrolyte were detected at the metal/coating interface of the work electrodes. Otherwise, the electrochemical potential would change abruptly before the generation of pits could occur.However, there is the possibility of having left unevenly sized resin edges around the samples, which may affect electrolyte flow and shear stresses on the exposed metal. The lack of symmetry in these imperfections suggests non-uniform corrosion at the edges and in the area exposed to flow. Sample geometry and size may also contribute to corrosion near the boundaries. Future research will certainly need to investigate the flow velocity near the sample, using techniques such as PIV, and complement with CFD simulations to better understand the impact of geometry and edges as well as the corrosion mechanisms that give rise to pitting in these zones. Beyond 26 hours, the number of pits increased, becoming more discernible from the surrounding non-corroded areas. ”
e) When discussing Figure 5, the authors make the following comment: “...In contrast, under static conditions, the potential suffers an abrupt drop to -0.5530 V (point C). This alternating behavior persisted until point D, where the potential drops abruptly below -0.6222 V (point E) due to the appearance and growth of pits that penetrated the 25-micron thickness of the steel, exposing tiny surfaces of Zn. Subsequently, the signal converges towards potentials very close to OCP of the steel/Zn galvanic couple...”. To support this statement, why don't the authors perform potentiodynamic polarization measurements for the Zn coating and then superimpose these measurements on the steel polarization measurements? This way, the
authors could empirically prove the value of the Zn/steel galvanic couple.
While the reviewer's suggestion is well-founded, it is essential to consider the fundamental aspect of the cathode/anode area ratio in our analysis. The superimposition of both polarization measurements does not yield accurate information about the potential of the couple when a small area of the anode is in contact with a significantly larger cathodic area, akin to the scenario observed in the pitting of a steel surface with the tip of Zn. Consequently, we conducted experiments, now more comprehensively outlined in the text, wherein we measured the potential of a perforated steel sample, exposing only a minute area of Zn. The obtained potential was precisely -0.565 V, progressively decreasing down to -1.0 V as the Zn area expanded with an increasing number of perforations (once the Zn is exhausted the potential slowly shifts towards less negative values).
g) In my opinion, the conclusion must be more objective, reflecting the outcome of the work. Please be more concise and critical, highlighting the key findings. Additionally, it would be beneficial to offer suggestions for subsequent research and potential advancements in this Domain.
We agree with your assessment. In the new version of the manuscript we shortened the conclusions to make them more concise and clear. In order to enhance the suggested methods, we have highlighted a few topics that we think should be further investigated. Possible applications were also briefly mentioned.
Reviewer #3: Dear author, The paper is interesting. In my frank opinion, it deserves to be published after minor revisions:
First and foremost, thank you very much for your comments; the authors truly appreciate the time and effort invested in reviewing our work.
Minor revision of English is necessary.
A double spelling check was performed, and typos were corrected.
The images are not in good resolution.
Images 7 and 8 were modified to improve the resolution. The other figures, due to limitations inherent to the software that generates them, could not be modified to improve the resolution.
Viscosity can be changed with pressure, temperature and concentration. In formula 2, wouldn't it be necessary to take these variables into account within viscosity?
Thank you for this observation. For our experiments the fluid viscosity was kept constant as the tests were performed under constant ambient conditions (Pa=101.2 kPa and Ta=20°C). Although there was a slight evaporation of liquid during each test, a small amount of water was added to the tank to keep the HCl concentration practically unchanged. On the other hand, since the concentration of the HCl solution used is low, the viscosity of the water was considered to estimate the Reynolds number. To support this assumption, the following graph was consulted from: “Viscosities of aqueous hydrochloric acid solutions, and densities and viscosities of aqueous hydroiodic acid solutions” https://doi.org/10.1021/je00025a008
In the revised version of the article, the following lines of text were added (a reference was included along with this text):
“It is important to note that the calculation of Reynolds numbers was made considering the properties of water under constant laboratory conditions, T=20°C and P= 101.2 kPa. This does not lead to considerable errors in our estimations since the solution used for the experiments was prepared with a low concentration of HCL, so the properties of the solution are very close to those of water [a1].”
[a1] E. Nishikata, T. Ishii, and T. Ohta, Viscosities of aqueous hydrochloric acid solutions, and densities and viscosities of aqueous hydroiodic acid solutions, J. Chem. Eng. Data 1981, 26, 3, 254–256.
Why exactly use the green laser? Wouldn't it be more interesting to use a laser in the UV region? The UV laser simulates sunlight.
We find Reviewer’s proposal interesting, probably in future studies we will use a UV laser. We employed a green laser mainly because it is visible to the human eye (in contrast UV light is not visible to the naked eye) and it is brighter than other colors such as red, widely used in commercial lasers ;https://www.plslaser.com/laser-level-application-guide/why-green-lasers-brighter-than-red/. 
“The images were digitally processed using Python Programming Language to determine”. It would be interesting if you provided, as an attachment, the programming used.” 
Program 1. This program performs IMAGE segmentation using the thresholding method. Moreover, multiplies grayscale IMAGE by a manually created MASK for each exposure time. The use of a separate mask for each exposure time is necessary to compensate for mechanical device vibrations that prevent the creation of a standard mask. Consequently, a manual creation of a mask using Paint software is required for each image. The output image of this program will feed into program 2.
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
"""
Created on Mon Jun 26 18:37:08 2023
@author: GRECCO_5
"""
import numpy as np
import cv2
from cv2 import imread
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
img = cv2.imread('IMAGE.bmp',0)
mascara= cv2.imread('MASK.png',0)
def segmenta(img,t):
 (N,M)=img.shape
 Y=np.zeros((N,M))
 area=0
 for i in range(N):
 for j in range(M):
 if img[i,j]>t:
 Y[i,j]=255
 area= area +1 
 print('El area es = ',area) 
 return Y
Y1=segmenta(img,200)
Y2=segmenta(mascara,150)
imgM1 = cv2.bitwise_and(Y1,Y2)
cv2.imshow('imagen',Y1)
cv2.waitKey(0)
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
cv2.imshow('imagen',imgM1)
cv2.waitKey(0)
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
Program 2. This program detects discontinuities in the segmented image (white pixels) and surrounds them with lines while counting them (which corresponds to the laser dots that indicate local dissolutions).
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
"""
Created on Mon Jun 26 18:37:08 2023
@author: GRECCO_5
"""
import numpy as np
import cv2
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
img = cv2.imread(' imgM1.png',0)
cv2.imshow('imagen', img)
cv2.waitKey(0)
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
def howis(img):
 print('size = ',img.shape)
 print('max = ',np.max(img))
 print('min = ',np.min(img))
howis(img)
ret,thresh1 = cv2.threshold(img,150,255,cv2.THRESH_BINARY)
thresh1=cv2.GaussianBlur(thresh1,(5,5),0)
(contornos,jerarquia)=cv2.findContours(thresh1,cv2.RETR_EXTERNAL,cv2.CHAIN_APPROX_SIMPLE)
imagen=cv2.drawContours(thresh1, contornos,-1,(255,255,255),1)
font=cv2.FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX
picadura =1
for i in contornos:
 momento =cv2.moments(i)
 cx=int(momento['m10']/momento['m00'])
 cy=int(momento['m01']/momento['m00'])
 cv2.circle(thresh1,(cx,cy),1,(255,255,255),-1)
 cv2.putText(thresh1, ""+str(picadura),(cx+5,cy+5),font,1,(255,255,255),2)
 picadura=picadura+1
cv2.imshow('imagen',imagen)
cv2.waitKey(0)
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
It is worth mentioning that the programs used for image analysis will be available to readers in an open-access repository, as required by the journal.
“the polarization resistance Rp and the Tafel extrapolation methods were utilized to determine the corrosion rate”. How the externally induced mechanical oscillation affects the charge transfer of the system: In the Tafel extrapolation, the frequency of the electric current through the material is taken into account.
Example: formula 6:

https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9717/11/3/721

There seems to be a misunderstanding, which we have clarified in the revised version of the manuscript. The Rp and Tafel extrapolation tests were performed solely under static conditions for the purpose of providing a comparative reference. As detailed in the corresponding sections, these measurements (Tafel and Rp) indicated a corrosion rate of approximately 0.7 mm/year. However, the experimental results obtained under oscillatory acidic streams demonstrated an average dissolution rate approximately twelve times faster. This significant disparity vividly underscores the aggressiveness of the conditions induced by the mechanical device described in the paper.
The study you did is very interesting and important. To emphasize the importance of this study, I suggest mentioning, for example in the introduction, other techniques for studying corrosion (currently used in static media, such as Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy), fuels such as electrolytes and different material manufacturing routes. Below are examples of articles that illustrate these points.

https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/00219983211029352

https://meridian.allenpress.com/corrosion/article-abstract/76/12/1109/447822/Silicon-Content-Affecting-Corrosion-Behavior-of

Thanks for the recommendation, now in the Determination of corrosion rate under activation control and no flow conditions we have added a new paragraph about EIS.
“It is important to bear in mind that, while Rp and Tafel extrapolation tests provide swift and effective corrosion rate assessments under static conditions, there exist additional electrochemical techniques such as Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) that furnish valuable insights into corrosion dynamics. EIS accomplishes this by scrutinizing intricate impedance characteristics across a spectrum of frequencies, promising to unveil nuanced insights into the electrochemical dynamics of such systems. The establishment of an equivalent circuit further refines the interpretative framework, providing a comprehensive understanding of corrosion phenomena, even in dynamic environments and non-aqueous electrolytes. [GARCIA, A. et al (2009) Electrochemical corrosion response of a low carbon heat treated steel in a NaCl solution, https://meridian.allenpress.com/corrosion/article-abstract/76/12/1109/447822/Silicon-Content-Affecting-Corrosion-Behavior-of]”. 
Reviewer #4: Dear authors, below are some comments and suggestions that I consider relevant to the work and doubts that may not have been clarified in the text:
1. It is known that the central objective is not to be the result of the corrosion test but there is a focus on this area as well. It is believed to be interesting to think about applying an equivalent circuit to obtain relevant information regarding corrosion parameters. Below is an indication of reading the articles: GARCIA, A. et al (2009) Electrochemical corrosion response of a low carbon heat treated steel in a NaCl solution. and GARCIA, A. et al. (2010) Electrochemical corrosion behaviour of a Ti-IF steel and a SAE 1020 steel in a 0.5M NaCl solution., where corrosion in steel is discussed.
First and foremost, thank you very much for your comments; the authors truly appreciate the time and effort invested in reviewing our work.
Thank you for the suggestion. Indeed, we are currently incorporating EIS measurements into our ongoing research. However, the authors anticipate that the completion of this research may extend beyond spring 2024. Nevertheless, the updated manuscript now features a new paragraph addressing this specific topic.
“It is important to bear in mind that, while Rp and Tafel extrapolation tests provide swift and effective corrosion rate assessments under static conditions, there exist additional electrochemical techniques such as Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) that furnish valuable insights into corrosion dynamics. EIS accomplishes this by scrutinizing intricate impedance characteristics across a spectrum of frequencies, promising to unveil nuanced insights into the electrochemical dynamics of such systems. The establishment of an equivalent circuit further refines the interpretative framework, providing a comprehensive understanding of corrosion phenomena, even in dynamic environments and non-aqueous electrolytes. [GARCIA, A. et al (2009) Electrochemical corrosion response of a low carbon heat treated steel in a NaCl solution, https://meridian.allenpress.com/corrosion/article-abstract/76/12/1109/447822/Silicon-Content-Affecting-Corrosion-Behavior-of]”. 
2. I believe the explanation for the galvanic couple formation after the first pit appearance occurs is vague. Something expected did not happen.
To answer this question, we measured the Open Circuit Potential (OCP) of the carbon steel and Zn galvanic couple in the acidic medium used in this study. Figure 1 illustrates both the black and front view of the sample used in this investigation (a), as well as the OCP of the galvanic couple between carbon steel and Zn in a 2 wt. % HCl solution (b). As expected, when this galvanic couple was exposed to an acidic medium, the OCP showed the typical potential of Zn. However, as the Zn began to dissolve, the OCP decreased in proportion to its content, causing the OCP of the galvanic couple to shift towards intermediate values. As the exposure continued over time, the OCP gradually reached a stable value, which represents the potential of carbon steel due to the complete dissolution of Zn.
In the presented investigation, the occurrence of localized dissolving in carbon steel leads to the electrolyte reaching the Zn. However, since only a small amount of Zn is reached by the electrolyte during the initial localized dissolutions (as shown in Figure 7 at 26 hours), the OCP does not decrease. As the dissolution of the steel increases, more electrolyte reaches the Zn. Due to the high activity of Zn in an acidic environment, the OCP then decreases to a more active value (as shown in Figure 5, at point D). In other words, the OCP decreases to a value between the potential of the steel and Zn (constant dissolution of small quantities of Zn), thereby consolidating the galvanic couple at a potential around -0.6222 V (dotted purple line)[1]. This information was discussed in the Results and Discussion section.
Figure 1. a) Sample of Zn coated carbon steel and b) OCP evolution of sample in 2 wt. % HCl solution.
[1] C. Arrighi, T.T. Nguyen, Y. Paint, C. Savall, L.B. Coelho, J. Creus, M.G. Olivier, Study of Ce(III) as a potential corrosion inhibitor of Zn-Fe sacrificial coatings electrodeposited on steel, Corros Sci. 200 (2022) 110249. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CORSCI.2022.110249.
3. The analysis of the formation of pits was never discussed regarding their appearance on the edges of the samples. Is there any influence on the sample preparation or its dimensions?
Very good question, thank you. As mentioned in the article, we used cyanoacrylate to glue the samples and we do not rule out however that resin edges are left around the periphery of the specimen. Even such glue edges may not be of the same thickness (and shape) along the periphery, which of course influences the electrolyte flow, particularly by modifying the velocity field and the shear stresses on the exposed metal. Obviously, the possibility that there is no symmetry of these imperfections along the periphery of the specimen also implies that the corrosive effect is also not uniform at the edges and even over the entire area of metal exposed to the flow. The geometry and size of the samples can also play an important role in the pitting near the edges because of the aspects mentioned above. In future research, it would be necessary to perform flow velocity measurements in areas close to the sample (using for example the PIV technique) and complement them with CFD simulations to clarify the effect of sample geometry and edges, however this is beyond the scope of the present work.
In view of the above, the following lines were added to the revised version of the manuscript:
“What is interesting to note is that the first pits were observed in areas close to the edges of the sample. As previously mentioned, cyanoacrylate was successfully used to fix the sample and prevent leakage of the electrolyte. It is worth stressing that no filtrations of electrolyte were detected at the metal/coating interface of the work electrodes. Otherwise, the electrochemical potential would change abruptly before the generation of pits could occur. However, there is the possibility of having left unevenly sized resin edges around the samples, which may affect electrolyte flow and shear stresses on the exposed metal. The lack of symmetry in these imperfections suggests non-uniform corrosion at the edges and in the area exposed to flow. Sample geometry and size may also contribute to corrosion near the boundaries. Future research will certainly need to investigate the flow velocity near the sample, using techniques such as PIV, and complement with CFD simulations to better understand the impact of geometry and edges as well as the corrosion mechanisms that give rise to pitting in these zones. Beyond 26 hours, the number of pits increased, becoming more discernible from the surrounding non-corroded areas.”
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Anwers Plos One.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0298266.r003Decision Letter 1
OsórioWislei RiuperAcademic Editor© 2024 Wislei Riuper Osório2024Wislei Riuper Osóriohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
23 Jan 2024

Accelerated corrosion of low carbon steel by oscillatory acidic streams generated with a bio-inspired claw device
PONE-D-23-36475R1
Dear Dr. Montoya,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Wislei Riuper Osório
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Based on the Reviewers’ comments and the rebuttals provided by Author, it is observed that the manuscript was meticulously revised and considerably improved. With this, it deserves its final publication.
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0298266.r004Acceptance letter
OsórioWislei RiuperAcademic Editor© 2024 Wislei Riuper Osório2024Wislei Riuper Osóriohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
23 Mar 2024

PONE-D-23-36475R1 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Montoya, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Wislei Riuper Osório 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE