pmcPLOS Digit HealthPLOS Digit Health4362pdig9918335064206676plosPLOS Digital Health2767-3170PLOSPMC11530017PMC11530017.111530017115300173948581210.1371/journal.pdig.0000646PDIG-D-23-004531Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMental Health and PsychiatryMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Care FacilitiesComputer and Information SciencesSoftware EngineeringComputer SoftwareOpen Source SoftwareEngineering and TechnologySoftware EngineeringComputer SoftwareOpen Source SoftwareScience PolicyOpen ScienceOpen Source SoftwareComputer and Information SciencesData ManagementComputer and Information SciencesData ManagementData VisualizationComputer and Information SciencesData ManagementData MiningBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingSocial SciencesPsychologyCognitive PsychologyDecision MakingBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCognitive ScienceCognitionDecision MakingPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsMedical PersonnelA digital dashboard for reporting mental, neurological and substance use disorders in Nairobi, Kenya: Implementing an open source data technology for improving data capture
Open source data technology for improving data capture in Nairobi, Kenyahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3907-1538MwangaDaniel M.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySoftwareVisualizationWriting – original draft WaruingiStellaConceptualizationInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – review & editing ManolovaGerganaConceptualizationInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – review & editing WekesahFrederick M.ConceptualizationInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7586-4928KadengyeDamazo T.Data curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing OtienoPeter O.MethodologyValidationWriting – review & editing BittaMaryMethodologyValidationWriting – review & editing OmwomIbrahimData curationFormal analysisMethodologyWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2366-2774IddiSamuelMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7134-1406OderoPaulMethodologySoftwareWriting – review & editing KinuthiaJoan W.Project administrationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4269-7657DuaTarunFunding acquisitionMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing ChowdharyNeerjaMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing OumaFrank O.Data curationVisualizationWriting – review & editing KipchirchirIsaac C.MethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing MuhuaGeorge O.MethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6041-9661SanderJosemir W.Funding acquisitionMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6999-5507NewtonCharles R.ConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing AsikiGershimConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing on behalf of the EPInA Study Team 1
African Population and Health Research Center (APHRC), Nairobi, Kenya2
Department of Mathematics, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya3
Mental Health and Substance Use Program, Nairobi City County Government, Kenya4
Department of Mental Health and Substance Use, World Health Organization5
Julius Global Health, Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, the Netherlands, UMC, AIGHD, the Netherlands6
Kenya Medical Research Institute-Wellcome Trust, Kilifi, Kenya7
Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom8
Department of Clinical & Experimental Epilepsy, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG9
Chalfont Centre for Epilepsy, Chalfont St Peter SL9 0RJ, United Kingdom10
Stichting Epilepsie Instellingen Nederland (SEIN), Heemstede 2103 SW, the Netherlands11
Neurology Department, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China12
Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, SwedenMcGinnisRyan S.Editor files.

## Data Availability
All the data used in the analysis are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that over 110 million people in Africa live with mental health disorders [ ]. For local planning and prioritisation of mental health care, it is essential to capture service data routinely collected when providing care. The primary reporting system for service data in most low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) is the District Health Information System (DHIS-2) [ ] known in Kenya as the Kenya Health Information System (KHIS). The availability of quality and timely data on mental Health from DHIS-2 is a challenge in many African countries[ , ]. In Kenya, the reporting of mental, neurological and substance use (MNS) disorders from KHIS is low, and available data in the KHIS are not disaggregated for the different MNS disorders. Currently, there are only three MNS indicators (generalised as mental disorder, alcohol use and epilepsy) reported in KHIS [ ].
The Nairobi City County mental health program developed a reporting tool which prioritised the reporting of MNS disorders guided by the WHO priority MNS disorders in the mhGAP-IG version 2.0 [ ]. In addition to the conditions listed in the mhGAP-IG, Nairobi City County also reports data on perinatal mental health disorders (PMHD). This was informed by Nairobi having one of the largest obstetric hospitals with high users flow and thus the need to capture data on PMHD. Secondly, with the roll-out of free maternity services in Kenya in 2013, there has been an increase in utilisation of maternity services and skilled deliveries [ ] and Nairobi City County has integrated PMH into the Mother and Child Clinics.
The tool captures demographic profiles of individuals and whether the case was new or a repeat visit at the time of visiting the primary healthcare facility. Reporting new cases is crucial for surveillance purposes and for tracking trends. This is also important for the measurement incidence of a condition. Previously, in each sub-county, the local mental health focal persons reported and aggregated data monthly and submitted to the county mental health focal person via email. These records were then collated manually to obtain estimates for the County. The above outlined manual reporting process used at the Nairobi City County had challenges including late submissions, inaccurate aggregations, incomplete data and difficulties in analysing the data for timely use for local planning and decision-making. Due to these challenges, it was imperative to devise an efficient method, in the form of a digital tool, that could be used easily by primary healthcare workers to capture and update reports promptly. This was based on the requirement of the county mental health team of a a more efficient way to report mental health data to improve outcomes. This led to the development of the this digitised/online reporting platform.
Thus, this study aims to demonstrate the use of open-source applications for reporting health data using a case study of mental health data reporting in Nairobi. We describe how we digitised the data capture system and linked it to an online live reproducible dashboard built on R Shiny package in R software [ ].

## Materials and methods

## Study setting
This study was part of the Epilepsy Pathway Innovation in Africa (EPInA) project in Kenya, Tanzania and Ghana [ ]. EPInA mandate is to improve epilepsy treatment pathways, including prevention, diagnosis, treatment and awareness in Africa. Here, we focus on the development of tools to improve data capture for mental health data. It is a case study of mental health program data systems under the Directorate of Health, Nairobi City County, Kenya. It focuses on mental health data reported in all the health facilities under the Nairobi City County. The health facilities managed by the Nairobi City County are primarily public health facilities from level II to level IV. The data covers people of all ages.

## Structure of the Nairobi City County mental health program data systems
The health sector at Nairobi City County has two management levels: The County Health Management Team (CHMT) and the sub-County Management Team (SCHMT), with ten administrative sub-counties. The mental health program is headed by a mental health focal person coordinating mental health services in the County through the SCHMT. Each sub-County is assigned a mental health focal person whose qualifications and practice are in mental health (such as a psychiatrist, mental health nurse, psychiatric physician and psychologist) as per Kenya Mental Health Act (Cap 248) [ ]. The mental health focal personnel offer mental health services, coordinate them, and support and supervise healthcare workers at the facility level within their sub-counties. This program is responsible for the management and reporting of MNS disorders in the County, with 54 health facilities seeing people with mental illnesses.
Service data from healthcare facilities were reported monthly through the sub-County focal persons to the county focal persons as aggregated data. These data, under three indicators generalised as mental disorder, alcohol use and epilepsy, were initially reported through KHIS. This required the aggregation of monthly data on paper at the facility level and the entry of aggregated data into KHIS at the sub-County level. Nairobi City County later introduced reporting of aggregated data with more MNS disorders, but it was reported by email, compiled by the SCMH focal person, and sent directly to the county focal person. Simultaneously, aggregated data on the three mental health indicators in KHIS continued to be reported. On average, 18 facilities would report data monthly through the described structures, changing from around 10 in some months to about 20 out of 54 facilities.

## Digitising data capture and reporting platform
We digitised the reporting tool by developing a short electronic data capture form on Kobo Toolbox [ ]. This is an online replica of the tool the mental health focal personel used to collect and aggregate data monthly, manually. In the context of this study, manually means aggregating data at the end of the month and submitting using manual forms or on email. A cohort of 100 primary health workers drawn from 54 public health facilities under the Nairobi City County were trained to use the digital tool. The training covered performing data entry, submitting the data to the online server, and troubleshooting in case of system failure. The tool was tested during the training and during the first month of deployment to ensure no system bugs and technology hitches persisted.
The trained healthcare workers currently use digital tools to capture information on all diagnosed cases for real-time data transfer to electronic storage. The form is accessed on an Android tablet or as a link on a web browser. In addition to MNS disorders on the WHO’s mhGAP-IG version 2.0, and the added perinatal mental health, the form also collects information on the following items: date when the person was seen at the health facility, sex, age, whether it is a new visit or repeat visit, the disorder diagnosed (multiple disorders are allowed) and the care/service provided (treated or referred).

## Data security and protection
The platform adheres to data security measures in the Kenya Data Protection Act of 2019 [ ]. To use the online reporting platform, every primary healthcare worker and the mental health focal worker were given a unique username and password to submit the data only using the front end of the reporting tool (see FigA1 in ). The back-end (with the programmed tools and the database) is only accessed by the programmer and the data manager (see FigA2 in ). The head of the mental health department is the only one responsible for providing authorisation to access the platform.

## Integration between R Shiny dashboard and Kobo Toolbox
Data received in the online database was linked to a live dynamic dashboard built using R Shiny [ ] to summarise the data in the form of charts and tables for quicker visualisation and use of the data for decision-making. R Shiny web application (interchangeably called Shiny dashboards) is a visualisation platform that executes in R software [ ]. It is a powerful and flexible interactive environment for statistical computing and conducting research in general. The choice of using R Shiny for this study was guided by its reproducibility, open source applicability and flexibility as it can be installed on different platforms, including local servers, cloud servers and personal computers, allowing for easier sustainable access compared to commercial visualisation platforms. Documentation about R Shiny is published elsewhere [ ]. Data management processes was conducted in R using various R functions available in its repository of packages designed to handle different data management or analysis needs.
Integration between R Shiny and Kobo toolbox was implemented through an application programming interface (API) using a package called “robotoolbox” available in Gitlab or Github mirror [ ]. The package has not yet been published in CRAN but is accessed using the remote environment within R. The API is built in Kobo Toolbox and together with the official API instructions, can be accessed from the Kobo account [ ]. Once the connection between R and Kobo was established using the API, the data were downloaded into R for management, exploration, and visualisation. The actual codes on how we integrated R and Kobo are provided in . The requirements for the development of the dashboard include having R and RStudio installed on any computer operating system. Documentation of the different sections of the dashboard code is documented elsewhere [ ].

## Data management, analysis and visualisation
Before displaying summaries on the dashboard, data management processes including formatting and variable labeling are done. These include date formatting using the lubridate package, renaming and labelling variables, recoding variables that need to be recoded, and converting variable types from numeric to string or character where necessary. Analysis involved creating summary tables using functions available in tidyverse package [ ] and visualisations using either ggplot() function found in the ggplot2 package [ ] or using plot_ly() function found in the plotly package[ ]. After the data was cleaned and ready for analysis, the shiny dashboard was created. We used the shinydashboard package [ ]. It has three parts namely, header, sidebar and body. The dashboard back-end basic structure of the code is given in . The syntax shinyApp(ui, server) is the function that connects the user interface (UI) and the server sections.

## Hosting of the dashboard
Shiny applications can be hosted in the shinyapp.io platform [ ], an easy and self-service platform that enables users and developers to share their R Shiny applications on the web. An alternative approach is to host the dashboard on a local server running on Linux operating system. Open source or no- or low-cost hosting is preferred for sustainability purposes. Currently, the dashboard is hosted on a local server and a backup system on shinyapps.io. Details of how to host the dashboard on shinyapps.io or on a local server are described in .

## The Nairobi mental health reporting dashboard
The dashboard has four menu items on the sidebar: overall summaries, summary tables, trend analysis and sub-County reports (see FigA3-A5 in ). The menu items enable the user to navigate to the different pages to visualise. At the top of the dashboard is the header and below the header is the body where visuals are displayed. The displays show the overall summaries from all the 10 sub-counties in Nairobi City County. A dropdown menu allows users to select a specific sub-County to visualise separately.
Value boxes are provided to display the overall number of cases submitted and disaggregated by new cases, repeat visits and referrals. This gives the user timely insights regarding the number of new cases reported. This data can be disaggregated by year or month. This is useful for generating quick reports on the reporting for progress and monitoring purposes.
In the second section of the overall summary menu, the reported cases are displayed using bar graphs to show the total number of cases by sub-County, facility where the person was seen, age, sex and type of visit (see FigA3 in ). This helps report caseloads of mental health cases and make essential decisions on allocating resources. A user can download data into a comma-separated (csv) file format for further analysis (see FigA5 in ). The downloaded data are free from any personally identifiable information (PII). The data can be disaggregated regarding facility, type of visit, age, sex, year, month and week. Further disaggregation is possible and the code can be updated to enable this depending on the level of analysis needed.
For monitoring and evaluation purposes, the third menu labelled trend analysis (see FigA5 in ) enables the admin or a monitoring and evaluation staff to monitor the monthly reporting of cases. The data can also be customised by sub-County for planning, monitoring, supervision and learning.

## Pilot testing the digital tool
The system was launched in August 2022 and piloted for three months. During this period, healthcare workers from 54 facilities were trained on how to use the system, and the mental Health focal persons submitted data while continuing to use the manual system. Key lessons learnt during the pilot testing period included improving user-friendliness and ease of access of the data entry interface and submission procedures. Since the tool was accessed mainly online through a web browser, we trained the healthcare workers to create a bookmark for the link on the browser, refresh the link in case of a new form update, and troubleshoot procedures. We also learnt that sending out a notification with instructions on how to refresh the link whenever a new form update is available is necessary. There were visits to the teams at their facilities to provide technical support and document any challenges and lessons.

## Assessment of use of the digital tool
From January to August 2023, the system was adopted as the primary platform for reporting disaggregated mental health data in Nairobi City County. This is in addition to reporting nationally through the KHIS on the three required indicators. All 54 health facilities handling mental health in the County are expected to report. We assessed the use of the digital tool based on the efficiency in reporting, completeness of data, timeliness, user friendliness and how it aligned with the FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Re-usable) principles. For trends, completeness/missing and timelines, we compared the number of cases reported using the manual system in 2022 against those reported through the digital tool in 2023. To assess the difference between the numbers reported between the two systems, we done comparative t-tests of the means of number of facilities reporting per month and the total number of cases reported every month. While the difference in numbers may be contributed to some extent by natural temporal trends, they indicate the effect of the digitisation of the data system. This is triangulated with information from qualitative case narratives collected, as described below.
Qualitative information was also obtained from focal persons using the system through case narratives from key informants who mainly included focal persons representing health care workers in the sub-counties. We also had a data review meeting in December 2022 where we compiled best practices, lessons and challenges experienced while implementing the system. The main thematic areas were their experiences using the system and their perceptions of how the system has improved different aspects of data collection, monitoring and use for decision-making. Data were analysed thematically, and quotes summarising feedback on this were extracted and reported verbatim in the paper.

## Ethical considerations
The study was part of the EPInA project approved by the Scientific Ethics Review Unit (SERU) of the Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI) (Reference Number: KEMRI/RES/7/3/1). The data used to demonstrate the effect of the digitization are from routine service data from the Nairobi City County health facilities submitted by sub-County mental health focal persons as part of their routine health care services. As we used anonymised data and did not collect new data, the study did not require institutional review board approval. For the case narratives from the focal persons who were the direct users of the dashboard, verbal consent was obtained.

## Results

## Results from the pilot phase
Between August and December 2021, 3381 individuals were diagnosed with at least one mental health illness and manually reported from 20 facilities, with a mean of 15 facilities per month ranging from 10–20. During a similar period in 2022, 4956 diagnosed with at least one mental health disorder (2343 new, 2399 repeat visits and 14 referrals) were reported after the digital system was launched, mean of 29 facilities per month ranging from 23–32 (p<0.001) ( ). August -December 2022 was considered a testing phase for the system, and the data reported may not be complete. This was when the focal persons and the mental healthcare providers were familiarizing themselves with the system until the data review meeting held in December 2022, where lessons were shared based on the experiences from the pilot phase.
 The main lessons learned included the need for conducting regular support visits to the facilities, sharing best practices among the users, and prompting feedback in the event of questions asked by the team. The feedback was shared by the team members having a question directly calling their supervisors. They compiled their questions and shared them with the developer or shared directly through shared social media group explicitly created for this work.
There were no significant challenges relating to access to the dashboard. However, based on the experiences after implementing the system for three months, the team reported an increased workload specifically as they had to report each individual seen in real-time. To improve the system’s user-friendliness, they recommended additional features in the dashboard, including customised sub-County reports and additional indicators at the community level.

## Results from the dashboard compared to manual system during full implementation phase
This is a live dashboard where data are continuously uploaded. To compare the digital and the manual system, we restrict analysis results to data reported between January to August 2023 (digital system) and between January to August 2022 (manual system). This is shown in .
 Thirty-eight of 54 facilities (71%) reported mental health data through the digital platform between January and August 2023 compared to 22/54 (41%) facilities that reported data from January to August 2022 through the manual system. The mean of facilities reporting per month was 21, ranging from 17–27 for the digital system 16 ranging from 12–20 using the manual system (p = 0.004). The number of facilities reporting was not constant across the months for the digital and manual systems, with some months having only a third (32%) of the facilities reporting in the digital system and a quarter (23%) in the manual system. Nine-thousand-sixty-four people diagnosed with at least one mental health disorder (4454 new, 4591 repeat visits and 19 referrals) were reported through the system compared 5321 through the manual system between January to August 2022 (p = 0.007). The number reported through the digital system is almost double of those reported using manual system. This is mainly due to the increased number of facilities using the digital system. The manual system did not distinguish between the number of new vs repeat visits.
In addition to the actual numbers reported through the two systems, we show in the utility of the digital system on different aspects of data processing and utilisation compared to the manual system.
 

## Views of focal persons
Two representatives of the focal persons were also interviewed on their experiences using the system and whether it is helpful. Their narratives showed that the digital approach has improved the timeliness of reporting, supervision and data use for clinical decision-making. Below are excerpts of what they said verbatim;
“Since August 2022 the reporting of mental health indicators in Nairobi City County has been made easier. APHRC team developed a digital Reporting system where a mental health practitioner is able to upload data immediately after they see a patient. In the sub-County where I work we have a new facility offering alcohol rehabilitation services and also other mental health services on demand. Incorporating this new facility on the digital reporting system has made it easy for the new staff to upload data daily and carry out data review meetings to identify areas of focus during community sensitisation on mental health and demand creation for services. Through supportive supervision of the mhGAP trained physicians more mental health cases are being reported which informs decision on employment of more mental health practitioners by the county government.” Focal person 1, Nairobi City County
Another sub-County focal person also had similar sentiments but also added that the data are now easier to interpret including being able to interpret trends of the different MNS disorders reported through the system. The focal person had the following to say;
“The dashboard has played a crucial role in making informed decisions on treatment strategies to adopt for the various mental illnesses and also presents the data in a way that is easy to interpret showing the trends and patterns of the various categories of mental illness and also helps visualise activities across the various sub counties providing mental health services and also to monitor the staff actively reporting and follow up on the staff who are not reporting”. Focal person 2, Nairobi City County
The system also helped reduce workload and made data entry work more efficient, making it possible for healthcare workers to see more people. Two of the focal persons had this to say;
“Daily reporting helps in preventing backlog of data which can be cumbersome at end of the month. Integration of mental Health in primary health care facilities has seen more patients seeking services and this data reflects on the digital system as some non-specialist health care workers have had their capacity built and have rights to report digitally.” Focal person 1, Nairobi City County
“Before the acquisition of dashboard Nairobi mental health data was being collected haphazardly as the available MOH reporting tools only capture two variables in relation to mental health i.e. psychiatry illness, alcohol use disorder and epilepsy. This disadvantaged many practitioners who were not able to clearly capture the various categories of mental illnesses they were attending to in the facilities which led to massive underreporting of mental illnesses and thus portrayed an in accurate picture. With the advent of the dashboard the staff are able to report on the specific mental illnesses and this has led to a clearer picture of the illness categories and helped staff to direct more efforts in specific areas of interest in the various sub counties as the dashboard is able to provide a near real time picture of the actual situation in terms of data.” Focal person 2, Nairobi City County
While the system has been shown to have improved several aspects of mental health data use in the County, it is still being continuously updated and improved from time to time. After one year of implementation, the system will undergo several adjustments and refinements drawn from the lessons learnt so far. These include additional features to allow more interactivity and better support supervision, generating individual sub-County customised reports and additional indicators to track community activities, such as counselling sessions.

## Discussion
We showed the use of open-source applications for reporting health data using a case study of mental health data in Nairobi. Overall, there was an increase in the number of facilities reporting data on mental health, from less than half using manual system between January to August 2022 to over two-thirds using digital systems between January and August 2023. The number of mental health cases reported through the digital system between January and August 2023 was almost double that reported using the manual system in the same period in 2022. The digital system also allowed data disaggregation between new and repeat cases and referrals, while the digital system reported all as an aggregate. Data was reported through the digital system at the individual level, while the data submitted through the manual system was at the aggregate level. Analysis of feedback from users of the system, represented mainly by the sub-County focal persons, showed that the digital system improved the timeliness of reporting, efficiency and use of data for timely decisions. The data from the system have been used for advocacy and for providing current information during routine department meetings.
The number of health facilities reporting was not constant over time, with variations observed over time. The first few months after launch, the numbers were high and but slightly reduced with time. During the pilot phase (August to December 2022), we actively visited the teams, checking about areas needing improvementand what support was needed. This could explain the decline in the number of facilities seen from January 2023, when we reduced the number of visits and check-ins with the team. The decline could also be attributed to the fact that the system was still new and users were still familiarizing themselves with it, since changes takes time. This indicates the need for continuously conducting support supervision and checking-in with the teams to identify areas where support is needed.
We have shown that it is feasible to use open-source, low-cost electronic data capture platforms integrated with data science technologies like R Shiny to improve decision-making data. With advances in data science tools, data analysis, and visualisation technology, simple localised solutions like ours can help improve data availability. Our study used R Shiny [ ], a package in R software [ ], to build the visualisation. Shiny applications have been used in multiple disciplines. Funk and Zahadat (2021) used it for reproducible dissemination of public health data [ ]. For their study, they developed an R Shiny dashboard that visualised cancer data from George Washington University. Their approach to building an interactive dashboard is similar to ours. Still, ours uses an application programming interface (API) to link the dashboard with live data from the health facilities submitted to an online database.
R shiny has also been used for planning healthcare capacity, comparing health metrics geographically and, mining health records data [ ], and comparing health inequalities for different countries by the WHO [ ]. R Shiny has also been used to provide a platform for power and sample size calculations for longitudinal models in R [ ]. Our study adds to this development by demonstrating the ability of R Shiny integrated with Kobo Toolbox electronic data capture tool to improve data capture of health data. We did not find another study that has implemented R Shiny combined with Kobo toolbox. Our study shows that R Shiny can be used to visualise routine data submitted to an online database for quick real-time decision-making. The fact that the code is reproducible makes it easier to scale up such interventions to other counties or replicate them for reporting data in other disciplines.
The application can be hosted in the shinyapps.io platform for simple routine processes. However, for sensitive and complex datasets, it is recommended that the application be hosted in local servers secured with solid firewalls. The process for hosting the dashboard in a local server is outlined in this paper. This can be a more cost-effective hosting method if the system requires the development of more than five applications. The hosting infrastructure provided by Posit (shinyapps.io) is limited to a maximum of five applications[ ].
The real-time dashboard data makes it possible to identify caseloads and particular mental health indicators trends by facility and sub-County. It enables County and sub-County mental health teams to make informed decisions about appropriate intervention, resource allocation and staffing needs. This is an important aspect of how simple systems and solutions can greatly contribute to evidence generation and informed decision-making. The cost of implementing open-source applications is only the personnel and computing costs (hardware and storage) since the software itself is free. The personnel costs may include costs to pay staff time and training the users of the system. This means that it can be used in any setting where software subscription is not a guaranteed option. While more sophisticated platforms can be built, our study demonstrates that simple open-source solutions can be used in resource-poor settings.
The KHIS has made significant efforts to create more mental health indicators. The process is ongoing and will take longer before it is fully implemented. To prevent missing out on reporting disaggregated mental health data during the period, our system provides an alternative to provide needed mental health data that could otherwise not have been reported efficiently. Our system offers individual-level data, and reporting is real-time. Our system also demonstrates that simple open-source solutions are an excellent option to consider in local contexts where data are needed rapidly. It has shown that it is an efficient alternative where data on specific indicators is required but may not have been captured in national data systems. The next steps in the development of the system include continuous maintenance and incorporating feedback from the users to its improvement including addition of spatial analysis. The spatial analysis component will provide spatial distribution of the data based on geographic information system (GIS) approach, which would be useful for targeting resource allocation. The county mental health team is also providing feedback to the teams updating the KHIS platform based on the lessons learned from this platform.
This system can be replicated elsewhere, and the methodology can be adapted for design in other software such as Python. We developed our system using the open source Kobo Toolbox [ ] for data capture and integrated it with R Shiny package in R [ ] using application programming interface (API) for the visualization and reporting. To replicate this system, one can can use the guidelines provided in this paper, alongside available support online through community platforms such as stack overflow for developing R scripts for data management [ ] and R Shiny[ ], available in the R software documentation pages online. The data capture can be built using any other electronic data capture platforms as long as they have APIs to enable integration.

## Strengths and limitations
This study has several strengths. First, it utilises open-source platforms, which are low-cost. This provides a cost-effective way of reporting routine data in income-restricted settings. Second, it is sustainable because the primary healthcare workers reporting through the system are employees of the County, which means they continue reporting as part of their responsibilities. Another strength of this system is because it is scalable as descrived above.
The study, however, has limitations. This study was conducted during COVID-19 pandemic. The country did not have a formal mental health response plan including aspects of data capture [ ], and in addition, infection with SARS-CoV-2 exacerbated mental health illnesses across the age spectrum [ ] as the pandemic evolved. This study, however, does not provide data on mental health cases that may be due to the effects of COVID-19. Challenges in reporting may be varied, including system-related and human resources issues. Our study focuses on the former by proposing methods that can be used to navigate the challenges of reporting health data from public health facilities.
Developing the dashboard requires advanced coding skills in R. This can be a limitation if such skills are lacking within an institution. We have documented the steps in building the dashboard for capacity building the county teams. The dashboard and data reporting require internet connectivity for the data to synchronise. It might be a challenge for places where internet connection is not guaranteed. This can be addressed by deploying offline forms on tablets to collect data offline and synchronising when internet connectivity is available. Recent announcements by Kobo suggested a change in the terms of service [ ]. Kobo announced that the platform will continue to be free (open-source) for over 90% of its current users. Still, some circumstances will attract subscription fees, for example, when one exceeds 5000 monthly submissions. While this can be a limitation for small-scale use in the future, it will still be an alternative for capturing data for rapid response or as a temporary solution to fill in a gap or technical hitches in the national systems. When mental health records are digitised in all health facilities through the national system, the lessons learnt in this solution can be replicated in developing other digital platforms in other disciplines.

## Conclusion
Building open-source applications to capture and report on MNS disorders is feasible. The technology improved real-time mental health data capture, reporting, and monitoring, made work more efficient by reducing data backlog and enhanced use for quick clinical decision making. Real-time reporting has enabled better support supervision, which will improve data quality. The next step is to scale up this system and integrate the disaggregated reporting of mental health data in the national and sub-national health management information systems. It is recommended that institutions should invest in building the capacity of data managers and producers in resource-restricted settings to build and use open-source platforms for better data capture and reporting. For scale-up and sustainability, health management teams need to be involved in the application development phases to ensure the system responds to the needs of the health system. Lessons from localised innovations like this should be used when developing or updating more extensive national or subnational data systems.

## EPInA Study Group
Abankwah Junior, Albert Akpalu, Arjune Sen, Bruno Mmbando, Charles R. Newton, Cynthia Sottie, Dan Bhwana, Daniel Mtai Mwanga, Damazo T. Kadengye, Daniel Nana Yaw, David McDaid, Dorcas Muli, Emmanuel Darkwa, Frederick Murunga Wekesah, Gershim Asiki, Gergana Manolova, Guillaume Pages, Helen Cross, Henrika Kimambo, Isolide S. Massawe, Josemir W Sander, Mary Bitta, Mercy Atieno, Neerja Chowdhary, Patrick Adjei, Peter O. Otieno, Ryan Wagner, Richard Walker, Sabina Asiamah, Samuel Iddi, Simone Grassi, Sloan Mahone, Sonia Vallentin, Stella Waruingi, Symon Kariuki, Tarun Dua, Thomas Kwasa, Timothy Denison, Tony Godi, Vivian Mushi, William Matuja.

## Supporting information
S1 Appendix

## Screenshots of different sections of the dashboard.
(DOCX)
S2 Appendix

## Integration of R and Kobo tool box.
(DOCX)
S1 Dataset

## Testing phase.
(CSV)
S2 Dataset

## Implementation phase.
(CSV)

We recognise the training facilitators, including the Nairobi City County mental health focal person and the sub-County mental health focal persons who went through the training of trainers (TOT) and facilitated the actual mhGAP training for the primary healthcare workers. The contributions of the all mental health focal persons coordinating mental health activities and reporting in the sub-counties is appreciated. Sub-County mental health focal persons included Keziah Anunda, Peter Ichangai, Regina Muthoni, Paul Mbugua, Judith Anyango, Nuru Hussein, Carol John, Hellen Wekesa, Lucy Mwaura and Jecinta Gakuu. The authors also thank the leadership of the Nairobi City County Health Services for supporting the project.
 10.1371/journal.pdig.0000646.r001Decision Letter 0
BadawiOmarSection EditorMcGinnisRyan SAcademic Editor© 2024 Badawi, McGinnis2024Badawi, McGinnishttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
11 Jun 2024

PDIG-D-23-00453
A digital dashboard for reporting mental, neurological and substance use disorders in Nairobi, Kenya: implementing an open source data technology for improving data capture
PLOS Digital Health
Dear Dr. Mwanga,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS Digital Health. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS Digital Health's publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript within 30 days Jul 11 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at digitalhealth@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pdig/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
* A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
* A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
* An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Ryan S McGinnis
Academic Editor
PLOS Digital Health
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article's retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Does this manuscript meet PLOS Digital Health’s publication criteria? Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions? The manuscript must describe methodologically and ethically rigorous research with conclusions that are appropriately drawn based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
--------------------
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: Yes
--------------------
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)?
 The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception. The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
--------------------
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS Digital Health does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
--------------------
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Summary:
goal is to use shiny/kobo dashboard to view and submit health care data about MNS disorders in real time. the system shows better real-time performance, as it was not aggregated and reported retrospectively in month increments (real time is more timely, accurate, and comprehensive). This work is aimed to build upon a previous manual tool, and to evaluate improvements using this new system
positives:
- i think this is a very relevant work for this venue. 
- this work shows the importance of real-time reporting, data visualization for public health, and how digitization can improve growing health systems
- the authors did well at "setting the scene" with the previous monthly reporting method, describing the challenges with routing data through "focal persons"
-authors did well to describe how the tool was made and why they selected the technologies they did (especially for shiny)
- I appreciated that the dashboard was described verbally in layout (lines 192-198) this improves accessibility/reproducibility
- Pilot testing was well described with lessons learned clearly indicated.
-flowed well and was easy to follow step by step
- table 3 is great and clear to see differences in the systems. 
- i appreciated the qualitative reviews from focal persons, i would be curious to hear if there were any focal persons who did not like the digital system more than the manual system.
changes requested:
-would recommend rework of keywords to be more general
- are there age limits for reporting? is this adults and children? More information on the populations/facilities would be helpful.
- I was surprised to see that many facilities still did not report, even with this new system. It also looked like less and less facilities were reporting as time progressed... can the authors reference this trend or describe why we are still seeing low compliance rates?
-table 1 format is strange and a bit difficult to read without a column divider between the two primary sections. please reformat so we can clearly compare the manual versus digital system.
-spelling error in media on line 269
- i am unclear on what is different in the data being shown in table 1 and table 2 - please make it clearer what we are comparing across these two tables and what makes them different. I can see the data is different but it is not abundantly clear why.
- it would be helpful to understand the financial burden of implementing this new system compared to the previous system (how expensive would this be for another group to do in terms of money, personal, resources, etc). this was touched on a bit in the discussion but could be dived into more.
- i would be curious to hear next steps and what other data is planned to be incorporated next and why
- i feel it is a significant downfall of the work that they don't have a screenshot or visualization of this dashboard or of some of the data collected. please add this in your next revision to help readers understand the dashboard beyond just the verbal description provided within text. 
- can the authors provide any additional numerical/quantitative analyses or statistical tests to show/demonstrate, beyond just summary counts, the significance in additional data being collected with this new system.
Reviewer #2: This paper describes a digital tool for reporting mental health services provided in Nairobi, Kenya. Overall, its well-structured, well-written, and relevant to PLOS Digital Health. I have a few minor issues with the paper that the authors should be able to address easily.
1. Introduction line 86: Why the sudden focus on perinatal mental health disorders specifically? Is the digital health tool being developed specific to PMH disorders (if so, were there any specific considerations made for this specific subset of mental health disorders), or is that the focus of the existing reporting tool? Of note, as far as I can tell, the acronym PMH is not used anywhere else in the paper outside of this paragraph. The authors should motivate the introduction of this concept.
2. Introduction line 96: This sentence is the motivation for this entire work and needs to be backed up in some way. Are there other studies, national/international surveys, government reports, etc. that show that the existing system suffers from “late submissions, inaccurate aggregations, incomplete data and difficulties in analysing the data for timely use…”?
3. Materials and Methods line 132: The authors note that they “digitized the data collection tool” here. Is this the same as the “reporting tool” mentioned and described on line 84? If so, the authors should pick one of the terms and use that terminology throughout the paper. If not, it would be helpful to readers to (at least briefly) describe here what that tool entails so they have some context as to what exactly is being digitized.
4. Materials and Methods line 195: The authors mention that the spatial distribution page is still being developed, what is the spatial distribution page? It isn’t mentioned anywhere else and I’m not clear as to what functionality it is supposed to provide. It doesn’t seem to be providing any functionality key to the evaluation of the system, so perhaps this should be moved to the discussion where the authors describe functionality to be added?
5. Tables 1 and 2: These tables are a bit difficult to parse, and it took me some time to understand what I was supposed to be taking away from the table. I think adding some additional border lines and bolding would go a long way towards guiding readers towards what columns to compare and key takeaways. I also don’t understand first symbol in the notes in these tables. The authors state that this symbol indicates the total number reported in the period for the digital system, does that mean the referrals and total are not the total number reported in the period? For example, my understanding is that the first data row of Table 1 indicates that there were 499 new cases, 540 repeat visits, and 5 referrals during the month of August; does the 5 mean something different?
6. Somewhere in the paper (perhaps in the introduction or discussion?) it would be beneficial to add a sentence or two discussing why having data on new cases, repeat visits, and referrals rather than just the total is useful/valuable to have.
7. Discussion: In thinking of what a reader would take away from this work, I would like to see an additional paragraph/section in the discussion section that clearly lays out the design considerations that were learned by the authors from this work that could be used by readers to develop their own similar system. If design considerations were specific to this system, I’d like some thought/insight into how they might generalize or be used for other systems.
Grammar/Minor Things:
Line 82: Missing period, should be “disorders. Currently, there are…”
Line 92: Missing a subject, who reported and aggregated data monthly?
Line 288: “in the digital system and a quarter (23%).” Should this end with “and a quarter (23%) in the manual system.”?
Table 3: Why is “Month” in the top left cell of this table?
--------------------
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Josh Cherian
--------------------
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pdig.0000646.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
28 Jun 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers_PLOSDH_18Jun2024.docx
10.1371/journal.pdig.0000646.r003Decision Letter 1
BadawiOmarSection EditorMcGinnisRyan SAcademic Editor© 2024 Badawi, McGinnis2024Badawi, McGinnishttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
18 Sep 2024

A digital dashboard for reporting mental, neurological and substance use disorders in Nairobi, Kenya: implementing an open source data technology for improving data capture
PDIG-D-23-00453R1
Dear Mr Mwanga,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'A digital dashboard for reporting mental, neurological and substance use disorders in Nairobi, Kenya: implementing an open source data technology for improving data capture' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Digital Health.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow-up email from a member of our team. 
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact digitalhealth@plos.org.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Digital Health.
Best regards,
Ryan S McGinnis
Academic Editor
PLOS Digital Health
***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Does this manuscript meet PLOS Digital Health’s publication criteria? Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions? The manuscript must describe methodologically and ethically rigorous research with conclusions that are appropriately drawn based on the data presented.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available (please refer to the Data Availability Statement at the start of the manuscript PDF file)?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception. The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS Digital Health does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: I am satisfied with the changes the authors have made to the manuscript. I've just noted some minor grammar issues I noticed while reviewing the revised manuscript.
Line 104: outined should be outlined.
Lines 94/95: Are PMH and PMHD the same? If so I would change one so that the acronym is the same, otherwise the authors should define PMHD so it’s clear that it’s something different.
Line 110: “developing of the this” should be “development of this”
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
**********