pmcJ Hist Med Allied SciJ Hist Med Allied Sci752jalsci0413415jalsciJournal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences0022-50451468-4373Oxford University PressPMC10329774PMC10329774.110329774103297743701110610.1093/jhmas/jrad012jrad0121Original ArticlesAcademicSubjects/MED00450Visualizing BDSM and AIDS Activism: Archiving Pleasures, Sanitizing History
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6061-9900SlagstadKetil
Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo, Norway
Institut für Geschichte der Medizin und Ethik in der Medizin, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany ). The provocative erotic poster, created in 1996 by the main HIV/AIDS (Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome) organization in Norway, provided detailed advice on safer BDSM (Bondage & Discipline, Dominance & Submission, Sadism & Masochism) sex. The poster embodied the thorny issues, medical controversies, and political tensions of Norwegian AIDS history. One issue centered on differing views of “respectability” in fetish subcultures and mainstream lesbian and gay activism: which role should sex and pleasure have in liberation work? Another was the relationship between BDSM activists and the state. The health authorities funded fetish and AIDS activist organizations but refused to remove the psychiatric diagnoses pathologizing the very same communities. Finally, the poster invoked medical controversies about harm reduction and public health approaches to safer sex. As destructive and devastating as HIV was, in Norway, the epidemic spurred new cooperation between activists and health authorities and enabled new approaches to public and sexual health. The epidemic became an impetus for fetish activists to destigmatize BDSM, and it provided a platform from which activists contested psychiatric fetish diagnoses. The crucifixion poster not only represented this complex political landscape; together with other visual material, it also took part in creating this historical reality. That is the argument of this paper, which examines BDSM, fetish, and AIDS activism imagery from the two first decades of the Norwegian AIDS crisis.
 In the pioneering book Health and Illness: Images of Difference published in 1995, Sander L. Gilman lamented that images had been neglected in medical historiography except for illustrative purposes or as decontextualized “windows” into the medical past. Medical historians have largely accepted Gilman’s invitation and images are now seen as valuable primary sources in their own right. Medical historians have used photographs to recover patient experiences, and have approached medical photography as an experimental system for capturing and materializing medical uncertainty. Medical photos can also be explored as genre balancing art and science, objective and subjective. Certainly, this has been the case in the history of AIDS. Paula A. Treichler famously rejected the ambition of “looking through language” to determine what AIDS “really” was, and this opened new analytical approaches to how health and illness are created in language and images. Visual material is a particularly fruitful entry point for the history of AIDS because it shows how heuristic boundaries between culture, politics, and medicine were products of AIDS history itself. 
The verb to “visualize” has a double meaning: to imagine and to make visible. To visualize therefore is always also about rendering things invisible. Lukas Engelmann, for example, has explored the visualization of AIDS in medical atlases and how the atlas became a source for restoring medical authority in a time of scientific crisis, but also a way of making people and issues unseen. In a comprehensive analysis of AIDS photo-journalism, David Campbell showed how images from the two first decades often centered around abjection and otherness, which produced an anthropomorphized, somatic, and internalized representation of AIDS. Medical museums and art institutions, on the other hand, have often been particularly keen to archive and exhibit exceptionally striking, provocative, or creative AIDS imagery. By selecting, preserving, and curating images from AIDS activism on the strength of its artistic qualities, striking motives, and creative ambitions, the historical contexts have often been lost. Celebrating AIDS imagery for its aesthetic qualities alone, including its kitsch-ness, creative appeal, or aesthetic ideals, can undermine its political importance. This curatorial tradition has also contributed to creating a misleading universalized and aestheticized notion of AIDS activism. It has eclipsed the images’ social biographies and material preconditions of production, including the contested historical, political context in which they were created and circulated.
While AIDS imagery has become a valuable primary source for historians of medicine and scholars of activism, the stories of sexual subcultures and fetish activists have received less attention. This article puts fetish and AIDS activism images from private and public archives at the center of the analysis. Ludmilla Jordanova argued that historians should attend to images’ audiences and contexts of production, including past visual logics and the theoretical and critical frameworks in which images were created and viewed initially. To this end, this article uses historical interviews with artists and activists to develop the social biography of the imagery, including the material preconditions for its becoming, societal circulation, and historical, political, economic, social, and visual context. At the center are visualization practices of the first decades of the AIDS crisis, practices that rendered some bodies and some objectives visible and others unseen.
Images do stuff. Like documents, they are “on the move.” Images mediate between pasts, presents, and futures and play a constitutive role in the becoming of history. One way of getting past a naïve representationalist approach to visual material is to take its materiality seriously, while not ignoring what Elizabeth Edwards defined as “the double helix of the simultaneous existence of objects that are both singular and multiple.” For example, Richard A. McKay has shown how the idea of the flight attendant Gaétan Dugas as “Patient Zero” of the AIDS epidemic was produced through the creation and circulation of images: the cropping, zooming, and jump-cutting of photographs of Dugas’ face and body; the composition of photography and text in artwork; and distribution in adverts and the media. These visualization strategies “gave the epidemic a face” – a simplistic, reductive, and stigmatizing personalized image of the causes of AIDS. As these images circulated, they cemented a myth of a single man as the cause of an epidemic that continues to be reproduced. 
The double life of AIDS and fetish activism images shows that this imagery was never mere representation. AIDS and fetish images have played subversive roles as vehicles of resistance, objects of liberation, laboratories for harm reduction, and platforms for political action at a time when fetish communities were confronted with psychiatric pathologization and a deadly epidemic. The article juxtaposes “professional” AIDS posters – characterized by provocative motifs, striking artistic quality, high-quality creation, and advanced production values – and the “amateur,” crude imagery of fetish subcultures to map out various activist strategies. Images from the first group have often ended up in museums and public collections, while images from the second group have not. Which material has been preserved and archived for the future has ultimately been connected to hierarchies and power dynamics, even within queer communities. In 1986, when the organization was dissolved, two leathermen burned the entire archive of the main fetish club SLM Norge (Scandinavian Leather Men Norway) in one of their fireplaces. AIDS dramatically increased stigma against the leather and fetish community and activists were afraid that the identity of its members could be revealed. To avoid the risk of reinforcing the same hierarchies when writing the history of fetish activism – the absence of images reproducing the non-existence of history – this article expands the understanding of fetish activism imagery to include material from “untraditional” and non-institutional sources such as newspapers, and uses activists’ private collections. 
Grouping together various forms of imagery often treated separately, such as journalism, activism, public health strategies, and art, as “fetish visualization” opens the manifold visual strategies of fetish activists. Fetish activists used photographs and images to stage themselves to the public and health authorities, for example by contributing to curated photo interviews in the lay press or by circulating safer fetish sex material between the subcultures and the health authorities. Tying AIDS activism and fetish activism together became an extremely productive strategy to legitimize fetish activism. Visualization became a way for activists to “normalize” fetish culture and enact fetish, leather, and BDSM communities as “responsible” public health actors.

## Confronting the New by Mobilizing a Legacy
In North America and the UK, the first people affected by AIDS were leathermen. For this reason, leathermen often faced stigma within the lesbian and gay communities that reinforced pre-existing prejudices against the fetish communities. For example, BDSM and fisting (using the fist for anal sex) were labeled as particularly dangerous, even in the absence of scientific evidence. As Gayle S. Rubin argued, stereotypes of leather sexualities as “inherently dangerous, unsafe, undesirable, or unhealthy” were “assimilated into concerns over AIDS-related risks and hazards.” Also in the historiography and HIV origin literature, leathermen and “fist-fuckers” have been singled out as a discernible group contributing to the early spread of HIV in North America. Edward Hooper, for instance, scapegoated them as “sadistic” people involved in “ill-advised” sexual practices. 
However, as media in the early months of 1983 reported the “mysterious, deadly and contagious disease” that had reached Norway, activists had already begun to hammer out responses to protect their communities. Historians have demonstrated how AIDS activists in North America and the UK built on health activism in lesbian and gay communities in the decades preceding the epidemic. These efforts included the creation of health clinics to test and treat venereal diseases among men who had sex with men. But health activism also expanded a narrow biomedical understanding of health and disease to include the negative health effects of racism and the stigma of growing up in heteronormative societies. Also in 1970s Norway, lesbian and gay activists and healthcare workers created healthcare services and infrastructures for lesbians and gays. With the advent of AIDS, activists used these networks as a foundation for concerted action. Among the first to respond to the looming crisis were activists and members of the fetish community. In 1982, the fetish club SLM Norge dedicated a full page to Kaposi’s sarcoma in its members’ magazine ( ).
 The human immunodeficiency virus was isolated in 1983 and 1984 (the abbreviation HIV was coined in 1986), but it took several years before disease mechanisms were properly understood, including prognostic factors, whether HIV was a necessary or sufficient disease cause, and natural development from transmission of the virus to full-blown AIDS. Hence, the article about Kaposi’s sarcoma reflects how little was known about the new disease during the early years in the medical community and among gay men. Returning from New York, activists reported that little was known about its causes, but that it could be related to “a special lifestyle,” including multiple sex partners, poppers, other drugs and repeated sexually transmitted infections and cytomegalovirus infection (CMV). When the first cases of AIDS were diagnosed in Norway, specialists in microbiology and infectious diseases supported the hypothesis that AIDS was caused by several different viruses. It should therefore come as no surprise that, years into the crisis, many gay men continued to believe that AIDS was caused by numerous lifestyle factors. Consequently, in early 1982, the author of the article could not provide specific advice about how his fellow leathermen could best protect themselves. However, he encouraged community members to “continue to follow the developments and take the future results into consideration,” a statement that exemplifies how seriously activists took the looming threat and how they rapidly mobilized to protect their community. 
Leather culture goes back at least to the sexual and fetish subcultures in the interwar Weimar Republic, before the Nazi takeover. Leather fetish was not confined to one specific sexual practice or identity, and could include gays, lesbians, heterosexuals, or sex workers. In the US, the first leather communities emerged in bigger cities after the end of the Second World War and from there gradually spread to other metropoles around the world. In the late 1940s and early 1950s, leather became a way for gay men to express a hypermasculine form of sexuality and distance themselves from the effeminate and therefore stigmatized labels of “queens” and “fairies.” Motorcycles, bike-wear, leather boots, jackets, jeans, chaps, and Harley caps materialized a newfound male homosexual masculinity. The Kaposi’s sarcoma illustration invoked and inscribed itself into this long tradition of leather hypermasculinity. As ciphers for gay male leather culture, these dominant images underline the types of masculinities that were allowed and celebrated, and disavowed and policed within the gay male leather communities. Internationally as well as in Norway, this homonormativity has been structured around Whiteness. 
Sex and S/M (sadomasochism) parties, usually held in private homes, played a central role in the emerging leather communities, but the subcultures also had a much broader function, enabling the confluence of a range of countercurrents, movements, and meanings. Leather subcultures stood for brotherhood and solidarity, radical and rebellious individualism, fierce resistance to a conformist and heteronormative post-war society, and celebrated kinky sex. North American subcultures were intersected by class, gender, race, and geography. From the 1960s, the leather scene gave rise to a plurality of fetish communities and practices, such as “fist-fuckers” and BDSM subcultures. With the sexual revolutions, the Stonewall riot and queer liberation, the original North American leather and S/M scene and community fragmented. At the same time, a range of leather clubs were founded in European metropoles, and in 1974, the European Confederation of Motorcycle Clubs (ECMC) was established in London as an umbrella organization for European gay leather and fetish clubs. The 1970s also witnessed the birth of the first North American political S/M organizations and new S/M and fisting clubs for lesbians and heterosexuals. By the 1980s, leather had become a dress code that no longer necessarily communicated membership of a community or sexual subculture; leather and kink had been diversified, but also commodified and “normalized” as fashion. AIDS created a crisis of leadership in leather culture, Rubin argued, and many institutions had to close. However, the crisis also fostered new alliances and leather social life centered around AIDS prevention. 
The Norwegian fetish scene and sexual subcultures were smaller and less organized. The country’s first leather and fetish club, SLM Norge, was founded in Oslo in May 1976 by a small group of friends who arranged private parties every month. In order not to provoke or attract unwanted attention, they presented themselves as a parachute club to remain undercover and unrecognized when they rented clubhouses and sports halls. The club initially counted thirty members and was allowed to throw parties in the basement of Metropol, the main lesbian and gay venue in Oslo. The club leader recalled being under the surveillance of the police, who thought they were neo-Nazis. To avoid trouble, they notified the police in advance, since many members showed up in uniforms. In the following years, small communities emerged in bigger cities, and starting in 1983 (the same year as the first man was diagnosed with AIDS in Norway) the club threw parties for members and guests every Sunday night at the Boys Club in downtown Oslo, at that time the capital’s largest gay club. SLM Norge was dissolved in 1986 and reestablished as SLM-Oslo two years later. 
The article on Kaposi’s sarcoma was accompanied by an erotic drawing of a leatherman in Muir cap and leather chaps ( ). The man with bare buttocks and a hungry, inviting look was a salute to the legendary Tom of Finland drawings. Placed at the same level as the title, it was as if the leatherman himself was the messenger delivering the devastating and deadly news about the skin cancer, while simultaneously refusing to bow to the moralism and sterility of many public health campaigns. The drawing was an early example of how fetish activists insisted on developing health advice adapted to their communities, using the language and information channels of the subcultures, mobilizing the long legacy of sexualized visual culture in leather communities. The fist on the magazine front page of a 1983 issue was an obvious reference to “fist-fucking,” but depicted as punching through a brick wall, it also worked as a symbol of pride and resistance ( ). In other words, from the onset of the epidemic, activists anchored AIDS responses in a rich and proud visual culture.
 

## Haunted by the (Visual) Clichés of Fetish Culture
The proud visual legacy of leather culture became a resource with which to confront AIDS, but sometimes the fetish aesthetics also created hurdles for activists. One example is the “fetish man.” The photograph was eye-catching: a tall, sturdy man in fetish gear – a Muir cap, mask, biker jacket and chaps – posed against a military tarpaulin. His skin was almost completely covered by leather except some dark chest hair sprouting out of the partly unbuttoned jacket. One hand on his rear, the leatherman pushed his groin towards the spectator, the other hand grabbing his genitals. The fetish man gave off a highly sexual vibe ( ).
 The photographer, Fin Serck-Hanssen, became a moving force in Norwegian AIDS photography activism. When AIDS emerged, he already frequented the rock and punk subculture and remembered finding Oslo’s queer nightlife conservative and superficial: “My first photos were of neatly blow-dried 1970s folks who had small hand purses in which they kept cigarettes and lighters, and then they placed the handbags on the dancefloor and danced around them. We used to refer to them as the swells.” In his early work, Serck-Hanssen wanted to challenge conforming norms of gender and sexuality in the queer communities, and the 1985 solo-exhibition 10 blå menn [10 Blue Men] consisted of ten blue portrait photos of friends and acquaintances portraying the diversity of Oslo’s subcultures. Serck-Hanssen first shot the 10 Blue Men portraits as black and white photographs before placing them on the ground and decorating them with various things such as maggots, rainbow sprinkles, and plastic foil. He then photographed the originals in daylight with a tungsten film that gave the photos a strong blue cast. In preparation for the photoshoot, he covered the original with water before placing it in the freezer. After taking it out and just before the ice covering had melted, he cracked the surface to create scratches and bubbles on a wet and uneven surface.
AIDS reinforced disagreements between the fetish communities and mainstream lesbian and gay organizations about who should represent the lesbian and gay community in public, which queer lifestyles were “supportable” and “worthy,” and ultimately what should be the goals of liberation work. The lesbian and gay organization Det norske forbundet av 1948 (DNF-48, The Norwegian League of 1948), which owned Metropol, refused to allow Serck-Hanssen to put up the poster in the club because it “didn’t suit their members.” Gay men should be portrayed in a way that was acceptable to straight people: “We were supposed to become more heteronormative, not be provocative.” Instead, he put up the poster around the city, with the paradoxical consequence that the only space in which the photo was actively denied a presence was the main lesbian and gay institution. Talking too openly or explicitly about sexual practices risked undermining the policy of promoting romantic and relational aspects of same-sex love, not to mention the heteronormative ideal of monogamy. This policy dated back to the 1950s. In contrast to activists in Denmark and Sweden, the activists of the first lesbian and gay organization deliberately chose the term homofil (homophile) instead of homoseksuell (homosexual). This tradition made it particularly challenging for fetish activists to be heard and have a seat at the table of mainstream lesbian and gay activism. It was not until the 1990s and 2000s that fetish communities gained acceptance among lesbian and gay activists and recognition that their identities and lifestyles were legitimate and worth fighting for.
Some powerful activists in the DNF-48 opposed turning sex, pleasure, and sexual subcultures into a fundamental part of liberation work. On top of that, they were worried that AIDS would overshadow all activism, especially if it became connected to lesbian identity, health, or liberation. Lesbian and gay medical professionals had already publicly criticized the fetish community for “giving a false impression of homosexuals that solidifies the notion of homosexuals as hypersexual beings,” and stated that “the so-called ‘queens’ and leatherboys represent a very small minority of the homosexual community.” Some years later, the gay author and historian Nils Johan Ringdal published the partly autobiographical novel Lystens død? Bekjennelse fra en mann av gay-generasjonen [Death of Desire? Confessions of a Man of the Gay Generation], describing a gay culture and lifestyle filled with sex, drugs, and electronic music. Kim Friele, the iconic activist and long-time leader and secretary general of the DNF-48, condemned the book publicly: 
I already knew that some homosexual men found pleasure rolling around in the sewage and sexual cannibalism that Ringdal describes, but there is one thing that I have never understood: that for some people, their whole personal integrity, their whole self-image, and their whole life experience are based in the groin. There is nothing but body and groin in that man. 
The remarks laid bare conflicting ideals in lesbian and gay activism. “While we were home in Norway doing lesbian and gay liberation work, Nils Johan Ringdal was in New York showing off his butt to other men. Now he is doing all he can to tear down what we have built up,” Friele said. She believed the book was a major setback for lesbian and gay liberation work. Labelling sexual subcultures and desires as “sewage” created a division between supportable and “respectable” liberation work on the one hand and discardable and disgraceful practices on the other. This statement must be seen against the backdrop of the struggle for legal same-sex union, the main goal of lesbian and gay organizations at that time. The 1993 Act recognizing same-sex partnerships in Norway was a product of intense lobbying by lesbian and gay activists. The “bastard image” of fetish, cruising, and sexual subcultures broke with the image of monogamous, “responsible,” and “good” lesbian and gay couples that leading activists mobilized in the political struggle. The concerns of the fetish activists were an obstacle to this political goal, and their objectives could be sacrificed.
The photograph of the blue fetish man created a cold and distant erotic image of the fetish community and played on a stereotypical view of fetish culture: not tender, loving, or supportive, but lonely, rough, and individualized. As we shall see, this was in stark contrast to the picture the community painted of itself only a few years later. In the meantime, AIDS had shattered the community. The crisis became an opportunity for fetish activists to redevelop traditional “relational ideals” of Norwegian lesbian and gay activists into a caring version of fetish practice as the main AIDS prevention tool.

## “Leatherwomen: Oppressed as Women, Lesbians and Leather Fetishists!”
The S/M community had a complicated history and conflicted legacy of gender exclusion. Fetish posters reflected this tension by reproducing unspoken ideals and by enacting solidarity and inclusion. A 1997 poster, for example, invited fetish people “of all kinds” interested in “S/M, fetishism, transvestism, and other exiting sexual interests” to party together and “learn from each other” ( ). It showed a woman in a leather dress, gloves, and stockings using a whip to jerk off, while a handcuffed man in a crop top, chaps, and bicep bands was grabbed by numerous gloved hands. A year later, another poster for a fetish party featured an androgynous human spider with a gas mask and six legs in women’s shoes, sitting on the backs of two people with their heads in a bucket ( ). Both posters can be seen as a response to the fetish communities’ problematic history of gender exclusion since people of all genders were welcome to party together. However, it also exemplified how AIDS activism in Norway was structured around Whiteness and ignored minorities within minorities (such as the Sami population, national minorities, and the immigrant population). Literally all Norwegian AIDS and fetish imagery from that period portrays White people.
 In S/M communities, it was more rule than exception that clubs and spaces were reserved for men, both in Norway and the US, but there were a few options for women. The Catacombs club in San Francisco had women’s nights from 1979, and the following year a significant number of lesbians, bisexuals, gay men, and heterosexual people partied together in the Bay Area for the first time. When SLM Norge was established in 1976, it was men-only; two years later, an amendment of the club’s laws allowed women to become members in “very special circumstances.” However, very few women ended up joining the club; women’s access was met with “much resistance” from members, the members’ magazine reported. In April 1983 at an extraordinary general meeting, it was ruled that women would no longer have access to the club, although existing female members were not expelled. This also meant that trans, non-binary, and gender-nonconforming people were unwelcome.
The student movements, lesbian and gay activism, and second-wave feminism of the 1960s and 1970s challenged rigid gender norms and a patriarchal societal order. In this context, the power hierarchies and gender roles in S/M culture could appear archaic, even repressive. The literary critic and queer theorist Leo Bersani noted that S/M was “complicit with the perpetuation of regimes that promote the erotic opportunities of domination and enslavement” and “profoundly conservative” because it relied on societies’ power structures rather than uprooting them and rethinking and remodeling social institutions. In 1980, a left-wing lesbian and gay organization named Gruppe Lambda held a meeting with the agenda “Fetishism and S/M: reactionary fashion phenomenon or sexual oppression?” Was there a difference between wearing a leather jacket or a Sigrun Berg scarf (i.e., a colorful woven scarf popular among young people on the political left at that time) to show that you belonged to a particular group or demonstrate identity, the activists asked. A columnist in a left-wing/liberal tabloid characterized leather porn as “Nazis in Hitler costume” and the leather scene as a “movement” coming from the US “seeping into the country disguised as a fashion phenomenon.” Fetish was constructed as a capitalist US phenomenon threatening the welfare state with its core ideals of gender equality including in sex and sexual liberation. Therefore, it was particularly important for fetish activists to depoliticize sexual subcultures, dissociate capitalism and fetish sex, and argue that fetish culture had nothing to do with politics. “I demonstrated how socialists could practice SM with the leather belt one was wearing or clamps from the nearby hardware store without becoming a slave of capital,” Svein Skeid recalled. He had just come out as a leatherman and represented the position of the fetish communities in Gruppe Lamda. But instead of depoliticizing S/M, his statement legitimized fetish culture in socialism, in effect re-associating fetish and politics.
Feminists attacked BDSM communities and accused them of reproducing patriarchal power structures and traditional misogynistic and oppressive gender roles that legitimized violence against women. “Is rape in marriage ‘the same’ as an equal S/M-relationship?” Gruppe Lambda asked. One lesbian activist and medical doctor told the newspaper that “One is quite naive if one does not see the symbols of this culture as pure violence.” In the 1990s, radical feminists increasingly attacked sexual subcultures portraying S/M as violence and abuse. “Do homosexuals really want to increase their own burden by carrying ‘oppressed’ sadomasochists on their back?” two feminists asked, echoing the position of lesbian and gay activists in the preceding decade. The fight against pornography and BDSM even created unprecedented alliances between the main radical feminist organization Kvinnefronten [The Women’s Front] and the church, and in June 1989, an outspoken bishop opened the feminist group’s exhibition on pornography. 
However, members in the fetish communities were used to challenge these arguments which did not distinguish between consensual and non-consensual sex. Leatherfolk simply “mirror the deadly games that a culture dishonest with itself plays,” Mark Thomson wrote in a book about leather culture. In a study of a leather culture in the US, anthropologist Peter Hennen argued that the community provided “membership in a fraternity of real men that had been presumed to be forbidden.” Exaggerating and parodying societal power structures in safe and caring spaces was a way of challenging and undermining them, albeit not in an ironic way, wrote leather activist Geoff Mains. Victorian morale and capitalism had estranged man from his biological and tribal nature, but leather culture was a “deeply moving and highly personal world” that provided meaningful relations between humans. 
The unease about fetish and BDSM sex among many feminists was of course not a phenomenon unique to Norway. Writing in the early 1980s, Gayle Rubin argued that part of the reason why S/M had become a bête noir to the women’s movement in the US was caused by the feminist ideal of replacing male with female values, what Rubin defined as “femininism.” Feminists should not celebrate sex for pleasure but for its potential for intimacy, and therefore “antifeminist” forms of sex had to be rejected, in particular S/M, since, as Rubin wrote, “It is dark and polarized, extreme and ritualized, and above all, it celebrates difference and power.” Similarly, in an analysis of Norwegian lesbian radical feminist movements and their publications in the 1970s and 1980s, historian Tone Hellesund argued that lesbian activists constructed male sexuality as radically different from female sexuality, which was elevated as “authentic” and “intimate.” Leather activists argued on their hand that feminists and lesbian and gay communities reproduced the exact same structural patriarchal and heteronormative mechanisms they sought to tear down by overlooking and ignoring the desires and pleasures of some of its members. Leatherwomen were “oppressed both as women, lesbians and leather fetishists,” Gruppe Lambda emphasized. As long as the relationship was built on communal respect and pleasure, why should people not feel free to enjoy sex and explore their sexualities and desires?
AIDS made the discussion even more sensationalist, as two discourses about “responsibility” were combined. On its front page in large bold letters a national newspaper stated that “HIV-infected comes forward – Rough gay sex in Oslo,” telling a sensationalist story of “uninhibited, free sex” in the capital’s fetish community. The goal was to create an image of an irresponsible community, which was underscored by the editorial decision of making the activist’s positive HIV status into a major point of the story. However, behind sensationalist headlines was a different story of how activists had turned “responsibility” and community building into major prevention and liberation strategies, and this shift was reflected in their visualization strategies. In the interview, the AIDS activist Arne Husdal provided the nuanced argument that transmission risk was related to how people practiced sex, not the number of sex partners. People in the fetish community had a “secure relationship” to sexuality, he said, therefore they were well-aware of the difference between “safe” and “unsafe” sex. Moreover, the leather and BDSM communities had long traditions of addressing issues of disclosure and consent, domination and submission, and agreeing personal boundaries before play.
A series of posters enacted a new phase of proud fetish solidarity, which, along with Husdal’s statement, show how fetish activists worked to distance themselves from the “rough,” unloving and uncaring picture of fetish communities created in the press, or even by the blue fetish man some years earlier. “Honor the leather jacket. Leathergays have much experience with signaling interests and personal boundaries. By talking together, safer sex becomes one of the agreements between leathergays,” one poster read ( ). Another stated “Only the fantasy sets the limits. Gays who are open and accepting of their sexual orientation have less risky sex than gays with little social network. Prieur 1988. There is a lot of health in accepting one’s nature in a safe and exciting community” ( ). The poster referred to anthropologist Annick Prieur’s book Kjærlighet mellom menn i aidsens tid [Love between men in the time of AIDS] (1988), based on interviews with gay men living in Norway, and the design was strikingly simple: interesting because aesthetically it is so uninteresting. As unillustrated black and white posters referencing academic work, they could easily be dismissed as dull. But perhaps that was exactly the dry message the fetish activists wanted to send: a “responsible,” well-read and informed community. As will become apparent, the message was not only directed at their communities but also at the funding authorities.
 

## Framing Fetish Activism as AIDS Activism
In the context of attacks from feminists, conservatives, and the press, it became increasingly important for fetish activists to tie fetish and AIDS activism together, as a way of sanitizing their political agenda. The prosecution of gay S/M men in Operation Spanner by the Obscene Publications Squad of the Metropolitan Police in the UK began in 1987, in which sixteen men were convicted for engaging in consensual S/M sex. This put the question of fetish people’s sexual freedom and human rights on the political agenda and gave impetus to queer and fetish activists to work together to remove the psychiatric diagnoses of F65.0 Fetishism, F65.1 Transvestic fetishism, and F65.5 Sadomasochism from the International Classification of Diseases (ICD). These diagnostic codes, which were added to ICD-10 and approved by the WHO in 1990, remained in use in Norway until 2010 and were not completely removed until ICD-11 was adopted in 2019. Psychiatric diagnostic thinking built on a long psychoanalytic tradition of pathologizing BDSM practices. In a praised Swedish psychodynamic psychiatry textbook from 1984, for instance, S/M was categorized as a “sexual deviation” often found among people with a “strongly authoritarian upbringing patterns with parents who have tabooed sexuality, sometimes unsettling memories of physical punishment.” In 1982, a Norwegian psychologist told the newspaper that people who practiced S/M had “severe problems,” adding that “homosexual men’s celebration of the so-called hypermasculine role” could lead to “sexual violence.” A prominent professor of psychiatry stated in a textbook that “Feelings of guilt play a major role in the sado-masochistic attitude. The sadistic behavior eases the feeling of inferiority, while the masochism sooths the feeling of guilt. … In other words, sado-masochistic relationships can share certain resemblances to authoritarian parent-child relationship.” Among psychologists and psychiatrists at that time, fetish diagnoses had widespread support, and fetish people were generally believed to be mentally unwell.
In the 1990s, intense lobbying by fetish activists led to the inclusion of the objectives of fetish communities in lesbian and gay activism. This culminated in 1996, when the convention of the main lesbian and gay organization in Norway agreed on the long-term goal of removing fetish diagnoses. However, this was mostly a symbolic gesture. “We did not get much support from the LLH,” said fetish activist Odd Reiersøl, referring to the main activist organization. Svein Skeid, another moving force in fetish activism, said “The struggle for depathologization was as much about increasing acceptance in the lesbian and gay movement as it was directed against the health authorities.” Fetish activists such as Skeid created new organizations to include marginalized parts of queer communities, like Lesber i lær [Lesbians in Leather], founded in 1993. Two years later, Smia [The Smithy], an activist group organized under the main lesbian and gay organization, was established with a goal of repealing the diagnoses and promoting self-esteem among fetishfolk, developing a “healthy relationship” with pleasure and sexuality, and preventing HIV in the fetish communities. Smia also provided a place for fetish lesbians to meet and develop a new sense of pride and community, and lesbian sadists and masochists gave interviews to the LGBT press under headings such as “S/M – a sexy diagnosis.” 
As a psychologist and psychiatric physiotherapist respectively, Reiersøl and Skeid had credibility as health professionals. Along with Smia and trans activists, Reiersøl and Skeid founded the ReviseF65 Forum in 1997, supported by the LLH. The heterosexual fetish organization SMil joined a year later. Reiersøl and Skeid published several scholarly articles, including in the Journal of the Norwegian Psychological Association, demonstrating the amphibious nature of fetish activism: how fetish activists mobilized their professional identity and experience as health experts to contest the harmful effects of fetish diagnoses. As in the US, this new phase also points to increased cooperation and solidarity between fetish people, whether straight, transgender, lesbian, bisexual, or gay. 
From the foundation of the Gay Health Committee in 1983 (the main gay and lesbian AIDS organization), fetish activists were on the board. This secured access to the Norwegian Directorate of Health, which was also represented, and funded AIDS and fetish organizations. One way to gain credibility for their political struggle among the authorities, who ultimately had the power to remove the psychiatric diagnoses, was to tie all fetish activism to AIDS prevention. Stigma and secrecy, fueled by psychiatric pathologization, hindered efficient responses to AIDS, the activists argued. Safer sex practices in sexual subcultures hinged on talking openly about pleasure, desires, and sexual practices, and depended on building pride and self-esteem in fetish communities. The pamphlet Lærhomsers lille sorte [Leatherman’s Little Black Book] (a reference to Mao’s little red book) was provided to SLM members, underscoring the long traditions of gay male leather culture and the community’s foundation of respect and solidarity. While gay leathermen often had particularly hard times coming out, as they had to come out as gay and leathermen, the pamphlet underscored that the leather bar could be like an “oasis in the desert of love” in which many people had found a life partner.
Much AIDS prevention was based on humor, such as the drill team Drillarguri demonstrating safer sex measures in queer venues, and Virusgruppa [The Virus Group] performing in clubs to collect money for people with HIV and AIDS admitted to the city’s hospitals. Humor became a potent tool with which fetish activists could break through the prejudices and clichés of the subculture as harsh or unwelcoming, an image reproduced by the fetish man photograph. “The only perversion is unsafe sex! Play safer sex,” one slogan read. From the beginning of the epidemic, fetish activists used humor and sarcasm to challenge stigma and stereotypes, such as members of San Francisco’s S/M community, who met stigmatizing remarks from other gay activists by advertising for “BLACK PLAGUE WEDNESDAYS” at the Boot Camp Club. Fetish activists also played with traditional Norwegian slogans and proverbs on posters and flyers, such as “There is nothing like bad skiing conditions – only bad lubrication. Use water-based lube” (the Norwegian word for ski wax, smøring, also referred to lubrication) or “There is no bad weather – only bad clothing. Dress in rubber” (rubber also referring to condoms). 
The principle, which also guided the official prevention strategy, was to follow the virus, meaning that preventative measures must be adapted to the individual situations in which there was a risk of contracting HIV. These approaches built on harm reduction rooted in the communities, which spoke to different people and needs instead of giving totalizing advice. The leading idea was that everybody could do something to protect their health. Acknowledging that some BDSM practices had the potential to cause physical harm, especially for inexperienced people, activists also offered first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation courses. They provided safer sex materials, such as folders and flyers with detailed descriptions of BDSM practices, including drawings of body parts that are no-go for spanking and whipping ( ), suggesting the use of disposable gloves when fisting, advising readers not to share razorblades and giving more general tips around discussing safe sex rules with new partners. 
 The drawings of safer sex spanking not only provided information on how to reduce the risk of injury, but also the imagery itself was crucial in building the communal sense of pride in practicing safer fetish sex, as well as providing physical “evidence” to funding authorities that the communities took prevention seriously. Unlike the raw, hard, and somewhat lonely expression of the Kaposi’s sarcoma drawing, the fisting hand, or the blue fetish man, these images invoked love and care, precaution and responsibility. Because safer sex imagery circulated between the fetish communities and the health bureaucracy, these images became a way for activists to build trust with funding authorities. These drawings showed how seriously the fetish communities took HIV prevention, health issues, and safer sex. Safer sex imagery provided a curated and community-endorsed window for authorities and society into the hidden practices and behaviors of fetish communities. This condoned voyeurism was another facet of fetish visualization: the images were actors on the public stage that allowed the welfare state, represented by the health bureaucracy, to inspect its minorities. 

## Visualizing Pleasure
In the new phase of depathologization activism, activists consciously used the media to make members of the fetish community appear more visible and relatable. In 1991, fetish activists marched openly for the first time in the Pride parade, under the slogan “Out of the diagnostic lists – into SLM,” denoting a new period of public visibility for sexual subcultures ( ). The photo depicting a group of leathermen marching together not only evidenced a more open phase of fetish activism but also produced a new image of the fetish community as a public community: fetish subculture was no longer confined to dark basements behind closed doors but enacted as a proud collective of people fighting together for a common cause. 
 The same year, a major national tabloid printed a long interview with the leathermen and activists Tore Stensby and Svein Skeid, introducing the term lærhomse (leather faggot) to the Norwegian public on the front page. Under the headings “We are completely normal peasants!” and “Gay on the countryside,” the couple was depicted in leather jackets tenderly embracing, passionately kissing in a field in front of a cow and posing in the kitchen. “We are two teddy bears who love to talk about feelings. We cry, laugh, fight, and become friends again.” By tying fetish to farming – a fundamental and respected institution in the history of democracy and state formation in Norway, as well as cultural symbol of rural policy in a country with a dispersed population (literally “district policy” in Norwegian) – these photos challenged prejudices about perversions and notions of normality, irritating conventional boundaries between the normal and the pathological ( ). As the images combined leather with livestock farming, tenderness, and the mundane reality of kitchen work, fetish was vernacularized and rendered harmless.
 It was Stensby and Skeid who suggested their farm as the setting of the interview. This was probably a strategic choice to present a less frightening and more relatable image of fetish culture. A year later, for example, they published an op-ed entitled “Turn the shame!” in which they denounced the widespread homonormative and negative attitudes of gay activists towards the fetish communities ( ). Shame had become a stumbling block in AIDS prevention work, they reasoned, and the article was illustrated with a heart-shaped photo of the authors kissing. The photo was taken by the same photographer as the Pride parade photo, and it was also used on a SLM poster: “Leather and love. Many solid relationships have started among the chains in the leather bar – the leather oasis in the desert of love” ( ). Fetish imagery circulated between the press and the fetish communities, and the activists mobilized them in their efforts to reshape the public image of fetish culture.
 Photographs of the mundane, humane, and relatable lives of fetish activists helped a new notion of fetish come about. AIDS activists had followed a similar strategy earlier in the epidemic. This “relational phase” of AIDS prevention imagery also reflected disagreements among activists about the role of monogamy, celibacy, and the importance of reducing the number of sex partners. In the first AIDS flyer from 1983, activists encouraged people to reduce the number of sex partners and to stop cruising. Moreover, the first major public safer sex campaign by the Gay Health Committee consisted of posters and advertisements with black and white photos of two half-naked men embracing each other, under headings like Glede og omsorg [Pleasure and Care], Åpenhet og respekt [Openness and Respect], and Trygghet og ansvar [Safety and Responsibility] ( ), reproducing aspects of trust and care, closeness and “responsibility.”
 If the first epoch of AIDS posters reflected the goal of reducing the number of sex partners and developing alternative ways of experiencing joy, later campaigns were characterized by a more direct focus on sexual practices. For instance, 1990s posters emphasized the importance of using condoms. This shift in prevention strategy was reflected in a new visual aesthetic, with activists directly portraying safer sex techniques and practices. The new explicit depiction of nudity and sex invoked a very different version of activism and safer sex advice, highlighting lust and pleasure. For example, one poster with the humorous but unsubtle caption Godt utstyrt [Well-equipped] depicted a man with condoms and lube in his jeans pocket. The photo was cropped to highlight the contour of his erect penis ( ). On the Kondom [Condom] poster, the names of global cities framed a photo of a naked man underwater showing off his buttocks and large, erect penis ( ). Both posters contained a minimum of text about safer sex practices: on one, the only word was condom. In contrast to the posters of the mid-1980s, with contained large boxes of text with detailed information, in 1990s posters the images delivered the message.
 AIDS did not change the meaning and aesthetics of health posters, Roger Cooter and Claudia Stein reasoned. The roots of late twentieth-century public health imagery, which included a new focus on the idealized and eroticized body, must be traced back to changes in the means of production, the revival of poster art, the design revolution, and the commercialization of health advertisement. The condom and underwater man posters embodied this shifting visual context and economy. The 1990s posters had a simple message – use a condom – but they also signaled a new globalized and liberalized phase of AIDS activism and public health imagery. In this era, activists, artists, health authorities, and public health bodies believed that the message of safer sex could move freely across borders and national contexts. Eye-catching images of phalluses conveyed the life-saving message without much text or contextualization – from Tromsø to Warsaw to Bangkok and Rio de Janeiro, according to one poster. At that time, the photographer and activist, Fin Serck-Hanssen, had started a job in an advertising company. This gave him access to high-quality printing techniques and efficient production technology. In other words, the advertising industry and economy, the infrastructure of mass-production and the design of capitalism, contributed to a new visual context and the practice of AIDS and fetish activism.
However, even though access to hightech photo equipment and production facilities professionalized AIDS and fetish visual activism, activists continued to do most of the work, usually unpaid. For the poster of the crucified leatherman from 1996, for instance, the activists built a three-meter-tall cross in the garden of the photographer’s mother, blackening it with a tar-burner ( ). “She was a bit embarrassed that we were burning a cross in her garden,” Serck-Hanssen recalled. “But since it took such a long time, she ended up helping us.” In the photo studio, a SLM member climbed up and the photographer used a 4x5 inch large format camera, the kind of slow-working cameras where the photographer pulls a focusing hood over the head, allowing for exquisite photo quality.
Unlike many other safer sex posters from the same period, it did not center a phallus but a behind. The poster provided advice about safer sex (“If you are fisting several people, make sure to change gloves between each partner”), but also enacted S/M sex as a safer way of having sex more generally: fetish sex was mobilized as safer sex. The crucified leatherman held up fetish sex as a safe alternative to other forms of sex, contradicting prejudices in the media and medicine. It ridiculed the moralism of feminists and the church, while challenging the pathologizing effects of psychiatric classifications. But the fetish man with his buttocks exposed on the cross – an obvious reference to the St. Andrew’s cross/X-cross used in BDSM to restrain the submissive person in spreadeagle position – also played with stereotypical ideas about fetish culture. Decentering the phallus, the penetrated or penetrable man ridiculed hegemonic and homonormative versions of masculinity and activism: the hypermasculine bottom dying in joy subverted masculinity sexually while reinforcing gender norms. If death from AIDS was symbolized by a crucifix, fetish sex was celebrated for its pleasure-providing capacities.

## Conclusion
In the short term, AIDS became an obstacle to liberation work in sexual subcultures. In the longer term, fetish activists succeeded in gaining visibility and recognition in queer communities and organizations and in building trust with the authorities. AIDS provided a platform from which activists could work to destigmatize BDSM practices, cooperate with the authorities, develop pragmatic approaches to public health, and provide alternatives to medicalized and pathologizing understandings of sexual subcultures, identities, and behavior. This work was mediated throughout. Activists implemented and experimented with new techniques and technologies with photographs, drawings, design, and typefaces to hammer out responses to AIDS and to depathologize BDSM. But the activism of visualization was not limited to shifting aesthetics, styles, and motives; visualization was about strategies of curation, making things visible, offering glimpses for inspection, and condoning voyeurism. Sometimes, images took on roles of their own and became actors that enabled knowledge to circulate among the subcultures, the public, and the authorities.
A dilemma pervaded fetish activism: the effort of blending in while standing out. The practice of making visible and invisible, the politics of visibility, shows how activists struggled to protect their community’s singularity and “otherness,” while redeveloping and adjusting their culture and behavior to a time of crisis. Visualizing fetish activism was a vulnerable project, perhaps particularly so in a relatively small country with conformist undercurrents and a welfare state with paternalistic traditions. One the one hand, the community wrestled with a proud visual legacy that often reproduced a homonormative, White, masculinist image of fetish culture. On the other, activists sought to build trust between health authorities and lesbian and gay activists, who in their turn, were concerned that a sexualized image could threaten marriage reform. They therefore strove to create a new image of fetish based on relational and caring traditions in the communities. The conjoined visualization of fetish liberation and AIDS prevention became a fundamental strategy for fetish activists. At the same time, they were aware of the importance of protecting fetish culture as what Peter Hennen characterized as a “secret” world: the realization that “gay leather culture can only be fully experienced through a process of initiation into the world of gay leather.” The vulnerability of this project lay in mobilizing “respectability” and “responsibility” to build support without compromising the uniqueness and history of leather and fetish culture.
The recovery work of reimagining and revisualizing fetish and AIDS activism could start with what Elizabeth Freeman called the “traces of historically specific forms of pleasure,” traces that have been “lost, repressed, disavowed, or subsumed into institutional forms.” Traditionally, only the most striking AIDS imagery has been preserved, archived, and displayed. For example, the fetish man photo and the crucifixion poster are now in the collections of major art institutions such as the National Museum of Norway, Preus Museum of Photography, and the Victoria and Albert Museum, while the phallic safer sex posters are available in the Wellcome Collection. Celebrated for striking aesthetic qualities, these images show how AIDS obscured, transgressed, and dismantled boundaries between science and art, public health and activism, medicine and politics. However, this article has pursued an analytical approach that combines inquiry of aesthetics with social biography. This implies attending to the political, social, cultural, economic, and visual context of its production but also the actions and afterlife of imagery: what images did. The juxtaposition of various fetish and AIDS activism images, from art and AIDS poster to newspaper articles, sex party flyers, and safer BDSM sex illustrations, shows that the politics of visualization was as much about circulation of knowledge, mediation of practice, and construction of alliances as it was about manifestation and representation.
Paradoxically, the same health authorities who paid fetish activists to make AIDS prevention campaigns, bolster confidence, and foster a positive relationship to sexuality had the power to remove the psychiatric diagnoses from the diagnostic lists. It took more than a decade of intense lobbying by fetish activists before the Directorate of Health removed the diagnoses from the Norwegian version of the International Classification of Diseases in 2010. Still, the willingness to fund fetish activism points to a pragmatic attitude among Norwegian health authorities: fetish activism was supportable as long as it could be framed as AIDS prevention. It was much more difficult to question the diagnostic power of psychiatrists.
Fetish activists struggled to be heard among lesbian and gay activists. Celebrating pleasure was difficult not only because AIDS ravaged queer communities, but also because the lesbian and gay organizations had turned sexual revolution into marriage reform. The goal of fetish activism and sexual subcultures was separate, and their radicalism disappears in the sanitization of fetish and AIDS activism: to insist on pleasure and brotherhood as a political project, community practice, and approach to public health.

## Acknowledgments
I am grateful to my colleagues in the research group Biomedicalization from the Inside Out (Anne Kveim Lie, isabelle dussauge, Per Haave, Ida Sofie Rettedal Skjæveland, Anne Sigrid Lindblad Stokke, and Ingvild Haraldsen) for comments and suggestions on an early draft of this paper. The archivists at Skeivt Arkiv in Bergen have been extraordinarily helpful. I want to thank two anonymous reviewers who helped me clarify my argument and whose suggestions and comments greatly improved this paper. I also want to thank the editors of the Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences for the smooth editorial process. The manuscript was originally submitted to a special issue of Radical History Review but had to be withdrawn due to my funder’s requirements for open access publishing. I thank the editors – Heike Bauer, Melina Pappademos, Katie Sutton, and Jennifer Tucker – and the reviewers for their comments. Stephen Molldrem pointed me to relevant literature. Finally, Jess Farr-Cox did a wonderful job proofreading the manuscript. A heartfelt thank you to all the people who shared their stories with me.

## Footnotes
1Ketil Slagstad, “The Amphibious Nature of AIDS Activism: Medical Professionals and Gay and Lesbian Communities in Norway, 1975–1987,” Medical History 64 (2020): 401-435.
2Sander L. Gilman, Health and Illness: Images of Difference (London: Reaktion Books, 1995), in particular chapter 1, “How and Why do Historians of Medicine Use or Ignore Images in Writing their Histories?” 9–32.
3Roger Cooter and Claudia Stein, “Coming into Focus: Posters, Power, and Visual Culture in the History of Medicine,” Medizinhistorisches Journal 42 (2007).
4Katherine D. B. Rawling, “‘She sits all day in the attitude depicted in the photo’: Photography and the Psychiatric Patient in the Late Nineteenth Century,” Medical Humanities 43 (2017): 99-110; Katherine D. B. Rawling, “‘The Annexed Photos were Taken Today’: Photographing Patients in the Late-Nineteenth-century Asylum,” Social History of Medicine 34 (2019): 256-284.
5Lukas Engelmann, “Picturing the Unusual: Uncertainty in the Historiography of Medical Photography,” Social History of Medicine 34 (2019): 375-398.
6Erin O’Connor, “Camera Medica: Towards a Morbid History of Photography,” History of Photography 23 (1999): 232-244.
7Paula A. Treichler, “AIDS, Homophobia, and Biomedical Discourse: An Epidemic of Signification,” October 43 (1987): 31-70.
8Sander L. Gilman, “AIDS and Syphilis: The Iconography of Disease,” in AIDS: Cultural Analysis/Cutlural Activism, ed. Douglas Crimp (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988), 87-107.
9Lukas Engelmann, Mapping AIDS: Visual Histories of an Enduring Epidemic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018), 217–19.
10Domenico Bertoloni Meli, Visualizing Disease: The Art and History of Pathological Illustrations (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017).
11Engelmann, Mapping AIDS.
12David Campbell, The Visual Economy of HIV/AIDS (2008), http://catalogue.safaids.net/sites/default/files/publications/The%20Visual%20Economy%20of%20HIV%20AIDS.pdf.
13Vladimir Čajkovac, “AIDS: Nach einer wahren Begebenheit” (Dresden: Verlag des Deutschen Hygiene-Museums, 2015).
14Claudia Stein and Roger Cooter, “Visual Objects and Universal Meanings: AIDS Posters and the Politics of Globalisation and History,” Medical History 55 (2011): 85-108.
15Gayle S. Rubin’s work as a notable academic exception, but there is a rich publication culture in fetish and BDSM communities. See Dangerous Bedfellows, ed., Policing Public Sex: Queer Politics and the Future of AIDS Activism (Boston: South End Press, 1996); Geoff Mains, Urban Aboriginals: A Celebration of Leathersexuality (Los Angeles: Daedalus Publishing, 2002 [1984]); Gayle S. Rubin, “Elegy for the Valley of Kings: AIDS and the Leather Community in San Francisco, 1981–1996,” in In Changing Times: Gay Men and Lesbians Encounter HIV/AIDS, ed. Martin P. Levine, Peter M. Nardi, and John H. Gagnon (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997); Gayle S. Rubin, “The Miracle Mile: South of Market and Gay Male Leather, 1962–1997,” in Reclaiming San Francisco: History, Politics, Culture, ed. James Brook, Chris Carlsson, and Nancy J. Peters (San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1998); Gayle S. Rubin, “The Leather Menace: Comments on Politics and S/M,” in Deviations: A Gayle Rubin Reader (Durham: Duke University Press, 2011 [1982]); Mark Thomson, ed., Leatherfolk: Radical Sex, People, Politics, and Practice (Los Angeles: Daedalus Publishing, 2004 [1991]). See also Leo Bersani, “Foucault, Freud, Fantasy, and Power,” GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 2 (1995): 11-33.
16Ludmilla Jordanova, “Image Matters,” Historical Journal 51 (2008): 777-791.
17Kristin Asdal and Helge Jordheim, “Texts on the Move: Texuality and Historicity Revisited,” History and Theory 57 (2018): 56-74; Ruth J. Prince, “The Diseased Body and the Global Subject: The Circulation and Consumption of an Iconic AIDS Photograph in East Africa,” Visual Anthropology 29 (2016): 159-186: Catherine Trundle and Chris Kaplonski, “Tracing the Political Lives of Archival Documents,” History and Anthropology 22 (2011): 407-414. For the role of images and prognostic epidemiological curves in the construction of the temporalities of AIDS and epidemics, see Ketil Slagstad, “The Pasts, Presents and Futures of AIDS, Norway (1983–1996),” Social History of Medicine 34 (2020): 417-444.
18Elizabeth Edwards, “Objects of Affect: Photography Beyond the Image,” Annual Review of Anthropology 41 (2012): 221-234.
19Richard Andrew McKay, Patient Zero and the Making of the AIDS Epidemic (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017), 186–245.
20Prince, “The Diseased Body.”
21For the subversive role of AIDS imagery between mourning and resistance, see Kevin Warth, “If I Could Turn Back Time: AIDS, Photography, and Queer Temporality,” http://www.kevinwarth.com/writing/#/if-i-could-turn-back-time/.
22AIDS education material is another example of sometimes aesthetically “unexciting” imagery. See Hannah J. Elizabeth, “Love Carefully and Without ‘Over-bearing Fears’: The Persuasive Power of Authenticity in Late 1980s British AIDS Education Material for Adolescents,” Social History of Medicine 34 (2020): 1317-1342.
23Svein Skeid, video interview with author, 13 May 2020.
24Svein Skeid generously shared his archive with me before he died. The archive was given to Skeivt Arkiv who provided images at higher resolution for the use in this article.
25I draw inspiration here from Richard A. McKay, who in turn follows Jennifer Brier’s analytical approach of “AIDS work” developed in the book Infectious Ideas, to recognize how activities, traditionally described separately, exist on a “spectrum of politicization, with no straightforward points of division.” See McKay, Patient Zero, 249.
26Hannah J. Elizabeth has made a related argument that AIDS was deployed to legitimize sex education for teenagers. See Elizabeth, “Love Carefully.”
27Virginia Berridge, AIDS in the UK: The Making of Policy, 1981–1994 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), 16; Edward Hooper, The River: A Journey to the Source of HIV and AIDS (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1999), 66–67.
28McKay, Patient Zero, 321–322, 32.
29Rubin, “The Miracle Mile.”
30Rubin, “Elegy for the Valley of Kings,” 109.
31Hooper, The River, 66, 82.
32
VG, “Mystisk sykdom i Norge,” 15 Feburary 1983, front page.
33Katie Batza, Before AIDS: Gay Health Politics in the 1970s (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2018); Richard A. Mckay, “Before HIV: Venereal Disease Among Homosexually Active Men in England and North America,” in The Routledge History of Disease (London: Routledge, 2016).
34Slagstad, “Amphibious Nature of AIDS Activism.”
35Kaposi sarcom, SLM-info no. 2, 1982, SSA.
36Slagstad, “Pasts, Presents and Futures of AIDS.”
37McKay, Patient Zero, 289–353.
38Kaposi sarcom, SLM-info no. 2, 1982, Svein Skeid private archive.
39Mel Gordon, Voluptuous Panic: The Erotic World of Weimar Berlin (New York: Feral House, 2006).
40Rubin, “Miracle Mile.”
41For example, Tom of Finland’s drawings are overwhelmingly of White men, with some rare exceptions. See Blacks in Tom’s Drawings (Los Angeles: Tom of Finland, 1990).
42Rubin, “Miracle Mile.”
43The Birth of ECMC. EMCM. http://ecmc.nu/j-ecmc/index.php/ecmc/ecmc-history.
44Gayle S. Rubin, “The Catacombs: A Temple of the Butthole,” in Leatherfolk: Radical Sex, People, Politics, and Practice, ed. Mark Thomson (Los Angeles: Daedalus Publishing, 2004 [1991]).
45David Stein, “S/M’s Copernican Revolution: From a Closed World to the Infinite Universe,” in Leatherfolk: Radical Sex, People, Politics, and Practice, ed. Mark Thomson (Los Angeles: Daedalus Publishing, 2004 [1991]).
46Rubin, “Elegy for the Valley of Kings,” 123–128.
47Skeid interview.
48Arnfinn Engen to Svein Skeid in “SM-homsene var først ute.” Text by Svein Skeid for the exhibition Skeivt uteliv, Oslo 2017.
49SLM-Info, no. 2, 1983, A-0078, Helseutvalget, da, box l0038, folder SLM, Skeivt arkiv, Bergen, Norway (hereafter SA).
50In the intervening years, a group of leathermen met privately. Erling Hornslien, who became leader of the club, recalled how they met in each other’s homes, mostly for coffee: “there was very rarely a bottle of beer around.” Erling Hornslien, video interview with author, 9 June 2021.
51Fin Serck-Hanssen, video interview with author, 5 May 2020.
52Transgender rights were not included in the major gay, bisexual, and lesbian organization’s political platform until the 2000s. DNF-48 was the first organization for lesbian and gay liberation in Norway. It was initially part of the Danish mother organization founded in 1948 but became an independent organization in 1953. Arbeidsgrupper for homofil frigjøring (AHF) [Working Groups for Gay Liberation], another lesbian and gay organization, was established in 1976 following disagreements within DNF-48 and members being excluded. AHF organized more left-wing lesbian and gay activists. Fellesrådet for homofile og lesbiske organisasjoner i Norge (FHO) [The Joint Council for Lesbian and gay Organizations in Norway], established in 1979, included numerous organizations for queer people outside of DNF-48. In 1992, DNF-48 and FHO were united in Landsforeningen for lesbisk og homofil frigjøring (LLH) [The National Association for Lesbian and Gay Liberation], which in 2016 changed its name to FRI – The association of gender and sexuality diversity.
53Serck-Hanssen interview.
54Runar Jordåen and Birger Berge, Ein kort intro til norsk skeiv historie på 1900-talet (Oslo: 2017), 6, https://www.bufdir.no/siteassets/likestilling-og-ikke-diskriminering/kort-intro-norsk-skeiv-historie.pdf.
55Slagstad, “Amphibious Nature of AIDS Activism.”
56Kirsti Malterud and Calle Almedal respectively in Sissel Benneche Osvold, “Det handler om vold,” Dagbladet (29 May 1982): 19.
57Nils Johan Ringdal, Lystens død? Bekjennelse fra en mann av gay-generasjonen (Oslo: Aschehoug, 1991).
58Karen Christine Friele in Ole Johannes Øvretveit, “Ringdals kloakk skader homse-saken,” Dagbladet (30 July 1991): 8.
59Friele in Øvretveit, “Ringdals kloakk.”
60Karin Enderud, Kjell Erik Øie, “Homotanker,” Løvetann 5 (1990): 4. For this story, see Kjell Erik Øie, “Partnerskapsloven – en politisk kamp der homoene seiret,” in Med regnbuen som våpen, ed. Jon Gunnar Arntzen (Oslo: Antinoos Forlag, 1995). For a discussion of the political and historical contexts of registered partnership laws and gay marriage in Scandinavia, see Jens Rydström, Odd Couples: A History of Gay Marriage in Scandinavia (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2011).
61For similar discussions among activists in the US and the flexibility of LGBTQI politics on respectability, see Martin Duberman, Has the Gay Movement Failed? (Oakland, CA: University of California Press, 2018), 64–65. For an account of how queer liberation in the US from the beginning intersected with struggles crossing the politics of race, gender, transgender, class, and poverty, and a criticism of the “depolitization” of queer politics, see Roderick A. Ferguson, One-Dimensional Queer (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2019).
62However, it would be unnuanced to see segregation policy as blatant misogyny. See Peter Hennen, Faeries, Bears, and Leathermen: Men in Community Queering the Masculine (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008), 167–168.
63I use “Whiteness” to refer to a majority position and the limited discourse on race and racialization in Norway, not necessarily limited to skin color. See Astri Dankertsen and Tone Gunn Stene Kristiansen, “‘Whiteness Isn’t about Skin Color’: Challenges to Analyzing Racial Practices in a Norwegian Context,” Societies 11 (2021): 46.
64Rubin, “Catacombs.”
65SLM-Info, no. 3, 1983, 4, A-0078, Helseutvalget, Da, box l0038, SLM, Skeivt arkiv.
66Ibid.
67Bersani, “Foucault, Freud, Fantasy, and Power.”
68Gruppe Lambda, Innkalling til nytt fellesmøte, 25 March 1980, SSA.
69Sissel Benneche Osvold, “Macho-menn i lær,” Dagbladet (29 May 1982): 19.
70Skeid interview.
71Gruppe Lambda, Innkalling til nytt fellesmøte (25 March 1980): SSA.
72Kirsti Malterud in Sissel Benneche Osvold, “Det handler om vold,” Dagbladet (29 May 1982): 19.
73Randi Mobæk and Ane Stø, “S/M og mishandling (II),” Klassekampen (29 May 1996): 3.
74Lars Bjørke, “Kirken står sammen med kvinnefronten!,” Morgenbladet (8 June 1989): 3.
75Mark Thomson, “Introduction,” in Leatherfolk: Radical Sex, People, Politics, and Practice (Los Angeles: Daedalus Publishing, 2004 [1991]), xvi.
76Hennen, Faeries, Bears, and Leathermen, 177.
77Mains, Urban Aboriginals, 15–16.
78Rubin, “Leather Menace,” 126.
79Tone Hellesund, “Better than Orgasm: Sex, Authenticity and Intimacy in the New Women’s Movement in Norway,” Gender & History 33 (2021): 209-226.
80Gruppe Lambda, Innkalling til nytt fellesmøte (25 March 1980): SSA.
81Interview with Arne Husdal in Ole Johannes Øvretveit, “De vil ha gummi, lenker og lær,” Dagbladet (30 July 1991): 8–9.
82Kai Lin, “The Medicalization and Demedicalization of Kink: Shifting Contexts of Sexual Politics,” Sexualities 20 (2017): 302-323; Odd Reiersøl and Svein Skeid, “The ICD Diagnoses of Fetishism and Sadomasochism,” Journal of Homosexuality 50 (2006): 243-262; Chris White, “The Spanner Trials and the Changing Law on Sadomasochism in the UK,” Journal of Homosexuality 50 (2006): 167-187.
83Geoffrey M. Reed, Jack Drescher, Richard B. Krueger, Elham Atalla, Susan D. Cochran, Michael B. First, Peggy T. Cohen-Kettenis, Iván Arango-de Montis, Sharon J. Parish, Sara Cottler, Peer Briken, Shekhar Saxena, “Disorders Related to Sexuality and Gender Identity in the ICD-11: Revising the ICD-10 Classification Based on Current Scientific Evidence, Best Clinical Practices, and Human Rights Considerations,” World Psychiatry 15 (2016): 205-221.
84Johan Cullberg, Dynamisk psykiatri i teori og praktik (Berlings: Natur och Kultur, 1984), 193.
85Einar Dannevig in Sissel Benneche Osvold, “Sadismepornografi stimulerer til vold,” Dagbladet (29 May 1982): 19.
86Einar Kringlen, Psykiatri, 5 ed. (Oslo: Universitetsforlaget, 1990), 285.
87Odd Reiersøl video interview with author, 17 June 2021.
88Skeid interview.
89Lillian Jensen, “SM – en sexy diagnose,” Blikk 11 (1998): 18–21.
90Reiersøl and Skeid, “ICD Diagnoses of Fetishism and Sadomasochism.”
91Odd Reiersøl, “Fetisj og SM-diagnosene i ICD-10,” Tidsskrift for Norsk Psykologforening 45, 6 (2008).
92Slagstad, “Amphibious Nature of AIDS Activism.”
93Rubin, “Elegy for the Valley of Kings,” 132–133.
94Gay Health Committee, Statutter for Helseutvalget for homofile, 12 December 1983, PA-1216 Det norske forbund av 1948, Db, box 3, Helseutvalget, The National Archives of Norway, Oslo.
95Rolf Thore Thomassen, “Sadomasochisme som helsepolitikk,” Klassekampen (1 July 1997): 12.
96Øyvin Palm, interview with author, 14 May 2020. Palm was chairman of the Gay Health Committee for several years.
97Slogans like these were not unique to Norway but used by AIDS activists in many different countries such as the UK. See Peter Tatchell and Robert Taylor, Safer Sexy: The Guide to Gay Sex Safely (London: Freedom Editions, 1994).
98McKay, Patient Zero, 321–322.
99“Det finnes ikke dårlig føre – bare dårlig smøring. Bruk vannløselig glidemiddel,” “Det finnes ikke dårlig vær – bare dårlige klær. Kle deg med gummi.” All flyers and posters in Svein Skeid archive.
100Verkstedet smia, Ressurshefte 2 – Sikrere smsex, April 1996, SSA.
101I am indebted to the reviewer for the term “condoned voyeurism.”
102Although this exact image was not printed in the newspaper, the photojournalist took several photos that day that were used both in the press and in activism.
103Interview with Tore Stensby and Svein Skeid by Kristin Høiland, “–Vi er helt vanlige småbrukere!” VG 24 (August 1991): 23–27.
104Correspondence with the journalist Kristin Høiland, 8 November 2021.
105The Gay Health Committee’s approach of the 1990s explicitly sought to avoid a moralizing message about reducing the number of partners or talking about sex as intercourse, as this reproduced heterosexual norms of sex. On the contrary, the new politics was to talk about sexual practices as explicitly as possible. See Arne Bernaas, Homotanker i tiden, Løvetann 2, 1990, 4.
106Roger Cooter and Claudia Stein, “Visual Imagery and Epidemics in the Twentieth Century,” in Imagining Illness: Public Health and Visual Culture, ed. David Serlin (Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press, 2010); Cooter and Stein, “Coming into Focus.”
107Serck-Hanssen interview.
108Serck-Hanssen interview.
109For this argument about leather culture, see Hennen, Faeries, Bears, and Leathermen, 177.
110Ibid, 176.
111Elizabeth Freeman, “Time Binds, or, Erotohistoriography,” Social Text 23 (2005).