pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10530006PMC10530006.110530006105300063775630410.1371/journal.pone.0283057PONE-D-23-055321Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesMental Health and PsychiatrySocial SciencesEconomicsLabor EconomicsEmploymentResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchSurveysMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthHealth ScreeningBiology and Life SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesSocial SciencesPsychologyPsychological AttitudesMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CarePsychological and Psychosocial IssuesMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Services Administration and ManagementSocial SciencesSociologySocial SystemsValues and preferences related to workplace mental health programs and interventions: An international survey
Values and preferences related to workplace mental health programs and interventionshttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8613-4429MurphyJill K.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draft NobleJasmine M.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisMethodologyProject administrationWriting – original draft ChakrabortyPromit AnanyoFormal analysis MichligGeorgiaConceptualizationWriting – review & editing MichalakErin E.Funding acquisitionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9097-900XGreenshawAndrew J.Funding acquisitionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7142-4669LamRaymond W.Funding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada2
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Department of Psychiatry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada3
Faculty of Science, Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada4
Faculty of Medicine, School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada5
Department of International Health, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States of AmericaChimaSylvester ChidiEditor , ]. Left untreated, they are associated with poor physical health [ ], reduced quality of life [ ], lower functional capacity [ ] and lost productivity [ ]. People living with mental health conditions may also experience stigma, discrimination and human rights violations [ ]. Despite the risks associated with poor mental health, approximately 50% of people worldwide do not have access to evidence-based mental health support, and in the lowest resourced countries this gap may be up to 90% [ ].
Work and mental health are inextricably linked. Work may have a positive or negative impact on mental health, while mental ill health may affect work performance, productivity, and employment status [ ]. Mental health conditions affecting workers include clinically diagnosed conditions like depression, anxiety or alcohol use disorders and sub-clinical issues including workplace stress and burnout [ ]. Experiences of mental ill health may lead to negative impacts for workers including workplace discrimination [ ]. The impact of untreated mental health conditions for workplaces include the costs of absenteeism (time off from work due to illness), presenteeism (reduced work capacity due to working while ill), lost productivity, increased risk of workplace injury or safety incidents, disability claims, and challenges with retention [ , ]. It is estimated that in the world’s 36 largest countries, the loss of workplace productivity due to untreated depression and anxiety is equivalent to 12 billion work days each year, costing up to US $925 billion [ ].
People over the age of 18 years spend more than 60% of waking hours at work [ ], suggesting that the workplace presents a considerable opportunity for the provision of mental health prevention, protection, promotion and support interventions. Considerable savings and financial benefit may result from investing in workplace mental health promotion and prevention [ ]. Despite this, access to occupational health services remains low worldwide, with only 20–50% of workers in high income settings and 5–10% in low and middle-income countries (LMICs) able to access to such supports [ , ].
Understanding the perspectives and experiences of workers is essential to informing how work and workplaces can best provide appropriate, targeted support to promote workforce mental health and wellbeing. The purpose of this global survey was to capture the perspectives of workers, including managers, in order to understand their values and preferences related to mental health at work. Specifically, we sought to 1) understand workers’ perspectives and preferences related to different types of workplace programs and interventions to promote mental wellbeing and prevent and treat mental health conditions, including their help-seeking preferences, and 2) to assess workers’ awareness of and access to specific types of mental health programs and supports at work. This survey was commissioned by the World Health Organization (WHO) to provide supporting evidence for the development of the WHO’s Guidelines on mental health and work [ ].

## Methods

## Survey scope and development
This survey examined values and preferences among workers and managers related to workplace mental health promotion, prevention and support programs and services. The survey development was led by co-first authors JN and JKM, in collaboration with co-author GM and the WHO technical officer responsible for the guideline development process. The survey scope and questions, including the intervention types that were included, were informed by the key questions identified for the Guideline Development Group and an Evidence to Decision Making Framework provided by the WHO partners. Survey questions were developed specifically for this survey based on a review of the relevant literature, and elements of the survey structure was informed by similar surveys including the WHO Consolidated Guideline on Self-care interventions for Health: Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights Global Values and Preferences Survey [ ]. In the Results section, we specify where survey items were informed by existing frameworks or classification systems.
The survey (see ) explored the following themes: (1) Values and preferences related to mental health and work generally, including help-seeking preferences for programs and services, and; (2) awareness, access, and values and preferences related to specific intervention types. Specific intervention types are described in . The survey consisted primarily of quantitative questions and we included short-answer, open-ended questions as part of the ‘general values and preferences’ section as described below.
 The survey contained specific questions for managers, people who provide mental health support at work, and ‘high-risk’ workers including first responders, humanitarian and healthcare workers. When participants indicated that they were managers (indicating that they supervise employees), ‘high-risk’ workers (indicating that they work in a health, emergency or humanitarian services), and/or provide mental health support at work, the survey logic directed them to a specific set of questions designed for these participant subgroups, which they responded to in addition to the questions that were available for all survey participants. Open-ended questions were included to provide a more comprehensive, qualitative understanding of attitudes related to mental health program and service provision at work in general, regarding the changing nature of work and mental health, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on work and mental health and attitudes related to mental health screening at work. For brevity, this paper focuses on the two themes identified above, with additional data available in the WHO Web Annex: Evidence profiles and supporting evidence (Available at: https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/363102/9789240053076-eng.pdf).
The survey focused on interventions delivered at or in relation to work that are provided at an individual, manager/ team, and organizational level. Interventions of interest include universal promotion and prevention programs (for the general worker population), selected promotion and prevention programs (for workers in high-risk occupations), indicated promotion and prevention programs (for workers showing signs of sub-threshold emotional distress), and programs to support treatment and recovery (for workers with symptoms of mental health or substance use conditions). The survey also examined perspectives on screening for mental health in the workplace. The full survey is available in the .
The survey was piloted by ten individuals representing a diversity of backgrounds and from several countries (Canada, the United States, Japan, Zambia, Peru, and the Netherlands), as well as several WHO-affiliated experts and expert groups. We asked pilot participants to provide feedback about their ability to understand the survey questions and terminology, the survey flow, appropriateness of the questions, and survey length. Pilot participant feedback was applied to the final survey, including removing repetitive questions, providing clear definitions of terminology, and rephrasing some questions for clarity.
Ethics approval for this study was obtained from the University of Alberta’s Research Ethics Office (approval number: Pro00107550). Participants were required to provide written informed consent by selecting “I consent to participate in this survey” in order to access the survey. Participants were provided with the option to withdraw consent at any time while completing the survey by withdrawing from the survey before submission. All data from withdrawn surveys has been excluded from the final dataset.

## Survey recruitment, sampling and dissemination
This survey was disseminated online in English, French and Spanish using Qualtrics survey software [ ]. Inclusion criteria for survey participation were employed civilian (non-military) adults over 18 years who are engaged in paid formal, non-standard work or informal work. The survey was open to people worldwide.
We used convenience sampling to generate survey participation. This consisted of broad dissemination via several channels, including through international global mental health networks, university networks, via mental health, workplace, and patient-serving organizations, and via social media. No incentives were provided to encourage survey participation. Data collection took place between April 9th and May 16th, 2021.

## Analysis
We used descriptive statistics to analyse the survey data. Responses to open-ended questions were analysed using rapid thematic qualitative analysis [ ]. Lead author JKM conducted the thematic analysis, reviewing the responses for immersion in the data and developing a code book based on each question category, with new codes added as they were identified in the dataset. Data were coded using NVivo 12 [ ] software, and reviewed to identify overarching themes related to each question category.

## Results
451 surveys were included in the final analysis after cleaning data to remove withdrawn surveys (indicating withdrawal of informed consent) and spam responses. Of these, 224 were complete and 227 were partially completed. We have included data from partially completed surveys except in cases where the survey respondents withdrew their consent. We have indicated in the results tables the total number (n) of responses for each question. In cases where participants could select more than one response (“choose all that apply”), we have indicated the total number of respondents and total number of response selections per item. 29 surveys were completed in Spanish, and 29 were completed in French, with the remaining 393 completed in English. Findings related to the general workforce and managers are reported here. Disaggregated findings related to workers in high-risk occupations will be reported elsewhere.
Quantitative and open-ended question results are described together where thematically aligned. For open-ended question responses, illustrative quotations are provided. Quotations are annotated with participant number based on the order in which they completed the survey, whether they are managers (i.e. supervise staff), and their gender.

## Participant demographics and types of work
451 individuals responded to the survey. Respondents were predominantly highly educated (64.2% with a graduate degree), identified as female (67.2%), averaged around 43 years old, and were living in large or medium sized cities (60.5%). 11.5% identified as sexual and gender minority groups, 18.6% identified as ethnic minority groups in their country of residence and 9.3% identified as Indigenous ( ).
 Just over half (55.3%) of responses came from people residing in high-income countries, 21.4% from upper-middle income, 14.2% from lower-middle income and 8.9% from low-income countries. Survey responses came from all WHO regions, with a majority of responses from the European region (42.4%) and the region of the Americas (28.5%). Additional responses came from the Western Pacific (13.0%), African region (8.9%), the Eastern Mediterranean (4.8%), and South East Asia (2.4%).
 displays the employment characteristics of respondents, with the majority (58.3%) engaged in paid full-time formal employment.
 Respondents selected the type of employment in which they are engaged by industry from a drop-down menu based on the United Nations’ International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC) [ ]. They were able to further select more detail on their employment type via additional drop-down menus and by entering open field data. The majority of respondents are employed in Human Health and Social Work Activities (25.5%), Professional, Scientific and Technical Activities (21.5%) and Education (19.8%). More detail can be found in WHO Web Annex: Evidence profiles and supporting evidence, page. 307 (Available at: https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/363102/9789240053076-eng.pdf).
Over half of respondents indicated that they play a role in supporting mental health at work (53.3%) in roles including occupational health and safety, human resources and mental health workers. Just over half of respondents identified themselves as managers (51.9%), indicating that they play a supervisory role at work. A majority of respondents (68.1%) indicate that they currently or have previously experienced a mental health condition, and 28.1% have taken a formal leave due to mental health challenges.

## Theme 1: General values and preferences regarding mental health at work
This theme sought to explore respondent’s general beliefs about mental health, and values and preferences regarding mental health programs and supports at work and help-seeking in general.

## Current impact of work on mental health
To the question, “What type of impact does your work have generally on your mental health?” a majority (40.2%) of respondents reported that work had a positive impact on their mental health, with 24.5% reporting a somewhat positive impact and 15.7% reporting a very positive impact. 19.0% reported that work has a somewhat negative impact on their mental health, while 6.2% reported a very negative impact. 9.8% responded neutrally, and 0.7% were unsure.
We also asked respondents to rate on a six point Likert scale the extent to which several factors, based on established categories of psychosocial risk [ ], negatively impact their mental health. As described in , issues related to “workload and work pace,” including high workload, challenging deadlines and understaffed work environments, had the most negative impact on mental health.
 We provided an open-response option, inviting participants to provide more context related to the impact of work on their mental health. Respondents provided a spectrum of responses, with some describing the positive impact of work on mental health, as described in the following quotation:
“My job contributes to positive well-being by providing pay, contact with other people, achievement and sense of importance/contribution to society. (P81, Worker, Man)”
Others report a mixed impact of work on their mental health, with work contributing several positive factors but also contributing to stress:
“My work provides purpose and structure and social relationships which is important for my mental health. It also provides stress and uncertainty at times. There are positive aspects and negative aspects: it carries stress and burnout but also a sense of fulfillment. (P41, Worker, Woman)”
Finally, other respondents describe a predominantly negative impact of work on mental health, often related to challenging relationships with management, overly demanding workloads and lack of work-life balance, and insufficient compensation:
“We are overworked with a lot of projects that we are responsible for, too many meetings, few opportunities for growth, feedback not is not acted upon by leadership/management, there is a lack of transparency about decisions and information, underpaid for value added (P 125, Worker, Woman)”

## Help-seeking preferences
We assessed factors related to help-seeking preferences and accessibility of programs and supports among workers. describes the comfort level of respondents when speaking about their mental health concerns at work with various individuals, workplace representatives and services. A majority report being most comfortable with speaking to health services outside of work, with 44.8% indicating they are very comfortable and 41.5% indicating they are comfortable. Participants reported being least comfortable speaking with human resources (23.1% uncomfortable and 17.9% very uncomfortable) and with managers (25.8% uncomfortable and 14.6% very uncomfortable).
 We sought responses regarding whether respondents had considered participating in mental health programs and supports at work but did not do so and their reasons for not participating so as to elicit potential barriers to participation. 62.6% of respondents had considered participating in an intervention but chose not to. The majority (45.6%) report that they chose not to participate in psychosocial and emotional programs and supports. The reasons for not participating are reported in , with the most frequent reported reason being that they did not have time (17.5%), followed by a preference to manage mental health concerns themselves (13.5%) and concerns about privacy (13.5%).
 As shown in , respondents also selected who they would prefer to receive support from across four scenarios related to experiencing mental health challenges at work. Respondents were able to select all that apply from a list of possible resources. As shown in , across all scenarios (first experiencing a mental health concern, seeking ongoing help for mental health concern, deciding whether to take a leave of absence or to return to work following a leave related to a mental health concern) participants rated managers or supervisors most highly, with responses ranging from 30.1% for returning to work after a leave to 25% for seeking ongoing support for their mental health at work. Union representatives were rated the lowest across all categories with responses ranging from 4% for first experiencing a mental health concern at work, to 7.1% for returning to work after a leave of absence.
 When asked about the importance of accessing mental health supports on their own, without the assistance of involvement of a manager, a large majority (63.5%) of respondents indicated that doing so is very important, not wanting their employer to know they are accessing services or supports for mental health. Responses are displayed in .
 Respondents rated their preferences for how they prefer to access mental health programs if needed (including individual, group, in-person and digital options), where they prefer to access programs or services via the workplace and their preferred method of delivery or provider for mental health support, as shown in . Respondents showed a preference for accessing mental health programs outside of work across all categories, with 50.3% indicating they prefer to access programs on their own in person and 32.6% preferring to access them on their own online. Regarding location of programs, 42.1% prefer to access them outside of work but not at their home while 27.7% prefer to access them online. Finally, 53.0% prefer to seek support from a health worker.
 We asked respondents to rank from most to least important considerations for employers when offering mental health supports or programs outside of the workplace. displays the frequency with which each item was ranked as a top priority. Ensuring anonymity in accessing services and ensuring that services are evidence based were ranked as most important, with each receiving 21.4% of responses. The least important consideration was ensuring physical space exists between work and the service with 0.5% of responses, followed by providing engaging and interesting content (2.4%).
 

## Theme 2: Awareness of, access to, and values and preferences for specific intervention types
In this section, the survey sought to explore respondents’ awareness of and access to specific types of mental health programs and supports at work, as well as their values and preferences for those interventions for which they have familiarity. Respondents were asked to provide their perspective on the intervention types described in .

## Awareness of services and program types
We asked respondents to select, from a list of intervention types, all program and service types that they had previously heard of. As shown in , awareness of service and program types ranges from approximately one half to approximately one third of respondents.
 describes whether respondents have access to each intervention type at work, whether they have previously used each intervention type, and, if not, whether they would be willing to.
 We asked respondents who have previously used programs and supports at work to rate the ease of accessing each intervention type. For respondents who had not previously accessed these interventions, we asked them to rate how easy they perceive access to be. As shown in , respondents who had previously accessed programs and supports at work reported easier access compared with perceptions about ease of access by those who had not accessed interventions:
 When asked to rate the level of importance of specific intervention types in supporting mental health at work, the majority of respondents selected extremely or very important across all categories, as described in .
 

## Benefits and concerns
Benefits by intervention type. We assessed perceived benefits and concerns by intervention type as shown in Tables and . We asked respondents to rate perceived benefits by intervention type according to the following criteria: convenience, being helpful in promoting or supporting mental health, removing barriers like stigma, affordability for the worker, affordability for the company, and benefiting the morale of the organization. As described in , an intervention being helpful for the worker’s mental health was the most highly rated benefit across all intervention types, followed by the perceived convenience of an intervention, affordability for the worker, and being beneficial to the whole organization. For the training and education intervention, the potential to reduce stigma was also rated highly by 19.7% of respondents.
 Benefits of supporting mental health at work. Responses to open-ended questions describing the benefits of promoting and supporting mental health at work, perceived benefits for workers included improved overall quality of life, well-being, and job satisfaction. It was noted that workers may be empowered and “flourish” through the establishment of a healthy and supportive work environment, as described in the following quotation:
“Ppl [sic] spend the bulk of their waking hours in work, so I believe that organizations have a duty to go beyond simply keeping places safe and doing no harm, but that by addressing primary concerns at the organizational level employees can thrive. That should be the goal!” (P267, Worker, Woman)
Supporting mental health programs and services at work was also noted as a contributing factor for improving mental health literacy, and, through the provision of information on pathways to care and support, may also improve timely access to care and promote help-seeking among workers. Stigma reduction is also described as a benefit of promoting mental health at work by creating workplace cultures that are open, accepting and are adequately equipped to provide appropriate supports.
Concerns by intervention type. We also asked respondents to rate their concerns by intervention type according to the following criteria: lack of privacy and confidentiality, fear of judgement or stigma, inconvenience, difficulty in accessing it, being expensive for workers, and being expensive for the company. Regarding key concerns ( ) related to each intervention type, a majority of respondents report no concerns related to physical exercise interventions (34.2%), training and education programs (30.4%) and health promotion programs (29.4%). Across all other intervention types, fear of judgement or stigma, and privacy and confidentiality are rated as the highest concerns.
Concerns with supporting mental health at work. Similar concerns were raised in the responses to open-ended questions, where respondents were asked to describe any worries they had with regard to promoting and supporting mental health at work, and stigma was raised as a key theme. More specifically, respondents worried that stigma related to mental health would prevent workers from disclosing their mental health challenges and might lead to discrimination or other negative impacts in the workplace.
Ongoing stigma, often associated with low mental health awareness, was also described as a concern. Respondents cautioned that this lack of understanding and awareness may lead to poor treatment of people who are open about their mental health challenges at work, as described below:
“Because of the stigma around mental health, the people who need help the most are probably the people who are not going to reach out for help. Colleagues and managers should know what to look out for and how to approach someone who they think may be suffering a mental health issue. Seeking help for, and offering assistance to someone who is struggling with a mental health problem, should become as common placed [sic] as seeking help and assisting someone with a physical health problem” (P285, Worker, Woman).
Of additional note, concern related to stigma was highest for screening interventions, with 34.7% of respondents indicating concerns about judgement and stigma and 27.6% reporting concerns with privacy and confidentiality ( ).
The quality of mental health programs and supports at work is also a concern among respondents, as illustrated in the following quotation that describes reluctance among workers to seek out existing mental health supports:
“…a lot of employers like higher education institutions rely on commercial and short-term mental health services that use a ’cookie cutter’ approach to CBT and resilience. Staff have noted that these services are not very beneficial in the long run and have learnt not to seek them out.” (P392, Worker, Man)
Respondents also emphasized the need for programs and supports that are appropriate and responsive to the needs of workers, calling for collaborative approaches to develop policies and practices that support their mental wellbeing, including by engaging workers with lived experience of mental health conditions, to understand how workplaces can fully support a range of mental health needs.
“I believe the best mental health initiatives are done in collaboration with workers and their representatives. Managerial approaches to promoting mental health sometimes don’t work so well, but a collaborative approach is best to ensure organizational cultural change.” (P276, Worker, Man)
Benefits and concerns related to mental health screening at work. Respondents were asked to reflect on the potential benefits and harms specifically around mental health screening at work via a short-answer question. In response, participants described several concerns, including privacy, confidentiality and the use of results or data by employers or other parties, including insurance companies. Stigma and discrimination as a result of mental health screening was also raised as a concern with some stating that workers would be reluctant to participate in screening for fear of stigma, ostracization or negative repercussions related to their role at work. Ethical considerations of screening for mental health at work were also raised when pathways to care or services may be limited or unavailable. Some participants questioned the legal implications around duty of care for an organization conducting mental health screening.
Many respondents questioned the appropriateness of the workplace for conducting mental health screening and the validity of an employer having this information about worker mental health, as described below:
“I don’t believe that the workplace is the setting in which screening should take place. There is a lot of risk for stigma as a result and it is only in very specific circumstances where an employer would need to know the details of this. Workplaces can be a conduit of information, but I would be concerned about them getting ’too close’ to the actual screening.” (P267, Worker, Woman)
Similarly, concerns regarding punitive measures associated with mental health screening at work were also raised by many respondents, as shown in the quotation below:
“There is evidence that those who share are penalised either by withdrawing promotion, actual demotion or bullied. The anonymity of reporting has to be fiercely guarded.” (P150, Worker, Woman)
Related to these concerns is the suggestion that screening and subsequent interventions or supports should take a population-based approach, avoiding the potential to single out and potentially marginalize individual workers:
“Screening needs to be done with a view to supporting all workers, and working out who needs what specific additional support. It should not be done as a way of weeding people out, or carrying negative connotations. For example, it would be beneficial to offer mental health awareness and a voluntary stress management training programme. It would be potentially harmful to single out staff members and tell them to complete a stress management programme.” (P285, Manager, Man)
Despite the concerns raised regarding screening for mental health at work, positive themes were identified as well. Possible perceived benefits include the potential for mental health screening at work to lead to prevention and early identification of mental health conditions, thus leading to earlier intervention or care access. Shifts towards a workplace culture that is more supportive and open to discussing issues of mental health and wellbeing was another potential benefit. Proper training and additional supports in the workplace can lead to a workplace culture that actively promotes mental wellbeing were also identified, as described below:
“Managers should be trained on the sensitivity of mental health information. When an organisation gets it right, like some do, the psychological safety spills into other aspects of work and life of those affected and related.” (P150, Worker, Woman)

## Organizational changes
Respondents indicated their awareness of, experiences with, and perceived benefits and concerns about policies or programs aiming to support worker mental health via organizational changes such as those that lead to changes in the working environment, working conditions or work tasks for the purposes of supporting workers’ mental health. We highlight these responses separately as the question types differed slightly from those related to the seven interventions described above.
When asked about perceived benefits of policies and programs to support worker mental health via organizational changes ( ) the greatest perceived benefits include being helpful to workers’ mental health (23.9%) and benefitting the whole organization (23.9%).
As extracted from responses to open-ended questions, perceived organizational benefits include improved work quality and productivity among workers, improved workplace culture, greater retention, and reduced absenteeism and presenteeism. Also noted was the anticipated high potential return on investment for businesses or organizations investing in mental health and wellbeing, as described below:
“A healthy (in a broad sense) workforce is generally a more productive workforce—money invested up-front on preventive strategies (education, stigma reduction, management training), early intervention (HR policies), health care and return to work programs reap the benefits later in numerous ways.” (P275, Manager, Man)
Regarding concerns about introducing policies and programs to support worker mental health via organizational changes ( ), the greatest concern among respondents was fear of judgement or stigma (18.3%), followed by cost for the company (15.7%).
Responses to open-ended questions show a clear desire among respondents for upstream interventions and organizational shifts to support mentally healthy workplaces and to address factors in the workplace that may contribute to poor mental wellbeing. Similarly, respondents raised concerns about organizations creating policies related to workplace mental health without investing in meaningful change to address mental health risk factors. One respondent stated: “Policies aren’t worth the paper they are printed on without good practice.” (P273, Manager, Woman). Another cautioned against over pathologizing the workforce by equating challenges with mental health conditions or poor mental wellbeing instead of with the work environment, thus shifting responsibility to the worker instead of the employer:
“I am concerned that current efforts to support workers mental health focus on building resilience and maximizing worker productivity, rather than putting in systems that ensure better work-life balance.” (P392, Worker, Man)

## Perspectives of managers
The survey assessed managers’ perspectives and experiences with providing mental health programs and supports at work. All respondents who indicated that they supervise staff are considered to be managers and were directed to a suite of questions to understand their experience with providing mental health support at work, including via information and referrals and Employee Assistance Programs (EAPs), their perceived self-efficacy regarding providing mental health support to workers, and capacity building needs related to providing mental health support at work.
We asked managers if they have previously provided a referral or information to workers for where or how to access mental health support. 67.3% indicate that they have previously provided a referral or information to workers for where or how to access mental health support. Reasons for not previously having done so include, “It is not related to my job” (46.9%), “It is not available at/through my work” (21.9%), “I do not know what is available at work” (6.3%), or “other” (25%). For ‘other’, reasons provided by managers include not being approached by a worker for support, never having perceived a need among workers for mental health support, and not feeling they know their employees well enough to approach the topic of mental health.
Manager respondents report a high level of confidence to support workers experiencing psychological distress or experiencing mental health conditions, with 38.7% indicating they are very confident and 40.6% stating they are somewhat confident. Despite high levels of confidence selected by managers, when asked to indicate which resources would help to increase their confidence, only 5.0% indicate that they feel sufficiently confident and well-informed (Respondents who indicated they felt ‘very confident’ in the previous question were not directed to this question.). describes factors that would help to improve manager confidence to support mental health among workers.
 We also asked managers to identify how easy it would be for them to access training to support knowledge, skills, attitudes, and behaviour to improve mental health of workers when needed. 60.0% indicate that they can access this training when needed, 30.5% have no access to training and 9.5% selected “other”. ‘Other’ responses included some respondents who were unsure about access to training, some managers indicating they can access training but only sporadically, and some stating that training is not yet offered but will be in the future.
Finally, we asked managers to report whether they have experience with EAPs, including through training, developing or managing these programs. A large majority (71.7%) do not have any experience with EAPs, while 28.3% report previous experience.

## Intervention specific
Managers have most frequently provided a referral to or information about psychosocial and emotional programs and supports (67.8%) and training and education programs (61.4%). They are least likely to have provided a referral to or information about vocational programs, with 40.0% indicating they had not done so, 33.3% indicating that they had, and 13.0% indicating these programs are not available where they work. Screening was also rated low, with 39.2% indicating they had not, 33.8% indicated they had and 17.6% indicating screening programs are not available where they work. With the exception of screening programs (33.8%) and vocational support programs (26.8%), approximately half of managers indicate that they feel very confident and informed about each intervention type. Managers report the highest level of confidence about psychosocial and emotional supports and programs at 59.2%. Approximately one quarter of respondents indicate the need for more information about each type of intervention, although the need for more information and training is indicated for vocational support (more information: 39.3%; more training: 23.2%), return to work programs (more information: 30.4%; more training: 15.2%) and screening programs (more information: 32.5%; more training: 20.0%). We also captured manager experiences and perspective with policies and programs to support work mental health through organizational changes. 45.2% of managers have provided information to employees about accessing or participating in such an intervention, while 28.8% have not and 17.8% indicate that these policies and programs are unavailable in their workplace.

## Discussion
The results of this survey provide a comprehensive understanding of the values and preferences of workers and managers related to the provision of mental health programs and supports at work. Below we present key considerations in reflection of survey findings.

## Organizational factors
The survey results show that workers place a high level of importance on organizational factors that may either contribute to negative mental health at work or promote mental wellbeing and psychological safety in the workplace. High workload and challenging workflow and organizational culture were most highly rated as having a negative impact on mental health, with open-ended response results emphasising the extent of these concerns among survey respondents. This suggests a need for employers and management to improve overall support for workers including via upstream interventions that support factors like work-life balance, healthy interpersonal relationships at work, prevention of extreme overwork, and effective communication between management and workers. These findings are consistent with research that describes the importance of prevention via workplace policies as an essential component of supporting mental health at work [ ]. Several studies have found that organizational interventions can be beneficial for worker mental health, including for reducing burnout [ – ], though more research is needed regarding the implementation of these intervention in diverse contexts [ ].

## Training and capacity building
Responses by both general workers and managers indicated that more training and capacity building for managers is necessary for providing effective mental health support at work. Although the majority of managers indicate they have some level of confidence to support worker mental health, 95% identified capacity building such as enhanced training and information about mental health issues and interventions as necessary to improve their ability and confidence to provide mental health support to workers. Almost one half of managers report that they had not provided information or referrals for mental health programs and supports because they don’t perceive it to be part of their job. Others indicate that they have never done so because no worker has ever reached out to them for support. While workplace policies regarding assessing and monitoring psychological safety and mental health vary by region and country, these findings suggest there is a need for enhanced training and capacity building for managers, including by supporting them to take a proactive role in identifying and supporting employee mental health. Evidence supports the importance of management training to promote mental health at work [ ]. For example, an Australian study found that implementing a mental training program for managers working with fire and rescue workers led to a significant reduction in sick leave by workers and a return on investment of the equivalent of almost £10.00 per pound spent on training [ ].

## Stigma
The issue of stigma and related concerns, including experiences of discrimination or punitive measures related to discussing or disclosing mental health concerns, was pervasive throughout the survey results. When describing general values and preferences related to mental health at work, perspectives on specific intervention types, and help-seeking preferences, stigma is at the forefront of concern among workers. Stigma-related issues emerged in several ways. When asked to rate their concerns related to specific intervention types, respondents rated worry about experiencing judgement and stigma and about privacy and confidentiality as top concerns across four intervention types: psychosocial and emotional, screening, return to work, and vocational support programs. Notably, the three interventions for which respondents indicated they had no concerns are interventions that can be delivered at the population level and do not involve singling out specific individuals due to mental health-related concerns: leisure-based physical activity, health promotion, and training and education.
Concerns about stigma are also evident in responses related to help-seeking preferences. Responses regarding preference for sharing mental health concerns suggest a high degree of reticence to openly seek mental health support at work. Respondents prefer to access care from external health services and are most concerned with ensuring that they are able to access programs and supports anonymously and without experiencing negative repercussions at work. This is also reflected in preferences for how to access care- most prefer to access care alone and in-person, and just over one quarter prefer to access support online via digital options. Respondents also report their preference for talking about mental health concerns outside of work or with health services at work, and report high levels of discomfort with speaking with human resource representatives or management.
The substantial influence of stigma and related concerns are consistent with the findings of an expert survey conducted in Europe and Australia, which found that workers are frequently reluctant to speak openly about mental health [ ]. Our findings show that concerns about experiencing discrimination and other negative repercussions related to being open about or seeking support for mental health at work suggests the potential value of targeted anti-stigma campaigns and interventions to promote a culture of openness and promote help-seeking at work. Evidence suggests that anti-stigma campaigns can improve comfort with disclosing mental health issues, including with employers [ ] and can improve supportive behaviour among workers [ , ]. Interventions based on social contact among people without and with lived experience of mental health condition are identified as highly effective in reducing mental health stigma [ ]. Related to the need for organizational change and supports to promote mental health and wellbeing, enforced policies that protect workers against the negative impacts of stigma related to mental health at work may also be warranted.

## Screening
Respondents show a high level of ambivalence about the use of screening for mental health at work. Quantitative results demonstrate low levels of knowledge, awareness and acceptance of screening programs at work compared with other intervention types. Survey respondents rated screening programs most highly compared with other intervention types for concerns about stigma and judgement, and screening programs are the least recommended by respondents for implementation at work. The responses to open-ended questions further demonstrate a high level of concern regarding the use of mental health screening at work. Respondents did, however, describe potential positive impacts of screening for mental health at work when done carefully and at a population level, including facilitating early detection and intervention. A US study testing a population-level, opt-in screening intervention with the option to access follow-up care found that the screening program facilitated care uptake among workers [ ]. However, a 2023 systematic review and meta-analysis [ ] found minimal evidence to support workplace mental health screenings and found that screening programs when implemented alone do not support improved mental health. When implemented on a voluntary basis at the population level with adequate privacy and confidentiality measures and available support for those who need it, screening programs may be beneficial in improving early detection and promoting pathways to care, but should not be relied on alone to improve mental health outcomes.

## Worker preferences
The survey results provide several key insights into respondents’ preferences regarding specific intervention types. Primarily, in addition to screening programs, respondents report the lowest levels of knowledge, experience and access to return to work and vocational support programs. Manager responses also indicate a low level of experience with and capacity related to these types of interventions. As long-term sickness absence and unemployment are themselves possible consequences of untreated mental health conditions [ ], these findings suggest that improved investment in and awareness about such programs and supports among workers and managers would be beneficial.

## Barriers to access
For those who have not previously accessed mental health programs or supports at work, responses related to perceived ease of access, for which a majority of respondents selected ‘neutral’ or ‘unsure/don’t know’ responses across all intervention types, are low compared with responses from those who have actually accessed these supports. This indicates low levels of knowledge about the availability and accessibility of programs and supports. Previous evidence shows that uptake of workplace mental health programs is often low among workers [ ]. A Canadian study that implemented mental health awareness training for managers found that improving manager awareness about mental health and mental health interventions increased manager support for workers experiencing mental health conditions and improved worker help-seeking and uptake of mental health supports [ ].
Finally, when asked which factors had deterred them from accessing mental health programs and supports at work, respondents indicated that time was the biggest access barrier. Time constraints include workload demands making it difficult for workers to access support, and lack of flexibility in how programs are delivered (e.g. after work hours). Time has previously been identified as a structural barrier to mental health service use by workers experiencing depression [ ]. Allowing flexibility in work hours to enable workers to participate in mental health programs and supports may thus support increased access to programs and supports.

## Including people with lived experience of mental health conditions
The results of the open-ended survey questions include a strong indication of the need for participatory approaches to designing and implementing mental health supports at work, including by involving people with lived or living experience of mental health conditions in the development of organizational policies and programs. The involvement of service users in design and improvement of mental health services is increasingly recognized as essential in the broader mental health field [ ]. For example, a qualitative study that elicited barriers and facilitators to use of a digital intervention to support workplace mental health [ ] points to the importance of engaging with service users in intervention design and implementation planning. This is particularly important when working with multicultural or otherwise diverse teams or when adapting interventions from one setting to another.

## Limitations
The survey sample includes a majority of respondents that are female, reside in Europe and the Americas, are urban-dwelling, highly educated, employed full-time with large businesses or organizations, and have access to benefits (e.g. sick days, vacation time) through their place of work. Over half of respondents work in a role that involves supporting mental health at work, suggesting they are highly familiar with the survey subject matter. Using convenience sampling can bias responses towards people with a pre-existing interest in the topic and with sufficient time and literacy to complete an extensive survey. The survey was available in three languages (English, French and Spanish), which may have limited participation from respondents who do not speak these languages. We believe that this survey offers a comprehensive overview of values and preferences for mental health programs and supports at work among workers internationally, but further research to capture more diverse perspectives could further enrich the findings. Almost 70% of survey respondents have experienced a mental health condition, indicating that this survey has captured the perspectives of people with lived experience of mental health concerns in the workplace. It also reinforces the need for enhanced mental health support at work.

## Conclusions
The results of this study underscore the importance of understanding the perspectives of workers and managers to inform the development and implementation of mental health programs and supports that are acceptable and appropriate for workers themselves, helping to improve uptake and to inform strategies for implementation. The results indicate the need for both population-level and targeted supports that are developed collaboratively with workers, for increased training and capacity building among managers, and for targeted interventions to address the pervasive impact of stigma on perceptions about mental health at work and help-seeking. These results provide a unique and global perspective related to mental health at work from the perspective of workers, managers, and providers of mental health supports at work. The findings directly informed the development of the WHO Guidelines on Mental Health at Work [ ] which were launched in the fall of 2022 and will help to advance workplace mental health support globally.

## Supporting information
S1 File

## Mental health at work survey.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.

The authors would like to sincerely thank everyone who participated in the survey for sharing their time and expertise.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0283057.r001Decision Letter 0
ChimaSylvester ChidiAcademic Editor© 2023 Sylvester Chidi Chima2023Sylvester Chidi Chimahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
28 Jun 2023

PONE-D-23-05532Values and Preferences Related to Workplace Mental Health Programs and Interventions: An International SurveyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Murphy,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
 Provide more clarity regarding the  research question and the study objectives in the introductory sections including the Abstract. 
Provide more information in the abstract regarding the survey, including sample size, etc.
Clarify whether this was quantitative survey with a few open-ended questions, rather than a mixed methods study using both quantitative and qualitative methods
Clarify whether study participants represent employees/ supervisors, rather than employees versus employers?
Clarify whether the study employed a validated questionnaire or whether the questionnaire was developed exclusively for this study? Was the study instrument validated, if so how? 
 Consider submitting a copy of the study Questionnaire as a supplementary file if not already included in your supplementary materials?
Expand or extend the Results and Discussion sections to provide more details and clarity for readers as suggested by the peer-reviewers
Reorganize the tables for better presentation as suggested by the peer reviewers…
Provide more information in the Conclusions regarding suggestions for future directions pertaining to this research study.
Kindly address all other pertinent issues as suggested by the peer- reviewers.

Please submit your revised manuscript by Aug 12 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sylvester Chidi Chima, M.D., L.L.M, LLD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match. 
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
3. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: 
"This survey was commissioned by the World Health Organization to provide supporting evidence for the development of the WHO Guidelines on Mental Health at Work. The funding was held by the University of Alberta. JN and PAC were paid from these funds to support this research. WHO representatives participated in the design of the survey and supported its dissemination. Analysis was conducted independently by the study team and presented to WHO. A WHO representative reviewed this manuscript for consistency with WHO terminology but did not influence the findings or conclusions."
Please state what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role, please state: ""The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."" 
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
4. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section: 
"JKM, JN, PAC, GM and AG declared that no competing interests exist.
EEM has received funding from Otsuka-Lundbeck for patient educational activities.
RWL has received honoraria for ad hoc speaking or advising/consulting, or received research
funds, from: Abbvie, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, Bausch, BC Leading Edge
Foundation, Brain Canada, Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments, CAN-BIND Solutions, Carnot, Grand Challenges Canada, Healthy
Minds Canada, Janssen, Lundbeck, Medscape, Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research,
MITACS, Neurotorium, Ontario Brain Institute, Otsuka, Pfizer/Viatris, Shanghai Mental Health
Center, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Unity Health, Vancouver Coastal Health Research
Institute, and VGH-UBCH Foundation. "
Please confirm that this does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, by including the following statement: ""This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests).  If there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared. 
Please include your updated Competing Interests statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
5. Please include a caption for figure 1. 
6. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: I Don't Know
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Overall
This is a well written, interesting study, with an international (including multiple languages) perspective. It is a great foundation for further exploration of workplace mental health programs and guidelines.
Major comments:
Your survey study has quantitative questions alongside a few, simple open-ended text responses – use “open-ended questions” or “comments” instead of referring to “qualitative” throughout the paper. You are using a qualitative data collection technique, not qualitative research methods. Thank you for labeling the quotes appropriately.
How many people were approached to complete the survey? Please provide more detail of how were participants recruited. Were incentives used? Were all participants asked the same questions (managers and workers)? It is unclear in the results section who were the respondents to Theme 1 and Theme 2, and then the “Perspectives of Managers”. Please add a paragraph in the methods describing your recruitment and sample.
Recommended additional analyses by gender – as preferences for males and mental health and workplaces are well known to be different from females. Especially in terms of access (table 12).
Seaton et al. (2017). Men’s mental health promotion interventions: a scoping review. American Journal of men’s health, 11(6), 1823-1837.
Seaton et al. (2018). Mental health promotion in male-dominated workplaces: perspectives of male employees and workplace representatives. Psychology of men and masculinity, 20(4), 541-552.
I see that 68.1% indicated current or prior experience with a mental health condition (page 8), is that participant’s self-experience, or caregiving/providing support to someone with a mental health concern/illness? Please clarify. This would also be a useful and interesting sub analysis.
Minor comments
What is the objective or research question? This should be detailed in the introduction.
Clarify the subheading “Current Impact” to “Current impact of work on mental health” or “Impacts of work”; as it is not the impact of mental health. Page 8
Sort data in tables intentionally (i.e., highest/greatest % at the top). You can also consider changing the likert scale tables to stacked bar figures for more impact (example, table 3 and 13).
“Benefits and concerns” is a large section. This might be better organized if separated with the appropriate subheading; or by personal benefits/concerns vs. population/organizational benefits/concerns; or by type of program?. Page 14-17.
Table 14 & 15, since you asked for people to select all, I would put present raw numbers over %s. These tables and their associated narration (page 14/15) needs some editing for clarity. They are challenging to follow and interpret.
Page 19 – Consider moving the “quality and appropriateness of programs and supports” up to Theme 1; and “engagement and collaboration with workers” up to “Organizational Changes”. No need for a separate section of “Additional considerations from Qualitative Responses”; these 2 topics can be embedded elsewhere.
I think the “Perspectives of Managers” section can be further flushed out, with its’ own theme(s), or else integrated within the other subheadings. There are some similar and related ideas (i.e., preferences for access with/without a manager).
The discussion section flows well and summarizes the main findings. You could consider adding some additional details about next steps, or what the WHO plans to do with the findings on a global scale.
Reviewer #2: Overall comments:
This is an interesting article about an international survey among employees and managers about their knowledge, use and attitude about mental health at work programs and initiatives. The results provide important knowledge about barriers and facilitators for better use of activities that can improve mental health at work. Although the article is well structured and written, I have the following comments to further improve the manuscript before publication.
Abstract:
The abstract is lacking more detailed information about the type of survey (online survey in a worldwide convenience sample) and the size of the survey (how many answered? description of the people answering the survey) to give the reader a better idea about what this article will report about. Although it might be difficult with the word count, a few more of this information should be included.
Considering who actually answered (52% indicate that they play a supervisory role at work), I would describe the sample as consisting of employees and supervisors (rather than employers, which refers more to top-management level). In addition, the formulation “workers, including managers” does not make sense, as there is a clear difference between workers and managers/supervisors. Since results for supervisors/managers are reported separately (page 19) the abstract should reflect this (i.e. “The findings of this study seek to reflect the perspectives of workers and of supervisors…”)
Methods:
More information about the origin of the questions is missing. Were all questions developed for this survey? Or were also validated questions and scales used?
Results:
Line 143: I am not quite sure how to understand this result: “To the question, “What type of impact does your work have generally on your mental health?” respondents reported equally that work has both a positive and negative impact (24.5%)” Does it mean that exactly 24,5% mentioned both positive and negative impact of work? Or that 24,5% mentioned positive and 24,5% mentioned negative impact? Please clarify.
Also, I suggest to report the results to this question differently so it is easier to see that actually more participants answered that work had “a somewhat positive (24.5%) impact on mental health” or “a very positive impact on mental health (15.7%)” (40,2% positive) compared to those that answered that work had “a somewhat negative impact on mental health (19.0%)” or “a very negative impact (6.2%)” (25,2% negative).
In the online material, there are some interesting quotes about the positive and negative impact of work on mental health, which I think would be interesting to report a bit more, as it illustrates that both aspects can be experienced at the same time. It is also important to highlight the positive aspects of work, as it shows that certain aspects of work can actually support mental health and that these positive aspects are therefore a potential that should be supported more – in addition to decreasing the negative aspects. This is also in line with the integrated approach to workplace mental health that the authors refer to (Line 604: LaMontagne et al., 2014).
A more general comment to the result section is that the presentation could be more informative. A number of tables are only presented shortly with regard to what questions were asked, while a presentation of the results that are shown in the table is often missing. I understand that not everything that can be seen in a table needs to be commented in the text to avoid repetition, but some comment that highlights the most important results should be added. This refers especially to tables 4, 5, 6,, 8 and 9. I also suggest presenting the result ordered by frequency, so it is easier to see which answers were given most often.
Page 14, line 231 Benefits and Concerns: Please check table 14 (line 678) which is commented in this part of the result section. It seems to be identical with table 15 (line 683). So the results that are reported in the text cannot be seen in the table.
Page 22, from line 430 the authors write, “We also captured manager experiences and perspective with policies and programs to support work mental health through organizational changes. 45.2% of managers have provided a referral or information to employees about accessing or participating in such an intervention, while 28.8% have not and 17.8% indicate that these policies and programs are unavailable in their workplace.” Please explain what is meant here as I feel that it is the managers that are in the position to develop and implement policies and programs and that this is not an intervention that employees can be referred to, but rather that at least policies are regulations or aims that the workplace is trying to live up to.
Discussion
I agree with the authors that the most striking result of this survey is the enormous impact of stigma which seems to be in the way for many initiatives that would be able to improve mental health at work. The fear of disclosing mental health problems might lead to negative consequences is expressed in many different ways throughout the entire survey. This is especially surprising considering that more than half of the participants identify themselves as managers. Stigma therefore is not only a barrier to faster help for mental health problems for regular employees, but also for supervisors.
The results are in line with what we found in a survey conduced among experts from a variety of European countries and Australia. Hogg, B., Moreno-Alcázar, A., Tóth, M. D., Serbanescu, I., Aust, B., Leduc, C., ... & Amann, B. L. (2023). Supporting employees with mental illness and reducing mental illness-related stigma in the workplace: An expert survey. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 273(3), 739-753.
The good news is that workplace anti-stigma program seem to work well and should therefore be used much more. Just for your information, we recently published a review about effectiveness of interventions to reduce mental health related stigma in the workplace which confirms the positive findings in the review by Hanisch et al. that you refer to (reference 27) (Tóth, M. D., Ihionvien, S., Leduc, C., Aust, B., Amann, B. L., Cresswell-Smith, J., ... & Purebl, G. (2023). Evidence for the effectiveness of interventions to reduce mental health related stigma in the workplace: a systematic review. BMJ open, 13(2), e067126.). These programs also seem to work when delivered online which has the advantage that also smaller workplaces with less resources for face-to-face activities could use them.
Another striking result is that “almost one half of managers’ report that they had not provided information or referrals for mental health programs and supports because they don’t perceive it to be part of their job.” Page 23, line 455). This might only refer to referral which might be considered as a task that should be done by health experts. Nevertheless, at least in Europe workplaces are obligated to conduct risk assessments of the working environment – including the psychosocial work environment – with the aim to identify risks early, reduce them and of course also provide help to people who are in need. Policy, law and guidance for psychosocial issues in the workplace: an EU perspective - OSHwiki | European Agency for Safety and Health at Work (europa.eu). That might be an aspect that could be mentioned.
Also, I would like to make the authors aware of a new review that investigated the effects of workplace mental health screenings (Strudwick, J., Gayed, A., Deady, M., Haffar, S., Mobbs, S., Malik, A., ... & Harvey, S. B. (2023). Workplace mental health screening: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Occupational and Environmental Medicine.https://oem.bmj.com/content/oemed/early/2023/06/15/oemed-2022-108608.full.pdf) adding to the critical discussion of this type of intervention. The review concludes that screening followed by feedback and advice does not improve employee mental health.
Finally, since organizational level interventions are mentioned several times and are also seen as a promising way to improve mental health at work I would also like to make you aware of recent reviews that have shown that organizational level interventions to reduce burnout seem to work well. See for example Pijpker, R., Vaandrager, L., Veen, E. J., & Koelen, M. A. (2020). Combined interventions to reduce burnout complaints and promote return to work: A systematic review of effectiveness and mediators of change. International journal of environmental research and public health, 17(1), 55.
DeChant, P. F., Acs, A., Rhee, K. B., Boulanger, T. S., Snowdon, J. L., Tutty, M. A., ... & Craig, K. J. T. (2019). Effect of organization-directed workplace interventions on physician burnout: a systematic review. Mayo Clinic Proceedings: Innovations, Quality & Outcomes, 3(4), 384-408.
For a more general overview of reviews of organizational level interventions see:
Aust, B., Møller, J. L., Nordentoft, M., Frydendall, K. B., Bengtsen, E., Jensen, A. B., ... & Jaspers, S. Ø. (2023). How effective are organizational-level interventions in improving the psychosocial work environment, health, and retention of workers? A systematic overview of systematic reviews. Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment & Health.
Minor comments
Page 5, line 70. Delete “by”
Page 10, table 5: correct to “wellbeing of workers”
Page 13, line 209: I think you mean box 1, not figure 1? At least I could not find figure 1
Page 14, line 221: delete “their”
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Allison Soprovich
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0283057.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
1 Aug 2023

We would like to thank the reviewers for their comprehensive and thoughtful comments on our manuscript. We have provided a comprehensive response to the reviewers' comments in the attached letter, and also provide them below (see attached letter for formatting with responses to reviewers in bold):
Reviewer #1:
 Overall
This is a well written, interesting study, with an international (including multiple languages) perspective. It is a great foundation for further exploration of workplace mental health programs and guidelines.
Thank you for your encouraging comments and recommendations. We have responded to them individually below and have indicated where we have made corresponding revisions in the manuscript. 
Major comments
Your survey study has quantitative questions alongside a few, simple open-ended text responses – use “open-ended questions” or “comments” instead of referring to “qualitative” throughout the paper. You are using a qualitative data collection technique, not qualitative research methods. Thank you for labeling the quotes appropriately.
Thank you for your comment. We have clarified this in the paper by using the term “open-ended questions” as recommended. These edits have been made throughout the paper and in the abstract, with all changes highlighted in yellow. However, the methodological rationale for including these open ended questions was to generate qualitative data to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the perspectives of respondents. We used qualitative thematic analysis to identify themes throughout the data set and describe the analysis and interpretation of results accordingly in the manuscript. 
How many people were approached to complete the survey? Please provide more detail of how were participants recruited. Were incentives used? Were all participants asked the same questions (managers and workers)? It is unclear in the results section who were the respondents to Theme 1 and Theme 2, and then the “Perspectives of Managers”. Please add a paragraph in the methods describing your recruitment and sample.
Thank you for your question. We have clarified on Page 7 and in the abstract that we used convenience sampling to recruit survey participants. We also clarify that we did not offer incentives: 
We used convenience sampling to generate survey participation. This consisted of broad dissemination via several channels, including through international global mental health networks, university networks, via mental health, workplace, and patient-serving organizations, and via social media. No incentives were provided to encourage survey participation.
We have also clarified the data collection process for managers and other sub-groups of interest (Page 5) in the following text:
When participants indicated that they were managers (indicating that they supervise employees), ‘high-risk’ workers (indicating that they work in a health, emergency or humanitarian services), and/or provide mental health support at work, the survey logic directed them to a specific set of questions designed for these participant subgroups, which they responded to in addition to the questions that were available for all survey participants.
Recommended additional analyses by gender – as preferences for males and mental health and workplaces are well known to be different from females. Especially in terms of access (table 12).
Seaton et al. (2017). Men’s mental health promotion interventions: a scoping review. American Journal of men’s health, 11(6), 1823-1837.
Seaton et al. (2018). Mental health promotion in male-dominated workplaces: perspectives of male employees and workplace representatives. Psychology of men and masculinity, 20(4), 541-552.
Thank you for making this recommendation. We certainly agree that disaggregating the results by gender (and indeed other demographic features) would provide important insights into differences in values and preferences related to mental health programs and supports at work by specific sub-populations. However, we believe the presentation of additional results would add to the already substantial length of this manuscript, the purpose of which is to provide an overview of global perspectives related to the values and preferences of workers related to accessing mental health support at work. While additional analysis would certainly be informative, it is outside the scope of this paper. We are exploring further publications of the results and will certainly consider expanding the analysis to account for demographic differences in the future. 
I see that 68.1% indicated current or prior experience with a mental health condition (page 8), is that participant’s self-experience, or caregiving/providing support to someone with a mental health concern/illness? Please clarify. This would also be a useful and interesting sub analysis.
Thank you for your question. This refers to personally experiencing a mental health condition. We have clarified this on Page 9 as follows:
A majority of respondents (68.1%) indicate that they currently or have previously experienced a mental health condition…
Minor comments
What is the objective or research question? This should be detailed in the introduction.
Thank you for raising this concern. We have provided a more detailed description of the objective and research questions in the introduction on Page 4, as follows:
The purpose of this global survey was to capture the perspectives of workers, including managers, in order to understand their values and preferences related to mental health at work. Specifically, we sought to 1) understand workers’ perspectives and preferences related to different types of workplace programs and interventions to promote mental wellbeing and prevent and treat mental health conditions, including their help-seeking preferences, and 2) to assess workers’ awareness of and access to specific types of mental health programs and supports at work.
Clarify the subheading “Current Impact” to “Current impact of work on mental health” or “Impacts of work”; as it is not the impact of mental health. Page 8
Thank you for this suggestion. We have revised the subheading to “Current impact of work on mental health” as suggested (Page 9). 
Sort data in tables intentionally (i.e., highest/greatest % at the top). You can also consider changing the likert scale tables to stacked bar figures for more impact (example, table 3 and 13).
We have revised the tables so that the results are ordered in descending order from lowest to highest. 
“Benefits and concerns” is a large section. This might be better organized if separated with the appropriate subheading; or by personal benefits/concerns vs. population/organizational benefits/concerns; or by type of program?. Page 15-17.
Thank you for your suggestion. We have included sub-headings throughout this section (Pages 17-21). 
Table 14 & 15, since you asked for people to select all, I would put present raw numbers over %s. These tables and their associated narration (page 14/15) needs some editing for clarity. They are challenging to follow and interpret.
Thank you for your suggestion. We have presented these tables using the same format as is used in the WHO’s Evidence Summaries and prefer to maintain this consistency. In the column headings, we have indicated the number of respondents and the total number of responses to reflect the use of “select all” for these survey questions. We do not feel that adding raw numbers instead of percentages would change the interpretation of results by readers. 
Regarding the narration, we have added additional text, as follows. For perceived benefits, we have added (Page 17): 
We asked respondents to rate perceived benefits by intervention type according to the following criteria: convenience, being helpful in promoting or supporting mental health, removing barriers like stigma, affordability for the worker, affordability for the company, and benefiting the morale of the organization.
For concerns, we have added the following text (Page 18):
We also asked respondents to rate their concerns by intervention type according to the following criteria: lack of privacy and confidentiality, fear of judgement or stigma, inconvenience, difficulty in accessing it, being expensive for workers, and being expensive for the company.
Page 19 – Consider moving the “quality and appropriateness of programs and supports” up to Theme 1; and “engagement and collaboration with workers” up to “Organizational Changes”. No need for a separate section of “Additional considerations from Qualitative Responses”; these 2 topics can be embedded elsewhere.
Thank you for this suggestion, we agree that it is better to integrate these sections elsewhere. We have moved both sections to the “Concerns with supporting mental health at work” section (Page 19). 
I think the “Perspectives of Managers” section can be further flushed out, with its’ own theme(s), or else integrated within the other subheadings. There are some similar and related ideas (i.e., preferences for access with/without a manager).
Thank you for this suggestion. We do however believe that this section is appropriate as it is because it provides an overview of the responses to specific survey questions that were directed towards managers related to themes including experiences with and perceived capacity to provide mental health support at work and their needs related to capacity building. We do not believe these findings would easily integrate into other sections of the paper. We did not include open-ended questions directed only at managers, making it difficult to identify additional themes specific to managers. 
The discussion section flows well and summarizes the main findings. You could consider adding some additional details about next steps, or what the WHO plans to do with the findings on a global scale.
Thank you for this suggestion. We have included a summary of broad implications of the findings in the Conclusion section and have added additional text (Page 31) related to the WHO Guidelines, as follows: 
The findings directly informed the development of the WHO Guidelines on Mental Health at Work (18) which were launched in the fall of 2022 and will help to advance workplace mental health support globally.
Because these findings directly informed the development of the Guidelines, making detailed recommendations would duplicate the work of the WHO Guideline Development Group and the content of the Guidelines themselves. We do, however, believe that this manuscript and its findings provide important and more detailed insight into the perspectives of workers that complements the content of the WHO Guidelines. 
Reviewer #2: 
Overall comments
This is an interesting article about an international survey among employees and managers about their knowledge, use and attitude about mental health at work programs and initiatives. The results provide important knowledge about barriers and facilitators for better use of activities that can improve mental health at work. Although the article is well structured and written, I have the following comments to further improve the manuscript before publication.
Thank you for your kind words about this paper. We appreciate your additional comments and have responded to them below, indicating where we have made corresponding changes in the manuscript. 
Abstract:
The abstract is lacking more detailed information about the type of survey (online survey in a worldwide convenience sample) and the size of the survey (how many answered? description of the people answering the survey) to give the reader a better idea about what this article will report about. Although it might be difficult with the word count, a few more of this information should be included.
Thank you for this suggestion. We have included additional details in the abstract within the limitations of the word limit. 
Considering who actually answered (52% indicate that they play a supervisory role at work), I would describe the sample as consisting of employees and supervisors (rather than employers, which refers more to top-management level). In addition, the formulation “workers, including managers” does not make sense, as there is a clear difference between workers and managers/supervisors. Since results for supervisors/managers are reported separately (page 19) the abstract should reflect this (i.e. “The findings of this study seek to reflect the perspectives of workers and of supervisors…”)
Thank you for raising this point of clarification. We have amended the language to state “workers and managers” as we agree it is more accurate. We have made this change in the abstract and also in the Discussion on pages 25. 
Methods:
More information about the origin of the questions is missing. Were all questions developed for this survey? Or were also validated questions and scales used?
Thank you for raising this issue. We have included more detail about the survey development on Page 4-5 as follows: 
The survey development was led by co-first authors JN and JKM, in collaboration with co-author GM and the WHO technical officer responsible for the guideline development process. The survey scope and questions, including the intervention types that were included, were informed by the key questions identified for the Guideline Development Group and an Evidence to Decision Making Framework provided by the WHO partners. Survey questions were developed specifically for this survey based on a review of the relevant literature, and elements of the survey structure was informed by similar surveys including the WHO Consolidated Guideline on Self-care interventions for Health: Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights Global Values and Preferences Survey (19). In the Results section, we specify where survey items were informed by existing frameworks or classification systems.
Results:
Line 143: I am not quite sure how to understand this result: “To the question, “What type of impact does your work have generally on your mental health?” respondents reported equally that work has both a positive and negative impact (24.5%)” Does it mean that exactly 24,5% mentioned both positive and negative impact of work? Or that 24,5% mentioned positive and 24,5% mentioned negative impact? Please clarify.
Also, I suggest to report the results to this question differently so it is easier to see that actually more participants answered that work had “a somewhat positive (24.5%) impact on mental health” or “a very positive impact on mental health (15.7%)” (40,2% positive) compared to those that answered that work had “a somewhat negative impact on mental health (19.0%)” or “a very negative impact (6.2%)” (25,2% negative).
Thank you for this suggestion. We have revised this paragraph as follows (Page 9):
To the question, “What type of impact does your work have generally on your mental health?” a majority (40.2%) of respondents reported that work a positive impact on their mental health, with 24.5% reporting a somewhat positive impact and 15.7% reporting a very positive impact. 19.0% reported that work has a somewhat negative impact on their mental health, while 6.2% reported a very negative impact. 9.8% responded neutrally, and 0.7% were unsure. 
In the online material, there are some interesting quotes about the positive and negative impact of work on mental health, which I think would be interesting to report a bit more, as it illustrates that both aspects can be experienced at the same time. It is also important to highlight the positive aspects of work, as it shows that certain aspects of work can actually support mental health and that these positive aspects are therefore a potential that should be supported more – in addition to decreasing the negative aspects. This is also in line with the integrated approach to workplace mental health that the authors refer to (Line 604: LaMontagne et al., 2014).
Thank you for suggesting this addition. We had excluded the open-response results in favour of brevity but agree that these responses provide a more nuanced perspective on the relationship between work and mental health. We have added the following section to Pages 10-11:
We provided an open-response option, inviting participants to provide more context related to the impact of work on their mental health. Respondents provided a spectrum of responses, with some describing the positive impact of work on mental health, as described in the following quotation: 
“My job contributes to positive well-being by providing pay, contact with other people, achievement and sense of importance/contribution to society. (P81, Worker, Man)”
Others report a mixed impact of work on their mental health, with work contributing several positive factors but also contributing to stress: 
“My work provides purpose and structure and social relationships which is important for my mental health. It also provides stress and uncertainty at times. There are positive aspects and negative aspects: it carries stress and burnout but also a sense of fulfillment. (P41, Worker, Woman)” 
Finally, other respondents describe a predominantly negative impact of work on mental health, often related to challenging relationships with management, overly demanding workloads and lack of work-life balance, and insufficient compensation: 
“We are overworked with a lot of projects that we are responsible for, too many meetings, few opportunities for growth, feedback not is not acted upon by leadership/management, there is a lack of transparency about decisions and information, underpaid for value added (P 125, Worker, Woman)”
A more general comment to the result section is that the presentation could be more informative. A number of tables are only presented shortly with regard to what questions were asked, while a presentation of the results that are shown in the table is often missing. I understand that not everything that can be seen in a table needs to be commented in the text to avoid repetition, but some comment that highlights the most important results should be added. This refers especially to tables 4, 5, 6,, 8 and 9. I also suggest presenting the result ordered by frequency, so it is easier to see which answers were given most often.
Thank you for this suggestion. We again attempted to promote brevity in the presentation of results given the length of the paper. We do agree that some interpretation of the results displayed in the tables improves readability and have added text to the sections reporting on Table 4 (Page 11), Table 5 (Page 12), Table 6 (Pages 12-13), Table 8 (Page 14), and Table 9 (Page 15). We have also revised the tables to present results in descending order of frequency. 
Page 14, line 231 Benefits and Concerns: Please check table 14 (line 678) which is commented in this part of the result section. It seems to be identical with table 15 (line 683). So the results that are reported in the text cannot be seen in the table.
We sincerely apologize for this error and thank you for pointing it out. We have now included the correct Table 14. 
Page 22, from line 430 the authors write, “We also captured manager experiences and perspective with policies and programs to support work mental health through organizational changes. 45.2% of managers have provided a referral or information to employees about accessing or participating in such an intervention, while 28.8% have not and 17.8% indicate that these policies and programs are unavailable in their workplace.” Please explain what is meant here as I feel that it is the managers that are in the position to develop and implement policies and programs and that this is not an intervention that employees can be referred to, but rather that at least policies are regulations or aims that the workplace is trying to live up to.
We apologize for the lack of clarity here. In the case of organizational changes, manager experience would consist of providing information to an employee about organizational programs or policies that are designed to promote or support mental health at work. As this question was asked in relation to all other programs and support types, we used the term “referral or information” to indicate that managers may refer to a specific program (e.g. psychosocial interventions”) or provide information about a program or policy at the organizational level. We have clarified this by removing the reference to a referral on Page 25 as follows: 
We also captured manager experiences and perspective with policies and programs to support work mental health through organizational changes. 45.2% of managers have provided information to employees about accessing or participating in such an intervention, while 28.8% have not and 17.8% indicate that these policies and programs are unavailable in their workplace. 
Discussion
I agree with the authors that the most striking result of this survey is the enormous impact of stigma which seems to be in the way for many initiatives that would be able to improve mental health at work. The fear of disclosing mental health problems might lead to negative consequences is expressed in many different ways throughout the entire survey. This is especially surprising considering that more than half of the participants identify themselves as managers. Stigma therefore is not only a barrier to faster help for mental health problems for regular employees, but also for supervisors.
The results are in line with what we found in a survey conduced among experts from a variety of European countries and Australia. Hogg, B., Moreno-Alcázar, A., Tóth, M. D., Serbanescu, I., Aust, B., Leduc, C., ... & Amann, B. L. (2023). Supporting employees with mental illness and reducing mental illness-related stigma in the workplace: An expert survey. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 273(3), 739-753.
The good news is that workplace anti-stigma program seem to work well and should therefore be used much more. Just for your information, we recently published a review about effectiveness of interventions to reduce mental health related stigma in the workplace which confirms the positive findings in the review by Hanisch et al. that you refer to (reference 27) (Tóth, M. D., Ihionvien, S., Leduc, C., Aust, B., Amann, B. L., Cresswell-Smith, J., ... & Purebl, G. (2023). Evidence for the effectiveness of interventions to reduce mental health related stigma in the workplace: a systematic review. BMJ open, 13(2), e067126.). These programs also seem to work when delivered online which has the advantage that also smaller workplaces with less resources for face-to-face activities could use them.
Thank you for your comments and valuable reflections on the findings of this survey, and for sharing your recent publications with us. We have added them to the references in the section on stigma in the Discussion. All new additions to the reference list are also highlighted in yellow. 
Another striking result is that “almost one half of managers’ report that they had not provided information or referrals for mental health programs and supports because they don’t perceive it to be part of their job.” Page 23, line 455). This might only refer to referral which might be considered as a task that should be done by health experts. Nevertheless, at least in Europe workplaces are obligated to conduct risk assessments of the working environment – including the psychosocial work environment – with the aim to identify risks early, reduce them and of course also provide help to people who are in need. Policy, law and guidance for psychosocial issues in the workplace: an EU perspective - OSHwiki | European Agency for Safety and Health at Work (europa.eu). That might be an aspect that could be mentioned.
Thank you for raising this point. We have included the following to acknowledge the diversity in workplace polices by country and region as follow on Page 26:
While workplace policies regarding assessing and monitoring psychological safety and mental health vary by region and country, these findings suggest there is a need for enhanced training and capacity building for managers, including by supporting them to take a proactive role in identifying and supporting employee mental health. Evidence supports the importance of management training to promote mental health at work (25).
Also, I would like to make the authors aware of a new review that investigated the effects of workplace mental health screenings (Strudwick, J., Gayed, A., Deady, M., Haffar, S., Mobbs, S., Malik, A., ... & Harvey, S. B. (2023). Workplace mental health screening: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Occupational and Environmental Medicine.https://oem.bmj.com/content/oemed/early/2023/06/15/oemed-2022-108608.full.pdf) adding to the critical discussion of this type of intervention. The review concludes that screening followed by feedback and advice does not improve employee mental health.
Thank you for calling our attention to this recent study. We have included the reference in the section on screening with the following updates (Page 28):
A US study testing a population-level, opt-in screening intervention with the option to access follow-up care found that the screening program facilitated care uptake among employees (32). However, a 2023 systematic review and meta-analysis (33) found minimal evidence to support workplace mental health screenings and found that screening programs when implemented alone do not support improved mental health. When implemented on a voluntary basis at the population level with adequate privacy and confidentiality measures and available support for those who need it, screening programs may be beneficial in improving early detection and promoting pathways to care, but should not be relied on alone to improve mental health outcomes. 
Finally, since organizational level interventions are mentioned several times and are also seen as a promising way to improve mental health at work I would also like to make you aware of recent reviews that have shown that organizational level interventions to reduce burnout seem to work well. See for example Pijpker, R., Vaandrager, L., Veen, E. J., & Koelen, M. A. (2020). Combined interventions to reduce burnout complaints and promote return to work: A systematic review of effectiveness and mediators of change. International journal of environmental research and public health, 17(1), 55.
DeChant, P. F., Acs, A., Rhee, K. B., Boulanger, T. S., Snowdon, J. L., Tutty, M. A., ... & Craig, K. J. T. (2019). Effect of organization-directed workplace interventions on physician burnout: a systematic review. Mayo Clinic Proceedings: Innovations, Quality & Outcomes, 3(4), 384-408.
For a more general overview of reviews of organizational level interventions see:
Aust, B., Møller, J. L., Nordentoft, M., Frydendall, K. B., Bengtsen, E., Jensen, A. B., ... & Jaspers, S. Ø. (2023). Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment & Health.
Thank you for calling our attention to these studies. We have added the following text, referencing these studies, to the section on organizational factors (Page 25):
Several studies have found that organizational interventions can be beneficial for employee mental health, including for reducing burnout (25, 26,27), though more research is needed regarding the implementation of these intervention in diverse contexts (27). 
Minor comments
Page 5, line 70. Delete “by”
We have made this change. 
Page 10, table 5: correct to “wellbeing of workers”
Thank you for picking up this typo. We have now corrected it. 
Page 13, line 209: I think you mean box 1, not figure 1? At least I could not find figure 1
Using “Box 1” was an error and we have revised it to be labelled “Figure 1”
Page 14, line 221: delete “their”
We have made this correction (now on Page 16). 
Thank you again for the opportunity to respond to these comments and suggestions. We look forward to any additional comments or suggestions the editor and reviewers might have.
10.1371/journal.pone.0283057.r003Decision Letter 1
ChimaSylvester ChidiAcademic Editor© 2023 Sylvester Chidi Chima2023Sylvester Chidi Chimahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
15 Aug 2023

PONE-D-23-05532R1Values and Preferences Related to Workplace Mental Health Programs and Interventions: An International SurveyPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Murphy,
Thank you for submitting your revised manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it may be suitable for acceptance for publication. However, there are still a few minor errors that need correction, to fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. 1. Kindly read through your manuscript carefully to correct all typographical and grammatical errors within the manuscript.2. In your revision kindly address all comments and suggestions as recommended by Reviewer 2.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Sep 29 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sylvester Chidi Chima, M.D., L.L.M, LLD.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for addressing my comments and suggestions adequately. Best wishes and I look forward to reading the final publication.
Reviewer #2: The authors successfully addressed all comments. However, I have a few last comments that I like the authors to check before publication (no need to see the manuscript again)
(I am referring to the page numbers of the manuscript version where changes were marked)
Page 58, Abstract, second and last sentence in the result part:
In the abstract there is still the formulation “employees, including managers” or “workers, including managers” (and also in a new part on page 60, line 30). I recommend again to change this to “workers and their managers” as workers can not include managers.
Also I noticed that the authors sometime use the term “employee”, but I recommend to consistently use the term “worker” for those who are not managers (unless there is a reason to single out “employees”). When you want to refer to all – workers and managers - you could just write “participants of the study” or “respondents”.
The last sentence of the result section seems to be the conclusion. Please add a headline for conclusion.
Page 61, line 57
I think the word “questions” is missing after “open-ended”
Page 63, line 106
Instead of ”Open-ended responses” it should be “Responses to open-ended questions”. (Check also other parts of the manuscript)
Page 65, line 166
add “has” before “a positive impact”
Page 67, line 204
”indicating” instead of ”indication”
Page 70, line 245
“Respondents” instead of “Responses”
Page 70, line 248
“to access them outside of work but not at their home” instead of “to access them outside of work but outside their home”
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Allison Soprovich
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0283057.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
22 Aug 2023

August 22nd, 2023
Dear Dr. Chidi Chima, 
Thank you for the opportunity to make additional revisions and resubmit our manuscript, entitled “Values and Preferences Related to Workplace Mental Health Programs and Interventions: An International Survey” for consideration by PLoS One. 
Below, we provide responses to Reviewer #2’s comments below the original comments in bold. Revisions in the manuscript text have been highlighted in yellow. 
Journal Requirements: 
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
We have reviewed the reference list and confirm it is complete and correct. To the best of our knowledge we have not included any retracted articles in our reference list. 
Comments from Reviewer #2: 
The authors successfully addressed all comments. However, I have a few last comments that I like the authors to check before publication (no need to see the manuscript again)
(I am referring to the page numbers of the manuscript version where changes were marked)
Page 58, Abstract, second and last sentence in the result part:
In the abstract there is still the formulation “employees, including managers” or “workers, including managers” (and also in a new part on page 60, line 30). I recommend again to change this to “workers and their managers” as workers can not include managers.
Thank you for this comment. We have now updated the language in the abstract as suggested. 
Also I noticed that the authors sometime use the term “employee”, but I recommend to consistently use the term “worker” for those who are not managers (unless there is a reason to single out “employees”). When you want to refer to all – workers and managers - you could just write “participants of the study” or “respondents”.
We have changed the term “employee” to “worker” throughout, except where the term refers to workers that are directly employed by others to distinguish from the broader category of “worker” which may include self-employed, gig, contract or other types of workers. We have made these changes on Page 2, Page 17, Page 20, Page 23, Page 25, Page 26, Page 27, and Page 28. 
The last sentence of the result section seems to be the conclusion. Please add a headline for conclusion.
We believe the reviewer was referring to the last sentence of the Abstract. We have added a heading for “Conclusion” before the last sentence on Page 2 as recommended. 
Page 61, line 57
I think the word “questions” is missing after “open-ended”
Thank you for catching this omission. We have added the word “questions” to line 57 (Page 5 in the Word document of the manuscript). 
Page 63, line 106
Instead of ”Open-ended responses” it should be “Responses to open-ended questions”. (Check also other parts of the manuscript)
We have made this change on line 106 (Page 7 in the Word document). We have also made this change on Line 123 (Page 8), Line 331 (Page 18), Line 424 (Page 21), and on Line 576 (Page 28).
Page 65, line 166
add “has” before “a positive impact”
We have now made this change on Line 166, Page 9. 
Page 67, line 204
”indicating” instead of ”indication”
We have now made this change on Line 204, Page 11. 
Page 70, line 245
“Respondents” instead of “Responses”
We have made this change on line 245 on Page 14. We also changed “indication” to “indicating” on Line 246 of the same page. 
Page 70, line 248
“to access them outside of work but not at their home” instead of “to access them outside of work but outside their home”
We have made this change on Line 248, Page 14. 
Thank you again for the opportunity to respond to these further suggestions. 
Sincerely, 
Dr. Jill Murphy
Research Associate 
Department of Psychiatry 
University of British Columbia
Canada
10.1371/journal.pone.0283057.r005Decision Letter 2
ChimaSylvester ChidiAcademic Editor© 2023 Sylvester Chidi Chima2023Sylvester Chidi Chimahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
29 Aug 2023

Values and Preferences Related to Workplace Mental Health Programs and Interventions: An International Survey
PONE-D-23-05532R2
Dear Dr. Murphy,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Sylvester Chidi Chima, M.D., L.L.M. LLD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0283057.r006Acceptance letter
ChimaSylvester ChidiAcademic Editor© 2023 Sylvester Chidi Chima2023Sylvester Chidi Chimahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
1 Sep 2023

PONE-D-23-05532R2 
Values and Preferences Related to Workplace Mental Health Programs and Interventions: An International Survey 
Dear Dr. Murphy:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Professor Sylvester Chidi Chima 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE