pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC12962465PMC12962465.112962465129624654178527610.1371/journal.pone.0344036PONE-D-25-270661Research ArticleEarth SciencesGeographyHuman GeographyHousingSocial SciencesHuman GeographyHousingSocial SciencesEconomicsLabor EconomicsEmploymentSocial SciencesEconomicsLabor EconomicsEmploymentJobsSocial SciencesSociologySocial DiscriminationPeople and placesGeographical locationsNorth AmericaUnited StatesCaliforniaSocial SciencesEconomicsHuman CapitalEconomics of MigrationResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignQualitative StudiesMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsInfectious DiseasesViral DiseasesCovid 19Latino/a experiences of homelessness in California: Qualitative findings from the California Statewide Study of People Experiencing Homelessness (CASPEH)
Latino/a experiences of homelessness in Californiahttps://orcid.org/0009-0002-8828-6105CoronadoZena K.Data curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareWriting – original draft DukeMichaelConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSoftwareSupervisionWriting – original draft RodriguezMadisonFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – original draft Avelar PortilloLourdes JohannaFormal analysisWriting – original draft HernandezDafna EranaFormal analysisWriting – original draft https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1361-6889KushelMargotConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Division of Health and Society, Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California, United States of America2
Benioff Homelessness and Housing Initiative, University of California, San Francisco, California, United States of AmericaPageKimberlyEditor ]. The Latino/a population in the U.S. is diverse with regard to citizenship status, language capabilities, and country of origin; these result in differential risk of and pathways to homelessness. A combination of socioeconomic, institutional, and immigration-related barriers and experiences of discrimination elevates the risk of homelessness among the Latino/a population.
Latino/a people face higher poverty rates and lower income and employment opportunities than white Americans [ , ]. They are more likely to be extremely low-income and experience housing cost-burden [ – ]. Hiring discrimination and bias against foreign credentials impair the economic outcomes of even the most educated Latino/a people, especially those who are foreign-born [ , ]. Undocumented legal status contributes to the risk of homelessness by impairing income opportunities, restricting access to safety-net protections, and limiting options to build credit or rental histories [ , ]. Compounding these economic stressors is the severe shortage of affordable housing in the U.S., with only 35 units per 100 extremely low-income households nationwide, and just 24 per 100 in California [ , , ]. Together, these conditions increase the risk of housing problems in Latino/a populations, including high housing cost burden, living in overcrowded or subpar housing, doubling up with family or friends without rental protection, or experiencing homelessness, defined by the Federal Homeless Emergency Assistance and Rapid Transitions to Housing (HEARTH) Act, as living in a shelter or in a place not meant for human habitation (vehicle, outdoors, abandoned building) [ ].
The economic and housing market effects of the COVID-19 pandemic worsened the housing conditions of Latino/a populations and contributed to the recent rise in Latino/a homelessness [ , ]. The pandemic disproportionately impacted Latino/a communities across the U.S. and widened pre-existing racial and ethnic disparities [ , ]. Both living in crowded households and being employed as essential or food service workers, common in Latino/a populations, increased exposure to the SARS-Cov-2 virus [ ]. Unemployment and income loss disproportionately affected Black and Latino/a workers [ , ]. Many undocumented Latino/a immigrants and mixed-status Latino/a families lacked social security numbers and proof of unemployment; thus, they were excluded from federal relief provisions under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, & Economic Security (CARES) Act [ ]. Many of those who qualified for aid were reluctant to participate in these programs due to concerns about the public charge policy that could deny them from obtaining a green card, visa, or citizenship status for requesting aid [ , , ]. With limited access to these programs, some responded by moving in with family and friends and some entered homelessness [ , ]. These environments render Latino/as who do meet the HEARTH Act definition of homelessness less likely to be included in the Federally mandated Point-in-Time count and in research studies of homelessness that sample from service venues [ ]. Stigma, lack of awareness of resources, and a dearth of linguistic and cultural competency among service providers contributes to the underutilization of services among this population [ , ].
There is little known about the lived experience of homelessness among Latino/a people. Understanding the socio-structural conditions that create the risk for homelessness in the Latino/a population and their unique challenges in accessing housing and social safety net services is important for developing solutions to address Latino/a homelessness. Based on qualitative data from a large-scale representative study of homelessness in California, we explore the distinct and complex factors that shape the lived experiences of Latino/a Californians experiencing homelessness.

## Methods
The California Statewide Study of People Experiencing Homelessness (CASPEH) is the largest representative study of homelessness in the U.S. since the mid-1990s, and the first large-scale study to use a mixed-methods approach (administered questionnaires and paired in-depth interviews). From October 2021 to November 2022, the research team surveyed a representative sample of people experiencing homelessness in eight regions of California (N = 3,200). To recruit participants, we used venue-based sampling supplemented by respondent driven sampling. We recruited participants from a random sample of venues where adults experiencing homelessness congregate (e.g., shelters, community centers, food programs, showers, and unsheltered encampments). We used respondent driven sampling to recruit hard-to-reach populations, including farm workers and day laborers who are overwhelmingly Latino/a [ , ]. The study received approval from the University of California, San Francisco Institutional Review Board (IRB #: 20–33117). Verbal informed consent was obtained from each participant prior to participation in the study. Participants received a verbal explanation of the study’s objectives, protocols, potential risks, measures to maintain confidentiality and privacy, and how their data would be used. Eligibility criteria included being at least 18 years of age and homeless, as defined by the HEARTH Act, ability to provide informed consent, and not having a previous record of participating in the CASPEH [ ].
To understand the full context of participants’ experiences and aid in the interpretation of survey data, we developed seven conceptually overlapping qualitative interview-based sub-studies: barriers to housing returns, behavioral health, precipitants of homelessness, Black experiences of homelessness, Latino/a experiences of homelessness, incarceration, and intimate partner violence. We used purposive sampling to select participants for the qualitative interviews (N = 365). Purposive sampling is a technique in qualitative research to identify participants who have information, experiences, or characteristics that are relevant to the aims of the study.
Participants were selected based on a) having completed the survey b) being flagged for a particular qualitative sub-study based on their responses to specific survey questions, and c) the survey interviewer’s assessment of the participant’s ability to discuss the topic at length. Qualitative interviews included a series of open-ended questions to elucidate the respondents’ experiences of homelessness; each sub-study used a unique interview guide. The Latino/a experiences study included topics on familial and social support, immigration and citizenship, language barriers, and discrimination. We intentionally focused our analysis on themes participants discussed most often, excluding topics that were less frequently mentioned such as healthcare access, mental and behavioral health, and other health-related experiences. This approach aligned with our research objectives and the scope of this manuscript.
We administered the qualitative interview portions in English or Spanish. We provided a $30 gift card for participating in the survey and an additional $30 gift card for completing a qualitative interview. All interviews lasted 30–45 minutes each and were audio-recorded and transcribed. Transcriptionists transcribed the Spanish interviews verbatim in Spanish then translated them to English, and Spanish-speaking staff performed quality assurance on the final English-version transcripts.
This paper uses data from qualitative interviews with participants across the qualitative sub-studies who self-identified as Latino/a (n = 84); 35 participated in the Latino/a sub-study and 51 in one of the other studies. Thirty percent were conducted in Spanish. Among the 84 Latino/a participants, 67% identified as cis-men and 32% as cis-women, and 30% were born outside the U.S. (see ). We created a single coding manual to allow for analysis both within and across the sub-studies, because they contained substantial thematic overlap. We used a deductive approach to build a thematically broad group of codes based on the research questions for each sub-study; we then added additional codes inductively by closely reading the interview transcripts. By employing a structured coding manual to organize and categorize the qualitative data, we used an interpretivist codebook approach for our thematic analysis [ ]. We then used the coded materials to identify emerging themes from the data [ ].
 We coded and analyzed the qualitative interview transcripts using the Dedoose (version 9.0) software platform. We assigned coding teams, consisting of a primary and secondary coder, to each sub-study. The primary coder initially coded the interview transcript. The secondary coder then reviewed and, when relevant, added to the primary coder’s coding decisions. We developed several protocols to ensure intercoder reliability. We report details of our data collection and coding processes elsewhere [ ].

## Results
Participants described a variety of experiences of homelessness, reflecting the diversity of legal status, country of origin, language, and characteristics of their location within California (e.g., population density, proportion of Latino/a population within communities). Participants’ experiences varied based on whether they were first-generation, monolingual or Spanish-dominant, and/or undocumented. We identified three major themes: 1) limited familial and social support, 2) barriers to housing returns, and 3) job loss precipitating homelessness and barriers to employment. We describe these below.

## Limited familial and social support

## Social networks played a role in supporting participants, but were unable to stave off homelessness.
Latino/a participants relied on their families, friends, and other members of their social network for housing, financial, and other forms of support. When unable to afford the full cost of housing, participants moved in—without formal rental agreements-- with family, friends, or acquaintances (“doubling up”). While these arrangements do not meet the federal definition of homelessness, participants described them as overcrowded, chaotic, and substandard. While these strategies staved off homelessness for the short term, participants’ concerns that they would become a financial burden on housed family members and friends limited the length of stay; family or friends, at times, would force participants to leave with little warning.
Participants reported periods of moving between family and friends for brief periods (“couch surfing”), when they did meet the federal definition of homelessness, but did not self-identify as homeless. One participant shared:

Well, my mom passed away last year. So I was always able to run back to Mom’s. I don’t have that anymore … my sister will let me stay every so often… a couple days or whatever. But it’s never very long. And it’s just because of my nephew always just got an attitude… he just thinks I’m a freeloader.

Some participants reported fluctuating between couch surfing and other forms of homelessness. During their current episode of homelessness, participants occasionally stayed with family or friends, but were more often unsheltered, living outside, in vehicles, or in places not intended for human habitation, including abandoned buildings and unfurnished garages without access to running water or electricity. One participant described:
I ask if there is an available place for renting. If everything is occupied, you look for cars to sleep in. And ask the owners to let you sleep in [one] for one night or so. They let you stay one night or something like that, and next morning you must leave, you can’t stay any longer because they don’t want you there. So, you leave and look for another place.

## Need to support family decreased participants’ ability to maintain housing.
Immigrant men whose families remained in their country of origin described their desire to maintain their paternal roles and fulfill responsibilities as head of their household. They tried to spend as little as possible on their own housing and living expenses to send remittances to their families, as described by one participant:

Sometimes you need to help your family, help your wife in El Salvador, help your daughter and everything for her school, so then I don’t have enough money to pay for rent and everything else. And for that reason, I say that I'm going to stay outside because I feel like I live good, and the little bit of money I have is enough for me to send to them and eat here as much as I can.

These participants reported conflicting priorities. While participants desired housing, family obligations to send money home constrained participants’ ability to maintain their own housing and prolonged their experiences of homelessness.

## Barriers to receiving familial support.
Participants described feelings of shame, pride, and independence as barriers to staying with people they know. Some described not wanting to be a burden to their families nearby who were facing economic precarity. Others were reluctant to seek help from their social networks because they felt ashamed that they were falling behind or struggling to survive on their own. This was especially true for participants who identified as men, as one shared:

I do have family that I could talk to, but I don't really let them, I mean, my situation is not good, and I need to make it better myself. And I don't want to tell people my situation for them to feel sorry for me, you know what I mean? Or I told you so or you know what I mean? I’m at the age where I know what I should be doing and what I should’ve could’ve done…

Participants described being torn because they wanted to be independent from family and friends but relied on them to meet basic needs. Many expressed a strong desire to resolve their housing situation on their own, reflecting culturally prescribed values pertaining to stoicism and self-reliance. One participant explained:

I'm very closed about what I'm going through. None of my family knows I'm homeless, none of my friends. I just don't want to tell anyone. I want to be able to get out of this alone. It feels like I'm stuck in this, and it sucks.

## Barriers to housing returns

## Structural barriers and discrimination.
Participants experienced several barriers to accessing social services and obtaining housing. Most participants described the process of applying for market-rate and subsidized housing and housing subsidies as time-consuming and confusing. Some found it challenging to navigate online housing applications or did not know where to apply.

I just wish they had more open doors when it comes to housing… the trouble I've had is finding who, what, you know? You hear about Section 8 housing. How do I get in there?... You can fill out an application online, but you never get no phone calls, you could never call them… they say the waiting list is like years and years away. And it's like, man, I really wish there was an easy way… or somewhere where you can go and work with people that can help you find this housing and stuff.

Others, particularly older Latino/a adults, described limited English language skills as a barrier. One older Spanish speaking participant recounted experiencing a language barrier when trying to access housing services:

There was a person who was speaking with me, with a lot of shame, but I couldn’t manage the language, English… A person was contacting me, I don’t know, there are some places that tell you… that the government offers housing for homeless people. But to this day, there are many people waiting. And I don’t know and I haven’t known what the problem was... but that person gave up because of how we just talked and talked.

Several participants experienced discrimination based on their ethnic identity, appearance, and homelessness status when trying to obtain housing or services. Some perceived that people of other races and ethnicities received priority over them when trying to access services, particularly those who shared the same racial or ethnic background as the service provider staff.
Experiences of discrimination discouraged participants from seeking services and other assistance. As one participant described:

I think [race] has to do with it a little bit... my name says it all... 'I’m [first name] Garcia (pseudonym).'... That name is so common that – 'That’s another Mexican... Let’s put them at the end of the line again.'... That’s the type of treatment that I've been getting. Everywhere I go, I’m like this, 'I’m going to go change my name, maybe, you know, Smith.'...It’s getting to me where I don’t even try anymore...Because it’s repetitive.

Some participants recounted experiencing differential treatment in shelter settings. While some residents were allowed to break shelter rules, like arriving late for curfew, Latino/a participants described facing harsher consequences for doing the same.

Here [at the shelter], though, yeah, like, sometimes they ignore me, or they give other people special privileges and stuff, you know. Like, they'll let people come and go when they want, and if I come in late, I’ll get written up…

Others described experiences of discrimination from their past and potential neighbors, noting that they did not feel welcomed in their communities.

There was a woman, I don’t know [what was wrong with her] and she came out saying a lot of things and she told the children that if I moved in there (into the apartment complex) she would set our place on fire with everything and the children. For me, I don’t know if she was crazy, but that is like discrimination.

## Police interactions.
Participants described experiences of harassment by police, especially when living outdoors, in vehicles, or in other unsheltered environments. Some perceived that they were subjected to increased police harassment while unhoused because of their Latino/a identity:

It all depends... because the police is always harassing – 'Oh, you can't park here.' I mean they’ll try to find anything to get you out and harass you, especially if you're Hispanic.

Others described how police interactions created additional challenges around navigating homelessness, noting that these interactions sometimes came with verbal threats of arrest or jail time, and the potential loss of their pets or belongings, as one participant described:

You get sick of the grind… every time you see a cop car, they're not there to help you…they laugh at us, mock us, call us names, make fun of us. I mean, that day I wasn’t moving fast enough and so he (the police officer) kept telling me… ‘You need to get, you need to get, get, I’m not letting you take anything else,’ he was like, ‘You either go now or I’m going to throw you in jail and I’m going to take your dog.’

## Immigration status and legality.
Participants discussed how their lack of citizenship status created barriers to financial and housing stability. Lacking documentation or citizenship status impeded access to government benefits like the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, Medicaid, unemployment insurance, and Housing Choice Vouchers. Participants sought work permits or permanent residency status, though often unsuccessfully. One undocumented participant described relying on their own resources as a means for survival because they do not qualify for government benefits:

Wages are not enough around here, especially for me since I am undocumented. I can’t apply for benefits like unemployment, I try to take care of my money so that I have enough until I start working again and get funds together to survive. That is the way you survive here.

Participants whose immigration status allowed for eligibility faced other barriers to housing. Many reported having lost or been unable to renew essential documents needed to secure housing (e.g., green cards or identification cards) due to their homelessness and faced long wait times to receive replacements. One participant shared:

Yes, I applied for Section 8, and they already gave me the voucher, but I can't go because they want proof of payment, to charge me 30% or something like that, but since I don't have my MICA (Border Crossing Card) [because it expired], and I can't get paid with a check, they don’t want to take me in the apartments. So, I need to wait for my proof of payment. The question is, are they (Section 8) going to wait the three months? Because the woman from Social Services called, and they told her it can take up to three months to send the MICA.

## Job loss precipitating homelessness and barriers to employment

## Exposures to health and safety hazards.
Most men who were Latino/a and employed prior to homelessness worked in construction, landscaping, farmwork, and the service sector. Working in these sectors was more common among those born abroad, as these positions did not require English language fluency or legal documentation. Participants who were born outside the U.S. noted that they were motivated to move in part by these positions paying more in California than similar jobs in their home country.
Workers in these industries, regardless of gender, faced a high risk of injury, a risk made worse because many employers did not provide proper protective equipment. Few of these employers provided health insurance or paid into workers’ compensation. As a result, workers who became injured faced losing their job, leaving them vulnerable to homelessness, as described by one participant:

In my jobs I did feel discrimination… I have had situations where because I am a woman, because I am Latina, In my job I’ve had to work extra, to do heavy duty work, I gave a lot of effort and because of that I had an accident while I was working in a hotel, and that totally changed my way of life and is why I am in my current situation now.

Other Latino/a workers reported having been employed in the service sector, working in restaurants, retail establishments, or as delivery drivers. The COVID-19 pandemic placed these workers at risk for both infection and job loss. Some participants reported that they quit their job because they did not feel safe being employed as essential workers due to the risk of contracting COVID-19. Others reported losing their jobs due to COVID-19-related closures. Some participants reported receiving COVID-19 stimulus checks but noted that they did not provide enough to prevent homelessness. Some reported trying to receive stimulus checks, but not getting them, attributing this to their lack of a consistent home address, not having previously submitted income tax forms, or being undocumented, as one participant expressed:

I have my driver's license, I´ve never had a ticket, I’ve never had accidents, I’m clean of everything. I’ve never been in jail; I don’t have any felonies. I am just waiting for an opportunity to work and establish my taxes. For that reason, I have not been able to get any support like the one there was with COVID [because I don’t have the MICA].

## Poor health as a barrier to employment.
Participants reported being highly motivated to get a job, even among those for whom advanced age or physical infirmities would make employment difficult. Although Latino/a participants were highly motivated to work, poor health often led to job loss and subsequent homelessness. The longer they remained homeless, the worse their health became, interfering with their ability to work. Physical health, transportation challenges, and the absence or loss of legal documents (e.g., drivers licenses) proved to be substantial barriers to obtaining employment. For example, a 61-year-old man told us:

I don’t want disability. What I want is to work to be able to pay for my housing…If I have disability, I can’t work at anything. And I still feel a little good to be able to work.

Because participants experiencing poor health faced substantial challenges in obtaining employment in the formal sector, they often turned to informal avenues for generating income, particularly recycling. Participants reported spending several hours per day recycling. Despite these efforts, they did not receive enough money to meet their basic needs.

## Discussion
In a large qualitative study of Latino/a adults, recruited purposively from a representative study of adults experiencing homelessness in California, we found that Latino/a participants experienced challenges related to accessing social support networks, underutilized housing and other social services, and faced employment precarity that resulted in homelessness. While people experiencing homelessness who identify as Latino/a have a range of experiences shaped by their immigration experience and status and language capability, they shared a set of experiences that shaped their pathway into and experience of homelessness.
We found that Latino men were hesitant to rely on familial support due to cultural norms that validate self-sufficiency and stoicism. There is substantial literature describing the importance of kin-based networks as sources of mutual aid in Latino/a families, but we found that economic and related factors constrained participants’ ability to use these networks, including concerns about burdening members of their network who themselves faced economic hardship [ – ]. These findings are similar to those of other populations in the United States, including the widespread traits of individualism and self-reliance and the economic precarity faced by low-income households regardless of their racial or ethnic composition. Our findings contribute to the literature by showing the ways in which Latino/a people experiencing homelessness grapple with trying to balance the cultural norms regarding self-reliance and the use of family as a source of support and mutual aid.
We found that Latino/a populations under-utilize services, including housing and homelessness prevention services, supporting nascent research on Latino/a homelessness [ , – ]. The reasons Latino/a do not access services are complex and differ according to immigration status, language skills, and age [ ]. Participants reported that language barriers and the complicated process of completing paperwork made it challenging to access and use services successfully. Participants who accessed housing and homelessness services faced discrimination. Negative and perceived discriminatory encounters with law enforcement officers created additional barriers to safety and housing. The intersectional discrimination that Latino/a people experiencing homelessness face as unhoused people and people of color corresponds with similar forms of prejudice and discrimination among Black populations experiencing homelessness [ ]. Our research provides a clear illustration of Olivet and colleagues’ contention that “disproportionate rates of homelessness among people of color can be understood as a symptom of the failure of multiple systems to provide equal opportunity for all racial and ethnic groups” [ ].
Lastly, our findings illustrate the relationship between loss of employment and loss of housing and the role of the COVID-19 pandemic in both. Our study supports previous literature showing that Latinos tend to be over-represented in hazardous, low-wage occupations while being under-insured, resulting in an increased likelihood of experiencing work-related injuries and accidents and poorer health outcomes overall [ – ]. Our participants experienced job loss and subsequent loss of housing due to accidents and injuries that occurred on the job or on route to their place of employment. Although Latino/a employees were over-represented among frontline workers during the COVID-19 pandemic, we did not find that COVID-related illness contributed to job loss and subsequent homelessness [ ]. Instead, our participants were particularly vulnerable to income loss resulting from COVID-related economic disruptions.
The rise in Latino/a homelessness calls for an increase in policy and programmatic attention. Homelessness and housing systems need to adapt to the changing demographic profile of the homeless population. Latino/a people experience various forms of discrimination, including barriers based on immigration status, concerns about the public charge, increased criminalization, and lack of responsiveness from the homelessness and housing systems. The Trump administration’s reversal of a policy that previously restricted US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) operations in sensitive locations has increased barriers and risks for Latino/a people experiencing homelessness, particularly those who are undocumented. ICE has reportedly begun targeting homeless shelters, which may discourage Latino/a individuals from seeking shelter and support [ ]. Strains on homelessness and housing systems across many US cities resulting from the recent influx of primarily Latino/a migrants heightens this urgency [ , ]. There is a need for increased enforcement of employment and fair housing laws, regardless of immigration status, and access to employment and housing benefits for those who qualify. The recent ruling in Grants Pass v Johnson that re-criminalized homelessness will only heighten criminalization of homelessness; our findings suggest that this will disproportionately fall on people of color and those who lack legal status, since these groups experience heightened criminalization and are vulnerable to having their civil rights violated [ ]. Housing and homelessness service providers should increase culturally and linguistically tailored services and address the role that discrimination or other forms of unfair treatment may play in accessing these services.
Our study has several limitations. First, while the CASPEH study is representative of the Latino/a population in California, Latino/a in the state may differ from those in other parts of the U.S. in terms of legal status, country of origin, and cultural orientation, among other factors. Additionally, California policies related to housing and homelessness specifically may be unique and these results may not be representative of other regions. Furthermore, California’s high housing costs relative to wages play an outsize role in driving homelessness in the state; the experiences of homelessness among Latino/a residing in states with lower housing costs may be different from what we found. To build rapport and protect participants from unanticipated harm, we did not directly ask them about their immigration status, limiting our ability to draw comparisons and to fully understand how their immigration status impacted their experiences of homelessness. However, participants frequently disclosed their immigration status organically during the interview, which allowed us to take legal status into account during our subsequent analysis. Our study was conducted prior to an increase in migrant asylum-seekers from Latin America and other parts of the world who arrived at the US southern border in 2023 and 2024, whose numbers greatly impacted shelter and other housing services in several US cities. Further, our study took place prior to the Trump administration’s second term, during which several policies have shifted in ways that negatively directly impact this population.

## Conclusion
The findings from this study highlight the complex and multifaceted challenges faced by Latino/a adults experiencing homelessness in California. These challenges stem from systemic discrimination, economic precarity, and cultural norms regarding responsibility, familial obligation, and personhood. These norms result in individual and interpersonal tensions between culturally prescribed notions of self-reliance and social support, leading people of Latino/a origin to experience homelessness and to underuse vital services. Further exacerbating these challenges are structural barriers, including language differences, immigration status, and discriminatory practices. While this study has provided valuable insight into the Latino/a experience of homelessness in California, additional research is needed to explore the effects of migration on the homelessness landscape, and the impacts of evolving homelessness and immigration policies. Only by initiating evidence-based measures that address the unique cultural, social, and structural conditions impacting unhoused and precariously housed Latino/a populations can we begin to address the increasing rates of homelessness among this population.

## Supporting Information
S1 Data

## Availability Statement for Publication_2.19.26.
(DOC)
S2 Data

## Inclusivity in global research.
(DOCX)

We would like to thank our study participants for sharing their stories. We thank the study staff who conducted the research and the members of the community advisory boards who guided our work.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0344036.r001Decision Letter 0
PageKimberlyAcademic Editor© 2026 Kimberly Page2026Kimberly Pagehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
28 Jul 2025

Dear Dr. Kushel,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Sep 11 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Kimberly Page, PhD, MPH
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1.Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. (1) In the ethics statement in the methods, you have specified that verbal consent was obtained. Please provide additional details regarding how this consent was documented and witnessed, and state whether this was approved by the IRB.
(2) Please include a complete copy of PLOS’ questionnaire on inclusivity in global research in your revised manuscript. Our policy for research in this area aims to improve transparency in the reporting of research performed outside of researchers’ own country or community. The policy applies to researchers who have travelled to a different country to conduct research, research with Indigenous populations or their lands, and research on cultural artefacts. The questionnaire can also be requested at the journal’s discretion for any other submissions, even if these conditions are not met.  Please find more information on the policy and a link to download a blank copy of the questionnaire here: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/best-practices-in-research-reporting. Please upload a completed version of your questionnaire as Supporting Information when you resubmit your manuscript.”
3. We note that you have indicated that there are restrictions to data sharing for this study. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For more information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
Before we proceed with your manuscript, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially identifying or sensitive patient information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., a Research Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board, etc.). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories. You also have the option of uploading the data as Supporting Information files, but we would recommend depositing data directly to a data repository if possible.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
4. We note you have included a table to which you do not refer in the text of your manuscript. Please ensure that you refer to Table 1 in your text; if accepted, production will need this reference to link the reader to the Table.
5.If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.
6. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Both reviewers point out areas for manuscript improvement.  I agree with them that this research is valuable and highly needed. Given the complicated environment for health research in this area and potential new policies, I expect that this article will be highly cited as many agencies and communities look for support and compassionate approaches to support Hispanic people experiencing homelessness.  I do note that neither reviewer commented on the term Latinx.  I understand the effort to find a term that is applicable to the many groups of Hispanic/ who are in our communities.  The term Latinx is not widely used and may puzzle some readers who are less academic. (I use the term Hispanic because I am in New Mexico and that is the normal term used by most in our area. California context should be considered for the terminology you use and not me or my context!)
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: This is a well done and informative study to identify and describe drivers of Latino/a homeless in California (CA). Qualitative interviews of 84 participants from the larger CASPEH study provide the data. The introduction makes a compelling case for Latino/a homelessness as a growing public health problem. Authors do a good job laying out challenges to sampling CA Latino/as in page 4 and justification for venue based sampling supplemented by respondent driven sampling.
More detail on how “purposive sampling” which should be defined (lines 127-128) is used to choose 365 participants for qualitative interviews from the 3,200 is needed. Authors should address “purposive sampling” not leading to bias. The sample for this manuscript (Lines 141-143) comes from Latino/as from one of 7 interview based sub-studies. Some basic demographic information about similarities and differences of Latinos in these different sub-studies would be helpful. For example, what percentage of interviews were conducted in Spanish in each of the seven sub-studies as a marker of acculturation, age, gender, birth outside US?
The term “housing returns” in abstract line 45 and line 125 should be defined. Perhaps this means an inability to return to temporary housing?
The interview quotes in the Results section are illustrative and support the themes under which they are grouped.
Lines 459-461- I would add word “negatively”: “Our study took place prior to the Trump administration’s second term, during which several policies have shifted in ways that negatively directly impact this population.”
This is a timely qualitative study with valuable difficult to obtain interview data on drivers of Latino/a homelessness in the US’ most populous state. It is an important contribution to the public health and social science literature.
Reviewer #2: This article addresses a highly relevant topic that fills a critical gap in our understanding of homelessness experiences. While homelessness research has expanded significantly in recent decades, studies specifically examining the experiences of Latina/o/e populations remain notably underrepresented in the literature. This gap is particularly concerning given the documented inequities in housing insecurity and the unique cultural, linguistic, and socioeconomic factors that may influence homelessness trajectories within these communities. Furthermore, California's significant Latina/o/e population, relative high rates of homelessness, and dedicated resources to address it, make this research especially important. Approaches like the one employed in this research are both welcome and urgently needed to advance our understanding of how structural factors intersect with homelessness experiences. I recommend the article for publication with one minor suggestion: The established homelessness research literature indicates that interviews with people experiencing homelessness typically encompass healthcare access and utilization, mental and behavioral health topics, and other aspects of the health-illness continuum, in addition to the themes examined in this study. I suggest that the authors acknowledge in their methodology section which topics were intentionally excluded from data collection and/or analysis and provide a rationale for these decisions on the scope of the study. This would help readers better understand the authors' criteria for topic inclusion and exclusion, thereby strengthening the methodological strengths of the work.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Laura Nervi
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org
AttachmentSubmitted filename: plos_one_rvw_D_25_27066.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0344036.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
12 Feb 2026

Dear Dr. Page,
Thank you and the reviewers for your thoughtful and encouraging feedback on our manuscript, “Latino/a experiences of homelessness in California: Qualitative findings from the California Statewide Study of People Experiencing Homelessness (CASPEH).” We appreciate the recognition that our manuscript is “valuable and highly needed.” We are grateful for the acknowledgment that our manuscript will be “highly cited as many agencies and communities look for support and compassionate approaches to support Hispanic people experiencing homelessness.”
Below are our responses to the reviewers’ comments and actions to address them in the paper revision.
Journal Requirements:
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming.
Author response: We reviewed the journal’s style requirements and made edits accordingly.
2. In the ethics statement in the methods, you have specified that verbal consent was obtained. Please provide additional details regarding how this consent was documented and witnessed, and state whether this was approved by the IRB.
Author response: After discussion with the UCSF IRB who approved all parts of the California State Study of People Experiencing Homelessness (CASPEH), we chose to create verbal consent processes for both the survey and related in-depth interviews. Because we completed the study anonymously (we did not collect participants’ names or other identifying information), the IRB noted that collecting signed consents could increase the participants’ risk, as we would have their name (on the consent). Thus, we created a two-step verbal consent process for the survey (first, a pre-screen to see if the potential participant consented to be asked screening questions, and then if they were eligible, a longer verbal consent. The trained staff read a script explaining the study, including potential risks. Participants were told that they could stop at any time. Prior to giving verbal consent, the participant had to briefly explain their understanding of the study and its risks and benefits to the staff member. If they were able to do this, the participant completed a verbal consent, asserting that they wanted to be in the study. If they did so, the trained staff recorded their assent into the REDCap screening tool, which then assigned the participant a unique ID code. If the participant was unable to briefly explain the study and the risks, confirming that they could consent, the staff member repeated the information. If the participant was unable to do so, the participant thanked them for their time and marked them as unable to give consent. Only participants who had completed the administered questionnaire were eligible for the in-depth interview study, from which we drew the data for this paper.
At the completion of the administered survey, the staff member who completed the survey would (if the participant were eligible) ask them if they would like to be considered for the in-depth interview. If the participant expressed interest, they were offered a break if they wished. If they wanted to proceed, a separate staff member approached and completed another verbal consent for the qualitative study using a similar process. If the participant consented, the in-depth interview staff member would record their assent.
The consent process was developed with recommendations from the UCSF Institutional Review Board and approved by them.
3. Please include a complete copy of PLOS’ questionnaire on inclusivity in global research in your revised manuscript. Our policy for research in this area aims to improve transparency in the reporting of research performed outside of researchers’ own country or community. The policy applies to researchers who have travelled to a different country to conduct research, research with Indigenous populations or their lands, and research on cultural artefacts. The questionnaire can also be requested at the journal’s discretion for any other submissions, even if these conditions are not met. Please find more information on the policy and a link to download a blank copy of the questionnaire here: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/best-practices-in-research-reporting. Please upload a completed version of your questionnaire as Supporting Information when you resubmit your manuscript.”
Author response: We have completed the questionnaire and uploaded it as part of our resubmission.
4. We note that you have indicated that there are restrictions to data sharing for this study. PLOS only allows data to be available upon request if there are legal or ethical restrictions on sharing data publicly. For more information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
Before we proceed with your manuscript, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially identifying or sensitive patient information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., a Research Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board, etc.). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories. You also have the option of uploading the data as Supporting Information files, but we would recommend depositing data directly to a data repository if possible.
We will update your Data Availability statement on your behalf to reflect the information you provide.
Author response: Because of the high likelihood of respondents describing illegal or socially-sanctioned behaviors in specific community settings, coupled with the current targeting of immigrant populations for deportation, our Lived Expertise Advisory Board urged us to maintain control of the de-identified data. While we collected the data anonymously, the detailed data given by participants in in-depth interviews (which often included information such as documentation status, location of interview, and detailed information that could possibly be identifying), the Community Advisory Board asked us to exercise caution. In light of these factors, and in consultation with UCSF’s Director of Data Science & Open Scholarship, we agree to share the study data based on individual requests to Margot Kushel, the study PI (Margot.Kushel@uscf.edu). Dr. Kushel will discuss data requests and ensure that data shared does not contain potentially identifiable information. Please note that UCSF does not currently have a data access committee.
5. We note you have included a table to which you do not refer in the text of your manuscript. Please ensure that you refer to Table 1 in your text; if accepted, production will need this reference to link the reader to the Table.
Author response: Thank you for identifying this error. We have added a reference to the table in line 146.
Reviewer #1
1. This is a well done and informative study to identify and describe drivers of Latino/a homeless in California (CA). Qualitative interviews of 84 participants from the larger CASPEH study provide the data. The introduction makes a compelling case for Latino/a homelessness as a growing public health problem. Authors do a good job laying out challenges to sampling CA Latino/as in page 4 and justification for venue based sampling supplemented by respondent driven sampling.
Author response: We thank the reviewer for their positive feedback about our manuscript.
2. More detail on how “purposive sampling” which should be defined (lines 127-128) is used to choose 365 participants for qualitative interviews from the 3,200 is needed. Authors should address “purposive sampling” not leading to bias.
Author response: We have added the following verbiage to clarify use of purposive sampling in the study (lines 127-134): “We used purposive sampling to select participants for the qualitative interviews (N = 365). Purposive sampling is a technique in qualitative research to identify participants who have information, experiences, or characteristics that are relevant to the aims of the study. Participants were selected based on a) having completed the survey b) being flagged for a particular qualitative sub-study based on their responses to specific survey questions, and c) the survey interviewer’s assessment of the participant’s ability to discuss the topic at length.”
3. The sample for this manuscript (Lines 141-143) comes from Latino/as from one of 7 interview based sub-studies. Some basic demographic information about similarities and differences of Latinos in these different sub-studies would be helpful. For example, what percentage of interviews were conducted in Spanish in each of the seven sub-studies as a marker of acculturation, age, gender, birth outside US?
Author response: The sample for this manuscript comes from participants who identified as Latino/a across the seven sub-studies, not just one. Demographic information about these participants is included in Table 1. We have added reference to the table in line 146 to point readers to this demographic information.
4. The term “housing returns” in abstract line 45 and line 125 should be defined. Perhaps this means an inability to return to temporary housing?
Author response: We use the term “housing returns” to mean re-entering housing so that the participant no longer meets the definition of homelessness. This would include moving in with family so long as the assumption was that the participant could stay as long as they wanted, moving into one’s own room or apartment, or moving into housing with a permanent subsidy. We recognize that there is never a guarantee that people are able to remain in housing long-term, but we focused on returns to housing with enough stability that people no longer met formal criteria for homelessness.
We have defined this term in lines 46 – 49.
5. The interview quotes in the Results section are illustrative and support the themes under which they are grouped.
Author response: Thank you for this positive feedback. We agree that the quotes were clear and effectively support the analysis.
6. Lines 459-461- I would add word “negatively”: “Our study took place prior to the Trump administration’s second term, during which several policies have shifted in ways that negatively directly impact this population.”
Author response: We appreciate this suggestion and have added the word “negatively” to line 469.
7. This is a timely qualitative study with valuable difficult to obtain interview data on drivers of Latino/a homelessness in the US’ most populous state. It is an important contribution to the public health and social science literature.
Author response: We appreciate the reviewer’s encouraging feedback. We are pleased that they recognize the significance and timeliness of this work, as well as the value of the perspectives of our participants. Thank you for acknowledging its contribution to public health and social science literature.
Reviewer #2
1. This article addresses a highly relevant topic that fills a critical gap in our understanding of homelessness experiences. While homelessness research has expanded significantly in recent decades, studies specifically examining the experiences of Latina/o/e populations remain notably underrepresented in the literature. This gap is particularly concerning given the documented inequities in housing insecurity and the unique cultural, linguistic, and socioeconomic factors that may influence homelessness trajectories within these communities. Furthermore, California's significant Latina/o/e population, relative high rates of homelessness, and dedicated resources to address it, make this research especially important. Approaches like the one employed in this research are both welcome and urgently needed to advance our understanding of how structural factors intersect with homelessness experiences.
Author response: We are grateful for the reviewer’s thoughtful and supportive comments. We agree that the underrepresentation of Latino/a experiences in homelessness research is a critical gap, especially given the structural inequities affecting these communities. We hope this study contributes meaningfully to advancing equitable and culturally informed responses to homelessness.
2. I recommend the article for publication with one minor suggestion: The established homelessness research literature indicates that interviews with people experiencing homelessness typically encompass healthcare access and utilization, mental and behavioral health topics, and other aspects of the health-illness continuum, in addition to the themes examined in this study. I suggest that the authors acknowledge in their methodology section which topics were intentionally excluded from data collection and/or analysis and provide a rationale for these decisions on the scope of the study. This would help readers better understand the authors' criteria for topic inclusion and exclusion, thereby strengthening the methodological strengths of the work.
Author response: We viewed a specific focus on the physical and mental health of the study population as beyond the scope of this manuscript. We appreciate the comment and note that we did extensive data collection in the survey on these topics, which we have published separately. The Latino/x interview guide did not focus on these questions, choosing instead to focus on the lived experience of Latino/x participants facing homelessness, although other in-depth interview guides did.
We have added a note that we excluded these topics from this analysis (lines 135-139).
Editor:
1. I do note that neither reviewer commented on the term Latinx. I understand the effort to find a term that is applicable to the many groups of Hispanic/ who are in our communities. The term Latinx is not widely used and may puzzle some readers who are less academic. (I use the term Hispanic because I am in New Mexico and that is the normal term used by most in our area. California context should be considered for the terminology you use and not me or my context!)
Author response: We use the term Latino/a to refer to our participants who indicated Latino/a/x, Hispanic, or Latin American on the CASPEH race measure. We recognize there is an ongoing debate around the most appropriate terminology to use for this population. We chose not to use Latinx because, as you mentioned, it is not widely adopted outside of academic settings. We opted against Hispanic, given its associations with Spain and colonialism, which may alienate individuals who do not identify with the Spanish language or heritage (e.g., those who speak indigenous languages). Our use of the term Latino/a aims to reflect a term that is more broadly familiar.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0344036.r003Decision Letter 1
PageKimberlyAcademic Editor© 2026 Kimberly Page2026Kimberly Pagehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
15 Feb 2026

Latino/a experiences of homelessness in California: Qualitative findings from the California Statewide Study of People Experiencing Homelessness (CASPEH)
PONE-D-25-27066R1
Dear Dr. Kushel,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. For questions related to billing, please contact billing support .
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Kimberly Page, PhD, MPH
Academic Editor
PLOS One
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
I am very happy to endorse publication of this paper.
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0344036.r004Acceptance letter
PageKimberlyAcademic Editor© 2026 Kimberly Page2026Kimberly Pagehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-25-27066R1
PLOS One
Dear Dr. Kushel,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS One. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Kimberly Page
Academic Editor
PLOS One