2992heliyonHeliyonHeliyonElsevierPMC1161792411617924116179243964104710.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e40470Implementing a migrant and refugee mentoring program through action research
KoiralaSubhash MekonnenGeberew Tulu DellerBryce ArinaitweGilbert KezabuKevina SwabeyKaren KemberDavid aSchool of Education, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, AustraliabSchool of Policing Studies, Charles Sturt University, Goulburn, NSW, AustraliacUniversity of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, Australia⁎Corresponding author. gmekonnen@csu.edu.au
171120241022e40470e404705122024© 2024 Published by Elsevier Ltd.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
This article reports an implementation, through action research, of the mentoring of recently arrived refugee and migrant children in secondary school years 9 and 10. The mentoring, by education students, was in: English language skills; literacy skills for other subjects; and, planning pathways for further education. There was a very positive reaction to the program from the mentees, coordinating teachers, schools and mentors. There was strong evidence of improvements in English language skills. This enabled the mentees to successfully complete reading, writing and speaking activities and assignments across the whole range of subjects. As the mentees developed greater fluency and confidence in the use of English, they felt more able to participate in class activities and discussions. This led to better integration into the school community. There was also evidence of integration into the broader Australian society, as the migrants were taught to write resumes and some obtained part-time jobs.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 May 26; Revised 2024 Nov 14; Accepted 2024 Nov 14; Collection date 2024 Nov 30.

1.

## Introduction
This article reports on the implementation of a program in which volunteer mentors mentored migrant and refugee students in years 9 and 10 in four secondary schools in Tasmania, Australia. The mentoring was in pathway planning for further education, English language skills and literacy in the context of other subjects. The mentees were divided into small groups so that it was possible to build strong bonds between mentees and mentors and cater to the individual needs of the mentees. Over 57 high school students, from 13 countries were mentored by 18 mentors from 9 countries.
The mentoring took place in the schools during school hours in a suitable timeslot designated by the school. This arrangement was chosen to maximise the chances of participation compared to alternatives such as out of hours sessions or using a venue other than the schools. More significantly, the in-school mentoring facilitated close integration between the school curriculum and the mentoring. The researchers present evidence later that it led to the mentees strengthening ties to the school community. The initiative was largely a venture into the unknown; certainly for all the mentors and mentees. The researchers, therefore, took an action research approach to implementation.
The steps in the action research cycle; planning, action, observation and reflection [ , , , ], constitute data for the project. In this case it is important to document the planning and action so that others can learn from what was done and apply it in other contexts. This makes the study important as there are numerous examples worldwide of refugees and migrants finding it difficult to settle in host countries and fully engage in schools. The observations of participants, both mentors and mentees, constitute evidence of what happened and the outcomes which occurred. The reflections of the project team are important as they should result in improvements for the future.
This article evolved from extracts from reflective diaries of the team leaders for schools and the coordinator. These reflections were supplemented by quotations from interviews with mentors and mentees.

2.

## Mentoring refugees and migrants
School-based mentoring is commonly used to describe the “programs that take place on school grounds, typically during regular school hours for 1 h each week” [ ]. In such programs, adult mentors work as “Big Brother/Big Sister” with younger students to improve their academic performance. Such programs are usually targeted towards the students who are identified as having difficulty in school. Studies [ , ] have shown that mentorship programs are highly beneficial for students' learning and overall well-being. When implemented effectively, mentoring can aid young people in developing their self-esteem and adaptability to their environment. This is especially important for migrant and refugee youth who are unfamiliar with their new environment and educational system. However, a challenge highlighted by Higley, Walker [ ] is the need for the right strategy in mentoring programs to address the specific issues faced by vulnerable individuals. In this context, the researchers propose that mentoring through action research could be a potential strategy to support at-risk youth who are new to the Australian context and school system.
Students who come to Australian education institutions through humanitarian immigration pathways face numerous challenges in integrating into the school culture and broader community, including developing academic English proficiency, social connection, and physical and mental well-being [ ]. Yet schools alone are not well-equipped to provide resources to fully support these students. It is therefore important that other institutions such as universities explore strategies and programs to facilitate integration of refugee and migrant background students [ ].
Youth mentoring programs have become increasingly popular as a way to support young people who are at risk of facing challenges in their social and psychological development [ ]. Given that the youth developmental stage is crucial, mentoring young individuals to meet their expectations and interests not only benefits their overall development but also contributes to their social and emotional growth [ ]. Other studies have also shown the importance of mentoring programs in supporting the psychological, social, emotional, behavioural, and cognitive development of young people's development [ , , ]. Furthermore, intervening and supporting young children in schools have a positive impact on their academic and social skills, resulting in positive outcomes for themselves and the community [ ]. As Hawkins, Karcher [ ] noted, mentoring at-risk youth plays an important role in crime prevention when it comes to preventing youth crime through a social approach.
Research on the mentoring experiences of refugee and migrant background students is still quite modest. For instance, Singh and Tregale [ ] noted that while studies have shown that mentoring can effectively enhance students' self-esteem, connectedness, identity, and academic engagement, research on mentoring programs specifically for students from refugee backgrounds remains underdeveloped. The available evidence indicates the beneficial effects of mentoring programs for refugee and migrant students on educational outcomes in terms of social capital and educational cultural capital building [ , , ]. In addition, Dosemagen and Schwalbach [ ] highlighted the benefits of mentoring for newcomer migrants to enhance social participation. Effective mentoring relationships, particularly those that are trusting and long lasting, can help refugee and migrant children integrate into the new school culture and community by promoting resilience and enhancing psychological well-being [ ]. A qualitative study conducted on Year 10 and Year 11 refugee-background students found a positive impact of a mentoring program on students’ social and academic transition from high school to university [ ]. Over the course of a 12-week program, with 1 h of mentorship each week, mentees reported that the program helped them develop important academic skills, such as study strategies, goal setting and time management. Additionally, they experienced increased motivation to study and gained a better understanding of the purpose and value of higher education. Another qualitative study on a peer-mentoring program for first-year refugee-background university students found that the program, conducted over a university semester, positively impacted students' educational outcomes [ ]. The mentees reported feeling more included and supported within the university community, increased confidence, improved social skills, and a greater sense of belonging, which helped them transition successfully into university culture and enhanced their overall well-being. A mixed-method study on a two-week mentoring program for newcomer refugee children transitioning into primary schools found notable improvements in academic performance [ ]. Students who were previously failing most of their classes achieved passing grades after attending the program, with particular progress in Mathematics and English. The program also increased school participation and facilitated cultural integration through relationships with teachers, school staff, and peers. Benefits of refugee and migrant mentoring also extend to mentors. Benefits for mentors can include increased intercultural awareness and greater sense of satisfaction [ , ].
The main criteria for offering a social mentoring process to newcomers include matching based on the mentee's needs and goals, as well as the mentor's knowledge, skills, and general expectations such as interests, hobbies, language skills, practical considerations, and preferences. Chevrier, Goiseau [ ] and Reeves [ ] also emphasised the importance of considering the mentees' experiences for successful mentoring outcomes. Overall, social mentoring should take into account the participants' needs, goals, skills, expectations, interests, language, age, and gender.
2.1.

## Integration for refugees and migrants
Integration has been identified as a central concept in the refugee and migrant settlement process. Much attention has been paid in academic and policy discourse to the successful integration of refugees in the society within which they settle [ , , ]. The existing immigration policy in Australia has focused extensively on objective indicators of integration [ ]. The outcomes of successful integration under the Australian Government's Humanitarian Settlement Services program are defined within a framework of English proficiency, employment, education, housing, health and social connection [ ]. Refugees and migrants with high English proficiency and educational and employment outcomes are considered to be well integrated. Education and language acquisition are important determinants of integration, leading to better employment and health outcomes [ ]. This prescriptive approach to integration focuses on one-way adaptation by which refugees and migrants assimilate into the host society.
However, the preparedness of refugees and migrants to adapt into the new socio-cultural environment is not alone sufficient to induce successful integration. It is largely dependent on the willingness on the part of the host society to embrace newcomers and enable them to access linguistic, cultural and social resources embedded in networks of the host society [ , ]. The resources embedded in the social networks can be regarded as social capital when these resources are mobilisable for the pursuit of individual and collective advantage [ ]. A high level of social capital generated through mutual trust and “norm of reciprocity” [ ] between migrant and host communities results in a high level of inter-cultural integration [ , ]. The importance of a two-way process of integration has been well-established in the literature [ , ].
Recent approaches to identity and cultural complexities recognize integration as a fluid, context-contingent and multidimensional phenomenon [ ]. Immigrants in today's society are not socially and culturally bound to one community; their networks, activities and patterns of life are complex and multifaceted [ ]. Vertovec [ ] uses the term super-diversity to describe the complexity surrounding the contemporary situation of migration-driven diversity arising from global migration flows. The diversity has resulted from the influx of waves of new immigrants from different origins, religions, language, social classes and cultures. This enables refugees and migrants to access social capital not only from host community networks but also from those networks derived from migrant and refugee communities. This type of bonding social capital [ ] can contribute to mutual integration and adaptation. The migration-derived social capital can enable newcomers to access “emotional, instrumental and informational support” from those who are more familiar with the local environment [ ].
While the literature supports the positive impacts of school-based mentoring on immediate academic performance, its role in fostering long-term social, community, and economic integration remains underexplored. Existing studies have primarily focused on school integration, highlighting improvements in study strategies and the sense of belonging within the school environment. However, no previous studies have directly examined the broader impact of mentoring on integration. This study addresses this gap by investigating school-based mentoring from an integration perspective, underpinning a two-way integration process within a very diverse, multicultural school-community context, where the majority of the mentors are also migrants. The focus on the regional context of Tasmania is particularly significant, as the region continues to welcome new cohorts of migrants, including recent arrivals from countries such as Bhutan, Afghanistan, Burma, and Eritrea. By exploring the interplay between mentoring, English language learning, and the integration process, this study aims to extend existing knowledge on how structured school-based mentoring can support holistic integration for refugee and migrant youth in regional settings.

2.2.

## Research objectives
The research reported in this study has taken an action research approach in order to try to identify the characteristics of mentoring programs which result in positive outcomes. The aim is to provide sufficient detail and examples that others have a model to follow for the operation of mentoring schemes.
The literature review notes the importance of promoting the integration of refugees and migrants. There are worldwide examples of problems which occur when migrants do not become integrated with the host society. As the outcome of integration with the host society has been shown to be so important, this study aimed to investigate whether and, if so how, mentoring programs could promote integration. For this aim, outcomes such as enhanced English proficiency, engagement with class and school communities and commitment to further education were recognised as significant steps towards integration with the host community.

2.3.

## Research questions

1.What is a suitable format for offering in-school mentoring to refugee and migrant school students?
2.Which factors contribute to effective mentoring in English language and educational pathways?
3.Which forms of mentoring will encourage migrants and refugees to engage in further education?
4.What are the forms of mentoring which result in enhanced integration with the school community and the host country?
5.How can researchers develop a model of the processes by which mentoring can enhance the integration of migrants and refugees with school and host country communities?

3.

## Method
Carr states that action research is characterised by cycles of planning, action, observation and reflection [ , , ]. The action research cycle is consistent with good practice in implementing innovation and changes to teaching and other practice. Everything rarely goes according to plan. Usually, ways are found to improve in light of experience and feedback. One cycle of planning, acting, observing and reflecting, therefore usually leads to another, in which improvements suggested by the initial cycle are incorporated.
The action research cycle is normally portrayed in texts as a four step cyclical process; with one cycle sequentially following another. In practice, though, the process is rarely this straightforward. Cook [ , ] observed that the process can be particularly messy at the start of projects. In the case of our project there were cycles within cycles, which again is common practice. The whole project was an ongoing cycle, as reflections from the first program were used to guide the mounting of a second program; and hopefully subsequent ones. At the initial stages, each mentoring session was an ongoing cycle trialling activities to suit the mentoring sessions. The mentors were venturing into the unknown and needed to work things out as they went along. More accurately, there were five mini cycles acting in parallel, as each of the teams in the five schools which started the program, had to adapt somewhat different strategies to suit the needs and expectations of the schools and the mentees. As the program progressed, and expertise and experience grew, the cycles became longer.
Types or variants of action research have been represented as a spectrum from practical problem-solving ones, through participatory variants, to critical action research [ , , ]. Practical problem-solving action research has been commonly used by practitioners, including individuals, to improve their practice [ ]. Participatory action research tends to have wider involvement and aims towards collective changes in perspective [ ]. Critical action research [ ] draws heavily on critical theory and the work of Habermas [ ].
Of these types of action research, this project is best described as participatory action research. The mentors, coordinating teachers and the project coordinator were all participants. They collectively strived, through regular discourse, to enhance their understanding and practice in the mentoring of migrants and refugees. The mentees also played a part in shaping the project by communicating their needs and their enthusiastic engagement. All participants saw it as a collective venture.
3.1.

## Sampling strategy
This study employed a purposive sampling method, which is commonly used in action research [ ]. Since the study specifically examined the mentoring of students with refugee and migrant backgrounds, secondary schools with diverse student populations were purposefully chosen from Tasmania, Australia. As a result, four secondary schools were purposively selected as the study sites.

3.2.

## Participant selection
In the Australian education system, high school comprises grades 9 and 10. For this study, the researchers employed availability sampling techniques to select participants from refugee and migrant students from selected high schools. The researchers selected 21 students from KM High School, 10 from P High School, 7 from B High School, and 19 from O High School. Similarly, researchers selected 7, 4, 2, and 5 mentors from KM, P, B, and O High Schools, respectively, as shown in below. From a total of 57 mentees, researchers selected 30 % of the total mentees/mentors for interview.
 The sample mentees/mentors were chosen from each school in proportion to the total number of mentees and mentors in each school, based on the formula by Pandy et al. [ ]. The formula determined the number of mentees/mentors (N i) to be selected from a specific school with a total of N i mentees/mentors. The total number of mentees and mentors required to be sampled from all four schools were 16 mentees and 6 mentors, with a total number of N = 57 mentees and N = 18 mentors. The detailed sampling process is indicated in , below.
 The existing literature suggests that qualitative investigations typically use smaller sample sizes due to the complexities of qualitative data [ , , ]. For this particular study, a sample size ranging from 5 to 25 individuals who have direct experience with the phenomenon being studied was used [ ]. In accordance with this recommendation, mentees and mentors were invited to participate in the interview. A total of 16 mentees and six mentors were interviewed, resulting in a total of 22 participants. Each participant was interviewed for approximately 30 min.

3.3.

## Data collection instruments and analysis
The observations and reflections consisted of direct observations recorded by the mentors. The observations were recorded everytime the mentors conducted the mentoring programs. The mentors sent their reflection diary to the team leaders. There were also interviews with two to six mentees in each of the four schools, which were conducted by the team leaders. In addition, there were six interviews with mentors. All interviews were fully transcribed. Quotations from the interviews are used to illustrate and substantiate observations and reflections. The source of a quotation is indicated in parentheses as either a mentor or mentee at the end of each quotation.
The data were analysed through reflective critical discussion within the team. Initially the discourse focused on the pragmatics of putting the program into operation. As the program progressed and the researchers realised that others could learn from the venture, the reflection became more critical [ ]. There was then an element of grounded theory [ , ] with emerging themes in that principles for conducting in-school mentoring were derived from the data. Triangulation between the reflective diaries of the multiple participants, the interview data, the observations of participants and teachers was used to ensure trustworthiness and authenticity of data and findings.

5.

## Conclusion and implications
5.1.

## Designing in-school mentoring
In answering research questions 1 and 2, the observations and reflections of the mentors provide detailed guidance on how in-school mentoring of migrants and refugees can be configured. The accounts of the implementation reveal the types of issues which need to be taken into account. There were differences between the approaches taken in the schools because of the differing needs and circumstances. The researchers would, therefore, suggest that our narrative provides a guide which will need to be adapted through an action research implementation, rather than a fixed template.
As the way migrants and refugees approach their integration process is highly complex, context-dependent and subjective [ ], the mentoring programs designed to support them should adopt a bottom-up approach, tailoring to the specific needs and circumstances of different groups of refugees and migrants and their participating schools. This study has shown that the flexibility that the program has allowed for each participating school in negotiating the mentoring time, focus of mentoring, and mentor-mentee ratio has a positive impact on the overall success of the program.
Another implication of the study is the co-design of learning support activities in partnership with the participating school and the mentees. This approach considers schools and mentees as partners in co-creating the learning activities [ ] for the mentees. The choice of whether to mentor the mentees in pathway planning, English language skills or other aspects of integration depend on the mentees and their specific needs and challenges. Therefore, it is important for the mentors to collaborate with the mentees in designing the mentoring sessions.
This study also highlights that matching mentors and mentees based on native language similarity is an important criterion for effective mentoring relationships and initial transition. Previous studies have identified the matching criteria such as gender, age, race and ethnicity as important for successful and effective mentoring relationships [ ]. In addition, Crijns and De Cuyper [ ] have highlighted the importance of taking into account the mentees' needs and goals as well as mentors’ knowledge and skills in the matching process. In addition to these criteria, this study has found native language similarity for matching mentors to mentees is critical for initial transition of new comer migrants into the school community. Koirala [ ] argues that bonding social capital built through this type of matching process can facilitate the attainment of functional measures of integration and initial transition of refugees.

5.2.

## Mentoring programs as a way to promote integration
The outcome sections presented evidence of a range of important positive outcomes. The sections were ordered to deal with particular outcomes in turn. In concluding, it is important to point out the links between outcomes. They can be seen as a causal chain.
The migrants needed to develop sufficient confidence in their English language ability to use it and converse in English [ ]. They could then build their confidence in the reading, writing and speaking skills needed for studying each subject. The more they use English the better their fluency becomes. As their confidence in their English ability develops, they become more able to contribute to class discussion and activities. This leads to better integration into the school community. Some mentees developed their confidence and English language ability to the extent that they obtained part-time jobs, which is a very significant step in integration into Australian society.
Returning to research questions 3 and 4, mentoring underpins the two-way process of integration [ ]. The mentoring bond evolved through mutual respect and cooperation between the mentors and the mentees provides a form of social capital. It enables mentee's access to resources, information and opportunities related to further education and enhanced integration. The migrant-to-migrant mentoring approach seems to be beneficial in creating personal connection and trust. It empowers and motivates mentees. Mentors are seen as role models by mentees for successful integration and demonstrate the beneficial outcomes of pursuing a pathway to further education. The mentoring network also serves the emotional integration function because showing care through providing practical support and information for mentees seems to have promoted their sense of inclusion and integration into the school and wider community.
In view of the importance of refugees and migrants being integrated into the host community, the study adopted research question 5 as exploring the possibility of developing a model of how integration might be promoted. In view of the widespread issues of social disorder associated with migrant communities, this is an aim of considerable significance. The series of outcome sections can be brought together as a set of steps for promoting integration. presents a series of steps, which, when combined together in sequence, presents a model for promoting integration through in-school mentoring programs.
 This research has shown the value of mentoring to recently arrived refugee and migrant children in secondary school years 9 and 10. All involved in this research, mentees, mentors and teachers have gained an enormous amount from their involvement and hopefully future funding will be made available to ensure similar programs are supported.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Subhash Koirala: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Geberew Tulu Mekonnen: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Bryce Deller: Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Gilbert Arinaitwe: Resources, Formal analysis, Data curation. Kevina Kezabu: Resources, Formal analysis, Data curation. Karen Swabey: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. David Kember: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

4.

## Ethical approval
The Tasmania Social Sciences Human Research Ethics Committee granted ethical approval for the study (Reference H0018079). As part of the approval conditions, participants were informed about the purpose of the study. Participants were assured of their confidentiality and anonymity, and interviewees were assigned pseudonyms.
4.1.

## Initial planning and negotiation with schools
After schools with higher populations of refugee and migrant students were identified, with support from the Tasmanian Department of Education, Tasmania, Australia the project team met with principals and teachers to understand their needs and determine how best to plan and deliver the program.
Nine schools were approached initially; with five schools agreeing to take part. Of the schools which did not take part, various reasons were given. For instance, in one school, the principal was going on study leave in term 2 of the year and it was difficult to negotiate arrangements for a new program. In another school, the principal was concerned that he lacked the financial resources to support it (workload-wise). Nevertheless, even the schools which did not take part were very enthusiastic in their recognition of the potential impact of the projects.
The projects were tailored to the specific needs and requirements of schools. Each school negotiated a time slot which suited them. Four schools agreed to run the mentoring during normal school hours, whereas one school preferred afterschool hours mentoring. Despite some initial enthusiasm, the school that organised afterschool hours mentoring did not complete the full length of the program. Many students stopped coming to the sessions because of their other commitments after school hours (e.g. sport, music).
In three schools, mentoring was organised as a separate lesson in which mentors planned and delivered small-group support and intervention to their allocated mentees. In one school, the mentoring took place in normal classes during the humanities lesson (history, geography and English). Mentors provided in-class support.

4.2.

## Recruitment of mentors and team leaders
The intention expressed in the grant proposal was to use, as mentors, Faculty of Education students undergoing initial teacher education in Bachelor of Education and Master of Teaching degrees. The initial recruitment was for four team leaders to lead the mentors for each school in which the program was undertaken. The initial recruitment was for PhD candidates to undertake this task. There proved to be such interest in the mentoring scheme among them that almost all of the Launceston mentors recruited (except one BEd student) were PhD candidates. Most of the international PhD candidates are based in Launceston. The PhD candidates turned out to be ideal team leaders and mentors as they are migrants themselves. A significant number of them have children who needed to adapt to the Australian school system. There are few international PhD candidates based in Hobart; therefore, the mentors from Hobart were four students from the MTeach degree.

4.3.

## Mentor training and support
During the mentorship process, mentors were provided with essential resources such as learning materials, stationery, and transportation fees. These resources ensured the smooth operation of the mentoring program. With the resources at hand, mentors prepared learning activities for their mentees in advance. Following the mentoring sessions, mentors took time to reflect on what went well and what could be improved, using this feedback to enhance their preparation for future sessions.
At the onset of the program, mentors were trained by the program coordinator and staff from the Migrant Resource Centre and the Tasmanian Department of Education. There were one-day sessions in Hobart and Launceston. The training was considered relevant by the mentors.
I think the training was relevant. Just reminded us a lot of things that we needed to consider. It gave us a brief introduction, or a brief background of what we were expected of by our mentees and it just got us a little prepared for the program. (Mentor)
4.3.1.

## Initial support
Mentors were given resources or materials that built consciousness about the nature of migrant and refugee students and how to develop rapport with mentees during the first week. In addition, there was ongoing support provided during the implementation phase of the program. The program coordinator and coordinating teacher continued to hold reflective meetings with mentors after the session to plan for the next session. Mentor P1 reported ‘I got a lot of support from the project coordinator. Yes. He just gave me some good suggestions.’ This support was explained by another mentor who reported:
I receive a lot of support. So, the support is from the project coordinator. So, it was very, like, helpful in the way that he found and compiled some useful learning resources. And if I have some concerns about the next session, I mean, the activities that I was going to do the next week, he was willing to search the resources and we discussed the activities together. (Mentor)

4.3.2.

## Teacher support
At each school the mentors had organisational support from a coordinating teacher who taught English as an additional language. At P High School the regular teacher stayed in the office next to the room where the mentoring was being undertaken and would come into the room to support any mentor/mentees as need arose. Mentor P1 reported ‘[The coordinating teacher] gave lots of backup and organisation.’ Similarly, Mentor P2 reported ‘I think she was helpful at the beginning when she arranged the mentees in the right groups. And later on we managed the groups by ourselves.’ The more the coordinating teacher supported the mentors, the more effective the mentoring.

4.3.3.

## Mentor-mentor support
The third source of support for mentors was support from other mentors in the team. For example, Mentor P2 reported; ‘The greatest support I gained was from my team, my fellow mentors’.

4.4.

## Pathway planning
The mentoring programs varied between schools and catered to the individual needs of the mentees. This main section and the following two main sections present accounts of the sessions from the report of each school.
At O High School, the first section, pathway planning, constituted approximately the first half of the course. The rationale for this time investment was primarily because the students seemed to have very little knowledge of how the subject selection process worked going forward to the college level, nor how these subjects would impact on their ability to study certain courses at the university level. The majority of our students were in year 10, and so this information was extremely pertinent. The students all expressed concern about their ability to make choices about their future and did not believe they were equipped with the knowledge or skills to make those choices with foresight and understanding.
While the students all said that they had received some instruction in pathway planning in the classroom, and in college preparation days, they did not believe that the instruction was adequate for them to make informed decisions. Furthermore, the mentees generally had moderately high levels of anxiety over their future careers, believing that the choices they made now would have an impact on what they would be able to pursue in the future, but also being unsure about how to make those decisions or understand the impact.
Based on this foundational knowledge, or lack thereof, our team constructed a pathway planning module that aimed to build overall proficiency and confidence. The mentors started by asking the students what they enjoyed and what they were passionate about. They completed personality and career aptitude quizzes to help them conceptualise potential future paths for study and work. The following weeks were spent on exploring the subject options available, using the government study guide and the subject selection website to build working subject lists for each mentee. A significant component of this exploration was spent explaining the particular language of pathways, with words like ‘prerequisite’, ‘study score’, and ‘ATAR’ requiring direct instruction for the mentees to understand in context.
At KM High School, the mentors met with the mentees in small groups to help them write down some options for potential pathways, emphasising throughout that these were not choices they had to make now, but were rather some potential ideas for the future. This helped the mentees build a more cohesive personal image of what their next two years of schooling might look like, with the understanding that concepts like prerequisite subjects need to be taken into account if there were certain areas of interest they wanted to pursue in the future. One mentee commented:
I like the way we learnt things that we do not learn in the classroom. I liked learning about the careers pathways because we got some really good advice from our mentors. (Mentee)

4.5.

## English language tutoring
At O High School the researchers decided to split the English program into two sections: English skills, and literacy in context. The rationale for the split was to better tailor the mentoring to the level of English proficiency of the mentees.
4.5.1.

## English language skills
The mentors set out to help the mentees increase their confidence and consider greater possibilities through their studies,. In the mentors’ reflection meetings at the end of every session, team leaders discussed and agreed that the only way to master English language is to use it. Therefore, they set strategies of joining the student community in speaking, listening, reading and writing in English. One of the observations made was that our mentees were not as engaged when the learning activities were planned in a serious learning structure. Therefore, mentors decided to design play-based, game-based strategies as much as possible. They made the sessions fun. The mentors made sure that every mentee had the opportunity to speak and take charge of their own learning. They loved it; they thrived on it. One of the mentees revealed at the end of the program:
I liked the way you mentors taught us, the way we learned new things in a fun way for instance learning and saying words in 10 seconds. I liked all the lessons that we had. (Mentee)
At O High School, after the pathway module, the researchers spent the next part of the course, approximately three weeks, on general English skills instruction. For this section the researchers decided to separate the mentors and mentees into smaller teams, with each of the four mentors taking four mentees in small group activities. The rationale for the separation was to provide individual support, ensuring that each mentee received assistance from an assigned mentor. Each mentor then structured this time differently. The following account describes, in general, the themes of the section, and not the specific activities. Broadly, the researchers focused on comprehension, writing skills, and the importance of reading for English language proficiency. This section was much more free-form and open than the previous, so the mentees had more input into the content of each session and the direction of each of the small groups. The researchers wanted to ensure that the mentors felt free to explore topics that their group were interested in without too much imposition of homogeneity from the program coordinator, and certainly the feedback from the mentees and mentors was positive regarding this approach.
At P High School each group came up with different learning needs and planned different activities to meet the identified needs. Mentors organised personalised support to individual mentees within the group whenever it was observed that their needs or levels of proficiency were slightly different, for example:
They have different difficulties. For the boy, I just focused on his vocabulary, on his English words. Because he couldn’t spell the basic English words. So, I made a lot of effort to improve him in this aspect. For the girl, she wanted to improve her writing. So, I just supported her in grammar, and gave them some models or some kind of structures to follow. (Mentor)

4.5.2.

## Literacy in context
The last section of the course, at O High School, approximately six weeks, was devoted to literacy practice in the context of all subjects. This was prompted by the mentees themselves, who felt that their understanding of each subject was being compromised by their language proficiency, especially in examination environments. In other words, the mentees felt that they could not always demonstrate their subject-specific competency because of their inability to articulate themselves, or in some instances to understand the questions being asked.
Our response was to separate the group each week into two teams, one focusing on English and the humanities, the other on mathematics and science, with two mentors leading each team. Each session the mentees would allocate themselves to a team based on what kind of help and instruction they wanted that week, and then the researchers structured each session based on the general instruction each team was looking for, coupled with time spent working individually with students to help with specific literacy questions they asked.

4.6.

## Other subjects
One of the three grants was for mentoring in mathematics. It was also suggested that schools were asked about needs in other subjects. However, there were no requests for help with mathematics or other subjects from either the schools or the mentors. If the mentees’ English literacy skills were brought up to standard, they then felt capable of coping with the other subjects.
The most difficult part for them is English. Because, you know, we Chinese are relatively good at maths. So, they feel no problems in maths. But they feel lots of problem in English. And this kind of difficulty just keep them back from improving a lot of other courses. They can’t understand the instructions, they can’t, they don’t know how to respond. (Mentor)

4.7.

## Integrating mentoring with regular class activities
At B High School, mentorship training was conducted during whole-of-cohort class time for 1 h every week. Before the class began, a regular teacher briefed the mentors for two to 5 min on the activities mentees were expected to do during a block of time allocated for humanities lessons, which comprise three areas; English, history, and geography. Most of the time, pre-designed activities were given to the mentees to complete and submit to the regular teacher as part of the class activity. For instance, mentees were given storybooks for reading activities and asked to identify different words; such as new words (word master), connecting words, summarising words, derivative words with prefix or suffix, and so on. The role of the mentors was, therefore, to support the mentees to understand the instructions and help them in explaining some difficult words and guiding them with the correct pronunciation of words.
This modality could be useful in integrating the objectives of the program with that of the school objectives. One of the goals of the program is to support the migrant and refugee background students to be successful in their learning. If the mentees are given in-class support, they will have the chance to ask a question in a small group and gradually build their confidence in classroom participation. This could help the regular teacher and the school community to ensure that all the students have the opportunity to achieve the learning outcomes.
The in-class support would be more productive if the mentors and regular teachers plan and work together and discuss how the specific lesson will be run in the next period. It would be good if the mentors and regular teachers have a common understanding of the weekly lesson in order to plan ahead of time. It is suggested that the regular teacher for a specialty should share his/her activities in advance.
The primary objective of the mentorship program was to incorporate learning support directly into the classroom setting. In the final phase of the program, the focus shifted towards in-class support, with subject teachers leading the classes while mentors provided individualised assistance to their mentees within the classroom itself. The school recognised the effectiveness of the mentorship strategies, such as designing learning activities based on the mentees' interests, using brainstorming activities to engage and stimulate them, and implementing learning games to boost their participation and confidence. As a result, the school began incorporating these strategies into their classrooms.

4.8.

## Outcomes: positive reactions of mentees
The feedback from the mentees was overwhelmingly positive. The mentoring style, being casual and collaborative, was far more instructive and enjoyable for the mentees than a traditional classroom. The mentees felt at ease and comfortable with the mentor teams, creating a degree of personal connection that established rapport very early in the program. This connection is probably the most important aspect of the entire program because it allows for mentoring that is tailored, dynamic, and responsive to the needs of the mentees. Our willingness to listen and implement the mentees’ suggestions also helped this connection grow and created genuine trust:
I think this program is good. It provided small group support. Just focus on individuals' needs. This is what I like. Because back in my country, we don’t have such experience. We normally just have a very big class, don’t focus on individuals. And they have time to ask questions. And we have time to do all kinds of activities. In large classes, you’re faced with such a crowd! (Mentor)

4.9.

## Outcomes: English language ability
One mentor enjoyed seeing the transformation that happened to most of these young people. When this research started, most of the mentees used their phones to provide translations before answering any questions, as they lacked confidence. Also, some of them would first speak to each other in their own language before speaking with the mentors. For example, one of the mentees from B school said “At the beginning of this class, I was not confident speaking in front of my friends. The support and encouragement I received increased my speaking confidence”(Mentee).
By the end of the term, everyone was confident enough to speak freely without use of phone-apps, or without the help of their peer interpreters. One of the mentees revealed at the end of the program interview how this transformation took place:
You [Mentors] always supported us to not give up, encouraged us to keep going, that if you fail once or twice you can get it the third time … In my English class, I didn’t have the confidence to talk in a group or to sit with them, I was always shy, but this program has helped me with that. I now have the confidence to talk in front of the class with my group. (Mentee)
Another mentee said that he has benefited from the program particularly in the area of English. The mentee revealed that English is the key to all subjects, and more emphasis needs to be given to English than other subjects:
English is really helpful because we can’t speak clearly before. And we don’t understand some of the words somewhere, like, hard word, some of the words that we never heard of, like that. So, we really need help with English. And that’s the important thing here. No English, no job, no school. You have to learn English. And it helps us really (Mentee).
The mentors assisted the mentees in English language skills as in most cases their class activities were related to reading storybooks and writing activities in the class. Reading, writing and searching for information from different websites were the major components of the support that mentors provided. Regarding this point, one of the mentees reported that ‘We have got help in an essay, like, reading and vocabularies and other, like, so much stuff that can be helpful, like English’ (Mentee).
[The mentor] helped me to get better in reading and something like sentence, essay, and something like that. I liked how we learn how to write essays. I learned simple sentences, essay. And resume preparation about what we’re going to do for the future. And then, talking in English. I like talking. I like speaking in the class. I learn how to speak properly. Like, when you speak up the front of the people. It’s very important. If you just go and you don’t know how to speak, that’s bad. So, you have to learn how to speak properly. (Mentee)

4.10.

## Outcomes: confidence
One mentor observed that through their interactions with these young people, they were able to observe their challenges. Many of them lacked confidence in their abilities and what they could achieve. They thought that their shortcomings in communicating in English meant that they were not accepted in the community and in their classes by their English-proficient peers. Lack of confidence was evident in these children and believed by researchers to bethe main cause for them being quiet and reluctant to participate in the general school activities. Understanding their varied challenges at the very start helped the mentors in tailoring the program activities to suit their individual needs.
The mentees felt an improvement in their confidence to express themselves more than before:
And then I learnt how to speak in front of audiences, like that. I did a presentation in science class. But I was so afraid, because it’s, yeah, there are more than 10 people. It just so afraid. But it was better than before. It was good and helpful to me. (Mentee)
Mentees felt that they received more support during mentorship than in regular subjects:
I learn with the mentor, it’s different. Like, learn more from my mentor than I do in the class. Yeah. Like, I learn much more, like, with my mentor. Because my English not very good. (Mentee)

4.11.

## Outcomes: determination to pursue further education
The first step in encouraging the mentees to pursue further education was to help develop a positive attitude towards school. In doing these activities, the research teams worked to keep them attentive, motivated, and confident in their learning:
This program motivated me to come to school, yeah, every day. Because it helps. You know, when we don’t have anyone to help us, we feel so boring. And, when you guys come, and there is, like, someone to talk with, share our feelings, and talk about, like, English, and homework, we become more motivated (Mentee).
Becoming more positive about school, then opens up the path to further education:
So, you know how you guys have gave us the knowledge that, like, what to do, and where you would go, like, if you did … For example, if you do level three subject you go to uni and if you do level six then, like, you, you know what I mean? So, yeah, that helped me a lot. I got knowledge of choosing good subjects for university. And enter university. (Mentee)

4.12.

## Outcomes: integration into Australian society
The mentors and mentees were from different countries and therefore it developed into a multicultural experience for both mentees and mentors:
I found this program really, like, meaningful because, like, I saw benefits from the program in the way that, I mean, in the way that I contact with people from diverse background. And understand their, I mean, their experience. And how to, and so, it also helped me with, I mean, the skills of building the relationship for the, you know, the rapport with the others. (Mentor)
A very positive outcome was helping some of the mentees to obtain part-time jobs. The mentoring program, therefore, had an impact beyond the school by helping integrate the mentees into the broader Australian community. When the research team started speaking about how they needed to get into the community, to get a part-time job and take charge of their lives, one girl said, with a wave of her hand, “You see, they don't want us here. No one can give me job.” The mentors, therefore, began designing activities that would develop self-confidence and the researchers thought that getting a job could be a significant part of that process. The research ream looked at writing resumes and cover letters and mentors searched online for available jobs in places like Hungry Jacks, KFC and Pizza Hut. The mentors then carried their own computers to the sessions for the purpose of assisting the mentees in applying for a job. By the end of the term, some of the mentees were successful in acquiring their first job. One of the mentees said during the end of term interview:
I used to think that no one would give me a job because of my poor English, but when you helped us to write our resumes and apply for the jobs, I got two job interviews and finally was given a job in KFC. I want to thank all of you [mentors] for this. (Mentee)

4.13.

## Overall reflections
In keeping with the action research approach, this main section reports reflections, mainly from the team leaders, about how the program might be improved in another round of offering.
4.13.1.

## Strong desire for more
Clearly a theme throughout was that there was ample justification and need for both a continuation of the program and widening of the net to provide support to other year groups and mentees with differing needs. This has been amply supported by quotations from mentors and mentees as well as teachers. The following quotation from a teacher was published in the news section of the University of Tasmania.:
I really wanted to thank you for organising the program at our school, I feel that it has been really successful and valuable for our Year 10 students in particular. There are a number of Year 9 students that I did not include this year, but after seeing how it worked I will include for 2020 if we are lucky enough to have it continue. My initial thoughts were to have students who were struggling, but it turned out that the students who are currently accessing the mainstream curriculum were the ones who found it most beneficial. It was also really good for those students who do not regularly access support from outside agencies [ ].

4.13.2.

## Newcomers and at-risk students
There were suggestions that the greatest need of the migrants was when they first arrived. It would, therefore, makes sense if mentoring was available to new arrivals regardless of the grade they were in. The mentees proposed that the program would benefit all children with migrant backgrounds to settle into the Australian education system. In the discussions that the researchers held towards the end of the last term with the mentees, some of them revealed that the challenges that they faced in settling into their new schools started when they first arrived at school here in Tasmania. For some, this was in primary school, for others it was in grade 7 or grade 8:
From our experience it would be better if this program considers the newly arrived refugee and migrant background students as they are new to the school environment and Tasmania education systems. (Mentor)
I hope this program goes for grade 7 and 8 and not only for grade 9 and 10 alone. If this program also happens for grade 7 and 8, they would enjoy it more and learn more. Especially for us people who English is our second language, this would help us a lot. It would also be helpful if this program happens in primary level. (Mentee)

4.13.3.

## Greater mentee-mentor contact
Another area for improvement noted by the mentees was increasing the ratio of mentors to mentees even further, as well as increasing the length of time for the sessions. This was a reflection of the value of small group and one-on-one work to the mentors and mentees and is certainly something to consider. Regarding the session lengths, with very few exceptions, almost every session the researchers conducted went over the 1-h time limit. While this was a function of the casual nature of the sessions, it also potentially shows a need for longer sessions in the future and should be discussed if the program is renewed. Mentees and mentors observed that there was need to extend the time for each session from 1 h to 2 h:
I do have recommendations about the length of each section. So, last time we only did, like, one hour for each section. And I don’t think, you know, like, we had enough time to cover all of the activities that we wanted to do. So, I suggest, like, lengthen. You know, extending the time to 1 ½ hours or even 2 hours. (Mentor)
5.13.3.1.

## Cooperation from schools is vital
It was vital to the success of the mentoring program that schools and the coordinating teachers cooperated fully with the mentors. The more committed and co-operative the schools were, the more the mentees got out of the programme. As mentoring was incorporated into the classroom, sometimes, the planned learning activities of mentors and subject teachers did not happen as expected. The students with migrant and refugee backgrounds require more time to complete the given activities, while the rest of the class has already finished their tasks. This mismatch sometimes affects the mentors and mentees, making it difficult for them to focus and complete their assigned activities. To address this issue, it is necessary for subject teachers, the school administration, and mentors to have serious planning and commitment when providing support.

4.13.4.

## Limitations of this study
Action research was the appropriate methodology for the study as it allowed the researchers to explore and refine strategies for mentoring which suited the needs of the schools and individual mentees. Others, and particularly quantitative researchers, might perceive the action research approach to be a limitation of the study. Although the number of mentors and mentees was large by the standards for mentoring scheme, the ‘sample size’ might be considered small for quantitative research. The evidence for outcomes relied upon self reporting interviews.
In addition, this study was conducted in the Tasmanian school system, which may have different provisions for migrant and refugee students compared to schools in other Australian states and territories. Additionally, the origin countries of the participants and the proportion of their representation in this program will differ between each cohort which could lead to different activities and outcomes in the future. Future studies should consider implementing mentoring programs for migrant and refugee students from different countries to compare and contrast the results, and provide further insight on this important topic.

## Data availability statement
No data are available as a condition of ethical approval.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgements
The researchers acknowledge the award of three grants from the Tasmanian Department of Communities, Sport and Recreation's Learning Grants Program.
The volunteer mentors were essential to the success of the project. Team leaders and mentors: Gilbert Arinaitwe, Bryce Deller, Kevina Kezabu, Geberew Mekonnen. Mentors: Lois Kidmas, Sara Maryniak, Nabaraj Mudwari, Nu Thuy Uyen Nguyen, Nita Novianti, Duc Thi Phung, Yasmine Shabaneh, Jingyi Shi, Kadison Street, Laura Wood, Qian (Amanda) Wu.
The cooperation of the participating schools, particularly the coordinating teachers and principals, was vital: Schools: B High School, KM High School, O High School, P High School.

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e40470.

## Contributor Information
Subhash Koirala, Email: subhash.koirala@utas.edu.au.
Geberew Tulu Mekonnen, Email: gmekonnen@csu.edu.au.
Bryce Deller, Email: bryce.deller@utas.edu.au.
Gilbert Arinaitwe, Email: gilbert.arinaitwe@utas.edu.au.
Kevina Kezabu, Email: kevina.kezabu@utas.edu.au.
Karen Swabey, Email: karen.swabey@utas.edu.au.
David Kember, Email: david.kember@utas.edu.au.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Data Availability Statement
No data are available as a condition of ethical approval.