1888jahaJournal of the American Heart Association: Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular DiseaseJ Am Heart AssocWileyPMC1207474612074746120747463995044810.1161/JAHA.124.031853Crème de la Conference: 8th World Congress of Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery–WCPCCS 2023
Baker‐SmithCarissa MMD, MPH ZühlkeLieslMBChB, DCH, FCPaeds, Cert, Card, MPH, MSc, PhD Co‐VuJenniferMD SrivastavaShubhikaMD GeorgeRenelleMD KuttyShelbyMD, PhD ZaidiAli NMD GoldbergDavid JMD SoodEricaPhD DoddsKathryn MCRNP CooperDavid SMD, MPH, MBA CohenMitchel IMD WernovskyGilMD JacobsJeffrey PMD 
1
Center for Cardiovascular Research and Innovation, Nemours Cardiac Center, Nemours Children’s Health, Wilmington, DE, USA
2
Sidney Kimmel Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
3
South African Medical Research Council, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Red Cross Children’s Hospital Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa
4
Congenital Heart Center, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
5
Taussig Heart Center, Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA
6
Mount Sinai Fuster Heart Hospital, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
7
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA
8
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA
9
Inova LJ Murphy Children’s Hospital, Falls Church, VA, USA
10
George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA
11
Children’s National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA
12
Cardiac Kids Foundation of FL, Oldsmar, FL, USA
13
Congenital Heart Center, Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery and Pediatrics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA*

Correspondence to: Carissa M. Baker‐Smith, MD, MPH, MS, FACC, FAHA, FAAP, Center for Cardiovascular Research and Innovation, 1600 Rockland Road, Wilmington, DE 19803. Email: carissa.baker-smith@nemours.org

✉Corresponding author.
1422025144e031853e0318531452025© 2025 The Author(s). Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2025 Feb 18.

Keywords: cardiac surgical procedures, cardiology, heart diseases

Subject Categories: Congenital Heart Disease, Cardiomyopathy, Valvular Heart Disease, Rheumatic Heart Disease, Hypertension

The 8th World Congress of Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery (WCPCCS) was held in Washington, DC, at the Walter E. Washington Convention Center from August 26, 2023 to September 1, 2023. It brought together 5768 registered attendees from 117 countries and 959 faculty from 65 countries ( ). The Congress’ content highlighted paradigms in clinical care, new areas of clinical research, population health, and global health initiatives. It focused on improved care of children and adolescents with congenital and acquired heart disease and adults with congenital heart disease (CHD). This review from the Journal of the American Heart Association summarizes scientific conference highlights from the 8th WCPCCS.
 

## OPENING SESSION, ORGANIZERS, AND SPONSORS
At the 8th WCPCCS, 14 professional societies held their scientific meetings; an additional 38 professional societies provided a formal endorsement of WCPCCS 2023, and 70 children's hospitals were institutional partners for the event, providing financial support to help fund the conference ( ). Sponsors of WCPCCS 2023 included Berlin Heart, Children's Health (Dallas), Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Children's National Hospital, Cincinnati Children's, Cleveland Clinic Children's, Dell Technologies, Edwards Life Science, Excel Continuing Education, Gore, Inova L. J. Murphy Children's Hospital, Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital, Medtronic, Mezzion, Nemours Children's Health, Pediatrix Medical Group, Prolacta Bioscience, Siemens Healthineers, Spectrum Medical, Texas Children's Hospital, University of Florida Congenital Heart Center, and University of Virginia Health Children's.

## HISTORY OF THE WCPCCS
The WCPCCS has a rich history. , The first World Congress of Pediatric Cardiology was held in London, England in 1980, the second in New York City, United States in 1985; and the third in Bangkok, Thailand in 1989. A World Congress of Pediatric Cardiac Surgery was held in Bergamo, Italy, in 1988. Ultimately, due to increasing recognition of the need for pediatric cardiologists and pediatric cardiothoracic surgeons to collaborate, the WCPCCS was established. The first WCPCCS was held in Paris, France in 1993. Subsequent WCPCCS meetings were held in Hawaii (1997); Toronto, Canada (2001); Buenos Aires, Argentina (2005); Cairns, Australia (2009); Cape Town, South Africa (2013); and Barcelona, Spain (2017). 

## GENERAL SESSIONS
General sessions for the 8th WCPCCS were divided into 22 subspecialty tracks and covered a range of topics, including adult congenital heart disease (ACHD), advocacy, artificial intelligence and big data, anesthesia, basic science, cardiac intensive care, cardiac surgery, cardiovascular disease in the neonate, catheterization, echocardiography, electrophysiology, fetal, global health, heart failure/transplant/ventricular assist device (VAD), multimodal imaging, neurodevelopment, nursing, outpatient cardiology, perfusion, pulmonary hypertension, and quality improvement.
Details about some of these subspecialty areas are listed below.

## Adult Congenital Heart Disease, Chaired by Craig Broberg (United States), Luke Burchill (Australia), Geetha Kandavello (Malaysia), Adrienne Kovacs (United States), Erwin Oechslin (Canada), Members at Large: Ali N Zaidi (United States), Elisa Bradley (United States)
The ACHD Scientific Committee at the 8th WCPCCS presented a unique 2‐day presymposium on ACHD, highlighting high risk of pregnancy (modified World Health Organization Group IV) in women with CHD, advanced heart failure, and cardiac transplant; long‐term consequences in Kawasaki disease; management of septal defects; and assessing surgical risk in adults with CHD undergoing noncardiac surgery. This was followed by the main conference, where ACHD experts from around the world provided state‐of‐the‐art lectures, debate, and discourse on arrhythmias, interventional congenital catheterization, shunt‐mediated pulmonary hypertension, neurocognitive dysfunction in ACHD, long‐term outcomes in adults with Fontan palliation, transition of care, and the state of ACHD on a global scale including a focus on low‐ and middle‐income countries. The Congress provided an avenue to highlight clinical, translational, and bench research in ACHD, with posters and oral abstracts from global participants, allowing for significant scientific discourse, exchange of ideas, and collaboration. With both clinical and research forums, the Congress played a vital role in the advancement of ACHD knowledge and professional development both within the United States and around the world.
Take‐home point(s): The ACHD sessions at the 8th WCPCCS addressed the challenges faced by ACHD centers in low‐ and middle‐income countries due to resource limitations, neurocognitive outcomes in patients with ACHD, and advanced heart failure in ACHD.

## Advocacy, Chaired by Stacey Lihn (United States), Jodi Smith (United States), and Amy Verstappen (United States)
Advocacy for the lifelong care of those with childhood‐onset heart disease was an integral component of the 8th WCPCCS. Preceding the Congress, a select number of WCPCCS faculty led and published a Call to Action, highlighting key advocacy priorities. Specifically, this Call to Action campaign called for several key actions, including (1) increased capacity to care for people with pediatric and CHD, (2) building of the pediatric and congenital cardiac workforce, (3) financial support for pediatric and congenital cardiac care, and (4) the recommendation that all governments, multilateral organizations, funders, professional societies, research and teaching institutions, civil society, and the private sector work to close the data gap for CHD and ACHD. A collaboration of patient and family groups, called the Global Village, was integral to leading the advocacy efforts within the conference. Specific advocacy sessions hosted by the Global Village focused on raising awareness and advocating for and ensuring better outcomes in all regions of the world. A specific example of this advocacy effort was a pre‐Congress workshop Pediatric and Congenital Heart Surgery in Africa that defined the gaps and focused on real‐world solutions as well as implementation targets for improved CHD care in Africa. This pre‐Congress workshop set the stage for discussions that continued in sessions throughout the remainder of the conference.
There were outstanding presentations on financing pediatric cardiac care, burden of disease, and preventative cardiology on a global scale that addressed leveraging rheumatic heart disease (RHD) and CHD diagnosis and treatment to optimize capacity in low‐ and middle‐income countries. Another excellent session, Prevention, Research, Advocacy, Policy: Applying Solutions to Health Inequities in the United States and Globally, featured a wide range of panelists debating these issues, which generated much interest. A moving and inspiring session was on patient and provider partnerships, which included round table discussions and thought‐provoking presentations. A highlight of this topic area was the Landmark Lecture given by Bistra Zheleva (United States) titled Equity for All: It's Time for a Population Health Approach to Pediatric and Congenital Heart Disease.
Take‐home point(s): Advocacy for the lifelong care of those with childhood‐onset heart disease was an integral component of the 8th WCPCCS, including a landmark Call to Action and broad, integrated solution‐driven sessions. We anticipate that this is only the beginning, and that the WCPCCS will plan to play an activist role in mandating improved pediatric cardiac services globally.

## Anesthesia, Chaired by Walid Habre (Switzerland), Viviane Nasr (United States), and Mark Twite (United States)
The Cardiac Anesthesia sessions included A Tale of Two Ventricles, Effects of Pain, Analgesia, and Sedation on the Neonatal Brain, Recent Advances in Pediatric Cardiac Anesthesia, as well as Optimal Organ Protection: Monitoring, Detection and Prevention. In the session titled A Tale of Two Ventricles, topics were expertly covered and included pathophysiology and monitoring in the low cardiac output state, best ventilation strategy for heart–lung interaction, differences and similarities between the right and left ventricle and ventricular interactions, severe pulmonary hypertension management, and inotropic agent use. The session addressing the effects of pain, analgesia, and sedation on the neonatal brain included a mix of cases and presentations and was well received by a multidisciplinary audience. The Recent Advances session covered advances in anesthetic management for VAD/extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) patients, perioperative blood management, new technologies, recruitment maneuvers, and locoregional anesthetic in cardiac surgery. The session on Optimal Organ Protection focused on key elements of monitoring, protecting, and preventing injury to the myocardium, the brain, and the kidneys. In addition to these sessions, there were multiple joint sessions in which the anesthesiologists participated, such as quality improvement, surgery and catheterization in tiny babies, and perioperative management of adult patients with CHD.
Take‐home point(s): Importance of understanding the impact of cardiopulmonary interactions and ventricular coupling on anesthetic management; review of the current technologies and techniques for hemodynamic monitoring, organ protection, and perioperative management; and recognition of the importance of pain and sedation management on outcomes of patients with CHD.

## Artificial Intelligence, New Technology, and Big Data Track, Chaired by David Axelrod (United States), Anthony Chang (United States), Keven Maher (United States), and Sara Pasquali (United States)
The sessions on artificial intelligence (AI) and big data during the 8th WCPCCS spanned applications across subspecialties in cardiology, from diagnostics, risk, and prediction models to management and quality assurance. The presenters provided an overview of the scope of AI in pediatric cardiovascular care. A session dedicated to AI in electrophysiology (EP) covered a range of topics, including mobile health technology's impact on lives of electrophysiology patients, applications in informatics for arrhythmic disease, pharmacogenetics, and incorporation of new AI‐driven technologies into electrophysiology interventions. Additional talks provided an overview of harnessing big data. Presentations addressed the scope of AI and neural network applications in fetal detection of CHD. Use of AI to enhance ultrasound and clinical diagnostics around the globe and abstracts and research were presented in the session titled Field Deployment of AI for Detection of Rheumatic Heart Disease by Echocardiography. A session dedicated to AI in cardiac critical care included a presentation on the implications of risk algorithmic paternalism. Applications of wearable biosensors in children's sessions included presentations on risk stratification, prediction models, and streamlining care delivery applications.
Take‐home point(s): AI‐based technology applications are rapidly evolving and will have a transformative global impact on access to care, early detection, diagnosis, treatment planning, risk stratification, and outcome prediction in pediatric congenital and acquired heart disease.

## Basic Science, Chaired by Martina Brueckner (United States) and Barry Byrne (United States)
This track brought bench to bedside with topics such as tissue engineering and regenerative therapy. The use of tissue‐engineered vascular grafts instead of polytetrafluoroethylene conduits for surgical Fontan completion was discussed. The results presented were promising, with clinically insignificant stenosis resolving spontaneously and with no evidence of calcification. The use of regenerative therapy in hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), one of which involving the intramyocardial injection of processed autologous cord blood into the ventricular myocardium at the time of the Glenn operation, was also discussed. Phase 1 results demonstrate good ventricular function in a small series. These promising clinical trials give us hope that future therapies will involve fewer synthetic materials and more biologically engineered strategies in the management of complex CHD. The Mobassaleh Symposium brought us information on reappraisals of several genes through ClinGen, which aims to define the clinical relevance of genes and variants. The role of the ATP1A3 (adenosine triphosphate 1A3) gene as an emerging cause of short‐QT syndrome and sudden cardiac death was also presented.
Take‐home point(s): Advances in tissue engineering research offer hope that in the future, treatment of select congenital heart defects will involve the use of grafts with growth potential, reducing the need for surgical conduit replacement. This would decrease the risks of redo sternotomies and represents a significant breakthrough for the field.

## Cardiac Intensive Care, Chaired by Nikhil Chanani (United States), Bruna Cury (Brazil), and Melissa Jones (United States)
This track addressed many current topics in Cardiac intensive care unit care, including analgesia, anticoagulation, heart failure, and teamwork. Both untreated pain and pain treated with conventional analgesics over a long period appear to be harmful to the developing brain, requiring a thoughtful approach to management in these patients. Animal research demonstrated that anesthesia toxicity preferentially affects immature neurons regardless of agent, and proposed studies demonstrating that other factors, such as maternal education, mechanical support, and length of hospitalization, may be more significant factors in neurodevelopmental outcomes. Attendees of these sessions were encouraged to prevent pain rather than treat it, and a digital tool developed to help manage difficult‐to‐sedate patients was presented. Effective and safe anticoagulation can be achieved with bivalirudin in ECMO. The pros and cons of default extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation for all in‐hospital cardiac arrests were discussed, and disparities in extracorporeal life support care were presented. We were all encouraged to consider where disparities in extracorporeal life support arise in our own centers and to address them. Data were presented that showed that despite limited technical and economic resources, ECMO can be performed safely in low‐resource countries.
Take‐home point(s): Patients receiving anesthesia early in the life course often have multiple risk factors for poor neurodevelopmental outcomes; a carefully developed anesthetic approach is required. Extracorporeal life support needs to be equitably delivered, and ECMO can be safely performed in low‐resource countries.

## Cardiac Surgery, Chaired by Jim Kirklin (United States), Giovani Stellin (Italy), and Christo Tchervenkov (Canada)
There were 6 focused surgery sessions and 4 surgical video sessions. Surgery 1, sponsored by the World Society for Pediatric and Congenital Heart Surgery, along with the Asian Association for Pediatric and Congenital Heart Surgery, focused on topics including the arterial switch operation for high‐risk coronary anatomy pattern in people with transposition of the great arteries (TGA), the role of a Nikaidoh operation and double root translocation, management strategies for left ventricular outflow obstruction in TGA‐ventricular septal defect and TGA‐intact ventricular septum, anatomic repairs for congenitally corrected TGA, and the ventricular switch procedure.
Surgery 2 focused on the repair of the complete atrioventricular canal and Ebstein malformation. Topics included repair of the complete atrioventricular canal with conotruncal anomalies, surgical decision‐making and management of the unbalanced atrioventricular canal, atrioventricular valve repair in the patient with a single ventricle, Ebstein malformation, the role of bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis for Ebstein malformation, and the role of bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis for Ebstein malformation.
Surgery 3 highlighted tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect, major aortopulmonary collaterals, and pulmonary conduits; classical transinfundibular repair for TOF, transatrial‐transpulmonary repair of TOF, single‐stage repair for pulmonary atresia, ventricular septal defect, major aortopulmonary collaterals, indications for placement of pulmonary valves, and conduits for pulmonary regurgitation following repair of TOF.
Surgery 4 presentations were on left heart obstructions, including critical aortic stenosis, critical coarctation, interrupted aortic arch, surgical treatment of complex left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, indications for biventricular repair for HLHS, Ross procedure, and supravalvar aortic stenosis.
Surgery 5 was sponsored by the World Society for Pediatric and Congenital Heart Surgery and the Congenital Heart Surgeons' Society and focused on congenital coronary arterial abnormalities. Lessons learned from the Congenital Heart Surgeons' Society were anomalous origin of the coronary artery registry, surgical techniques and management, coronary bypass surgery in patients with CHD, indications for one and a half and biventricular repair in pulmonary atresia‐intact ventricular septum, and challenging coronary abnormalities.
Surgery 6 focused on transplantation, VADs, and ECMO. Updates on pediatric heart transplantation and mechanical bridge to heart transplantation, pediatric lung and heart–lung transplantation, pediatric ECMO overview of indications and clinical experience, total artificial heart in infants, and VAD for patients with a single ventricle were provided.
For the surgical video sessions, surgeons from across the United States presented video on their favorite CHD operations. Surgical Video Session 1 included video presentations on aortic translocation, hybrid+VAD for neonatal HLHS, arterial switch operation for TGA with complex coronary anatomy modified Konno interdigitating Brom repair, post‐arterial switch operation aortic valve repair, and living aortic root replacement (partial transplant) after arterial switch operation. Surgical Video Session 2 concentrated on VSD repair in children with severe pulmonary hypertension and cryopreserved valve femoral vein homograft for right ventricular outflow tract reconstruction in infants. Surgical Video Session 3 included video presentations on arterial switch operation, placement of a pediatric VAD, fetal surgery for intrapericardial teratoma, and neonatal arch repair. Finally, Surgical Video Session 4 focused on complex biventricular conversion, TOF repair, mitral valve replacement using a handmade construct, and surgery for cardiac tumors.
Unique sessions titled Next Frontier of CT Surgical Planning–XR Gaming and Simulation, Hands‐on‐Tech‐Engineering Surgical Simulation, and Hands‐on‐Tech: The Power of Segmentation, From 3‐Dimensional Printing to extended reality Simulation also took place during 8th WCPCCS.
Take‐home point(s): The surgical track of WCPCCS 2023 included lectures that covered the entire spectrum of pediatric and congenital cardiac surgical care. Valuable lessons on strategies for optimizing surgical performance and facilitating charitable cardiac surgery were discussed in detail during the following Surgical Landmark Lectures:

On Monday, August 28, 2023, from 7:30 am to 8:00 am, the Eighth Aldo R. Castaneda Lecture of the World Society for Pediatric and Congenital Heart Surgery was presented by Joseph Dearani, MD (United States) titled Chasing Excellence–Peak Performance of Quarterbacks, Pilots, and Surgeons.
On Wednesday, August 30, 2023, from 8:30 am to 8:50 am, a Surgical Landmark Lecture was presented by Bohdan Maruszewski, MD (Poland) titled: The Great Orchestra of the Christmas Charity Fund: Thirty Years of Saving Children's Lives in Poland.
On Thursday, August 31, 2023, from 8:55 am to 9:15 am, a Surgical Landmark Lecture was presented by Nestor Sandoval, MD (Colombia) titled: Weaving Healthcare for the Forgotten Ones in Macondo.

## Cardiovascular Disease in the Neonate, Chaired by Amir Ashrafi (United States), John Cleary (United States), and Victor Levy (United States)
The sessions on cardiovascular disease in the neonate were planned in collaboration with the Neonatal Heart Society and emphasized the significance of multidisciplinary collaboration in optimizing patient outcomes. The first day began with a session on the hemodynamics of the premature infant, followed by a session on cardiovascular implications in patients with congenital diaphragmatic hernia. The next session highlighted point‐of‐care ultrasound and targeted neonatal echo. The day ended with a session on stabilization of the newborn with complex CHD. The second day started with a session on the hemodynamics of septic shock in the neonate, followed by an interesting session on the fetal and neonatal brain in CHD. The next session was on the management of patent ductus arteriosus in tiny babies, with discussions on different closure techniques. Sessions on the third day included pulmonary hypertension in the neonate and oral abstract presentations. Closing the third day was an excellent session on surgery and catheterization in tiny babies moderated by surgeons, neonatologists, and cardiac intensivists. Last, the fourth‐day session was on the state‐of‐the‐art management of acute and chronic pulmonary hypertension in the newborn.
Take‐home point(s): In neonatal CHD care, multidisciplinary collaboration is crucial for optimizing outcomes, as highlighted through these comprehensive sessions on hemodynamics, targeted diagnostics, and advanced management strategies for complex conditions in newborns.

## Cardiac Catheterization, Chaired by Ziyad Hijazi (Qatar), Ralf Holzer (United States), and Damien Kenny (Ireland)
With the 3D Imaging for Interventional Catheterization and Pediatric and Congenital Interventional Cardiovascular Society meetings embedded in the 8th WCPCCS, there were many learning opportunities for cardiac catheterization enthusiasts. The wide variety of live cases showcased sinus venosus defect closure, pulmonary valve replacement using balloon‐expandable and self‐expanding valves in the native right ventricular outflow tract, mitral valve‐in‐valve replacement, and magnetic resonance imaging‐guided catheterization. In an informative hybrid session, several cases were presented, including the treatment of bronchopulmonary fistula and posterior urethral valves in utero. The Giessen perspective, in which hybrid stage I palliation is the primary management approach for patients with HLHS and boasts 75% survival in their cohort, was also presented. There were debates on whether hybrid palliation for HLHS should only be offered at high‐volume centers that concluded with the point that center volume should not be the only consideration for whether to offer hybrid palliation. Best abstract was awarded to Bryan Goldstein (United States) for Procedural and One‐Year Outcomes in a Real‐World Multicenter Experience With Harmony Transcatheter Pulmonary Valve Replacement, which demonstrated excellent acute technical success and outcomes but frequent ventricular arrhythmias that appeared to be associated with pulmonary stenosis and annular implants. Michael Angtuaco (United States) won this year's Nightmare Case in the Cath Laboratory for his presentation, Rescue of an Embolized Atrial Septal Stent.
Take‐home point(s): Innovations in cardiac catheterization continue to offer alternatives to the surgical treatment of CHD. Access to procedures, such as the hybrid procedure, should not be limited solely by center volume.

## Echocardiography, Chaired by Meryl Cohen (United States), Leo Lopez (United States), and Jan Marek (United Kingdom)
The echocardiography track featured sessions showcasing historical and future cardiac imaging strategies. Participants were able to attend sessions such as Pediatric Echocardiography: Where It Started, Where It's Going, which featured presentations on historical perspectives, M‐mode to strain, explanation of Z scores, AI, handheld echo screening, and intraprocedural 3‐dimensional (3D) echo. Another essential session focused on training the next generation of imagers with discussions on echo simulation, tissue Doppler imaging, limitations of echo, and the role of computed tomography. Sessions on specific CHD lesions such as the right ventricle and double outlet right ventricle provided excellent reviews enriched with multidisciplinary discussions. One key highlight was a session on new and emerging echocardiographic modalities, where speakers discussed frontiers and innovation, high frame‐rate imaging, 3D printing from echo data sets, deep learning and AI, echo‐fluoroscopic fusion imaging, and intracardiac echo flow imaging. Another important session addressed providing comprehensive and available imaging on a global scale, with speakers from different economic regions of the world giving their insights and perspectives on imaging. Finally, the oral abstracts session featured 9 abstracts from the United States, Norway, Canada, Germany, Mexico, and Brazil, with topics ranging from blood speckle tracking and 3D echocardiography to aortic stiffness index.
Take‐home point(s): The future of cardiac imaging includes not only new technologies, including AI, but also training for the next generation and global access to comprehensive imaging.

## Electrophysiology, Chaired by Bryan Cannon (United States), Joachim Hebe (Germany), Gabrielle Hessling (Germany), and Elizabeth Stephenson (Canada)
PediRhythm sponsored presentations on the management of ventricular arrhythmias. Other sessions focused on cardiac implantable electronic devices, including underused program features in pacemakers and defibrillators, optimizing resynchronization in CHD, device implantation in ACHD, advances in device miniaturization and novel implantation techniques, remote monitoring in cardiac rhythm management devices, choosing implantable cardioverter‐defibrillator hardware: patient and disease characteristics to consider, and What's on the Horizon for Devices. Additional topics presented during organized electrophysiology sessions included: Ablations That Are Really Hard, including outflow‐tract arrhythmia with left‐sided origin/aortic cusp ablations, para‐Hisian accessory pathways, atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia with a nonresponding typical slow‐pathway‐region, epicardial inferoseptal accessory pathways, idiopathy left ventricular fascicular‐tachycardia, unusual accessory connections including Mahaim fibers, focal atrial tachycardias, and pulmonary vein isolation. A separate session titled Nightmare Cases in Electrophysiology and a session on electrophysiology cases, including epicardial ablation and TOF complex ventricular tachycardia ablation, also took place.
Take‐home point(s): Risk stratification for sudden cardiac death in TOF requires a multidisciplinary approach combining demographic, noninvasive imaging (echocardiographic and magnetic resonance imaging) and exercise stress testing and potential cardiac catheterization and electrophysiology testing. Ventricular tachycardia in TOF is becoming increasingly better understood, and with advances in 3D electroanatomic critical isthmuses, prophylactic ablations may reduce the late incidence of monomorphic ventricular tachycardia and potentially sudden cardiac death. The management of patients with a strong family history of sudden cardiac death and subsequent interpretation of genetic testing requires a multidisciplinary team of cardiologists specializing in channelopathies and cardiomyopathies, genetic counselors, and imaging specialists. Results from recent multicenter trials in patients with long‐QT syndrome and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy support return‐to‐play recommendations using shared‐risk decision models. Many countries in the world, specifically in Africa, parts of South America, and the Middle East, have no or limited pediatric electrophysiology support. Education of primary care physicians, improved use of telehealth with regional pediatric electrophysiology, collaboration with local adult electrophysiology, and training of cardiology fellows in noninvasive electrophysiology, cardiogenetics, device management, and invasive electrophysiology will be required to bring electrophysiology technology closer to home.

## Fetal, Chaired by Mary Donofrio (United States), Anita Moon‐Grady (United States), and Jack Rychik (United States)
The Fetal Heart Society collaborated with the 8th WCPCCS organizers to create sessions that encompassed basics to advanced fetal imaging topics. Challenges in Counseling, including palliative care and ethics of nonintervention in fetal perinatal management, were discussed by an expert faculty panel. Other topics included the impact of fetal CHD on organ and brain development, timing of delivery, and optimizing outcomes with the use of multimodality for imaging, presented by an international faculty. Hot topics covered advances in fetal diagnostics, gene therapy, oxygen therapy, AI, artificial placenta, and fetal interventions. The Neonatal Heart Society presented a session on perinatal management of congenital diaphragmatic hernia and endotracheal occlusion. Other topics included conveyance and compassion.
Take‐home point(s): Fetal cardiology's scope of care management has evolved beyond the early diagnosis of CHD with ultrasound to the incorporation of AI, multimodality imaging, counseling, and transformative research using an artificial placenta model. The evolution of current practice and research aims to decrease morbidity, support parental mental health, and improve postnatal neurodevelopmental outcomes.

## Global Cardiac Health/RHD, Chaired by Christoper Hugo‐Hamman (South Africa), David Overman (United States), Craig Sable (United States), and Bistra Zheleva (United States)
The RHD sessions blended well with global cardiac health as well as advocacy sessions. All sessions were so well attended that the usual venue spaces were often too small, and participants struggled to choose between sessions. A major highlight was the grand debates in RHD; these were not only incredibly entertaining but also challenging and well thought out. The topics were Let's Put Our Eggs in One Basket and Invest in a Strep A Vaccine, Echocardiographic Screening Is the Best Tool We Have to Reduce Global RHD Morbidity, and Mortality, and Improved Tertiary Care for RHD Is the Best Approach to Save Lives. Issues that were raised across these 3 debates were sociopolitical and environmental determinants of health, vaccine hesitancy, agency of people living with RHD in low‐ and middle‐income countries, and cost‐effectiveness analyses to determine interventions. It was standing room only, and exciting to hear the combination of hard science within the complex health systems landscape presented in a debate format. The abstract session and the dragon den sessions were also well attended, and new data about acute rheumatic fever and registries were presented. Finally, there were extremely interesting talks on correlates of protection, proteomic signatures, streptococcal serology, and the new World Heart Federation criteria, which were then published at the end of 2023.
Take‐home point(s): RHD has long been an exemplar of the difficult issues facing children living in low‐ and middle‐income countries. This section of the 8th WCPCCS encompassed pertinent problems in global cardiac health while showcasing bench‐to‐bedside community science and implementation strategies. It is a moral and ethical imperative to ensure that no child with heart disease is left behind.

## Heart Failure/Transplant/VAD, Chaired by Daphne Hsu (United States), William Mahle (United States), Davia Morales (United States), and Joseph Rossano (United States)
The Pediatric Heart Transplant Society sponsored events on optimizing cardiac donors. Sessions also included topics on heart failure and transplant across the lifespan in CHD. These sessions included case presentations followed by debates on whether to place a VAD in a newborn with HLHS, moderate tricuspid valve regurgitation, and severely depressed ventricular function. Additional topics presented included how to approach medical management of heart failure across the lifespan, mechanical support for the Fontan circulation, and approach to heart failure and transplant in resource‐limited areas. Other topics included multiorgan transplant in CHD, current and future anticoagulation strategies for pediatric VADs, and the importance of medical therapy trials. An additional case presentation included that of an infant with dilated cardiomyopathy and heart failure, followed by a discussion of what heart failure therapies to choose, biomarkers to use to predict outcomes, and surgical outcomes options. A final case was that of an 8‐year‐old child with restrictive cardiomyopathy. This case presentation was followed by a discussion of medical and surgical management options for restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Hot topics in cardiac transplantation included waitlist strategies to ensure success after transplant, new approaches to immunosuppression beyond calcineurin inhibitors, cell‐free DNA use in place of biopsy, controversies in diagnosis and treatment of cardiac allograft vasculopathy, management of acute and chronic antibody‐mediated rejection, transplantation after single ventricle surgery, and end‐stage care for the transplanted patient.
Take‐home point(s): Management of heart failure across the lifespan, mechanical support for the patient with Fontan mechanical support, newer approaches for monitoring for rejection, and discussions on VAD placement/management were all important topics discussed during the 8th WCPCCS.

## Multimodal Imaging, Chaired by Shelby Kutty (United States), Andrew Taylor (United Kingdom), and Israel Valverde (Spain)
Various imaging tracks formed a portion of the 8th WCPCCS, including multimodal (cross‐sectional) imaging, echocardiography, multidimensional anatomy laboratory, and imaging‐focused preconference workshops. The multimodal imaging track focused on 6 clinical conditions where cross‐sectional imaging is most clinically useful in the care of CHD. Those 6 conditions included aortic coarctation, TOF, single ventricle, double‐outlet right ventricle and transposition, valvular heart disease, and coronary arteries. For example, various aspects of aortic coarctation imaging were discussed, covering fetal cardiovascular magnetic resonance, computational flow dynamics, and finite element analysis. In the tetralogy session, there were lectures on imaging predictors for survival and what is next after right ventricular volume assessment by magnetic resonance imaging. How imaging has improved the anatomic knowledge of double outlet right ventricles, atrioventricular valve surgical planning, structural interventions, and coronary artery problems were also covered. The echocardiography track included case‐based lectures on the clinical presentation and outcomes of unusual variants of complex congenital hearts. There was a noteworthy session on the history of pediatric echocardiography including where it started and where it is going. There was also a new and emerging echocardiographic modalities session that reviewed some of the latest technology including high frame rate imaging, fusion imaging, artificial intelligence applications, intracardiac flow imaging, and myocardial work.
Take‐home point(s): Advanced multimodal imaging techniques and echocardiography are critical for diagnosing and managing complex CHD. The 8th WCPCCS emphasized the latest technological advancements and their impact on clinical outcomes.

## Neurodevelopment, Chaired by Frank Casey (Ireland), Bradley Marino (United States), and Jacqueline Sanz (United States)
For the first time, a neurodevelopment track was embedded within the WCPCCS, reflecting increasing awareness that successful care for CHD requires optimizing neurodevelopment. This track was planned in collaboration with the Cardiac Neurodevelopmental Outcome Collaborative and began with a preconference workshop, including sessions on neurodevelopmental risk, neuroprotection, and intervention across the lifespan. Experts debated hot topics such as the extent to which neurodevelopmental disorders can be modified through intervention and the role of neuroimaging. Throughout the week, joint sessions with multiple tracks addressed state‐of‐the‐art cardiac neurodevelopment, global perspectives on neurodevelopmental care, and cross‐cutting topics, including fetal and neonatal brain development and the effects of pain, analgesia, and sedation on the brain. The highly awaited plenary session featured results from the Cardiac Neurodevelopmental Outcome Collaborative clinical registry on predictors of attendance for neurodevelopmental evaluation and culminated in a lecture by Cheryl Brosig Soto, winner of the 2023 Newburger‐Bellinger Cardiac Neurodevelopmental Award, titled Caring for Our Patients, Ourselves, and Each Other: Reflections From a Parent–Provider. The top oral abstract in neurodevelopment, titled Language Brain Responses and Neurodevelopmental Outcome in Preschoolers With CHD: An functional near‐infrared spectroscopy Study, was presented in the Best Abstract Competition by doctoral student Sarah Provost and received the bronze medal.
Take‐home point(s): Sessions throughout the track highlighted that neurodevelopmental care is a central component of medical care for patients with CHD and reviewed not only the current standards of neurodevelopmental monitoring but also a push toward prevention, intervention strategies, and global application of current knowledge.

## Nursing, Chaired by Kathryn Dodds (United States), Cecilia St. George Hyslop (Canada), and Sandra Staveski (United States)
The nursing program included a 2‐day Nursing CHD Academy and a 5‐day World Congress Nursing Track with 2 oral abstract sessions for nursing science and nursing clinical inquiry. The unique and comprehensive 2‐day Nursing CHD Academy focused on the spectrum of CHD, from simple to complex, from presentation in the neonate to those presenting at older ages, from the operating room to the intensive care unit, and home. The Nursing CHD Academy provided a primer on cardiac nomenclature and the building blocks of CHD with in‐depth reviews on multiple forms of CHD, presentations of surgical repairs and the expected postoperative course, and discussions of longer‐term outcomes, including neurodevelopmental outcomes, nutrition and growth, post‐intensive care syndrome, emotional health, and transition to adult care. Last, attendees were able to participate in a hands‐on multidimensional cardiac anatomy laboratory. One hundred sixty‐four nurses attended the Nursing CHD Academy. The World Congress Nursing Track spanned 5 days with 5 nursing sessions, including Building Resilience in Patients, Families, and Ourselves, Provision of Nursing Care for CHD Patients Across the Lifespan, Improving Outcomes and Care, Conversations With Our Nursing Giants, and Challenging Cases From Around the World. The Nursing Track also included 2 oral abstract sessions, a session for nursing science abstracts, and a session for nursing clinical inquiry. Over 800 nurses from >34 countries attended the 8th WCPCCS, the largest gathering of pediatric cardiac nurses ever.
Take‐home point(s): The nursing sessions underscored the importance of comprehensive education and multidisciplinary collaboration in managing CHD, covering a wide range of conditions and focusing on both clinical and holistic care aspects to improve patient outcomes across their lifespan.

## Outpatient Cardiology, Chaired by Carissa Baker‐Smith (United States)
There were 2 preventive cardiology sessions. These sessions focused on pediatric cardio‐oncology, including epidemiology, screening, prevention and treatment, the importance of psychological counseling in prevention for cardiac patients, metabolic syndrome bridging the gap from childhood to adulthood, presentations titled Creating a Metabolic Signature for CHD Patients, Telehealth Is the New Answer to Preventing Premature Atherosclerotic Disease, Health Behavior, Healthy Eating and the Need to Treat the Family, and a final presentation titled Rationale and the Creation of Best Practices for Pediatric Cardiology Prevention Programs. The final presentation highlighted a recent publication that summarized survey data from pediatric cardiology division directors and pediatric preventive cardiology clinicians across the United States and Canada, and described the current landscape and perspectives for future directions in the field of pediatric preventive cardiology. 

Take‐home point(s): Outpatient preventive cardiology care benefits from a multispecialty perspective for achieving best practices for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease prevention beginning in children and adolescents. The topics presented during the 8th WCPCCS covered a broad range of topics from telehealth to psychological counseling and nutrition to dietary interventions.

## Perfusion, Chaired by Moly Oldeen (United States), Jim Reagor (United States), and Tami Rosenthal (United States)
Topics included strategies to minimize blood usage, ECMO transport, the quest for the perfect cardiopulmonary bypass prime, establishing an ECMO program, and perfusion considerations for the patient with complex ACHD. Attendees were informed of the American Society of Extracorporeal Technology Standards and Guidelines. Cases included a discussion of the perfusion technique for an 800 g premature neonate undergoing an arterial switch operation for TGA. Additional sessions addressed current topics in pediatric perfusion practice worldwide.
Take‐home point(s): The Pediatric Perfusion Track of the 8th WCPCCS 2023 included a wide range of current perfusion topics, including blood management techniques as well as discussions on the perfect cardiopulmonary bypass prime. Attendees gained an in‐depth understanding of the current American Society of Extracorporeal Technology standards and guidelines. Establishing an ECMO program and a session for discussion about current topics in pediatric perfusion practice worldwide was included.

## Pulmonary Hypertension, Chaired by Jeffery Fineman (United States) and Dunbar Ivy (United States)
Pulmonary hypertension presentations encompassed assessment and management from the neonatal period through adulthood, including during pregnancy. Nuances of management in the setting of shunts, pulmonary parenchymal disease, pulmonary vein stenosis, and borderline ventricles were presented. Presentations focused on lessons learned from registries, prognostic markers, and genetics. The role of pulmonary artery biopsies in echocardiography and catheterization in diagnosis and management was discussed, as were challenges in management with anesthesia, surgical planning, and global perspectives from other countries with diverse resources.
Take‐home point(s): Pulmonary hypertension management is rapidly evolving and remains challenging secondary to the heterogeneity of predisposing factors, modalities for detection, risk stratification, and therapeutics. The importance of collaborative research and learning incorporating a global contextual perspective is the call of the hour.

## Quality Improvement, Chaired by Jeffrey Anderson (United States), Katie Bates (United States), and Krishna Kumar (India)
The Quality Improvement (QI) sessions organized by track chairs Jeffrey Anderson (United States), Katie Bates (United States), and Krishna Kumar (India) were instrumental in the comprehensive exploration of strategies and initiatives aimed at enhancing health care standards and patient outcomes in pediatric cardiac care.
The sessions began with an emphasis on interdisciplinary excellence in heart center teams, highlighting the important roles of advanced practice providers, nursing staff, trainees, and junior faculty in driving operational and clinical excellence. The importance of mitigating the fears and stressors among trainees and junior faculty and investing in nursing to improve patient outcomes were also discussed. Other discussions included opportunities for improvement, with an emphasis on learning from mistakes and fostering a culture of continuous enhancement.
A key highlight of the Congress was the global perspective on QI, with discussions on challenges and solutions applicable across diverse health care settings and economic regions. Sessions showcased the impact of QI initiatives in catheterization laboratories, cardiac intensive care units, and collaboratives such as the National Pediatric Cardiology Quality Improvement Collaborative, underscoring the value of interdisciplinary collaboration and data‐driven approaches in optimizing patient care.
Beyond the clinical aspects of QI, sessions also explored transparency and patient‐centered QI initiatives, focusing on shared decision‐making, enhancing communication, and patient satisfaction. Emphasis was made on strategies for engaging patients and families as partners in care, recognizing that their invaluable perspectives are important in QI efforts.
Take‐home point(s): The QI sessions highlighted the critical role of interdisciplinary collaboration, continuous learning, and patient‐centered approaches in enhancing pediatric cardiac care, showcasing global strategies and data‐driven initiatives to optimize health care standards and patient outcomes.

## Specialty Topics, African Society for Pediatric and Congenital Heart Surgery Global Initiatives Session, Mobassaleh Symposium, and Landmark Lectures
The 8th WCPCCS also included various cross‐cutting sessions, including topics related to the importance of diversity in the workforce: The Gender Gap in Cardiothoracic Surgery and The “Only” in the Room. In this session, a physician from Nigeria and the first in her family to become a physician spoke about the unforgiven debt and the challenges of being a woman, immigrant, and Black pediatric cardiologist in the United States.
Additionally, the 8th WCPCCS provided several specialty topic sessions. One such example was the African Society for Pediatric and Congenital Heart Surgery Global Initiatives session. Although this session was late in the afternoon; it was well attended by delegates both from the continent and globally. The first lecture on the status of pediatric and congenital heart care in Africa was given by Liesl Zühlke, on behalf of a collaborative of the African Society for Pediatric and Congenital Heart Surgery, Pan African Society of Cardiology (PASCAR), Children's Heart Link (CHL), and International Quality Improvement Collaborative, the findings of a survey which, based on the infrastructural survey of the International Quality Improvement Collaborative, presented the collected responses from >42 countries in Africa and >116 respondents. Although it did identify several significant gaps, especially related to cardiac surgery, it also noted major improvements in terms of diagnostics and cardiology services throughout the continent. The session then focused on the impact of foreign missions on local team building and considered new mechanisms to ensure local capacity development, ensure independent programs, and facilitate technology transfer. This was followed by a deep discussion on pursuing fellowship training in Africa and a sharing of programs across the continent. There was enthusiastic and passionate audience participation, which made this an exciting session, hopefully resulting in practical applications in the future.
The Mobassaleh Symposium, an embedded symposium within the World Congress, featured presentations on primary electrical disease, risk stratification, and therapy, including genetic testing to aid in diagnosis and risk. Additional topics included exercise testing to aid in risk analysis and treatment consideration. There were sessions on individualized medicine for the patient with long‐QT syndrome, provocative testing, and therapy consideration for patients with Brugada syndrome, a discussion of advances in catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, and idiopathic ventricular fibrillation management. Cases on cardiac arrest and primary cardiomyopathies were presented. There was also an internationally lead review of CHD screening programs with presenters from Italy, United States, Israel, Pakistan, Argentina, China, and New Zealand; the genetics of channelopathies, including a reappraisal of the long‐QT syndrome, short‐QT syndrome, and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia genes, Brugada syndrome genes, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy genes, followed by a review of the polygenic cause of inherited arrhythmia syndromes.
Sixteen Plenary Session Landmark Lectures took place during the 8th WCPCCS:
Eighth Aldo R. Castaneda Lecture of the World Society for Pediatric and Congenital Heart Surgery: Chasing Excellence–Peak Performance of Quarterbacks, Pilots, and Surgeons
Looking to Our Past to Plan the Future
The Top 5 Papers of 2033: A Landmark Year for Heart Research
Integrating Psychology Within ACHD Programs: The Time Is Now
Lessons Learned From Multicenter Collaborative Studies
Leadership Insights to Create a More Inclusive Work Environment
Centralization, Team Building, and Technical Innovation to Achieve Better Results in the Future
The Long Road to Life‐Saving Therapy: Catheter Ablation for Cardiac Arrhythmias
Developing Pediatric Cardiac Treatment Services in Low‐Income Countries: Who Has What Roles?
Equity for All: It Is Time for a Population Health Approach to Pediatric and Congenital Heart Disease
The Great Orchestra of the Christmas Charity Fund: Thirty Years of Saving Children's Lives in Poland
Pediatric Cardiac Anesthesiologists: An Endangered Species
Final Common Pathways Associated With Cardiomyopathies and Arrhythmia
Learning From History (So We Are Not Doomed to Repeat It)
A Change of Heart: From Genetics of Congenital Heart Disease to New Therapeutics
Weaving Health Care for the Forgotten Ones in Macondo
Take‐home point(s): The specialist topics and society presentations were well attended. The presentations were of global relevance and included courageous conversations on emotive topics in our field, deep discussions on the provision of pediatric cardiac care in underresourced regions, and scintillating sessions on cutting‐edge approaches to conundrums in electrophysiology. These conversations continue to impact our field and our practice and hopefully improve policies in the area.

## Anatomy Sessions: The Multidimensional Anatomy Laboratory
The 8th WCPCCS featured The Multidimensional Anatomy Laboratory. This is a track that showcased all of the newest technology for imaging, including 3D modeling, virtual reality, and vintage heart specimens from the largest registries around the world. The anatomy laboratory faculty presented complex cases with various imaging modalities and discussed ways to improve perception and comprehension of the clinical environment. The multidimensional anatomy laboratory consisted of 2 series of lectures. The first was a cardiac anatomy lecture series, and the second was an advanced imaging/simulation lecture series. The cardiac anatomy lecture series comprised formal heart specimen demonstrations, imaging correlation, informal hands‐on with specimens, and virtual reality anatomy experience. Septal defects, conotruncal defects, atrial appendage isomerism, and normal and abnormal conduction systems were covered in the lecture series. The virtual reality anatomy experience was simultaneous during the hands‐on with heart specimens, with both occurring after the formal specimen demonstration and imaging correlation. The advanced imaging/simulation lecture series focused on practical aspects of how to incorporate new technology into clinical imaging and surgical programs. For example, the lectures discussed how to use 3D echo for managing CHD, personalized presurgical planning for aortic valve‐sparing operations, intraoperative electrophysiologic mapping, and pathways to increase access and adoption of 3D modeling technologies worldwide. The lectures were followed by the industry‐involved table experience to help the attendees explore each technology under expert guidance.
Take‐home point(s): Anatomy sessions during the 8th WCPCCS combined detailed anatomy instruction using heart specimens with imaging and with a virtual reality anatomy experience. These sessions were well attended and well received.

## Abstracts, Posters, and Awards at the 8th WCPCCS

The 8th WCPCCS received a record number of abstract submissions, with nearly 2800 posters across 17 scientific tracks presented in the exhibit hall over 3 days ( ). Each day there were >900 posters. These posters represented work from 104 unique countries, a true World Congress, and were a wonderful representation of the diversity of attendees. From the submitted abstracts for each scientific track, 9 were selected for oral presentation, of which 1 was then selected for re‐presentation in the final Best of the Best abstract competition. The first prize was awarded to Andrii V. Maksymenko for his abstract, Ukrainian Children's Cardiac Center Safekeeping During Martial Law. The second prize was awarded to Joselyn Rwebembera of the Uganda Heart Institute and her team for their abstract, The Echocardiographic Diagnosis of Rheumatic Heart Disease: A Review of the Performance of the World Heart Federation Criteria, 2012–2022. The third prize was awarded to Sarah Provost from Montreal, Canada, and her team for their abstract, Language Brain Responses and Neurodevelopmental Outcome in Preschoolers With Congenital Heart Disease: An fNIRS Study. The posters and oral abstracts created a venue for interdisciplinary and international scientific dialogue and provided the opportunity for future collaborations.
Take‐home point(s): The 8th WCPCCS served as an international scientific repository for novel abstracts aimed at improving the care of children with acquired CHD. The volume of abstracts exceeded that of any previous conference specifically dedicated to pediatric cardiology or cardiac surgery.

## CONCLUSIONS
The 8th WCPCCS was an exciting 6 days of expert presentations, science, and discovery, inclusive of international leadership in a variety of subspecialties. The knowledge shared and scientific sessions such as the 8th WCPCCS will further enhance efforts to improve the care of children and adolescents with congenital and acquired heart disease and adults with CHD.

## Next Meeting, Upcoming 9th World Congress
The 9th WCPCCS (Chair Yiu‐Fai Cheung [China] and Co‐Chair Nicholson Yam [United States]) will be held from December 7 to 12, 2025, in Hong Kong, China, with the scientific program represented by the 5 I's: interdisciplinary, interactive, innovative, inspiring, and intense. Leaders in the field from all parts of the world will join efforts to develop an exciting program. There will be 18 tracks with defined course content, including pre‐Congress symposia, abstract presentations, subspecialty sessions, interdisciplinary meetings, debates, late‐breaking/thought‐provoking sessions, and opening and closing plenary sessions. Special topics include artificial intelligence and augmented reality, digital health and big data, innovative therapies from genes to cells, personalized cardiac care, and rare diseases. The program track committees were formed in February 2024. The draft program sessions were submitted to the Scientific Committee by June 30, 2024, and the sessions (titles, chairs, speakers, topics) were confirmed by August 31, 2024. Abstract submission for the Congress opened December 2, 2024.

## Sources of Funding
None.

## Disclosures
Dr. Baker‐Smith reports funding from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS), research funding support from Regeneron, and Medscape speaker fees.

## Acknowledgments
Although we were unable to include each faculty member and contributor by name in this review, this is in no way a reflection of each contributor's time, effort, or talent. The names and contributions of each faculty member, speaker, and contributor can be found at https://www.wcpccs2023.org/event.

This article was sent to Daniel E. Clark, MD, MPH, Assistant Editor, for review by expert referees, editorial decision, and final disposition.
All abstracts published in conjunction with the World Congress of Pediatric Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery can be found online here: https://wcpccs2023.org/abstract‐poster‐presentation.
For Sources of Funding and Disclosures, see page 12.

## References