pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosoneplosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC12970916PMC12970916.112970916129709164180196810.1371/journal.pone.0326551PONE-D-25-293301Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Care ProvidersBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesDNA virusesPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyMedical MicrobiologyMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusMedicine and Health SciencesPathology and Laboratory MedicinePathogensMicrobial PathogensViral PathogensPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusBiology and Life SciencesOrganismsVirusesViral PathogensPapillomavirusesHuman PapillomavirusMedicine and Health SciencesHealth CareHealth Care PolicyScreening GuidelinesBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyReproductive SystemGenital AnatomyCervixMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyReproductive SystemGenital AnatomyCervixResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch DesignSurvey ResearchSurveysMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthHealth ScreeningPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsProfessionsMedical PersonnelPeople and PlacesGeographical LocationsOceaniaAustraliaExperiences of HPV self-collection among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix
HPV self-collection among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervixhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2114-1577MitchellLouise E.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing PhillipsEmilyConceptualizationData curationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – review & editing JennettChloe J.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7981-7878BavorClaireConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – review & editing SaundersTessaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesWriting – review & editing NightingaleClaireConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – review & editing SmithMegan A.ConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – review & editing WhopLisa J.ConceptualizationFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing on behalf of Screen Your Way Investigator Team 1
Yardhura Walani, National Centre for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Wellbeing Research, Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia2
Sydney School of Public Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia3
Evaluation and Implementation Science Unit, Centre for Health Policy, Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaNair-ShallikerVisaliniEditor , ]. Australia offers both primary and secondary prevention programs: a school-based human papillomavirus (HPV) immunisation program and primary HPV screening through the National Cervical Screening Program (NCSP). As a consequence of these programs, Australia will potentially become the first country to actively eliminate cervical cancer as a public health problem [ , ]. However, inequities remain and without targeted efforts, elimination may not include Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix [ ]. Cervical cancer burden among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix remains unacceptably high, with age-adjusted incidence rates 2.1 times higher (2016–2020) and mortality rates 2.8 times higher (2018–2022) compared to non-Indigenous individuals [ ].
The HPV vaccine has been available since 2007, initially targeting girls aged 12–13 and expanding to include boys in 2013. The program transitioned from a three-dose quadrivalent vaccine to a two-dose nonavalent schedule in 2018, and in 2023, adopted a single-dose based on evidence of one-dose efficacy [ , ]. While HPV vaccination rates among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adolescents peaked in 2020, they have since declined, with 2023 data showing 80.9% of girls and 75.0% of boys were vaccinated before age 15 [ ]. The shift to a one-dose schedule aims to support more equitable vaccine coverage.
In December 2017, the NCSP transitioned from cytology-based (Pap test) to HPV DNA-based screening, inviting women and people with a cervix aged 25–74 years to undertake a cervical screening test every five years. In 2023, among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people aged 25–74, HPV 16/18 was detected in 2.2% of tests and other oncogenic HPV types in 9.3%. Those eligible for HPV vaccination (born after 30 June 1980) had lower positivity for HPV 16/18 (1.6%) but higher rates for other oncogenic types (13.7%), compared to those not offered vaccination (born on or before 30 June 1980), who had 2.7% and 5.2% positivity respectively. These patterns reflect the vaccine’s targeted protection against HPV 16/18 and the higher prevalence of HPV in younger, vaccinated age groups [ ].
The transition to primary HPV testing also allowed for the introduction of HPV self-collection, which allows women and people with a cervix to collect a vaginal screening sample using a flocked swab to be tested for HPV. Initially, self-collection was thought to be less sensitive than clinician-collection, so it was limited to individuals aged over 30 years who were two or more years overdue or never-screened, and declined clinician testing [ ]. These restrictions led to low uptake and poor awareness among both clinicians and those eligible for screening [ ]. The number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to have used self-collection under this model is unknown.
In July 2022, based on strong evidence of the equivalent sensitivity between self-collection and clinician-collection, and modelling suggesting benefits from improved participation would outweigh any feasible loss in sensitivity [ ], Australia updated its policy to expand eligibility for self-collection to include anyone eligible for cervical screening within the context of a practitioner-supported model of care (referred to as ‘universal access’). [ , ]. This change aimed to improve access in practice to self-collection, and thereby remove barriers to cervical screening participation and reduce inequities in cervical cancer incidence and mortality [ ]. However, it is unknown to what extent this choice is being offered as a result of the policy change. Research has demonstrated initially slow implementation with variable knowledge and adoption among the primary care workforce resulting in inconsistent promotion of self-collection [ ].
Universal access to self-collection provides an opportunity to address screening inequities among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix. However, it must not be implemented in isolation. Without addressing systemic issues, such as racism, access to culturally safe care, and the ongoing impacts of colonisation, inequities in cervical screening participation will persist. While NCSP data is not yet available for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix who have used self-collection, research suggests it is highly acceptable. By offering increased privacy, comfort, convenience and autonomy, self-collection has the potential to increase cervical screening participation [ – ]. It remains uncertain whether Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander screening participants are adequately informed about self-collection as a choice for cervical screening, or what their experience has been in accessing self-collection since the implementation of universal access.
This study aimed to understand the screening practices of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix and explore the experiences of recently screened participants since the policy change to introduce universal access to HPV self-collection (i.e., since July 2022).

## Materials and methods

## Positionality
This work is led by a research team with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander lived experience (LJW, EP), Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander leadership in public health (LJW, EP), epidemiology (LM, LJW, MAS), experience working in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health (LM, LJW, EP) and extensive experience in cervical cancer prevention (all authors).

## Governance
Cultural governance is monitored by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Reference Group, Thiitu Tharrmay, at the Australian National University. Thiitu Tharrmay in Ngiyampaa language translates as ‘to share/exchange knowledge’. An Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Project Caucus comprised of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Chief and Associate Investigators provided over-arching project governance to ensure that the project is culturally safe and meets the needs and priorities of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and communities.

## Ethics approval
Ethics approval was obtained from the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies Research Ethics Committee (REC-0209) and ACON (RERC 202404), and was ratified by The Australian National University (H/2023/1434) and the University of Melbourne (2023-28454-47328-1) Human Research Ethics Committees. Individual consent was obtained from all study participants.

## Survey development
An electronic survey was designed containing questions about awareness and experience of, and future preferences for, self-collection cervical screening. The survey was designed to capture sociodemographic variables (including Indigenous status, age, sex, gender, sexuality, highest level of education, and postcode) and comprehensive feedback on cervical screening practices and preferences. For respondents who had recently screened (i.e., since July 2022), questions asked about their experience at their most recent screen, including if they were offered the choice of self-collection, how they chose to screen, and were they given sufficient information to support their choice. Questions were primarily multiple-choice questions to ensure ease of response and consistency in data collection; however, free text fields were included to capture any specific reasons or additional comments. Questions were informed by the COM-B system for behaviour change [ ] and Theoretical Domains Framework [ ]. The participant information and consent forms and survey were pilot tested by both non-Indigenous and Indigenous peoples, including a non-Indigenous consumer advisory group. The survey was hosted on Qualtrics and took approximately 10–15 minutes to complete.

## Recruitment
Participants were recruited to the study through multiple channels, including a paid Meta campaign via the Cancer Council Australia Instagram and Facebook page, targeted promotion through peak Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Community Organisations, and through local stakeholder groups, social media, websites, newsletters, and hard-copy flyers. Recruitment was open between December 2023 and April 2024. Participants accessed the survey through an anonymous link and received a plain language statement. Informed consent was obtained from all participants. Participants were not remunerated for their time but at the completion of the survey, participants were invited to enter a draw to win a voucher valued at AUD$100. To maintain confidentiality, one study team member (CJ) managed a separate database for the voucher draw, ensuring that survey responses remained independent from participant contact details; 12 vouchers were available exclusively for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander participants. Random selection function was used in Excel for the prize draw. The prize draw was completed within 1 month from the final dataset being downloaded, and participant contact details were deleted following this.

## Participants
In total, 11,311 people consented to the survey, of which 677 identified as Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander. Of these, 2 people were aged <24 or >74, 19 whose sex was not recorded female at birth, and 21 who answered no/unsure to having a cervix were ineligible and therefore excluded. A review of data quality, informed by published studies [ , ] and data available to the investigators from the Qualtrics platform, for identifying potentially fraudulent responses was undertaken. We excluded surveys less than 40% complete (i.e., did not reach key questions on outcome variables) or completed in <120 seconds. We then undertook manual review of surveys utilising Qualtrics fraud detection data; ReCaptca score of <0.5 and Fraud ID > 30, and groups of >5 survey which were submitted within a 1-minute window, which identified 191 responses. The manual process involved review of key free text fields (where did you hear about this survey [asked twice], qualitative response questions, and email address), some of which were specifically included to help identify fraudulent responses. Two co-authors undertook the manual process, and 80 responses were excluded on consensus (EP and CJ). This analysis reports on the 555 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who were eligible for the study. Results for non-Indigenous participants will be reported separately. This process is outlined in .
 

## Data analysis
Data analysis was conducted according to Indigenous data sovereignty principles [ ] and directed by previously established Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Governance processes at Yardhura Walani. The analysis was grounded within Rigney’s Indigenist research approach [ ]. This means ensuring that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples lead, shape, and benefit from how data are collected, interpreted, and used. Data remains the property of participants, with the research team as its custodians.
Research questions included: were participants offered a choice of collection methods at their most recent screen? If so, what method did they choose and why? If they chose to complete their own self-collection, did they feel they had sufficient information to support their decision?
Participants were categorised as recently screened if they responded “Within the last year (on or after July 2022)” (i.e., after the policy change) to the question “Do you remember when your last cervical screening test was?” (n = 261); previously screened if they responded “More than a year ago (before July 2022)” (n = 215), or never screened (n = 79) if they had never had a screen (n = 17), never heard of cervical screen (n = 1) or could not remember participating in cervical screening (n = 61). Postcode was used to classify the participant’s place of residence by geographic remoteness using Australian Statistical Geography Standard Remoteness Structure derived from Accessibility/Remoteness Index of Australia Plus (ARIA+) [ ] grouped into categories of Major City, Regional (comprising Inner Regional, Outer Regional) and Remote (comprising Remote, and Very Remote) due to participant distribution, and area-level relative disadvantage using Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) Index of Relative Socioeconomic Disadvantage 2021 [ ]. Summary data are provided as number of observations (n) and percentage (%). Data was analysed in STATA v18 (StataCorp, Texas, USA).

## Results

## Participants
A total of 555 screen eligible Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix were included in the analysis. Participants predominantly identified as Aboriginal (87%), female (99%) and heterosexual (90%; ). Almost half of the participants were aged 25–34 years of age (n = 239, 44%), had tertiary qualifications (n = 254, 50%), and lived in a major city (n = 224, 56%). The majority of survey participants had screened previously, either before (n = 215, 39%) or after (n = 261, 47%) the policy change to offer universal access to self-collection. A smaller proportion of participants (14%, n = 79) had never screened. When asked to select from reasons for not screening, participants most commonly indicated being scared (n = 9, 11%), feeling embarrassed or shame (n = 7, 9%), or not wanting to be touched by a healthcare provider (n = 7, 9%).
 

## Screening practices
Among participants who had previously participated in screening, 42% (n = 201) indicated that they usually screened around the time they were due, approximately one-third (n = 158, 33%) said sometimes left it a bit too long between screens, and 25% (n = 115) reported having had one previous screen ( ). Of the 115 who had only screened once, 5 were aged 24 years and 28 were aged 25–29 years and therefore up to date. Participants most commonly accessed cervical screening at a doctor’s clinic, or another clinic setting such as family planning or a women’s clinic ( ). Around 13% of participants indicated usually screening at an Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation or Aboriginal Medical Service. When asked what prompted participants to get a cervical screening test, the most frequently identified reason was having gone to the healthcare provider for another reason and being reminded (n = 130, 27%), highlighting the importance of opportunistic screening. Other prompts included receiving a reminder (such as a letter or SMS) from their usual clinic (n = 110, 23%), or remembering they were due for screening (n = 109, 23%). Reminder based prompts were frequently cited for those who screened around when due, with 33% (n = 66) citing a reminder from their usual clinic and 27% (n = 55) remembering they were due. In contrast, participants who reported ‘leaving it a bit too long’ or had only screened once most frequently cited being reminded by their healthcare provider during a visit for another issue (n = 51, 32% and n = 30, 26%). Many also reported screening because they were worried about a symptom or health problem (n = 95, 20%). This was the most frequently cited reason for screening among those who had only screened once (n = 39, 34%).
 

## Experiences of recently screened participants
Participants who reported screening since the policy change recommending universal access to the option of self-collection were asked additional questions about their most recent experience. In total, 46% (n = 118) of recently screened participants, used HPV self-collection, either doing it themselves at home (n = 41, 35%) or at the clinic (n = 48, 41%), or assisted by a healthcare provider without a speculum (n = 29, 24%; ). Over half of recently screened participants reported having a clinician collected their sample with a speculum (n = 133, 51%).
 Among recently screened participants who described screening ‘around when due’, almost two-thirds reported using clinician-collection with a speculum at their last screen (n = 87, 65%), while 34% used self-collection (n = 46; ). In contrast, self-collection was more common among those who ‘left it a bit long’ (n = 47, 59%) or had only one previous screen (n = 25, 57%). Clinician-collection was reported by 40% (n = 32) and 32% (n = 14) in these groups respectively ( ).
Over half of respondents (n = 151, 58%) recalled being offered the choice of self-collection at their last screen ( ). Of those offered the choice, 67% chose to screen using self-collection (n = 101). A further 15 participants were not offered a choice and 2 who could not recall whether or not they had been offered a choice screened using self-collection.
The majority of participants who screened using clinician-collection (61%, n = 81) were not offered a choice of collection method. However 50 participants were offered a choice and elected to have a clinician-collected sample, and an additional two couldn’t remember.

## Reasons for collection method
Among the 89 participants who collected their own sample either at home or in the clinic, the most commonly reported reasons for so, whether offered a choice or not, were because it was less embarrassing (n = 49, 55%), they felt in control of their body (n = 34, 38%), and it was less scary (n = 27, 30%; ). Nearly half (n = 43, 49%) said they would have screened anyway if self-collection were not an option. However, 31% (n = 27) indicated they might have screened, and 20% (n = 18) reported they would not have screened without self-collection, highlighting the importance in supporting participation.
 Among those who chose self-collection assisted by a healthcare provider (i.e., without a speculum), the most commonly reported reasons for doing so was they wanted the health professional to have a look without a speculum and ensure everything was OK (n = 19, 66%) or they believed the provider would collect a better sample (n = 14, 48%).
For those who screened using a clinician-collected sample, the most commonly reported reasons included always having had it done by a healthcare provider (n = 66, 50%), wanting the healthcare provider to have a look (n = 25, 19%), or believing the healthcare provider would collect a better sample (n = 17; 13%; ). Of those who were not offered a choice who screened using clinician-collection, 40 were not told about self-collection (31%); ).

## Information to support the choice of self-collection
Participants who recently screened and collected their own sample at home or in the clinic (n = 89) were asked if they were given information to support their choice.
More than half of these participants recalled being provided the specific pieces of information needed to make an informed decision around self-collection, such as needing to return for a clinician-collected sample if HPV was found, that they could ask for assistance to collect the sample, or how they would receive test results ( ). Only 55% of participants felt they had enough information to choose between self-collection and clinician-collection methods.
 When asked about their agreement with statements regarding self-collection, most participants agreed that they understood how to collect their sample (70% agreement), that the test was accurate (69% agreement) and that self-collection was easy to do (66% agreement). Participants were less confident in their ability to correctly collect the sample (55% agreement), and 33% were worried having to return for a follow-up test ( ).
 

## Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine the experience of cervical screening among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix since the introduction of universal access to self-collection in July 2022. This change means that anyone who is eligible for cervical screening should be offered the choice of HPV testing on clinician-collected cervical sample or on a self-collected vaginal sample [ ]. Our survey was conducted between December 2023 and April 2024, almost 18 months after the policy shift. Among survey participants screened in this approximately 18-month period, 39% of participants reported they were not offered a choice. This is consistent with reports of implementation challenges experienced prior to universal access, including limited promotion, and lack of confidence in test accuracy, leading to low self-collection uptake [ , ]. The policy change to universal access, alongside improved provider education on updated clinical guidelines and more accredited pathology services had already driven a steady increase in use of self-collected tests prior to this study, from 1.2% of all tests immediately prior to universal access to 23.9% in Q3 2023 [ ]. This has continued to increase since then, reaching 45.96% of all tests in Q2 2025, after the commencement of a major national campaign in September 2024 that promoted awareness of the option to use self-collection and which was preceded by a range of promotion activities encouraging providers to be ready to offer self-collection [ , ].
Our findings indicate a higher proportion of self-collected samples than national population-wide statistics at the time of the survey with 46% of recently screened participants reporting using self-collection either in the clinic, at home, or assisted by a healthcare provider. Our findings also show that when offered a choice, 67% of participants chose self-collection. Participants selected this option as it was less embarrassing, scary and painful, let them feel in control of their body, and was more convenient. These findings are consistent with existing literature where self-collection is shown to promote privacy, bodily autonomy and control among Indigenous women and people with a cervix, in particular among those who would not normally participate in screening [ , , , ]. Interestingly, the majority of this group had previously screened and over 40% indicated they typically screened on time. Our results confirm that having a more positive screening experience by avoiding trauma, pain, discomfort and embarrassment are important factors for women and people with a cervix, even among those who typically screen. This is particularly important to consider for under- or never screened participants who indicated they chose not to screen because they were scared, felt embarrassed or shame, didn’t want to be touched by a healthcare provider. Research shows that cervical screening should be conducted in a way that empowers Indigenous women to feel in control of their bodies, health, and health decision-making [ ] and that the choice of self-collection for under- and never-screened Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix is integral to participation [ – , ]. Our research demonstrated that participants who screened “around when due” predominantly chose clinician-collection with a speculum suggesting comfort or familiarity with the traditional method. However, 34% reported “switching” to self-collection – consistent with national figures of 38% of people who screened switching from clinician-collection to self-collection [ ]. In contrast, those who “left it a bit long” were more likely to opt for self-collection or assisted self-collection without a speculum, indicating a preference for less invasive or more accessible options. This underscores the critical role of self-collection in enabling participation, particularly for those who may otherwise delay or avoid screening. Among those who had only one screen since the policy change, screening methods were more evenly distributed, reflecting varied uptake and possibly differing levels of awareness or access. Ensuring a positive first screening experience is a key factor in supporting ongoing participation in cervical screening programs [ ].
When asked about the information provided to support their decision to screen using self-collection, only 55% felt they had enough information to choose between collection methods. It is important to note that these responses occurred in a group of participants where almost half had tertiary qualifications and almost all were English-speaking. This highlights the role of healthcare providers in not only providing information but supporting clients to make an informed decision, and more broadly to the need to embed health literacy into systems and environments to support screening participants to access, understand and act upon health-related information [ ]. This is particularly important to consider in the case of cervical screening to support decision making around any follow-up tests that may be required. For example, almost half of our survey participants were aged 25−35 years of age and national statistics show relatively high rates of oncogenic HPV (not 16/18) detected in these age groups, particularly among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix [ ]. Guidelines reinforce that to support informed choice, any conversation with these participants should involve discussing the likelihood of follow-up tests, including explaining that those who test positive for non-16/18 HPV types on a self-collected sample may need to return for a clinician-collected sample for cytology [ ]. This information is important to ensure informed decision making around the collection method.
To our knowledge this is the first insight into the preferences, use and experiences of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix in relation to self-collection assisted by a healthcare provider (i.e., without a speculum). The most common reasons for doing so wanting an examination and a perception that the healthcare provider would take a better sample. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women have raised concerns in previous research that a clinician-collected test was more accurate and professional, and had expressed concerns around self-sampling incorrectly or hurting themselves [ ]. This reinforces the need to educate clients about the accuracy of self-collection and the need for only a low to mid vaginal swab [ , ]. Self-collection with the help of a trusted healthcare provider also offers an alternative for those who struggle with self-collection. While less than five participants in our sample indicated being unable to collect their sample as a reason for choosing this method, this possibly reflects the younger cohort with potentially fewer physical limitations. However, for women and people with a cervix who have physical limitations that may hinder their ability to self-collect, it is important that their healthcare provider offers them this choice and supports them in making the best decision for their individual needs.
In Australia, self-collection is offered via a practitioner-supported model of care. Our survey results support the role of the healthcare provider in the delivery of cervical screening, with most participants screening opportunistically due to being reminded by their healthcare provider, or in response to a reminder from their clinic. Maintaining the role of the healthcare provider, rather than mail-out models seen in other high-income countries, also helps address any perceived barriers to self-collection, such as concerns about collecting the sample correctly or its accuracy. Additionally, it ensures that follow-up care is appropriately managed if the test results are positive for HPV. This model maintains the critical role of healthcare providers in delivering comprehensive care and supports informed decision-making [ ]. Over half of participants lived in major cities, where access to primary care is generally easier. Despite this, participants in urban areas still face barriers such as cost, transport, caring and work commitments, and limited access to culturally safe care. These factors can significantly impact participation in cervical screening. For those in regional or remote areas, access is likely even more restricted, and alternative models may be needed to improve cervical screening uptake.
Just over half of recently screened participants reported having a clinician-collected sample (i.e., with a speculum) at their most recent cervical screening test. For some people under surveillance or those exhibiting symptoms a co-test is indicated, necessitating a clinician-collected sample. This fits with a small proportion of participants (6%) being told they were not eligible for self-collection. While the majority of participants who were screened using clinician-collected samples were not offered a choice of collection method (61%), some who were offered a choice elected to have a clinician-collected sample. This highlights the importance of offering screening participants a choice of collection methods, ensuring they are fully informed and supported in making the decision that best suits their needs. When asked why, participants indicated they chose a clinician-collected sample because they had always had it done by a healthcare provider, they wanted the healthcare provider to have a look, or they thought their healthcare provider would be able to collect a better sample. Providers can reassure their clients that genital inspection is not necessary in the absence of vulvovaginal symptoms or risk factors for vulvar disease [ ]. This reinforces the importance of empowering eligible clients to make an informed decision around collection methods. In doing so, this also honours the sovereign rights of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to govern health decisions.
Our findings – that is, that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander screening participants value the choice of collection methods and require support to make an informed decision – are potentially even more important for these groups who likely need greater information and support. These findings provide an important benchmark for a planned future survey using similar methodologies, that will be able to explore whether there have been changes as self-collection becomes more established practice and following the major national campaign. The ‘Own it!’ campaign was developed in partnership with the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation (NACCHO) and features Aboriginal and Torres Strait people who are a primary audience for the campaign, targeting both provider and participant focused education and awareness.

## Strengths and limitations
This survey successfully reached potential participants through a targeted social media recruitment campaign alongside traditional recruitment methods. Online surveys are inherently at risk of fraudulent responses by bots or individuals aiming to complete multiple survey responses to receive prize incentives. Our recruitment method aimed to minimise the risk of attracting bots using a paid meta campaign which specifically targeted Instagram and Facebook users based on age and geographical location and not mentioning the prize draw in the caption text of any social media posts. In our study, we implemented multiple layers of protection in our survey, including captchas and honeypot questions (imbedded in the survey using JavaScript, and only visible to bot responses), and undertook a method of data review to ensure data quality. Based on our experience of recruiting a large-scale online survey, a multi-pronged approach is required to control for fraudulent survey responses and maintain data integrity.
A key limitation of the study was that it was conducted exclusively online, which may have introduced bias by excluding individuals without reliable access to the internet or a computer. The sample has a higher proportion of participants aged 25–34 years compared to the total sampling frame (44% vs 35%), and fewer participants aged 65–74 years (1% vs 7%). Similarly, the sample over-represents those living in Major Cities (56% vs 41%) and under-represents those living in Very Remote areas (1% vs 11%) compared to the total sampling frame. This likely reflects the primary method used to recruit to the survey (online survey with advertisement via a Meta Campaign). Additional research using alternative methods is needed to engage with and understand the experience among populations in very remote areas or those experiencing digital exclusion.
Another limitation of the data is that participants’ cervical screening history was self-reported and collected from a non-probabilistic, convenience sample, meaning it may not be representative and cannot be verified against clinical records. This is particularly of note for individuals whose screening occurred several years ago, introducing differential recall bias potentially affecting the reliability of self-reported data. To strengthen the reliability of findings, program-level data on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander participation in cervical screening, with details on collection methods, is needed to understand the uptake nationally and support accurate monitoring of cervical screening.
Finally, this study did not seek to capture qualitative data exploring participants’ experiences with different screening methods. Additional research is required to understand the personal, cultural, or emotional factors that may influence choice.

## Conclusions
This study indicates a preference for self-collection among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix when offered a choice between clinician collected and self-collection. Findings also highlight the vital role of healthcare providers in the delivery of cervical screening, in particular supporting clients to confidently choose and complete self-collection. There is a significant opportunity to ensure all screen-eligible participants are aware of self-collection, are offered this option and can make an informed decision to participate in cervical screening, due to the national promotional campaign running during 2024–2025.

## Supporting information
S1 File

## Inclusivity in global research questionaire.
(DOCX)
S2 File

## Survey.
(PDF)

We wish to thank those who participated in the study. We acknowledge the assistance and guidance of the Screen Your Way Investigators, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Caucus as well as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander reference group Thiitu Tharrmay. Professor Lisa J Whop (Wagadagam, Gumulgal) from Yardhura Walani, Australian National University, (Lisa.Whop@anu.edu.au) is Principal Investigator of Screen Your Way. Chief Investigators are Associate Professor Julia Brotherton from the Centre for Health Policy, Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne; Professor Gail Garvey (Kamilaroi) from the First Nations Cancer & Wellbeing Research Program, The University of Queensland; Dr Tamara Butler (Undumbi) from both the Yardhura Walani, Australian National University and the First Nations Cancer & Wellbeing Research Program, The University of Queensland; Associate Professor Mark Wenitong (Kabi Kabi) from the School of Public Health, The University of Queensland; Associate Professor Megan Smith from the Sydney School of Public Health, The University of Sydney (Named Author); Associate Professor Claire Nightingale from the Centre for Health Policy, University of Melbourne (Named Author); Professor Marion Saville from the Australian Centre for Prevention of Cervical Cancer; Professor Rebecca Guy from the Kirby Institute, UNSW Sydney; and Professor Joan Cunningham from the Menzies School of Health Research, Charles Darwin University.
Associate Investigators include Claudette “Sissy” Tyson (Kuku Yalanji) from the Queensland Centre of Excellence in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Primary Health Care; Sonya Egert (Noonuccal Goenpul) from Inala Wangarra; Kristine Falzon (Gummeah, WandiWandian, Wodi Wodi, Walbunja) from Waminda South Coast Women’s Health and Wellbeing Aboriginal Corporation; Professor Bev Lawton (nō Ngāti Porou) from Te Tātai Hauora o Hine-National Centre for Women’s Health Research Aotearoa, Victoria University of Wellington; Professor Karen Canfell from the Sydney School of Public Health, The University of Sydney; Associate Professor Natalie Taylor from the School of Population Health, UNSW Sydney; and Dr Hamish McManus from the Kirby Institute, UNSW Sydney. We also thank Josephine Mondino, Cancer Council Australia, for providing support and advice for the Meta recruitment campaign. Ownership of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander knowledges and cultural heritage is retained by the informants.

## Abbreviations
CSTcervical screening test
HCPhealthcare provider
HPVHuman Papillomavirus
NCSPNational Cervical Screening Program
 10.1371/journal.pone.0326551.r001Decision Letter 0
Nair-ShallikerVisaliniAcademic Editor© 2026 Visalini Nair-Shalliker2026Visalini Nair-Shallikerhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
8 Sep 2025

Dear Dr. Mitchell,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 23 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Visalini Nair-Shalliker
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Please include a complete copy of PLOS’ questionnaire on inclusivity in global research in your revised manuscript. Our policy for research in this area aims to improve transparency in the reporting of research performed outside of researchers’ own country or community. The policy applies to researchers who have travelled to a different country to conduct research, research with Indigenous populations or their lands, and research on cultural artefacts. The questionnaire can also be requested at the journal’s discretion for any other submissions, even if these conditions are not met. Please find more information on the policy and a link to download a blank copy of the questionnaire here: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/best-practices-in-research-reporting. Please upload a completed version of your questionnaire as Supporting Information when you resubmit your manuscript.
3. Your ethics statement should only appear in the Methods section of your manuscript. If your ethics statement is written in any section besides the Methods, please delete it from any other section.
4. One of the noted authors is a group or consortium Chief Investigators: Brotherton, Garvey, Butler, Wenitong, Smith, Nightingale, Saville, Guy, Cunningham; Associate Investigators: Tyson, Egert, Falzon, Lawton, Canfell, Taylor, McManu. In addition to naming the author group, please list the individual authors and affiliations within this group in the acknowledgments section of your manuscript. Please also indicate clearly a lead author for this group along with a contact email address.
5. We note that you have indicated that there are restrictions to data sharing for this study. For studies involving human research participant data or other sensitive data, we encourage authors to share de-identified or anonymized data. However, when data cannot be publicly shared for ethical reasons, we allow authors to make their data sets available upon request. For information on unacceptable data access restrictions, please see http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-unacceptable-data-access-restrictions.
Before we proceed with your manuscript, please address the following prompts:
a) If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially identifying or sensitive patient information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., a Research Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board, etc.). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent.
b) If there are no restrictions, please upload the minimal anonymized data set necessary to replicate your study findings to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. Please see http://www.bmj.com/content/340/bmj.c181.long for guidelines on how to de-identify and prepare clinical data for publication. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories. You also have the option of uploading the data as Supporting Information files, but we would recommend depositing data directly to a data repository if possible.
Please update your Data Availability statement in the submission form accordingly.
6. In the online submission form, you indicated that Individual survey responses cannot be provided as participants did not consent to the public release. However, summarised findings with suppressed counts to maintain participant privacy may be shared upon reasonable request. Requests should be directed to the corresponding author (louise.mitchell@anu.edu.au) and will require approval from the relevant Human Research Ethics Committees (HRECs) listed in the Ethics Approval section.
All PLOS journals now require all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript to be freely available to other researchers, either 1. In a public repository, 2. Within the manuscript itself, or 3. Uploaded as supplementary information.
This policy applies to all data except where public deposition would breach compliance with the protocol approved by your research ethics board. If your data cannot be made publicly available for ethical or legal reasons (e.g., public availability would compromise patient privacy), please explain your reasons on resubmission and your exemption request will be escalated for approval.
7. One of the noted authors is a group or consortium on behalf of Screen Your Way Investigator Team. In addition to naming the author group, please list the individual authors and affiliations within this group in the acknowledgments section of your manuscript. Please also indicate clearly a lead author for this group along with a contact email address.
8. If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: Manuscript ID: PONE-D-25-29330
Title: Experiences of HPV self-collection among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women
and people with a cervix
*Comments to the Author
This article describes a survey of Australian women and people with a cervix that asked questions about awareness and experience of and preferences for, self-collection cervical cancer screening. Australia implemented the option for self-collection in July 2022 and this study focused on the subset of the respondents who self-identified as Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders months after this option was implemented.
This is an important question for this population as they have historically participated less in cervical cancer screening than non-Indigenous populations due to multiple factors, with corresponding higher incidence and mortality rates.
A strength of this research study was the composition of the research team, which included members from the National Centre for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Wellbeing Research, who also had lived experience. Other research team members have experience including leadership in public health in this population as well. This study received ethics approval from multiple organizations including the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies Research Ethics Committee. The survey materials were pilot tested with Indigenous people as well. Another strength was the rigorous evaluation of the data collected to minimize bias from non-human responses in an online survey.
The manuscript was easy to read and follow. This research will contribute to understanding the preferences for Indigenous women for HPV self-sampling and perhaps increase participation in this population.
General Comments
Suggest that you include the questionnaire as an appendix as that would provide a suitable resource for other Indigenous groups to consider using some or all of the questions to assess self-sampling in their populations.
Introduction
The background information provided important details on changes to the cervical cancer screening guidelines in Australia over the past 10 years. The rationale for evaluating self-sampling in the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander was reasonably supported but whether this change will overcome barriers to participation by these people was not as clearly established. The cited literature was relevant and generally very recent; however, there was a lack of information about HPV vaccinations uptake in this population. Please include additional information as that is likely most relevant in the 25–35-year-olds mentioned on page 15 beginning on line 14 regarding positive oncogenic HPV screens.
Materials and Methods
Page 5 line 2 – an electronic version of the survey will not be accessible to people without access to computers and the internet. How would this potentially bias the results in general but specifically this population who tend to live in more remote areas?
Page 6 line 5 – how were responses kept separate from participants enrolling in the draw for a voucher? Was only one voucher offered for all respondents to the survey?
Results
Table 1 – many of the reported counts for variable categories do not sum up to the column totals. Please include a category for missing data so that it is clear to the reader if questions were not answered. Data suppression is fine but likely not needed for missing information.
- How is remoteness defined?
Table 2 – many of the reported counts for variable categories do not sum up to the column totals. Please include a category for missing data so that it is clear to the reader if questions were not answered.
– are the categories for the question “What prompted you to get a CST “ mutually exclusive? It does not seem so. Please include information about the question in the table, for example add (select all that apply).
- Add a row total to this table as results for individual questions are reported for the combined groups in the Screening Practices section.
- Could report some differences between the two groups, such as “Around when due for screening“ and “I was worried about a symptom or health problem.” The reasons for these differences could then be explored in the Discussion.
Table 3 – add a column with the sample size for each question rather than including it with the question.
- As with Tables 1 and 2, many of the reported counts for variable categories do not sum up to the sample sizes. Please include a category for missing data so that it is clear to the reader if questions were not answered.
- are the categories for the questions “Reasons for choosing HCP assisted self-collection (i.e. no speculum “ and “Reasons for choosing self-collection” mutually exclusive? It does not seem so. Please include information about the question in the table, for example add (select all that apply). The footnote for this table is helpful but adding information to the question makes this easier to understand too.
- Why is the sample size 89 for this question “Reasons for choosing self-collection” when it seems it should be 116? Is this the number who answered this question out of the 116 respondents?
- It would be more informative to look at the responses to this question separately for the groups who were or were not offered a choice for screening: “Reasons for choosing a clinician-collected sample (i.e. with a speculum).” The reasons might be different and that could inform who to target with educational materials in the future.
Page 13 lines 3 to 13: the counts and percentages presented here do not tally with the numbers in table 3, unless these are the results only from those who answered these questions, not whether they did self-collection. For example, Screened using self-collection^ should be 116 in total not 89. Please include more information on these results (e.g., 89 out of possible 116 answered this question ….) as they are difficult to interpret and understand as they are written now.
Figure 2 – the figure legend should indicate the results are given as percentages. It should also indicate multiple responses are possible and why the results do not sum to 100%. The graph currently shows the total is 100% but it is not for the data presented. Including a missing or not answered category would improve the interpretation of these results. The figure is also quite blurry.
Results from this Table 2 can be shown better using multiple bar charts, side by side. See this web page for an example: https://communities.sas.com/t5/Graphics-Programming/Multiple-Bar-charts-side-by-side/td-p/277586
Discussion/Conclusions
Page 16 Lines 11-19- Are there challenges with access to primary care in this population due to remote locations or fewer options? Or was your sample more likely from an urban setting (see comment about study limitation below)?
Page 17 line 15 “… in a major (city)”?
Strengths and Limitations section – only mentions strengths. A major limitation is self-report information was collected from a non-probabilistic, convenience sample. The data cannot be verified using actual examination data. Another limitation is the use of an electronic version of the survey that would likely exclude people who don’t have access to a computer and the internet. Another potential limitation is differential recall bias – the people recently screened will likely have more accurate recall of their appointment compared to someone who might have been screened several years ago.
The Discussion does not describe how the results of this study could improve participation by people who have never screened or are not up to date in their screening? Does the National Campaign that started in 2024 target these groups? Or their healthcare providers? Please expand so that the knowledge gained from this survey can improve cervical cancer screening in this population, and possibly the more general screen-eligible population in Australia.
Reviewer #2: The manuscript is scientifically sound, well written and of relevance to the current Australian healthcare landscape. I would encourage the acceptance of this paper with a few ramifications. I would also like to add a bit more content regarding cultural safety of healthcare spaces.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PLOS ONE Review July 28 2025.docx
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Review.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0326551.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
29 Oct 2025

Thank you for your thoughtful and considered feedback on our manuscript. We appreciate the time taken to review our work. We have addressed these comments and suggestions, and attach a revised version of the manuscript for your consideration.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PONE-D-25-29330_AuthorResponse.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0326551.r003Decision Letter 1
Nair-ShallikerVisaliniAcademic Editor© 2026 Visalini Nair-Shalliker2026Visalini Nair-Shallikerhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
29 Jan 2026

Dear Dr. Mitchell,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 15 2026 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Visalini Nair-Shalliker
Academic Editor
PLOS One
Journal Requirements:
1. If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.
2. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Dear Dr Mithcell
Thank you for submitting the revised version of your manuscript PONE-D-25-29330R1 entitled "Experiences of HPV self-collection among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix."to PLOS ONE. I have now completed my evaluation of your revisions and am pleased to inform you that the changes satisfactorily address the concerns raised by the reviewers.
On this basis, I am happy to provisionally accept your manuscript. It will now proceed to the next stage of our editorial workflow, which includes final checks by the journal’s staff to ensure compliance with PLOS ONE’s publication criteria, ethical standards, and formatting requirements.
Please note that during this stage you may be contacted by the journal office if any additional minor edits or clarifications are required to finalize the manuscript for publication.
Thank you once again for your careful attention to the reviewers’ comments and for choosing PLOS ONE as the venue for your work. We look forward to seeing your article move toward publication.
Kind regards,
Visalini (Lini) Nair‑Shalliker
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: No
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: Thank you for carefully addressing my previous comments and suggestions. I found the revised manuscript to be easier to follow and the additional content improved my understanding of the research study. I have two additional comments based on reading the revised manuscript:
1. The last paragraph on page 13 of track-changed version of the manuscript seems to require clarification in order to understand what is being presented. This is the sentence that seems to need some additional explanation:
“The majority of these participants (61%, n=81) were not offered a choice of collection method, however 38% (n=50)
participants were offered a choice and elected to have a clinician-collected sample, and an additional
two couldn’t remember.”
2. On page 20, this sentence would benefit from the addition of the word 'group': 21 Interestingly, the majority of this GROUP had previously screened and ...”
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
To ensure your figures meet our technical requirements, please review our figure guidelines: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures
You may also use PLOS’s free figure tool, NAAS, to help you prepare publication quality figures: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-tools-for-figure-preparation.
NAAS will assess whether your figures meet our technical requirements by comparing each figure against our figure specifications.
10.1371/journal.pone.0326551.r004Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
7 Feb 2026

Thank you for your thoughtful feedback and consideration of our manuscript. We submit a revised version incorporating the recommendations. Our response is provided in the document "Response to Reviewers".
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response To Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0326551.r005Decision Letter 2
Nair-ShallikerVisaliniAcademic Editor© 2026 Visalini Nair-Shalliker2026Visalini Nair-Shallikerhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
23 Feb 2026

Experiences of HPV self-collection among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and people with a cervix
PONE-D-25-29330R2
Dear Dr. Mitchell,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. For questions related to billing, please contact billing support .
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Visalini Nair-Shalliker
Academic Editor
PLOS One
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0326551.r006Acceptance letter
Nair-ShallikerVisaliniAcademic Editor© 2026 Visalini Nair-Shalliker2026Visalini Nair-Shallikerhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-25-29330R2
PLOS One
Dear Dr. Mitchell,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS One. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Visalini Nair-Shalliker
Academic Editor
PLOS One