pmcPLoS GenetPLoS Genet331plosgen101239074plosPLOS Genetics1553-73901553-7404PLOSPMC10470942PMC10470942.110470942104709423760356210.1371/journal.pgen.1010885PGENETICS-D-22-010391Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsNeuronsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceNeuronsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsNeuronsNeuronal DendritesNeuritesBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceNeuronsNeuronal DendritesNeuritesBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesCytoskeletonMicrotubulesBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyNervous SystemSynapsesMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyNervous SystemSynapsesBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyElectrophysiologyNeurophysiologySynapsesBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeurophysiologySynapsesResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentAltmetricsArticle-Level MetricsBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsPhenotypesBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsCytoskeletal ProteinsTubulinsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesCytoskeletonMuscleblind-1 interacts with tubulin mRNAs to regulate the microtubule cytoskeleton in C. elegans mechanosensory neurons
Muscleblind-1 in axon growth and synapse formationPuriDharmendraConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 
National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, Gurgaon, Haryana, India
HilliardMassimo A.Editor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript and its files.

## Introduction
A highly ordered functional neuronal circuit comprises polarized nerve cells, which are compartmentalized into dendrites and axons for unidirectional reception and transmission of information. Several reports suggest that the structural and functional polarity of neurons relies on cytoskeletal elements within the neuron [ – ]. These cytoskeletal elements are regulated by intra- and extra-cellular signal transduction pathways during neuronal polarization [ – ]. The organization of the microtubule cytoskeleton in neurons plays a crucial role in directing neuronal polarization [ ].
In vertebrate neurons, axonal microtubules are arranged in a parallel array with their plus-ends facing toward the synapse, while dendrites exhibit a mixed orientation of microtubules [ ]. In invertebrate dendrites, the microtubule orientation is minus-end-out [ , ]. This polarized arrangement of microtubules is the basis for the proper localization of synaptic components and neurotransmitter release [ , ].
Recent reports have identified the critical roles of RNA-binding proteins in neuronal development [ ] and synaptic transmission [ – ]. Disruptions in these genes can cause various neurological disorders [ – ]. The Muscleblind-like protein family (MBNL) is an evolutionarily conserved RNA-binding protein family that contains CCCH zinc-finger domains [ ]. MBNL regulates alternative splicing, alternative polyadenylation, mRNA localization, RNA processing, and translation [ – ]. The role of MBNL in the neural pathogenesis of myotonic dystrophy type 1(DM1), has been extensively discussed [ – ].
In the mouse brain, loss of MBNL leads to misregulated alternative splicing and polyadenylation, resulting in defects in motivation and spatial learning, and abnormal REM (Rapid Eye Movement) sleep [ , – ]. The MBNL family in mammals consists of three proteins: MBNL1, MBNL2, and MBNL3, encoded by three different genes, each with several isoforms [ ]. The functions of these different isoforms of MBNL vary, corresponding to their differential localization [ – ]. A recent report in Drosophila showed that Muscleblind (MBL) is expressed in the nervous system and regulates alternative splicing of Dscam2 during the development of the nervous system [ ]. In C. elegans, the Muscleblind homolog MBL-1 binds to multiple transcripts and regulates life span [ ]. MBL-1 has also been shown to regulate synapse formation in motor neurons [ ]. In touch neurons, it regulates the splicing of the sad-1 (SAD/BRSK kinase) gene [ ]. Although there is an indication of a functional link between Muscleblind and microtubule cytoskeleton [ ], a comprehensive understanding of how Muscleblind regulates the microtubule cytoskeleton in neurons remains unclear.
C. elegans neurons have been extensively used to study the mechanisms of neuronal polarization in vivo [ – ]. Specifically, studies using mechanosensory neurons responsible for gentle touch sensation, have provided insights into the role of the microtubule cytoskeleton in neuronal development and maintenance [ , – ]. In this study, we identified a mutation in the muscleblind-1 gene, as a suppressor of the loss of kinesin-13 family microtubule depolymerase klp-7, which affects the neuronal phenotypes observed in the ALM and PLM touch neurons. We found that Muscleblind-1 (MBL-1) is required for axonal growth and synapse formation in the PLM neurons. Using live imaging of plus-end binding protein (EBP-2::GFP), and synaptic protein (GFP::RAB-3), we observed compromised microtubule stability in the absence of mbl-1, leading to reduced vesicular transport. We found that mbl-1 is epistatic to both mec-7 and mec-12 for controlling axon outgrowth in PLM neurons. We also demonstrated that MBL-1 binds and regulates the stability of transcripts encoding these touch neuron-specific tubulins. Moreover, we found that mbl-1 is epistatic to sad-1, which regulates the synaptic organization in C. elegans neurons [ ]. Our data illustrate that mbl-1 regulates sad-1 in controlling synapse positioning in PLM neurons. Collectively, our findings suggest that MBL-1 regulates the cytoskeletal machinery in neurons by regulating mRNA stability.

## Results

## Loss of muscleblind-1 (mbl-1) suppresses the ectopic neurite growth phenotype in touch neurons of klp-7(0) mutant
In C. elegans, six mechanosensory neurons are responsible for gentle touch sensation, including a pair of Anterior Lateral Microtubule (ALM) and a pair of Posterior Lateral Microtubule (PLM) neurons (white arrowheads, ). ALM and PLM neurons extend their axons laterally towards the anterior side and establish connections with their respective postsynaptic neurons through a ventral synaptic branch (white arrows, ). Additionally, the PLM neuron extends a short posterior neurite into the tail of the animal (double-sided white arrow, ). Previous research has shown that loss of microtubule depolymerizing protein kinesin-13/KLP-7 leads to an ectopic extension of the posterior neurite from the ALM cell body (yellow arrow, ) due to increased stabilization of the microtubule cytoskeleton [ ]. Similarly, an overextension of the posterior neurite is observed in the PLM neuron (double-sided white arrow, ). This neurite overgrowth phenotype in the klp-7 mutant can be suppressed by destabilizing microtubules using colchicine or by the loss of tubulin subunits [ ]. Based on this, we hypothesized that conducting an EMS mutagenesis suppressor screen in the klp-7 mutant background could help identify genes and associated pathways involved in regulating the microtubule cytoskeleton in neurons.
 In this suppressor screen, one of the mutants isolated, named ju1128, showed suppression of the ectopic extension phenotype in the ALM neurons in klp-7(0) background (red arrow, ). Further analysis indicated that ju1128 mapped to the locus of the mbl-1 gene, which codes for the RNA binding protein Muscleblind-1/MBL-1. Several lines of evidence suggest that ju1128 is an allele of the mbl-1 gene. Firstly, the SNP chromosomal mapping indicated a linkage between the suppression and the right arm of the X chromosome (red arrowhead, ). The whole-genome sequencing and Cloudmap analysis of the outcrossed suppressor [ ] allowed us to narrow down the mutation to the mbl-1 gene locus on the X-chromosome ( ). By annotating the SNPs obtained from the Cloudmap analysis [ ], we identified a C-T transition at the 17002646th base pair position of chromosome X ( ). This specific transition occurs at the 85th nucleotide in the third exon of the mbl-1 gene, resulting in the introduction of a premature stop codon instead of the expected glutamine amino acid in ju1128.
To confirm the mapping results, we expressed the fosmid WRM0616bE04, which exclusively contains the complete mbl-1 gene locus, in the klp-7(0); mbl-1(ju1228) background. This fosmid, referred to as genomic mbl-1, rescued the suppression of the ectopic extension phenotype in the ALM neurons (yellow arrow, ) as well as the overgrowth phenotype of the posterior neurite in the PLM neurons (double-sided white arrow, ). Another allele of mbl-1, tm1563, which is a deletion mutation of the third exon ( ), also suppressed the ectopic neurite growth phenotypes in klp-7(0) ( ). Both the ju1128 and tm1563 mutations in mbl-1 resulted in stunted growth of the anterior neurite of PLM in klp-7(0) background, and this phenotype was rescued by the genomic fragment of mbl-1 ( ). These findings collectively confirmed that ju1128 is a mutation in the mbl-1 gene and that loss of function of mbl-1 suppresses the neuronal phenotypes observed in the klp-7(0).

## Muscleblind-1(MBL-1) regulates axon growth and synapse formation in PLM neuron
To investigate the role of the mbl-1 gene in touch neuron development, we conducted experiments by removing the klp-7(tm2143) allele from the suppressor background. In the wild-type background, the PLM anterior neurite extends anteriorly and crosses the vulva, frequently approaching the ALM cell body (yellow arrowhead, ). Additionally, it forms a ventral synaptic branch near the vulva (white arrowhead, ). However, in both mutant alleles of mbl-1, the anterior neurite either terminates (yellow arrowhead is the termination point) before reaching the vulva or at the vulval position (marked by an asterisk, ), resulting in a ‘short neurite’ phenotype. Approximately 88% of the PLM neurites in mbl-1 mutants exhibited this short neurite phenotype ( ). Since the Muscleblind-1 protein has known roles in both muscles [ ] and neurons [ , ], we wanted to investigate the tissue-specific function of mbl-1 in neurite development. When mbl-1 cDNA (C isoform) was transgenically expressed using the muscle-specific promoter Pmyo-3 in mbl-1(0) mutants, there was no rescue of the ‘short neurite’ phenotype ( ). However, pan-neuronal expression of mbl-1 cDNA (C isoform) using Prgef-1::mbl-1, as well as mechanosensory neuron-specific expression using Pmec-4::mbl-1, in the mbl-1(0) background, resulted in significant rescue of the short neurite phenotype, comparable to the rescue obtained using the mbl-1 genomic DNA ( ). This suggests that mbl-1 functions in a cell-autonomous manner to regulate neurite length in PLM neurons.
 It is known that the PLM axon extends anteriorly and establishes physical contact with the BDU interneuron through a gap junction synapse at its distal end [ ]. In mbl-1(0) mutants due to the short neurite phenotype, the physical contact between the PLM axon and the BDU interneuron is lost ( ). By using the gap junction reporter UNC-9::GFP [ ] in the mbl-1(0) mutants, we observed the absence of gap junction at the tip of the PLM anterior neurite ( ).
In the wild-type background, the axon of the ALM touch receptor neuron forms a synapse at the nerve ring (white arrowhead ) and extends anteriorly, terminating near the tip of the head (yellow arrowhead, ). Similar to PLM in mbl-1(0) mutants, the ALM neuron also exhibits a short neurite phenotype that terminates at the nerve ring (yellow arrowhead, ).
The short neurite phenotype observed in the PLM neurons of mbl-1(0) mutants is not caused by the degeneration of neurons, as no neurite fragmentation was observed until the day-6 adult stage ( ). However, we did observe 33% degeneration of PLM neurites in the day-7 adult stage, which was comparable to the wild-type ( ).
In addition to the short neurite phenotype, an ectopic branch near the PLM cell body (red arrowhead, ) was also observed in mbl-1(0) mutants. We used a presynaptic marker (Pmec-7::GFP::RAB-3) [ ] to characterize this ectopic branch. In the wild-type background, GFP::RAB-3 is enriched along the ventral cord at the end of the ventral branch of PLM near the vulva (white arrowhead, ). However, in mbl-1(0) mutants, GFP::RAB-3 is also enriched at the tip of the ectopic synapse near the PLM cell body (red arrowhead, ), in addition to the original synapse (white arrowhead, ). Approximately 50% of PLM neurons in both mutant alleles of mbl-1 exhibited these ectopic synapses ( ), and this phenotype was rescued by extrachromosomal expression of mbl-1 cDNA in mechanosensory neurons ( ). To further confirm this result, we used another presynaptic active zone marker ELKS-1 (ELKS-1::TagRFP) [ ], and it showed similar localization in these ectopic synapses near the PLM cell body as observed with GFP::RAB-3 (red arrowhead, ). These observations suggest that MBL-1 regulates synapse formation and positioning in PLM neurons.
To determine if the mutation in the mbl-1 gene affects other classes of neurons, we visualized the D-type GABAergic motor neurons using the Punc-25::GFP reporter transgene. In the mbl-1(0) mutant, we noticed gaps on the dorsal side, (red arrowhead, ) indicating a possible defect in neurite growth, similar to what was observed in the DA9 neuron of mbl-1 mutants [ ]. This suggested that the role of mbl-1 in regulating neurite growth is not specific to TRN, rather more general to different classes of neurons.
To examine the localization pattern of MBL-1, we used an MBL-1::GFP translational reporter [ ] under its native promoter and observed GFP expression in several tissues throughout the body of the animal ( ). MBL-1::GFP was highly enriched in ALM and PLM neurons ( ), with localization detected in the cell bodies (White arrows, ) as well as in the PLM and ALM neurites (white arrowheads, ).
Several RNA-binding proteins have been identified in the nervous system of C. elegans, including MEC-8/RBMPS (RNA-binding protein, mRNA processing factor), MSI-1/Musashi (enables RNA-binding activity), UNC-75/CELF5 (CUGBP Elav-like family protein, enables ssRNA-binding activity), and EXC-7/ELAVL4 (enables ssRNA-binding activity) [ ]; we investigated if any of them played a role in regulating neurite length or synapse formation in TRN. However, no noticeable morphological defects were observed in loss of function mutants of these genes ( ). These observations suggest that the RNA-binding protein, MBL-1 is specifically required for neurite growth and synapse formation in touch neurons.

## MBL-1 regulates microtubule polarity and stability in the anterior neurite of PLM neurons
Since the mbl-1 mutant suppressed the neuronal overgrowth phenotype caused by the increased stabilization of microtubules in the klp-7 mutant, we looked for any possible defects in the microtubule cytoskeleton in mbl-1(0). We conducted time-lapse live imaging using the EBP-2::GFP reporter, which binds to the plus ends of growing microtubules, to examine the microtubule dynamics [ ]. By analyzing kymographs generated from regions of interest in the anterior and posterior neurites of PLM neurons ( ), we determined the polarity of the microtubules from the direction of growth of microtubule plus ends ( ). In the wild-type background, the majority of the EBP-2::GFP movements in the PLM anterior neurite were directed away from the cell body (plus-end-out, green trace), whereas the posterior neurite showed movements in both directions, away from and towards the cell body (minus-end-out, purple trace, ), as we have reported previously [ ]. Plotting the fraction of microtubule tracks with ‘plus-end-out’ or ‘minus-end-out’ orientation ( ) revealed a significant decrease in the percentage of microtubules with plus-end-out orientation in the PLM anterior neurite of mbl-1(0) animals compared to that of wild-type animals ( ). The microtubule polarity in the posterior neurite of mbl-1(0) was similar to the wild-type ( ). Additionally, we observed an increased number of EBP-2::GFP tracks in both the anterior and posterior neurites of PLM in mbl-1(0) ( ) compared to the wild-type. However, the growth length and duration of these tracks were significantly shorter in the PLM anterior neurite of mbl-1(0) compared to the wild-type, while in the PLM posterior neurite only the growth duration was shorter than the wild-type ( ). These observations suggest that mbl-1(0) exhibits increased microtubule dynamics and a defect in the microtubule polarity in the anterior neurite.
 Furthermore, we investigated whether the mbl-1 mutation alters the microtubule dynamics phenotype in the klp-7(0) background. In the klp-7(0) mutant, there was a reduction in the number of EBP-2 tracks, and their growth length and duration were increased ( ), as we have previously reported [ ]. Interestingly, the mbl-1(0) mutation in the klp-7(0) background did not change the number of EBP-2 tracks or the distribution of plus-end-out or minus-end-out tracks ( ). However, the growth duration and length of the tracks were significantly reduced in klp-7(0); mbl-1(0) double mutant animals as compared to klp-7(0) alone ( ). This indicates that the mbl-1(0) mutation partially suppresses the increased stability phenotype of microtubules observed in the klp-7(0) background.
In summary, these results provide evidence that MBL-1 regulates microtubule polarity and stability in PLM neurons.

## MBL-1 regulates axonal transport and gentle touch sensation in PLM neurons
Since the loss of mbl-1 affects microtubule orientation and stability, we examined axonal transport in mbl-1(0) mutants using a GFP reporter for the presynaptic protein RAB-3 [ ]. We imaged GFP::RAB-3 in similar ROIs ( ) as those used for imaging EBP-2::GFP. In the mbl-1(0) mutants, the number of anterograde and retrograde transport events was reduced in the PLM anterior neurite compared to the wild type ( ). However, in the PLM posterior neurite, the number of transport events was similar to that in the wild type ( ). We also observed that in the PLM anterior neurite in mbl-1(0), most of the particles were static ( ). The run length of the transport events was shorter in the mbl-1(0) compared to the wild type in both the anterior and posterior PLM neurites ( ).
 Considering the significant impact on the transport of synaptic proteins, we wondered whether the function of this neuron is compromised in the mbl-1 mutant. To address this, we assessed the gentle touch response in the mbl-1(0) mutant. The anterior and posterior touch response was significantly reduced in both mbl-1 mutant alleles, and this reduction was rescued by introducing a genomic copy of the mbl-1 transgene ( ).
Collectively, our findings suggest that loss of MBL-1 compromises the microtubule cytoskeleton in the PLM axon, which consequently disrupts the axonal transport and impairs the function of this neuron.

## mbl-1 interacts with the genes that regulate the microtubule cytoskeleton to control neurite growth of PLM neurons
MBL-1 is a Zinc finger family RNA-binding protein that preferentially binds to the CGCU sequence of target RNA [ ] ( ). To understand how MBL-1 regulates MT dynamics and axon growth in PLM neurons, as well as to identify potential interacting partners, we screened for transcripts containing an MBL-1 binding site using the oRNAment database [ ]. We focused on mRNAs expressed in the PLM neuron, as reported in the CeNGEN database [ ], that resulted in the identification of 2,000 MBL-1 targets ( ) ( ). Using gene ontology (GO) analysis, we short-listed four sets of genes from this pool for further analysis, categorized based on their involvement in (1) microtubule-based processes, (2) axon development, (3) regulation of synapse structure, and (4) axodendritic transport ( ) ( ). In this study, for each category we analyzed a subset of genes for genetic interactions with mbl-1, based on their known involvement in neuron development ( ).
 In the microtubule-based processes category, we identified 129 genes ( ) ( ), of which we tested 21 ( ) that are either part of the microtubule structure or regulators of microtubule dynamics. For example, we examined genes such as mec-7 and mec-12, which are touch neuron-specific tubulins and crucial for microtubule assembly, as well as CRMP-2 (unc-33) which helps in microtubule polymerization [ , ]. In the axon growth-related genes category, we found 61 genes ( ) ( ), and we tested 16 ( ) known to play important roles in axon growth, including unc-51 and unc-53 [ – ].
For the regulators of the synapse structure category, we identified 31 genes ( ) ( ) and examined 4 ( ) known to regulate synapse development, such as sad-1/SAD BRSK kinase [ , ].
In the axodendritic transport-related genes category, we found 11 genes ( ) ( ) and tested 3 ( ) known to be regulators of motor-based transport, such as unc-104 [ , ].
Additionally, a recent report identified a set of 235 genes that are downregulated in the mbl-1 mutant [ ]. We further analyzed this set, using GO analysis, to identify candidates within the aforementioned categories. This analysis led us to mec-7, mec-12, and klp-13, which are directly involved in microtubule-based processes. However, we did not find any candidates linked to axon development, synapse structure, or axodendritic transport.
We did a phenotypic assessment of touch receptor neurons in the mutants of the above-mentioned candidate genes, for short neurite or ectopic synapse phenotype in the PLM neuron, as observed in the mbl-1(0) mutant.
We observed that loss of function mutations in TRN-specific tubulins, mec-7, and mec-12 resulted in a short neurite phenotype in the PLM anterior neurite ( ). In the mec-7 mutant, the anterior neurite of PLM terminates near the vulva (marked by an asterisk) resembling the phenotype seen in the mbl-1 mutant alone. We also found that mutation in the vesicular adaptor protein (unc-76) leads to a short neurite phenotype in the PLM anterior neurite (red arrow, ), similar to mbl-1(0). The transcript of each of these genes has putative MBL-1/MBNL-1 binding sites with varying binding probabilities, as inferred from in-silico data ( ). Further analysis in the mbl-1(0) mec-7(0) double mutant revealed that the length of the PLM anterior neurite remained the same as that observed in the mbl-1(0) single mutant, indicating that the phenotype is not additive ( ). Similarly, the short neurite phenotype in mec-12(0); mbl-1(0) double mutant was not enhanced compared to the mbl-1 single mutant ( ). However, in the mbl-1(0); unc-76(0) double mutant, the length of the PLM axon was significantly shorter than in either single mutant ( ). A similar observation was made in the ALM neurons (yellow arrowhead, ).
As observed in mbl-1(0) mutant, and as it is already known for tubulin mutants, they exhibit defects in both anterior and posterior gentle touch responses. We examined how this behavior was affected in the double mutants. We did not observe any additive effects in the anterior or posterior touch response index in mec-7(0) mbl-1(0) or mec-12(0); mbl-1(0) double mutants ( ). These results suggest that since the mbl-1 and tubulin genes have a similar phenotype and are epistatic in regulating the neurite length, they are genetically functioning in the same pathway. Given that mbl-1 and unc-76 mutations have an additive effect, these two might be working through two separate pathways to regulate neurite length. However, we did not observe any synaptic defect in these mutants.
A recent study demonstrated that MBL-1 regulates the splicing of sad-1 in ALM neurons, and in-silico analysis revealed putative binding sites in sad-1 [ ] (S4D). We found that the sad-1 mutants exhibited a synapse defect similar to that of the mbl-1 mutant animals (red arrowheads, ). Additionally, in the sad-1(0) mbl-1(0) double mutants, the extent of the ectopic synapse defect was the same as in single mutants ( ). These results suggest that mbl-1 and sad-1 are genetically functioning in the same pathway for synapse positioning in PLM neurons.
Taken together these results indicate that mbl-1 collaborates with mec-7 and mec-12 in the same genetic pathway to regulate neurite length. Furthermore, it genetically interacts with sad-1 to control synapse formation in PLM neurons.

## MBL-1 regulates the expression of mec-7 and mec-12 mRNAs
MBL-1 protein has well-documented functions in alternative splicing, RNA stability, and RNA localization [ – ]. As discussed, MBL-1 functions in conjunction with mec-7, mec-12, and sad-1 to regulate TRN development. To understand how MBL-1 regulates these transcripts, we conducted quantitative RT-PCR analysis of mec-7, mec-12, sad-1, and unc-76 in wild-type and mbl-1(0) animals. We observed no changes in the lengths of the RT-PCR products of mec-7 and mec-12 genes in mbl-1(0), a result verified using multiple primers, suggesting that MBL-1 most likely does not regulate the splicing of these transcripts ( , ). However, we did observe a decrease in the transcript levels of mec-7 and mec-12 in the mbl-1(0) mutant animals ( ). This reduction was not observed in control genes such as aak-2 or tba-1, nor putative targets sad-1 or unc-76 ( , ). Quantitative RT-PCR analysis further confirmed a significant decrease in total mec-7 and mec-12 levels in the mbl-1(0) background compared to the control ( ). Another set of primers yielded similar results ( ), supporting the conclusion that MBL-1 regulates the transcript levels of mec-7 and mec-12 genes.
 However, no changes were observed in the transcript length or the total amount of sad-1 in the mbl-1(0) background ( and ). Similarly, no changes were observed in the transcript length or transcript levels of unc-76 in mbl-1(0) animals ( ). As we have already seen ( ), unc-76 works genetically in a parallel pathway with mbl-1 and is likely regulated by a separate mechanism.
Next, we investigated whether MBL-1 regulates the transcription or stability of its target mRNAs. To test this, we fed the animals Actinomycin D (Act D), a well-known transcription inhibitor across various model organisms including C. elegans [ – ]. By blocking new transcript production, we could assess changes in pre-existing mec-7 and mec-12 transcript levels in mbl-1(0). In wild-type animals, Act D treatment resulted in a 25% reduction in mec-7 transcript levels (0.7462 ± 0.0437 fold difference relative to untreated, p <0.05) and an 18% reduction in mec-12 transcript levels (0.8245 ±0.0503 fold difference relative to untreated) ( ), confirming the effectiveness of Act D in blocking transcription.
Comparing mec-7 and mec-12 transcripts in ActD-treated wild-type and mbl-1(0) mutant animals we observed additional reductions in the transcript levels in mbl-1(0). In ActD-treated mbl-1(0) animals mec-7 transcript levels decreased by 58% (0.4170 fold difference relative to untreated) compared to a 25% reduction in treated wild-type animals. Similarly, mec-12 transcript levels in ActD-treated mbl-1(0) animals showed a 33% reduction (0.6689 fold difference relative to untreated), compared to an 18% reduction in treated wild-type animals ( ). This additional reduction suggests increased instability of the pre-existing mec-7 and mec-12 transcripts in the absence of MBL-1 and new transcription. Notably, the ActD-dependent reduction in mec-7/mec-12 transcript levels in the wild-type background indicates inherent turnover of these transcripts. If MBL-1 did not influence their stability, degradation patterns would have been similar in both wild-type and mbl-1(0) mutants. The observed additional decrease during transcriptional blockade may be attributed to increased instability of the pre-existing transcripts in the absence of MBL-1.
To validate the reduction in mec-7 transcript levels we used a translational reporter Pmec-7::MEC-7::GFP using both cDNA and genomic constructs, along with a touch receptor neuron-specific reporter Pmec-4::mCherry ( ). We observed diminished absolute (MEC-7::GFP) and normalized (MEC-7::GFP/MCherry) intensity in the anterior and posterior PLM neurites and cell body of mbl-1 mutants, indicating decreased protein levels of MEC-7 ( ), ( ). A similar trend was observed when both MEC-7::GFP and MCherry were expressed from a single construct Pmec-7::MEC-7::GFP::SL2::MCherry ( ). This suggests that the visible drop in MEC-7::GFP intensity is not due to reduced transcription under a specific promoter. The level of a translational reporter for mec-12, GFP::MEC-12, was also significantly reduced in the mbl-1 mutants ( , ). Based on these results, we concluded that MBL-1 controls the levels of mec-7 and mec-12 mRNAs in PLM neurons, potentially by regulating their transcript stability.
Given the observed reduction in tubulin levels in the mbl-1 mutant and the earlier findings of increased microtubule instability, we hypothesized that microtubule dynamics might also be compromised in mec-7 and mec-12 mutants. Supporting this hypothesis, imaging of the EBP-2::GFP reporter in mec-7 and mec-12 mutants, revealed a significant increase in the number of EBP-2 tracks in the respective kymographs ( ). Additionally, microtubule polarity in the anterior neurite became mixed in these mutants ( ), similar to the observations in the mbl-1 mutants ( ). These findings further strengthen the notion that tubulin levels are compromised in the mbl-1 mutant animals leading to disruptions in the microtubule cytoskeleton.

## MBL-1 interacts with mec-7, mec-12 and sad-1 mRNAs
To determine the interaction between MBL-1 and mec-7/mec-12 mRNAs, we conducted Ribonucleoprotein Immuno-Precipitation (RIP) using transgenic worms expressing MBL-1::GFP::FLAG under its native promoter. An anti-Flag antibody was used for immuno-precipitation ( , left panel). As a control, we used animals expressing KLP-7::GFP::FLAG under its native promoter [ ]. The immuno-precipitated sample showed the presence of MBL-1::GFP::FLAG ( , red arrow, left panel). We observed the enrichment of mec-7, mec-12, and sad-1 transcripts in the immuno-precipitated (IP) sample compared to the control sample ( ). However, we did not find any enrichment of unc-76 mRNA upon immunoprecipitation of MBL-1( ), indicating the specificity of interaction between MBL-1 and mec-7, mec-12, and sad-1 transcripts. To further support the association of MBL-1 protein with mec-7, mec-12, and sad-1 mRNAs in mechanosensory neurons, we immuno-precipitated GFP-tagged MBL-1 from mbl-1(0) animals expressing MBL-1::GFP (C isoform) specifically in the mechanosensory neurons under the Pmec-4 promoter (Pmec4::MBL-1::GFP) ( , panels on right, for both A and B). Pmec4::GFP was used as a control. We observed an enrichment of mec-7 and sad-1 mRNA, but not mec-12, in the immunoprecipitated MBL-1 (C isoform) complex compared to the control ( ). This might account for the relatively poor binding of mec-12 transcripts to the c-isoform of MBL-1.
 

## Expression of tubulin gene mec-7/ mec-12 and sad-1 rescues the ‘short neurite’ and ‘ectopic synapse’ phenotype respectively in PLM neurons
In this study, we observed that the mbl-1 mutant exhibited a short anterior neurite phenotype and reduced amount of tubulin transcripts (mec-7 and mec-12) in mechanosensory neurons. Based on these findings, we hypothesized that increasing tubulin transcript in touch neurons in the mbl-1 mutants could suppress its short neurite phenotype. Indeed, when mec-7 cDNA was expressed under its native promoter in the mbl-1 mutant, the proportion of PLM neurons with a short anterior neurite decreased from 80% to 20% ( ). Consistently, overexpression of mec-7 in mbl-1(0) mutants using a genomic mec-7 construct also significantly suppressed this phenotype ( ). Additionally, overexpression of mec-7 in wild-type animals resulted in overgrowth of the anterior neurite of PLM ( ). Similarly, overexpression of mec-12 also rescued the short neurite phenotype observed in the mbl-1 mutant animals ( ). These findings suggest that tubulin levels are limiting for neurite growth in mbl-1 mutants. Furthermore, overexpression of tubulins in wild-type worms led to neurite overgrowth, indicating that tubulin levels are sufficient for promoting neurite growth.
 We further investigated whether overexpression of tubulins could rescue the gentle touch response defect observed in the mbl-1 mutant animals. Interestingly, we found that overexpression of both mec-7 and mec-12 rescued the anterior touch response in mbl-1(0) animals ( ). However, the posterior touch response was significantly rescued in mbl-1(0) mutants only by mec-7 overexpression ( ). Based on these observations, we concluded that MBL-1 regulates both neurite growth and the gentle touch response behavior through touch neuron-specific tubulins (mec-7 and mec-12).
In contrast, we did not observe any detectable change in the stability or amount of sad-1 transcript in mbl-1(0) mutants. However, we did observe an enrichment of the sad-1 transcript in the immunoprecipitated MBL-1 complex. A previous study also indicated that MBL-1 prevents the exclusion of the 15th exon of sad-1 transcript in ALM neurons, resulting in the expression of only the exon-included isoform [ ]. Thus, we speculated that the ectopic synapse defect in mbl-1(0) mutants could be attributed to the absence of exon-included isoform of sad-1 ( ). Remarkably, this defect was significantly rescued by expressing the exon-included isoform of sad-1 in the mbl-1 mutants using a touch neuron-specific promoter ( ). However, transgenic expression of the genomic sad-1, in the mbl-1 mutants failed to rescue the ectopic synapse defect ( ). These findings provide further evidence that MBL-1 may be involved in the isoform-specific regulation of sad-1 transcript, as previously observed [ ].

## Discussion
In this study, we uncovered a cell-autonomous role of the RNA-binding protein MBL-1 in neurite outgrowth and synapse formation in touch neurons ( ). Our findings demonstrated that microtubule stability in PLM touch neurons is compromised in mbl-1 mutants due to reduced levels of MEC-7 (β-tubulin) and MEC-12 (α-tubulin). Further investigation revealed that MBL-1 directly binds to the mec-7 and mec-12 transcripts regulating their stability ( ). Additionally, mbl-1 plays a crucial role in the proper positioning of synapses in PLM neurons by regulating sad-1 ( ).

## MBL-1 regulates axon growth and synapse formation in neurons
RNA binding proteins (RBP) play important roles in various developmental stages of neurons, including neurogenesis, migration, axon guidance, synapse formation and axon and dendrite outgrowth [ , ]. However, the specific functions of Muscleblind-1 in nervous system development have been less explored. It is known to regulate alternative splicing, localization, stability, and processing of mRNAs [ – ]. In our study, we revealed that the C. elegans homolog of MBNL-1, MBL-1, is involved in regulating the neurite growth of PLM neurons and we also observed defects in neurite growth in the BDU interneuron. Previous studies have shown that MBL-1 controls axon guidance by regulating alternative splicing of Dscam-2 in Drosophila, in a cell-autonomous manner [ ]. Our data align with the role of the cytoplasmic form of MBNL-1 in promoting neurite extension in primary cultures of mouse hippocampal neurons [ ]. Additionally, a previous study in C. elegans demonstrated that MBL-1 regulates synapse formation in DA9 motor neurons [ ], and we similarly observed that MBL-1 is involved in synapse formation and positioning in PLM neurons. Moreover, we detected significant gaps in the dorsal cord region of the mbl-1 mutants using a GABAergic motor neuron reporter, which may indicate improper neurite extension or loss of neuromuscular synapses. In C. elegans there are four other, known RNA binding proteins, namely MEC-8/RBMPS, MSI-1/MSI-2, UNC-75/CELF5, and EXC-7/ELAVL4, which control the splicing, stability, and localization of transcripts in neurons [ ]. However, loss-of-function mutants of these genes did not exhibit morphological defects in mechanosensory neurons, as observed in the mbl-1 mutants. Notably, MEC-8 specifically regulates the alternative splicing of mec-2 in mechanosensory neurons and controls gentle touch sensation [ , ], but we did not observe any morphological defects in PLM neurons upon loss of mec-8. It is worth mentioning that patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) exhibit symptoms of progressive muscle degeneration as well as learning disabilities, impaired cognitive function, and memory impairment [ , ]. Similarly, DM1 patients experience an age-related decline in frontotemporal functions, including memory impairment [ , ]. Our results indicate a touch neuron-related behavioral deficit in the mbl-1 mutant, which is consistent with these observations.

## MBL-1 regulates neuronal microtubule cytoskeleton for controlling axon growth
We initially identified the mbl-1 mutation as a suppressor of the klp-7 mutant, which causes ectopic neurite outgrowth due to microtubule hyperstabilization. Our suppressor screen was specifically designed to isolate factors involved in microtubule stabilization. Through this screen, we discovered that the mbl-1 mutation suppresses the abnormal neurite outgrowth phenotype caused by the klp-7 mutation, indicating that MBL-1 plays a role in regulating microtubule stability. Although MBNL is primarily known as an RNA-binding protein, its involvement in microtubule cytoskeleton regulation and RNA transport has been emerging [ , ]. A thorough investigation of neuronal microtubule dynamics in the mbl-1 mutants revealed an increase in microtubule instability as well as compromised microtubule orientation in the anterior neurite of the PLM neurons. A similar observation has been reported in the mutants of mec-17, an α-tubulin acetyltransferase, that regulates the microtubule stability and axonal integrity of PLM neurons [ ]. The increased microtubule instability correlates with the mixed polarity of microtubules, which is also observed in the posterior neurite of the PLM neurons [ ]. Similarly, in vertebrate dendrites, microtubules are relatively unstable compared to the axon and display random orientation [ , ].
In the mbl-1 mutant, along with the strong effect on microtubule stability, we observed a severe reduction in the anterograde transport of the synaptic protein RAB-3. These findings are consistent with previous studies demonstrating that MBL-1/2 knockout in mice cortical neurons leads to reduced dendritic complexity and alterations in postsynaptic densities [ ]. The observed changes in axonal and dendritic morphology have been linked to cytoskeletal machinery [ , ]. Through in-silico analysis, immunoprecipitation, and RT-PCR, we demonstrated that MBL-1 directly binds to the transcripts of both α (mec-12) and β-tubulins (mec-7), regulating their transcript levels. However, we did not detect a specific association between mec-12 and the c-isoform of MBL-1 in mechanosensory neurons, which could be attributed to the weak interaction of the MBL-1 c-isoform with mec-12 mRNA. In-silico analysis revealed five different consensus sequences recognized by MBNL-1/MBL-1, each with different binding probabilities for the recognized transcripts, including sad-1, mec-7, and mec-12 ( ). Mutations in mec-7 and mec-12 lead to defects in microtubule dynamics and orientation like those observed in the mbl-1 mutants. Notably, overexpressing tubulins (mec-12 and mec-7) in the mbl-1 mutants rescued both the neurite-growth defect and touch response defect. These findings are consistent with previous reports describing the roles of touch neuron-specific tubulins (mec-7/12) in microtubule regulation and neurite outgrowth [ – ]. Our data suggest that MBL-1 is involved in regulating the stability of α (mec-12) and β (mec-7) tubulin transcripts for axon growth in PLM neurons. However, the mechanisms underlying the regulation of mec-7 or mec-12 transcript stability by MBL-1 remain unclear. MBL-1 is known to act as an adaptor for mRNA localization [ , ]. The stability of tubulin transcripts may be achieved through such mechanisms.
Previous studies have shown that MBL-1 regulates the splicing of sad-1 in ALM and BDU neurons of C. elegans [ ]. The function of SAD-1 in synapse formation and stabilization is well established [ , ]. We observed ectopic synapse formation in both mbl-1(0) and sad-1(0) mutants indicating that these two genes act in the same pathway to ensure proper synapse formation. The sad-1 has two isoforms, each with a cell-specific expression pattern [ ]. When we over-expressed the exon-fifteenth included isoform specifically in touch neurons in the mbl-1(0) background, it suppressed the ectopic synapse phenotype. However, over-expression of the genomic sad-1 failed to suppress the ectopic synapse phenotype. These results support the hypothesis that MBL-1 regulates the splicing of sad-1 to control synapse formation. In summary, this study provides mechanistic insights into how an RNA-binding protein, MBL-1, regulates the structure and function of neurons through the cytoskeletal machinery ( ).

## Materials and methods

## C. elegans genetics
C. elegans strains were cultured on standard Nematode Growth Medium (NGM) plates seeded with OP50 Escherichia coli bacteria at 20°C [ ]. All the loss-of-function mutant alleles were denoted as “0”. For instance, the mbl-1(tm1563) mutant was represented as mbl-1(0). The N2 Bristol wild-type strain was used to eliminate background mutations, while CB4856 Hawaiian isolates were employed for restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) mapping. The list of mutant strains and transgenic reporter strains used in this study can be found in and Tables, respectively. Additionally, the list of newly generated transgenes, carrying extrachromosomal arrays utilized in this study is included in .
Transgenes were introduced into the various mutant backgrounds through crossing. PCR or sequencing methods were employed to confirm the homozygosity of all mutants. The following published transgenes were utilized in this study, Pmec-7::GFP (muIs32), Pmec-4::EBP-2::GFP (juIs338) [ ], Pmec-4::MCherry (tbIs222) [ ], Pmec-7::GFP::RAB3 (jsIs821) [ ], and Pmec-7::TagRFP::ELKS-1 (jsIs1075) [ ].

## EMS mutagenesis and forward genetic screen strategy
We conducted an EMS mutagenesis screen [ ] to isolate suppressor mutants, which exhibited suppression of the ectopic neurite growth phenotype in the ALM neurons of klp-7(0) animals. Age-synchronized L4 stage klp-7(0) animals were pooled and subjected to three washes with 1XM9 solution. Subsequently, the animals were incubated in 1XM9 media containing 47mM EMS at 20°C for 4 hours with continuous mixing. After the incubation period, we pelleted the animals and discarded the supernatant, followed by three additional washes with 1XM9 solution.
Next, we transferred approximately 6–7 healthy late L4 stage animals to fresh NGM plates seeded with OP50 bacteria. From these parent plates, around 700 F1 progeny animals were single-selfed at the L4 stage onto fresh seeded NGM plates. We then screened the resulting F2 progeny to identify mutants exhibiting the suppression of ALM ectopic extension phenotype. We isolated three suppressor mutants, one of which, ju1128, was mapped to the mbl-1 gene, as discussed in the paper.

## Mapping of ju1128 mutation by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)
To map the ju1128 mutation, we crossed the klp-7 suppressor strain carrying the ju1128 mutation (klp-7(0); ju1128) with the polymorphic C. elegans Hawaiian strain (CB4856). The individual worms from the resulting F2 progeny were single-selfed on NGM plates and their progeny was allowed to grow. The progeny from each of these plates was then genotyped to identify the presence of klp-7(tm2143) deletion mutation. The F2 plates with the confirmed klp-7(tm2143) genotype were subsequently phenotyped to assess the suppression of ALM ectopic extension phenotype, and therefore identify homozygotes for suppressor mutation.
We selected 30–50 F2 plates that were homozygous for both klp-7(tm2143) and suppressor. To determine the chromosomal location, we pooled DNA from these 30–50 unique F2 recombinants and performed SNP mapping. This involved using three primers per chromosome for ChrI-ChrV and two primers for the X-chromosome, following previously established protocols [ ]. The results of the SNP mapping are presented in . Since the EMS suppressor screening was conducted in the N2 (Bristol) strain, we utilized N2 SNPs to establish the linkage.
In the SNP mapping gel image, we observed linkage between N2 SNPs and two chromosomes: the 3rd chromosome and the X chromosome (marked with a red arrowhead in ). As the klp-7 gene is known to reside on the 3rd chromosome, we inferred that the linkage observed on this chromosome was associated with the klp-7 mutation. Additionally, the linkage observed on the X chromosome was likely due to the ju1128 mutation (marked with a red arrowhead in ). This inference was consistent with the results of whole-genome sequencing data analysis.

## Whole-genome sequencing analysis for ju1128 mapping
The same F2 recombinants used for SNP mapping, as discussed in the previous section, were also utilized for whole genome sequencing analysis. We extracted genomic DNA from these recombinants using the phenol-chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation method. The DNA samples were then sent for sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq4000 platform, generating 50 bp paired-end reads.
After filtering out low-quality reads, a total of 300 million high-quality reads were retained, resulting in an average coverage of 18X for the C. elegans genome from this dataset. These reads were aligned to the C. elegans reference genome version WS220, and subsequent analysis was performed using the CloudMap pipeline [ ]. By analyzing the aligned reads, a single file containing all the variations was obtained using genome-wide variant call statistics.
To identify candidate mutations specific to ju1128 allele, background variations from the parental strain klp-7(0) and other sister mutants isolated in the same screen (such as ju1130) were subtracted from the list of total variants. This process yielded a filtered list of candidate mutations. The resulting list was further annotated using the available reference annotation file of C. elegans.
From this analysis, eight candidate genes, including the mbl-1 gene, were short-listed for the ju1128 mutation. To validate the potential involvement of these candidate genes, we performed rescue experiments by injecting a fosmid carrying the wild-type copy of each gene into klp-7(0); ju1128 background. We observed rescue of ectopic neurite suppression phenotype by the fosmid carrying the mbl-1 gene in klp-7(0); ju1128 background ( ).

## Widefield fluorescence imaging of mechanosensory neurons for quantifying developmental defects
The touch receptor neurons (TRNs) were phenotyped on a Leica DM5000B microscope under a 40X objective (NA 0.75). For all imaging purposes, animals at L4 stage were immobilized and mounted on 5% agarose beds using 10 mM levamisole (Sigma-Aldrich; L3008) in 1XM9 buffer. The morphological defects in ALM neurons resulting from loss of klp-7 ( ) or in PLM neurons resulting from the loss of mbl-1 ( ) were assessed qualitatively based on their microscopic appearance. The posterior neurite of ALM neurons was considered as an ectopic extension if it extended to or beyond the vulva in animals at the L4 stage ( ). Similarly, the anterior neurite of PLM was considered a ‘short neurite’ if it did not extend beyond the vulva. This method was also used to determine the percentage of worms with ectopic synapses or more than one synapse phenotype in the mbl-1(0) background ( ).

## Image acquisition and analysis of neurite length of mechanosensory neurons using a point-scanning confocal microscope
The ALM/PLM neurons expressing a fluorescent reporter under a tissue-specific promoter, Pmec-7::GFP (muIs32), were imaged in L4 stage animals using a Zeiss Axio Observer LSM 510 Meta confocal microscope. The imaging was performed at 66% of a 488 nm laser under a 40X oil objective (NA 1.3). Simultaneously, the differential interference contrast images of these animals were captured.
The absolute length of the anterior and posterior neurites of PLM, as well as the anterior neurite of ALM, was calculated using either Zeiss LSM Image Browser software or ImageJ. These software tools were used to draw segmented traces over the neurite in a fluorescent channel image and measure the length value of the neurite.
The length value of the anterior neurite of PLM was normalized to the distance between PLM cell body and vulva of the corresponding animal, measured from the differential interference contrast images ( ). The length of the posterior neurite of PLM was normalized to the distance between PLM cell body and tip of the tail ( ). In the same manner, the length of the anterior neurite of ALM was normalized to the distance between vulva and tip of the head ( ), as previously described [ ].

## Image acquisition for GFP::RAB-3, Punc-86::GFP, Punc-25::GFP, ELKS-1::TagRFP, and UNC-9::GFP using a point-scanning confocal microscope
The transgenic animals expressing GFP::RAB-3, Punc-86::GFP, Punc-25::GFP, ELKS-1::TagRFP, and UNC-9::GFP, were imaged using a Nikon A1HD25 confocal microscope under 60X oil objective (NA 1.4). The GFP reporter was imaged using 7% of the 488 nm laser. The TagRFP and MCherry reporters were imaged using 0.3% of the 561 nm laser.

## Molecular cloning and generation of new transgene
In order to express mbl-1 under pan-neuronal, touch neuron-specific, and muscle-specific promoters, we first made an expression gateway entry clone for mbl-1 pCR8::mbl-1(cDNA)/pNBRGWY29. The mbl-1 cDNA (c-isoform) was obtained from Yuji Kohara collection, in Japan [ ]. The pNBRGWY29/pCR8::mbl-1(cDNA)) was LR recombined with pCZGY66 (Prgf-1 destination vector), pCZGY553 (Pmec-4 destination vector), and pCZGY61 (Pmyo-3 destination vector) respectively, using LR clonase enzyme (Invitrogen;11791–020). To make Pmec-4::sad-1 (pNBRGWY164), the entry clone pNBR58 corresponding to sad-1a cDNA was recombined with pCZGY553 (Pmec-4 destination vector). sad-1 was amplified using the following primers 5`TCCGAATTCGCCCTTCGTCAATCGGGCAAAGTC 3`and 3`GTCGAATTCGCCCTTGATGATAGATTAGACTTTATCAGCC 5`and was cloned into pCR8 vector using an infusion reaction (Takara, 638947).
The mec-7 constructs Pmec-7::mec-7::gfp (cDNA) (pNBR165) and Pmec-7::mec-7::gfp (genomic) (pNBR166), were constructed by an LR reaction between the destination vector Pmec-7::GWY::GFP (pNBR61) and mec-7 genomic and cDNA entry clones. The gateway construct was the result of another infusion reaction between mec-7 promoter, linearized using 5`CCATGATTACGCCAATGGCGCGCCAAATGTAAACC 3`and 3`TGGCCAATCCCGGGGCGAATCGATAGGATCCACGATCTCG 5`primers, and GWY::GFP vector backbone, linearized using, 5`CCCCGGGATTGGCCAAAG 3`and 3`TTGGCGTAATCATGGTCATAGCTG 5`primer pair. The mec-7 cDNA and genomic DNA fragments were amplified using the following primers: 5`TCCGAATTCGCCCTTATGCGCGAGATCGTTCATATTC 3`and 3`GTCGAATTCGCCCTTCTCTCCGTCGAACGCTTC 5`. Subsequently, each was cloned into the pCR8 vector backbone using infusion reactions to make entry clones mec-7 cDNA (pNBR59) and mec-7 genomic (pNBR60).
Pmec-7::mec-7::gfp::SL2::mCherry (genomic) (pNBR66) was constructed by linearizing the vector backbone Pmec-7::mec-7::gfp (genomic) (pNBRGWY166) using following primers 5’ GATATCTGAGCTCCGCATCG 3’ and 3’ GCATGGACGAGCTGTACAAGTAA 5’ and amplifying the insert SL2-mCherry from Pmec-4::Chrimson::SL2::mCherry::unc-54 (Addgene Plasmid #107745) using the following primers 5’ GAGCTGTACAAGTAAGCTGTCTCATCCTACTTTCACC 3’ and 3’ GGTGGCATGGATGAATTGTATAAGATATCTGAGCTCCG 5’. The two linearized fragments were then recombined by an infusion reaction (Takara, 638947).
To make Pmec-4::gfp::mec-12 (cDNA) (pNBRGWY170) construct, pCR8::mec-12 (cDNA) (made by Topo cloning, (Thermo Fisher Scientific; K2500-20)) was single-site LR recombined with pCZGY1867 (Pmec-4::gfp destination vector) (Takara, 638947). The following primers were used for amplifying mec-12 cDNA: 5`CTCTTTTGCAAAATGAGAGAAGTAATTTCG 3`and 3`GAGAAGAAGGAGATGAGTATTAGGCG 5`.
These plasmids were injected at different concentrations as described in . Pttx-3::RFP was used as a coinjection marker at 50 ng/ul concentration to generate transgenic strains. The total DNA concentration of the injection mixture was kept at around 110–120 ng/μl by adding pBluescript (pBSK) plasmid to the injection mixture.

## Live imaging of EBP-2::GFP, and GFP::RAB-3 using spinning disk confocal microscopy
For imaging EBP-2::GFP and GFP::RAB-3 we used a Zeiss Observer Z1 microscope equipped with a Yokogawa CSU-XA1 spinning disk confocal head and a Photometric Evolve electron-multiplying charge-coupled device camera for fast time-lapse image acquisition.
EBP-2::GFP imaging was conducted for a total duration of 2 minutes at a rate of 2.64 frames per second. For the GFP::RAB-3 imaging, images were acquired at a rate of 3.19 frames per second for a total duration of 3 minutes. To achieve the best signal-to-noise ratio, EBP-2::GFP was imaged with an excitation laser of 8.75mW at 488nm. While a power of 10mW was utilized for GFP::RAB-3 imaging.

## Analysis of EBP-2::GFP and GFP::RAB-3 dynamics
The kymographs of EBP-2::GFP ( ) and GFP::RAB-3 ( ) were generated using the Analyze/ MultiKymograph tool in ImageJ software (https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/). To create these kymographs 30 μm regions of interest (ROIs) were placed on both the anterior and posterior neurite of PLM (Figs and ). In both types of kymographs, the horizontal axis represents the neurite length in micro-meters, and the vertical axis represents the duration of time in seconds.
The microtubule dynamics was quantified from EBP-2::GFP movies by generating kymographs from the 30 μm ROIs. The ROIs were drawn on the anterior neurite of PLM in a distal-to-proximal direction (towards the cell body) and on the posterior neurite in a proximal-to-distal direction (away from the cell body). The diagonal tracks which were moving away from the cell body were annotated “plus-end-out” microtubules (P; green traces in ), while diagonal tracks moving towards the cell body were denoted as “minus-end-out” microtubules (M; purple traces in ). The fraction polarity of microtubules was calculated by determining the number of plus-end out tracks or minus-end out tracks out of the total number of tracks in each EBP-2::GFP kymograph. The growth length and the growth duration of EBP-2::GFP tracks was calculated as a net pixel shift in the X and Y axes, respectively ( ).
The GFP::RAB-3 movies were analyzed to study axonal transport. Similar to EBP-2::GFP movies, ROIs were placed on the anterior and posterior neurite of PLM to generate kymographs. The diagonal tracks moving away from the cell body were annotated “anterograde” (green traces in ), while diagonal tracks moving towards the cell body were denoted as “retrograde” (purple traces in ). We calculated anterograde and retrograde particle movement from each kymograph by quantifying the number of tracks in either the anterograde or retrograde direction from the 30 μm ROIs corresponding to the anterior and posterior neurite of PLM near the cell body during the 3 minutes of imaging. We calculated run length by quantifying the net pixel shift in the x-axes in the anterograde and retrograde directions [ ].

## Gentle touch assay
The L4 stage hermaphrodite worms were subjected to a gentle touch assay using the tip of an eyelash, following the protocols described previously [ , ]. Each animal was given ten alternative touches at the anterior and posterior ends. A response was considered positive if the touch elicited a reversal behavior. A positive response was denoted as 1 and no response as 0. To quantify the touch response, we calculated the anterior touch response index (ATRI) ( ) and the posterior touch response index (PTRI) ( ) as a ratio of the total number of responses to the total number of touches given (which was 10 touches per animal).

## Identification and analysis of MBL-1 targets
To identify MBL-1 targets in the PLM neuron, we first used the CeNGEN database [ ] to list all the genes expressed in PLM neurons, considering a threshold value of 2. It enlisted a total of 5,283 genes which are expressed in the PLM neuron ( ) (CeNGEN database).
Next, we employed the oRNAment database (http://rnabiology.ircm.qc.ca/oRNAment) to identify potential genes with MBL-1 binding site (CGCU) out of 5283 genes expressed in PLM neurons. This analysis resulted in the identification of 2000 genes that potentially contain MBL-1 binding sites and exhibit enriched expression in the PLM neurons.
To further narrow down our focus, we conducted gene ontology (GO) analysis and shortlisted genes involved in the following processes: (1) Microtubules-based (2) axon development (3) regulation of synapse structure (4) Axodendritic transport. The results of this analysis are presented in and .

## Reverse transcription (RT) PCR for checking the splicing of the transcript
To examine splicing defects in the mbl-1(0), we used the reverse transcription method. The total RNA was extracted from wild-type and mbl-1(tm1563) age-synchronized worms at the day-one adult stage (A1). To age synchronize gravid adults were allowed to lay eggs for 30 minutes and then the progeny was grown at 20°C till the 1 day old adult stage. The synchronized animals were washed three times with M9 buffer, and the pellet was collected and stored at -80°C for RNA isolation. RNA was isolated from thawed pellet using the Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit (no. 74104; Qiagen). The extracted RNA was treated with DNase I (Ambion’s DNA-free kit AM1906) to remove any genomic DNA contamination. Approximately 3–4 μg of the treated RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA using Superscript III Reverse Transcriptase (18080093). For splicing analysis, we used 200 ng cDNA from either wild-type or mbl-1(tm1563) background in a 25 μl PCR reaction. Emerald Amp GT PCR (2X master mix, cat-RR310) Taq polymerase was used for the PCR amplification of mec-7, mec-12, sad-1, and unc-76 transcripts. The sequences of the specific primers used are given in , and the primer binding sites are depicted in . For mec-7 and mec-12 transcripts, primers were designed to amplify the full length of the transcript. These genes have only one isoform based on Wormbase-WS285 annotation. The amplification was performed for 30 cycles. The 5 μl volumes of PCR products of mec-7, mec-12, and aak-2 (used as a control) were separated on a 1% agarose gel ( ), while sad-1 and unc-76 PCR products were separated on a 2% agarose gel ( ).

## Quantitative real-time (qRT-PCR) for checking the total transcript
We used 1 day old adult animals to isolate the total RNA from wild-type and mbl-1(0) mutant backgrounds, as described in the previous section. The extracted RNA was treated with DNase I (Ambion’s DNA-free kit AM1906) to get rid of any genomic DNA contamination. Subsequently, approximately 2–3 μg DNase-treated RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA using Superscript III Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen no. 18080093).
For each qRT reaction, 50ng of this cDNA was added to 20 μl of Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems Life Technologies, no. 3367659). The amplification was performed for 40 cycles.
The primers designed for this experiment were selected to ensure a single Ct peak for each qRT PCR reaction, thereby ensuring the specificity of the amplicon being quantified. Secondly, to prevent amplification of any residual genomic DNA contaminants, some primers were designed with binding sites at the intron-exon boundary. The primer sequences and their relative positioning are given in the supplementary information in and , respectively.
Gel electrophoresis of PCR products on a 3% agarose gel, did not show any contaminating bands. The relative mRNA levels of target genes in the mbl-1(tm1563) and the wild-type N2 strains were calculated using the standard ΔΔCt method [ ]. The calculated values were normalized to tba-1 values, which served as a control for endogenous mRNAs [ ]. We used the ΔΔCT method for calculating the fold change of transcript relative to respective controls in the wild-type and mbl-1(tm153) background [ ].

## Transcriptional inhibition experiment
The RNA synthesis was inhibited by feeding animals 400 μM actinomycin-D (Sigma, A9415), dissolved in DMSO, as previously described [ , ]. OP-50 bacteria were cultured in B-broth media overnight at 37°C in a BOD incubator. Actinomycin D solution in DMSO was further diluted in OP-50 B-broth to prepare a working concentration of 400 μM, for control, the same volume of DMSO was dissolved in OP50. These ActD and DMSO dissolved cultures were then used to seed a 60 mm NGM plate. Gravid adult animals were transferred on NGM plates containing ActD or DMSO for 30 minutes to allow for egg laying and age synchronization. One day old adult animals, which were grown on these plates, were then washed thrice with 1XM9, collected, and frozen at -80°C. These pellets were later thawed on ice to isolate RNA for qRT PCR as described above.

## Ribonucleoprotein-immuno precipitation (RIP)
Immunoprecipitation experiments were conducted following previously described protocols [ ]. Approximately 50–100 gravid adult worms expressing either Pmbl-1-MBL-1::GFP::FLAG [ , ] or Pmec-4-mbl-1::GFP (c-isoform) were transferred to thirty 60 mm NGM plates and allowed to lay eggs for half an hour at 20°C. The resulting progeny was then grown until the one day old adult stage (A1) at 20°C. These synchronized animals were then pooled, washed three times with 1XM9, and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 2 minutes. The collected pellet, which was more than 300 μl in volume, was then stored at -80°C until further use. For the RIP experiment, the pellet was thawed on ice for homogenization and all subsequent procedures were performed at 4°C. The animal pellets were homogenized in 400–500 μl of ice-cold 2X lysis solution [which consisted of Buffer A (20 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA) + 1.5 mM DTT, 0.2% NP-40, 0.5 mg/ml Heparin Sulphate, 1X EDTA complete Protease inhibitor (Roche -11836153001, 1 tablet for 5ml), RNase inhibitor (Invitrogen AM2696, 50 U/ml), Phosphatase inhibitor (100 U/ml) and RNase out (Invitrogen 1643272, 100 U/ml)].
The homogenized sample was passed successively through 19 mm, 22 mm, 26 mm, and an Insulin syringe to make a smooth homogenate, which was then centrifuged, at 19,000Xg for 20 minutes, to obtain a clear supernatant. A portion (5–10%) of the total lysate was set aside as the total input for RNA estimation and western blotting. The total protein concentration in each sample was determined using the Bradford assay. Equal amounts of protein were used across all conditions for the RIP experiments.
Agarose beads (Roche, 11719416001) were equilibrated in 1X lysis buffer. For pre-clearing, each supernatant was incubated with 20 μl of equilibrated agarose beads for one hour, followed by centrifugation at 8,000Xg for 10 minutes to collect the beads. The supernatant obtained after this step was the pre-cleared lysate, which was further processed.
To immunoprecipitate Flag-tagged GFP from the strains, anti-Flag M2 agarose beads (Sigma, A2220-1ML) were used. For each sample 60 μl of 50% slurry (equivalent to 30 μl of packed beads) of anti-Flag M2 agarose beads was taken in a 1.5 ml tube and washed with 1X lysis buffer to equilibrate. The pre-cleared lysates from the previous step were added to the equilibrated beads and incubated at 4°C overnight with continuous mixing. In the case of immunoprecipitation of Pmec-4::MBL-1::GFP from wild-type and mbl-1 samples expressing this transgene, 3 μg of anti-GFP antibody (MBL LifeSciences M048-3, raised in mouse) was added to the precleared lysates and incubated for 8–10 hours with continuous mixing. The following day, 30 μl of equilibrated Protein G–agarose beads (Sigma 15920010) were added to the lysates and incubated further for 3 hours.
Both samples (anti-Flag M2 and anti-GFP) were then centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 15 minutes at 4°C. The resulting pellets were collected and washed with lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, followed by centrifugation at 10,000Xg for 15 minutes at 4°C. The agarose beads were collected, with 20% of the bead’s volume reserved for western Blot analysis and the remaining 80% was used for RNA isolation and qRT PCR as described earlier.

## Western blot
Samples were boiled in Laemmli buffer and resolved on a 12% SDS-PAGE. After the proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, the membranes were blocked with 5% BSA for one hour and then probed with the anti-GFP antibody (Abcam ab290) overnight. The following day, the membranes were washed in 1X Tris Buffer Saline containing 0.1% Tween 20 (TBST) and then incubated with a secondary antibody (anti-Rb) for 3 hours. Finally, the protein bands were detected using a standard ECL chemiluminescence detection kit (Millipore, WBKLS0500).

## Image Acquisition and Quantification for Pmec-7::MEC-7::GFP and Pmec-4::GFP::MEC-12
For image acquisition and quantification of fluorescent intensities a Nikon confocal microscope (A1HD25) with a 60X oil objective (NA 1.4) was used. The worms were mounted on 5% agarose beds and immobilized using 10 mM levamisole in M9 buffer. The transgenic worms co-expressing Pmec-4::mCherry (tbIs222) along with either Pmec-7::mec-7::gfp (cDNA, shrEx473) or Pmec-7::mec-7::gfp (genomic DNA, shrEx474)were imaged using 10% of 488 nm laser for GFP tagged cDNA, 1.5% of 488nm laser for GFP tagged genomic DNA, and 0.3% of 561 nm laser for mCherry (constitutive reporter).
To analyze the fluorescent intensity, average fluorescent intensities of mec-7::gfp, or mec-12::gfp, and mCherry reporters were measured from the PLM cell body and the 50 μm regions of both the anterior and posterior neurite of PLM neuron, using ImageJ. We measured average intensities from ROIs placed on the background, outside the PLM neuron for background correction. The ratio of average intensities of GFP and MCherry ( ) as well as the absolute intensities of GFP and MCherry ( ) were plotted based on these measurements.
Similarly, worms expressing Pmec-7-mec-7 (genomic DNA)::gfp::SL2::mCherry, which co-expresses the mec-7::gfp (genomic DNA) and mCherry under the same promoter,) were imaged using 8% of 488 nm laser for GFP and 1% of 561 nm laser for mCherry from the same ROIs as discussed above.
For quantifying the ratio of the average intensities of gfp::mec-12 and mCherry ( ) and their absolute fluorescent intensities ( ) worms coexpressing Pmec-4::gfp::mec-12 (cDNA, shrEx492) and Pmec-4::mCherry (tbIs222) were imaged using 5% of 488 nm laser for GFP::mec-12 and 1% of 561 nm laser for mCherry.

## Statistical analysis
The data analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism software version 9.0.2. The mean value and the standard error of the mean (SEM) were represented by the bar in the plots. The X2 test (Fisher’s exact test) was used for comparing proportions, while ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test was used for comparing more than two groups. Bartlett’s test was conducted to test the homogeneity of variances before proceeding with ANOVA. The P-value, indicating the level of significance, was presented in each panel of the Figure to compare the respective groups. The sample number (n) for each experiment was mentioned in the respective Figure legend, along with the total number of biological replicates (N).

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Mapping of the ju1128 mutation, related to .
(A) The Gel picture showing the result of Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) mapping of ju1128 mutation. The 100-base pair ladder was used as a marker. In the gel picture, mutation showed linkage on two chromosomes, one on the third chromosome, which is because of klp-7(tm2143) (marked with red arrowhead) and another on the X chromosome (marked with red arrowhead). (B) Frequency plot of X-chromosome for mapping of the ju1128 mutation from the whole genome sequencing data using the method described by Minevich et al. (2012), with chromosome position (in megabases/Mb) plotted against the Normalized frequency of pure parental alleles. It peaks at the genomic position linked to the ju1128 mutation.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## mbl-1 mutants display a defect in the BDU neuron and GAP junction, related to .
(A) Representative confocal images and (B) illustration of touch neurons (ALM and PLM) and BDU neurons in both wild-type and mbl-1(0) at the L4 stage. BDU neurons were visualized using Punc-86::GFP (kyIs262) and for visualization of touch neurons, Pmec-4::mCherry (tbIs222) and Punc-86::GFP (kyIs262) transgenes were used. The presence of physical contact between the PLM anterior neurite and BDU neuron is shown by the white arrowhead in the wild-type background which is lost in mbl-1(0) shown by the red arrowhead. (C) Quantification of the defect as shown in the image (A). N = 3 independent replicates, n (number of worms) = 25–32. (D-E) Representative confocal images (D) and schematics (E) of the gap junction synapse labeled with UNC-9::GFP(shrEx434) in the touch neurons, in the wild-type and mbl-1(0) backgrounds. The green arrows show the localization of UNC-9::GFP in the wild-type background, whereas in the mbl-1(0) the red arrow is pointed at the tip of PLM anterior neurite missing UNC-9::GFP localization. (F) Quantification of the percentage of defect shown in the image in panel D. N = 3–4 independent replicates, n (number of worms) = 30–35. (G-I) Representative confocal images (G) and illustration (H) of PLM neuron in the wild-type (muIs32) and mbl-1(tm1563); muIs32 backgrounds at A7 (seven-day adult) stage. White arrows are showing the visible gaps in the anterior neurite indicating degeneration. (I) Histogram showing the quantification of degeneration of PLM neurons at A3 (three-day adult stage), A5 (five-day adult stage), and A7 in wild-type and mbl-1(tm1563) background. N = 3 independent replicates, n (number of worms) = 16–26. For C, and F***P <0.001; Fisher’s exact test. ns, not significant.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## mbl-1 mutants display a defect in D-type GABAergic motor neurons, related to .
(A-C). Confocal images of wild type (A) and mbl-1(0) (B) worms expressing a presynaptic reporter Pmec-7-ELKS-1::TagRFP (jsIs1075), shown in magenta color. The neuron is also labeled with diffusible reporter Pmec-7-GFP (muIs32), shown in green. The ectopic synapse in the PLM anterior process in the mbl-1(0) background is marked by a red arrowhead, whereas the original synapse is marked by a white arrowhead. (C) The histogram shows the percentage of PLM neurons with ectopic synapses in the mbl-1(0) background. N = 3 independent replicates, n (number of worms) = 25–30. (D-F) Representative images (D) and schematic (E) of D-type motor neurons labeled with Punc-25::GFP (juIs76) in the wild-type and mbl-1(0) at the L4 stage. Red arrow showing a defect in neurite growth in mbl-1(0) background. (F) The histogram shows the percentage of worms showing neurite defects in the mbl-1(0). N = 3–4 independent replicates, n (number of worms) = 30–50. (G) Representative confocal images of touch neurons in the mutants of different RNA binding proteins. The names of the mutants are mentioned next to the respective image panels. (H) Quantification of any defects in PLM morphology seen in the mutants mentioned in (G) N = 3 independent replicates, n (number of worms) = 80–130. For C, F, and H ***P <0.001; Fisher’s exact test. ns, not significant.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## Putative MBL-1/MBNL-1 binding sites in different transcripts, related to .
(A-D) Pictures depicting MBL-1/MBNL-1 preferential binding sequence and binding positions in the transcript of mec-7 (A), mec-12 (B), unc-76 (C), and sad-1 (D). (E and F) The histograms show the anterior (E) and posterior (F) gentle touch response index of the worm in the wild-type, mbl-1(0), mec-7(0), mec-12(0), mbl-1(0) mec-7(0) and mbl-1(0); mec-12(0) backgrounds. N = 3 independent replicates, n (number of worms) = 16–50. For E-F, **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. Error bars represent SEM. Statistical comparisons were done using ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test. ns, not significant.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## Relative quantification of different transcripts in mbl-1(0) background using quantitative RT-PCR, related to .
(A) Illustration showing the positions of different primers, used for checking the transcript length or doing qRT-PCR, on tba-1, mec-7, mec-12, sad-1, and unc-76 genes. The sequence of these primers is given in the supplementary file . (B) Representative agarose gel image showing sad-1 and unc-76 transcript in the wild-type and the mbl-1(0) background. (C) The histogram is showing the relative fold change of the transcript of mec-7, mec-12, sad-1, and unc-76 in the wild type and the mbl-1(0) backgrounds. These data were obtained from quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Independent replicates (N) = 6 and the number of reaction (n) = 6–8. For C, ***P < 0.001; ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test. Error bars represent SEM. ns, not significant.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## Quantification of fluorescent intensity of MEC-7::GFP and GFP::MEC-12 reporters in wild-type and mbl-1(0) background, related to .
(A-D) Histograms showing the absolute fluorescence intensities of Pmec-7::mec-7::gfp (cDNA) (shrEx473) (A-B), Pmec-4::gfp::mec-12 (cDNA) (shrEx492) (C-D), and Pmec-4::mCherry (tbIs222) (A-D) in the wild-type and mbl-1(0) backgrounds. The fluorescence intensity is quantified in an arbitrary unit from the anterior (Ant) and posterior (Pst) neurites of PLM, from 50 μm regions of interest (ROI) as shown in the , and the PLM cell body in the wild-type and mbl-1(0) backgrounds. For A-D, independent replicates (N) = 3–4 and the number of neurons (n) = 20–25. (E and G) Representative confocal images of the worms expressing Pmec-7::mec-7::gfp (genomic DNA) (shrEx474) and Pmec-4::mCherry (tbIs222) (E), and worms expressing Pmec-7::mec-7::gfp::SL2::mCherry (shrEx486) (G) in wild-type and mbl-1(0) background. (F and H) The histogram is showing quantification of the ratio (MEC-7::GFP/MCherry) of average fluorescent intensity from 50 μm regions of interest (ROI) as shown in in the anterior (Ant) and posterior (Pst) neurites and cell body (CB) of PLM neurons. (I-J) Histograms showing the fluorescence intensities of Pmec-7::mec-7::gfp (genomic DNA) (shrEx474) and Pmec-4::mCherry (tbIs222) in arbitrary units (I) and histogram showing fluorescence intensities of Pmec-7::mec-7::gfp::SL2::mCherry (shrEx486) (J) in the wild-type and mbl-1(0) backgrounds. For F, H, I, and J, independent replicates (N) = 3–4 and the number of neurons (n) = 20–25. For A-D, F, H, and I-J, *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P <0.001; ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test. Error bars represent SEM. ns, not significant.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## mec-7(0) and mec-12(0) mutants display a defect in the microtubule dynamics, related to .
(A) Schematic of the PLM neuron showing the 30 μm Regions of interest (ROIs), marked in red and orange for anterior and posterior neurites, respectively. These ROIs were used for analyzing the time-lapse movies of Pmec-4::EBP-2::GFP (juIs338) in wild-type, mec-7(0), and mec-12(0) backgrounds. (B) Representative kymographs of EBP-2::GFP obtained in the wild-type, mec-7(0), and mec-12(0) backgrounds obtained from the above-mentioned ROIs. The green and magenta traces on kymographs represent the Plus-end-out (microtubule growth events away from the cell body) and Minus-end-out (towards the cell body) tracks, respectively. (C) The bar graph is showing the fraction of microtubules with plus-end-out’ (P) or ‘minus-end-out’ (M) polarity in wild-type, mec-7(0), and mec-12(0) backgrounds in the PLM anterior (Ant) and posterior (Pst) neurites. N = 3–5 independent replicates, n (number of worms) = 20–50. (D) The bar graph represents the number of EBP-2::GFP tracks (number of growing microtubules) in PLM anterior (Ant) and posterior (Pst) neurites in wild-type, mec-7(0), and mec-12(0). N = 3–5 independent replicates, n (number of worms) = 20–50. (E and F) Growth length (E) and growth duration (F) of the tracks, measured from net pixel shift in the X and Y axis, respectively, from kymographs shown in B. N = 3–5 independent replicates, n (number of tracks) = 1986–6064. For C-F, ***P < 0.001; ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test. Error bars represent SEM. ns, not significant.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Transcripts with MBL-1 binding site expressed in PLM neuron.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## GO analysis of MBL-1 targets involved in different biological processes.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## MBL-1 targets checked for a phenotype in PLM neuron.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Table

## Primers used for doing qRT-PCR.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Table

## Strains used in this study.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Table

## Transgenes Generated.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

We would like to thank the National Bio-Resource Project, Japan, and the Caenorhabditis Genetics Centre for strains. We thank Andrew Chisholm and Yishi Jin for their support and guidance at the initial stage of this project. The ju1128 mutant was isolated in their labs. We thank Neeraj Singh and Pankajam Thyagarajan for their assistance in WGS data analysis. We thank Sibaram Behera for helping with touch assay experiments and for the help in Bioinformatics analysis. We thank Arnab Mukhopadhyay, Sandhya Koushika, Michael Nonet, and Cori Bargmann for their help with strains. We are also grateful to Yuji Kohara for sharing mbl-1 cDNA.
 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010885.r001Decision Letter 0
CopenhaverGregory P.Editor-in-ChiefHilliardMassimo A.Guest Editor© 2023 Copenhaver, Hilliard2023Copenhaver, Hilliardhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
31 Oct 2022

Dear Dr. Ghosh-Roy,
Thank you very much for submitting your Research Article entitled 'Musleblind-1 regulates microtubule cytoskeleton in C. elegans mechanosensory neuron through tubulin mRNAs' to PLOS Genetics.
The manuscript was fully evaluated at the editorial level and by three independent peer reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important problem, but raised some substantial concerns about the current manuscript that need to be addressed to provide mechanistic insights, expand the data analysis, and strengthen the conclusions.  These are especially related, but not limited, to the insufficient data provided to support the conclusion that MBL-1 stabilizes the mec-7 and mec-12 transcripts, how mbl-1 suppresses kpl-7, and what link exists between the regulation of mec-7/12 by mbl-1 and the microtubule polarity and dynamics.  Moreover, the manuscript will need to be structured within the context of previous published work, some of which has not been cited.  This includes the early work on neuronal development and polarization, as indicated by Reviewer 1, as well as the work on mbl-1 in synaptic formation(Shen lab) that should be presented as the entry point for this study of mbl-1 on synapses.  Finally, the manuscript will need to be carefully checked for grammatical errors, typos, and colloquial language, which populate the current version.  Based on these reviews, we will not be able to accept this version of the manuscript, but we would be willing to review a much-revised version. We cannot, of course, promise publication at that time.
Should you decide to revise the manuscript for further consideration here, your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. We will also require a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript.
If you decide to revise the manuscript for further consideration at PLOS Genetics, please aim to resubmit within the next 60 days, unless it will take extra time to address the concerns of the reviewers, in which case we would appreciate an expected resubmission date by email to plosgenetics@plos.org.
If present, accompanying reviewer attachments are included with this email; please notify the journal office if any appear to be missing. They will also be available for download from the link below. You can use this link to log into the system when you are ready to submit a revised version, having first consulted our Submission Checklist.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please be aware that our data availability policy requires that all numerical data underlying graphs or summary statistics are included with the submission, and you will need to provide this upon resubmission if not already present. In addition, we do not permit the inclusion of phrases such as "data not shown" or "unpublished results" in manuscripts. All points should be backed up by data provided with the submission.
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool.  PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
PLOS has incorporated Similarity Check, powered by iThenticate, into its journal-wide submission system in order to screen submitted content for originality before publication. Each PLOS journal undertakes screening on a proportion of submitted articles. You will be contacted if needed following the screening process.
To resubmit, use the link below and 'Revise Submission' in the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder.
We are sorry that we cannot be more positive about your manuscript at this stage. Please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any concerns or questions.
Yours sincerely,
Massimo A. Hilliard
Guest Editor
PLOS Genetics
Gregory P. Copenhaver
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Genetics
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: The article by Puri et al. investigates the role of MBL-1 in neuronal structure and synapse localization in the mechanosensory neurons of C. elegans. It provides new insights into the importance of this molecule for correct neuronal structure. It also offers mechanistic insights by demonstrating interactions with mec-7, mec-12, and sad-1 mRNAS. Thus, overall it provides novel data on how an RNA binding protein interacts with cytoskeletal elements to mediate correct neuronal structure. As listed below, I have numerous suggestions for the authors to address before the manuscript can be considered for publication.
Overall, the writing of the manuscript needs significant improvement. The grammar and sentence structure need to be improved to help with the readability of the manuscript, as there are many instances in which the meaning of the authors is unclear.
It would be important to cite some of the early work on neuronal development and polarization in C. elegans in the introduction. For example, Adler et al., 2006 Nat Neuro; Chang et al., 2006 Curr Biol; Hilliard and Bargmann, 2006 Dev Cell; Prasad and Clark, 2006 Development; Quinn et al., 2008 Curr Biol.
All gene names should be italicized.
Figure 1.
Panel A. The authors may wish to label the PVM neurons in their images to make them more understandable for those who are not familiar with the mec neurons of C. elegans.
Panel C. Was the ALM defect analysed with a yes or no qualification, ie it either had a posterior neurite or it didn’t? This is not clear in the manuscript.
Panel D and E. The stats are not clear in these two graphs – is the fosmid rescue line significantly different to the controls (ie WT and mbl-1(ju1128)?
Is the fosmid able to rescue the tm1563 allele?
Figure 2.
Why did the authors choose to focus on the tm1563 allele for this figure (for images and rescue) when they primarily used the ju1128 allele in Figure 1?
Panel A. In the image of the mbl-1 mutant, the ALM and PLM axons appear much fainter than the WT and possibly fragmented. Is there degeneration occurring in these neurons? Thus, is the short phenotype developmental or is it degenerative?
Panel B. It’s interesting that the TRN-specific rescue is not as strong as the genomic or pan-neuronal rescues. Why do the authors think this is so? Is this difference significantly different?
Panel F. The text states that “MBL-1::GFP was 238 highly enriched in many neurons including ALM and PLM touch neurons”. However, from the images provided it is impossible to see the PLM neurons. It appears that the authors have performed the required co-localization experiments using a mCherry marker, but this is not visible in these images. Please provide clearer and/or enlarged images and/or quantification to demonstrate that MBL-1 is expressed in the ALM and PLM neurons. Furthermore, do you find enrichment of MBL-1 in any areas of these neurons?
Figure 3.
The author may wish to consider separating this figure into two to make it easier to follow.
Panel M/N. The functional decline in the posterior response is quite subtle. It would be good to show that this is rescued with the introduction of the rescue transgene to provide further strength the findings. Expanding subsequent findings, especially with mec-12, mec-7 and sad-7, to assess their effects on the mbl-1-mediated reductions in touch response would provide further strength to the proposed interactions and into their mechanisms of action.
Figure 4.
Both mec-7 and mec-12 mutants have previously been shown to present a high penetrance of axonal degeneration in the mec neurons. However, here the authors again refer to the phenotype as short neurites. The authors need to include additional experiments that clarify their phenotype as either developmental or degenerative.
Figure 5.
Panel D-E. I’m not sure that I follow the authors assumption that “This reduction observed in the mbl-1(0) mutants as compared to the wild type is interesting, as it illustrates the fate of the pre-existing transcripts in the absence of MBL-1 and in the absence of any new transcription. As transcription was blocked, the observed additional decrease could be attributed to the increased instability of the pre-existing transcripts in the absence of MBL-1.” It seems that the more plausible explanation would be that this experiment is showing the normal turn-over of the transcripts, as for both WT and mutant you show an ~40% decrease after treatment. Thus, the mutant is appearing to behave the same as the WT after treatment. As such, I am not convinced by the conclusion that “MBL-1 is regulating the stability of mec-7 and mec-12 mRNA in PLM neurons.”
Panel F/G. Did the authors find similar results with mec-12?
Figure 6.
Panel B/C. These panels show interaction with mec-7, mec-12 and sad-1, but then mec-12 appears to be forgotten about for the next experiments in this figure and in the text, which only refers to mec-7 and sad-1. Why is this? Did the authors find that mec-12 did not interact with MBL-1 in the mec neurons in subsequent experiments? The experiments conducted on mec-7 and sad-1 in panels D-E should also be included for mec-12.
Figure 7.
Again, why wasn’t mec-12 included in these analyses? It is included in the model in panel F. Although MEC-12 and MEC-7 are most commonly known as the major subunits of microtubules in the mec neurons, there are several examples in the literature demonstrating that they can function quite differently to one another and influence specific phenotype in different ways or to different degrees. Thus, it cannot be assumed that they will behave the same if the experiments have not been performed.
Panel F. The authors may wish to expand their model to make it more informative and reflective of their proposed mechanisms of action.
Figure S2. The images are far too small to allow the reader to see the required detail. Yes, the schematics are of great assistance, but the original images need to be able to be seen.
The text states “In the mbl-1(0) mutant, we noticed that on the dorsal side, there are often
gaps (red arrowhead, Figure S2J-L) indicating a synaptic defect”. However, the authors have only used a diffuse GFP marker to visualise these neurons. Further analysis using a synaptic marker in these neurons is needed to conclude that these gaps indicate a synaptic defect rather than shorter neurites (similar to the phenotype in ALM/PLM).
Reviewer #2: Review_PGENETICS-D-22-01039
Puri, Ghosh-Roy et al. described how C. elegans MBL-1/Muscleblind, an RNA-binding protein, promotes axon growth and synapse development by regulating microtubule polarity through controlling the level of tubulin mRNAs. They first identified mbl-1 as a suppressor for touch neuron defects in the klp-7 Kinesin mutant, followed by providing evidence that microtubule dynamics and levels of touch neuron-specific tubulins (mec-7, mec-12) are altered in the mbl-1 mutant. RNA-IP experiments showed that MBL-1 binds mec-7 RNA, suggesting that MBL-1 sustains MEC-7 levels through a posttranscriptional mechanism. Consistent with this notion, overexpression of mec-7 rescued the neurite defects of the touch neurons in the mbl-1 mutant. Most of the experiments in this study were reasonable, although some clearly need further refinement in terms of data analysis. However, it remains unexplored how regulation of tubulins by MBL-1 is linked to microtubule polarity and dynamics in the touch neurons. The interaction between mbl-1 and sad-1 is not explored at a deeper level, making one wonder whether the molecular mechanisms by which mbl-1 regulates tubulins and sad-1 are similar or distinct. Such unaddressed issues compromise the mechanistic depth of the paper.
Major points:
1. The paper needs a thorough editing check to correct the numerous grammatical errors and typos in writing. The authors should be more careful in checking their submitted manuscript. In addition, the authors have a tendency of using terms that are either too casual, or seem alienated to the audience without explanation. For example, in line 311 and line 314, “mode value” and “fraction polarity value” were used to describe the polarity defects of the mbl-1 mutant. I suggest the authors revise all terms like these to make their paper better received by the audience.
2. The suppression of klp-7 mutant phenotypes by mbl-1 remains unexplained. The authors need to test the following: (1) Whether microtubule dynamics in the klp-7 are different from the WT and the mbl-1 mutant, and whether defects of microtubule dynamics in the klp-7 mutant are suppressed by the mbl-1 mutation; (2) Whether mec-7 and mec-12 levels are altered by the klp-7 mutation, and whether these defects are again corrected by adding the mbl-1 mutation.
3. What is the link between mec-7/mec-12 regulation by mbl-1 and intact microtubule polarity and dynamics in the touch neurons? As had been stated above, this is the most important mechanistic issue for the current study that needs to be rigorously explored by experiments.
4. What is the basis of axon defects in the D-type motor neurons of the mbl-1 mutant? Obviously, this is unlikely to be the consequence of altered mec-7 and mec-12 levels, as these two tubulin genes are not expressed in DD or VD neurons. Can the authors speculate from the candidate MBL-1 bound RNAs (Figure 4A) and elaborate on this issue (by discussion or experiments)?
5. Figure 5D, 5E: The interpretation is flawed that instability of mec-7 and mec-12 transcripts is increased in the mbl-1 mutant. Since the expression of these two genes is already low in the mbl-1 mutant, the authors need to normalize the levels of mec-7 and mec-12 transcripts after Actinomycin D to those at baseline, and compare this value to that of the wild type animals. Without such quantification, the current conclusion that mbl-1 promotes the stability of mec-7 and mec-12 transcripts is premature and unsupported.
6. Figure 5F, 5G, Line 467-472: I could not find statements of using Actinomycin D in this experiment, so I assumed that it was conducted without Actinomycin D. If so, then the data presented here cannot be used to support the role of MBL-1 in maintaining MEC-7 stability. Moreover, the cytosolic mCherry protein was expressed from a different transgene using a different promoter (Pmec-4) from the mec-7-expressing transgene driven from the mec-7 promoter. As such, comparing the GFP to mCherry ratio using these two transgenes is not a valid way of normalizing MEC-7::GFP quantity. The authors need to create a Pmec-7::MEC-7::GFP::SL2::mCherry transgene for this purpose. That said, these experiments only explore the role of MBL-1 in controlling MEC-7 level without specifically examining its function in promoting MEC-7 stability, which clearly requires the use of Actinomycin D. These experiments need rigorous revision.
7. Figure 6: A negative control for the RNA-IP is necessary to show that MBL-1 does not bind most RNAs in a non-specific fashion. Using the KLP-7::GFP as a control is fine, but the authors need to show that not all RNAs are enriched in the RIP samples of MBL-1::GFP worms.
Minor points:
1. Line 47 and 107: please explain sad-1 (such as “sad-1/SAD BRSK kinase”)
2. Figure 1B: It is better to just show the gene structure of mbl-1 and what the ju1128 and tm1563 alleles are, rather than showing the fosmid contents.
3. The authors are suggested to provide high power images for the neurite and synaptic branch defects of the mbl-1 mutants as well as MBL-1::GFP in Figure 2. It is hard to see the details of the ALM and PLM phenotypes in the current images (Figures 2A, 2C, 2D and 2F).
4. Line 122: The term “multiple axon-like phenotype” (of ALM) is a bit confusing. Although there is still debate whether this is a bipolar ALM phenotype or a misguidance defect of the ALM process, the term that the authors used does not help clarify the issue. I suggest that they just say “ectopic ALM process” (to be exact, the long process of ALM is not a pure axon – it displays features of dendrites).
5. Line 182: Please correct this sentence: “making a ventral synaptic branch the PLM axon makes a synapse…”
6. Line 192: “Pmec-4” should be italicized
7. Line 242: Gaps in the dorsal axons of D-type motor neurons should be interpreted as defects in axon extension similar to the short ALM and PLM neurites, rather than as synaptic defects. The authors should examine the distribution of RAB-3 and ELKS-1 in the D-type motor neurons of the mbl-1 mutant to substantiate their conclusion that mbl-1 is required for synaptic development in this class of neurons.
8. Line 246-247: Please annotate these genes succinctly.
9. Line 252: correct “caused due”
10. Figure 3: The green and purple lines in embedded in Figure 3B are very hard to see. Figure 3J: Some lines are skewed.
11. Line 263: “%” should be “percentage”.
12. Line 268: “smaller” should be “shorter”.
13. It is not clear what microtubule “arrangement” means in the paper. Microtubule “polarity” or “orientation” could be a better term, or the authors need to provide convincing justification for using such a term.
14. Line 382-387: I am confused here as the authors said that they found mec-7 and mec-12 were among genes found to be downregulated by mbl-1 in some published reports but claimed that they could not find genes in this group that were related to GO terms of axon development or synapse structure. Aren’t mec-7 and mec-12 two such genes?
15. Line 420: The expression of “0.4717 +/- 0.03720 fold” is very strange and inappropriate. This could be seen again in Line 456. The authors should carefully revise their use of scientific expression. As has been stated above, this manuscript needs a thorough editing of writing. The senior author should take the responsibility to ensure the quality of writing.
16. Figure 6F, left: The protein band for MBL-1::GFP seems to be absent in the total lysate of the MBL-1::GFP::FLAG animals. The authors need to exlain this. A minor point is that the protein bands in the total lysates of the MBL-1::GFP::FLAG and Pmec-4::MBL-1::GFP look quite different. Why?
17. Figure 7A, the third image from top: That should be the AVM neuron, not the AVA neuron.
Reviewer #3: Puri et al. reveal the role of mbl-1 in neurite and synapse biology through regulation of microtubule cytoskeleton components. In a genetic screen for suppressors of ectopically extended neurites in the ALM neuron in C. elegans, they identify a mutation in mbl-1 that shortens neurites in klp-7 mutants that have enhanced microtubule stability. mbl-1 mutants displayed mixed microtubule polarity and defects in axonal transport of cargo. MBL-1 is an RNA-binding protein, and the authors show evidence that it regulates the mRNAs of the microtubule genes mec-7 and mec-12, as well as sad-1. The authors propose that MBL-1 binds these mRNAs and stabilises them or mediates splicing in the case of sad-1. Overall, the manuscript is technically robust, novel, and interesting, however some of the mechanistic data into MBL-1 function needs improving as does the explanation of results that do not fit the conclusions made. There are some outstanding questions that also remain unaddressed.
Major:
1. The interpretation that MBL-1 stabilises the mRNA molecules of mec-7 and mec-12 is based on insufficient data. While the use of Actinomycin D is good, it may not block transcription fully and the authors need to prove whether this is indeed the case in their animals. Moreover, the translational MEC-7::GFP reporter cannot distinguish between transcriptional or post-transcriptional mec-7 regulation. Therefore, other orthogonal evidence is required to conclude that MBL-1 stabilises these specific transcripts.
2. Some of the data do not fit the conclusions. From the RIP experiments, MBL-1 associates with mec-7 and sad-1 mRNAs in mechanosensory neurons, but not mec-12. In light of this, how do you reconcile its regulation of mec-12 in PLM? Sad-1 mRNA levels or splicing are not altered in mbl-1(0) mutants, yet it associates with MBL-1 protein. If association results in mRNA stability or splicing, why aren’t sad-1 mRNA levels lower or altered in length in animals lacking mbl-1?
3. There are also some unanswered questions. Why do PLM anterior processes develop a mixed microtubule polarity if mec-1 and mec-12 mRNA levels are reduced in mbl-1(0) mutants? Why is the number of growing microtubules increased in mbl-1(0) mutants?
MINOR.
At times, the manuscript is written in a descriptive manner (phenotypic data) and could be improved with more contextualisation and/or insight into the functional consequences of the observed neurite changes. Highlighting the conceptual advances or the point of each result throughout the manuscript may also improve readability in some sections.
Figure 2B: Authors should clarify in the main text and legend that TRN refers to mechanosensory neurons under pmec-4.
Page 8 – line 183 – only photos for one of the mutant alleles is shown in fig. 2A.
Page 8 – line 198 – The UNC-9::GFP reporter appears as puncta throughout the body of the wild-type animal in fig. S2D. Many of these puncta are missing in the mbl-1(0) mutant. Can the authors explain this? In addition, it is also very difficult to understand how the schematics in panel E of this figure were derived from the representative images. For example, there are many UNC-9::GFP puncta along the wild-type PLM axon that are not included in the schematic. What are these? This result needs better clarification.
Page 15 – line 351 – According to Table S3, 22 genes are noted are assessed, rather than 13.
Page 21 –line 469 - missing mcherry transgene nomenclature.
Page 15 -lines 342 – 362 should be condensed. It reads as repetitious.
Figure 4 - Authors should indicate what fluorescent reporter is used for the imaging and analysis. Figure needs images of controls/wild types for reference.
Some grammatical and sentence structure errors. Some parts of the text could be simplified to avoid confusion. The protein of interest is spelt incorrectly in the title.
**********

Have all data underlying the figures and results presented in the manuscript been provided?

Large-scale datasets should be made available via a public repository as described in the PLOS Genetics
data availability policy, and numerical data that underlies graphs or summary statistics should be provided in spreadsheet form as supporting information.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
10.1371/journal.pgen.1010885.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
29 May 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response Letter-Puri etal-Revision-210523.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pgen.1010885.r003Decision Letter 1
CopenhaverGregory P.Editor-in-ChiefHilliardMassimo A.Guest Editor© 2023 Copenhaver, Hilliard2023Copenhaver, Hilliardhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
12 Jun 2023

Dear Dr Ghosh-Roy,
Thank you very much for submitting your Research Article entitled 'Muscleblind-1 regulates microtubule cytoskeleton in C. elegans mechanosensory neurons through tubulin mRNAs' to PLOS Genetics.
The manuscript was fully evaluated at the editorial level and by independent peer reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important topic but identified some concerns that we ask you address in a revised manuscript.
We therefore ask you to modify the manuscript according to the review recommendations. Your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer.
In addition we ask that you:
1) Provide a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript.
2) Upload a Striking Image with a corresponding caption to accompany your manuscript if one is available (either a new image or an existing one from within your manuscript). If this image is judged to be suitable, it may be featured on our website. Images should ideally be high resolution, eye-catching, single panel square images. For examples, please browse our archive. If your image is from someone other than yourself, please ensure that the artist has read and agreed to the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution License. Note: we cannot publish copyrighted images.
We hope to receive your revised manuscript within the next 30 days. If you anticipate any delay in its return, we would ask you to let us know the expected resubmission date by email to plosgenetics@plos.org.
If present, accompanying reviewer attachments should be included with this email; please notify the journal office if any appear to be missing. They will also be available for download from the link below. You can use this link to log into the system when you are ready to submit a revised version, having first consulted our Submission Checklist.
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
Please be aware that our data availability policy requires that all numerical data underlying graphs or summary statistics are included with the submission, and you will need to provide this upon resubmission if not already present. In addition, we do not permit the inclusion of phrases such as "data not shown" or "unpublished results" in manuscripts. All points should be backed up by data provided with the submission.
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
PLOS has incorporated Similarity Check, powered by iThenticate, into its journal-wide submission system in order to screen submitted content for originality before publication. Each PLOS journal undertakes screening on a proportion of submitted articles. You will be contacted if needed following the screening process.
To resubmit, you will need to go to the link below and 'Revise Submission' in the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder.
Please let us know if you have any questions while making these revisions.
Yours sincerely,
Massimo A. Hilliard
Guest Editor
PLOS Genetics
Gregory P. Copenhaver
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Genetics
Dear Dr. Ghosh Roy,
Thank you for submitting a revised version of your manuscript. The reviewers have examined the paper and they have found it highly improved compared to the original submission. However, they found that there are still some editing elements that needs to be addressed before the paper can proceed further. Importantly, they also highlighted that the manuscript still needs improvement in the writing, grammar, and sentences structure; please ensure that these also are addressed before your final submission.
Unless you believe additional time is needed, I trust a revised version can be submitted within 2 weeks.
I look forward to receive your revised manuscript.
Thank you,
Kind regards,
Massimo.
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Authors:

Please note here if the review is uploaded as an attachment.

Reviewer #1: The authors have addressed most of my previous concerns and the paper is now much improved from the first submission. However, I still have some minor concerns that should be addressed prior to the manuscript being published.
1. The writing still needs significant improvement for clarity, and to correct grammatical errors and issues with sentence structure.
2. The title should be revised for clarity and to better describe the study. I suggest the following: "Muscleblind-1 interacts with tubulin mRNAs to regulate the microtubule cytoskeleton in the C. elegans mechanosensory neurons"
3. The authors should provide a definition for the sad-1 gene in the abstract. Currently, no indication is given for what this gene is, and therefore there is no capacity for the reader to grasp the importance of the interaction between MBL-1 and sad-1.
4. The TRN phenotypes of the mbl-1 mutants are remarkably similar to those observed in the absence of MEC-17 (neuronal defects, MT defects, synaptic defects, interactions with MEC-12/MEC-7). Yet, there is no mention of MEC-17 in the manuscript. The authors should at least include a mention of the similarities and potential involvement of MEC-17 in their discussion.
Reviewer #2: The authors had done significant amount of work for the revision, and these additional data strengthened the conclusion and clarified most of the issues that I raised during the initial review of the paper. The revised manuscript was much better than the original one. I think the paper can now be considered for publication at PLoS Genetics, after the following minor points are addressed:
1. sad-1 should be explained in the abstract.
2. In Author summary, the last statement "... might help mitigate the diseases such as muscular dystrophy caused due to misregulation of MBNL in humans" is better removed or tuned down. The study was conducted in neuronal cells, which have very different gene expression patterns and cell biology to those of the muscle cells. The current statement is misleading and exaggerating.
3. Line 119: The anterior cells should include AVM? Or the authors should just remove "anterior cells" and "posterior cells" to avoid confusion. As my comments in the initial review, the authors should avoid using jargons and instead stick with the standard terminology of the worm community.
4. I cannot find description of the suppressor screen in the Materials & Methods section. A few descriptions will be necessary, such as the mutagenesis method (EMS?), an estimation of the screen size (number of haploid genomes screened), etc. By contrast, a detailed description of mapping ju1128 in the Results may not be necessary or should be streamlined (line 136-147).
5. Line 175: "mbl" should be italicized.
6. Line 205: It should read "In both mutant alleles of mbl-1"
7. The y-axis scales of figure S3C and S3H should be mended as a full 100% scale.
8. Figure S7E: Statistics should be carefully checked again, as the data of the WT and mec-7 or mec-12 mutants look quite similar at the first glance.
Reviewer #3: Puri et al have submitted a revised version of their manuscript. They have addressed all of my comments well and the manuscript is an improvement overall.
**********

Have all data underlying the figures and results presented in the manuscript been provided?

Large-scale datasets should be made available via a public repository as described in the PLOS Genetics
data availability policy, and numerical data that underlies graphs or summary statistics should be provided in spreadsheet form as supporting information.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
10.1371/journal.pgen.1010885.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
14 Jul 2023

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response Letter-Puri etal-Revision2-120723.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pgen.1010885.r005Decision Letter 2
CopenhaverGregory P.Editor-in-ChiefHilliardMassimo A.Guest Editor© 2023 Copenhaver, Hilliard2023Copenhaver, Hilliardhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
26 Jul 2023

Dear Dr Ghosh-Roy,
Thank you for your revised manuscript that addresses well the reviewers’ criticisms.  We are pleased to inform you that your paper has been accepted.  Attached, please find a marked-up version of the manuscript in which I (MAH) have corrected several grammatical errors/typos.  Please incorporate those corrections as you prepare your final draft for the production team (the editorial team will not need to re-evaluate).  Congratulations on the acceptance of your paper, and thank you for choosing PLOS Genetics as a venue for your work!
Before your submission can be formally accepted and sent to production you will also need to complete our formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. Please be aware that it may take several days for you to receive this email; during this time no action is required by you. Please note: the accept date on your published article will reflect the date of this provisional acceptance, but your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until the required changes have been made.
Once your paper is formally accepted, an uncorrected proof of your manuscript will be published online ahead of the final version, unless you’ve already opted out via the online submission form. If, for any reason, you do not want an earlier version of your manuscript published online or are unsure if you have already indicated as such, please let the journal staff know immediately at plosgenetics@plos.org.
In the meantime, please log into Editorial Manager at https://www.editorialmanager.com/pgenetics/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production and billing process. Note that PLOS requires an ORCID iD for all corresponding authors. Therefore, please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field.  This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager.
If you have a press-related query, or would like to know about making your underlying data available (as you will be aware, this is required for publication), please see the end of this email. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming article at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. Inform journal staff as soon as possible if you are preparing a press release for your article and need a publication date.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Genetics!
Yours sincerely,
Massimo A. Hilliard
Guest Editor
PLOS Genetics
Gregory P. Copenhaver
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Genetics

www.plosgenetics.org

Twitter: @PLOSGenetics
----------------------------------------------------
Comments from the reviewers (if applicable):
----------------------------------------------------

Data Deposition

If you have submitted a Research Article or Front Matter that has associated data that are not suitable for deposition in a subject-specific public repository (such as GenBank or ArrayExpress), one way to make that data available is to deposit it in the Dryad Digital Repository. As you may recall, we ask all authors to agree to make data available; this is one way to achieve that. A full list of recommended repositories can be found on our website.
The following link will take you to the Dryad record for your article, so you won't have to re‐enter its bibliographic information, and can upload your files directly: 

http://datadryad.org/submit?journalID=pgenetics&manu=PGENETICS-D-22-01039R2

More information about depositing data in Dryad is available at http://www.datadryad.org/depositing. If you experience any difficulties in submitting your data, please contact help@datadryad.org for support.
Additionally, please be aware that our data availability policy requires that all numerical data underlying display items are included with the submission, and you will need to provide this before we can formally accept your manuscript, if not already present.
----------------------------------------------------

Press Queries

If you or your institution will be preparing press materials for this manuscript, or if you need to know your paper's publication date for media purposes, please inform the journal staff as soon as possible so that your submission can be scheduled accordingly. Your manuscript will remain under a strict press embargo until the publication date and time. This means an early version of your manuscript will not be published ahead of your final version. PLOS Genetics may also choose to issue a press release for your article. If there's anything the journal should know or you'd like more information, please get in touch via plosgenetics@plos.org.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: PGENETICS-D-22-01039_R2 Annotated.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pgen.1010885.r006Acceptance letter
CopenhaverGregory P.Editor-in-ChiefHilliardMassimo A.Guest Editor© 2023 Copenhaver, Hilliard2023Copenhaver, Hilliardhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
15 Aug 2023

PGENETICS-D-22-01039R2 
Muscleblind-1 interacts with tubulin mRNAs to regulate the microtubule cytoskeleton in C. elegans mechanosensory neurons 
Dear Dr Ghosh-Roy, 
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript entitled "Muscleblind-1 interacts with tubulin mRNAs to regulate the microtubule cytoskeleton in C. elegans mechanosensory neurons" has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Genetics! Your manuscript is now with our production department and you will be notified of the publication date in due course.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. 
Soon after your final files are uploaded, unless you have opted out or your manuscript is a front-matter piece, the early version of your manuscript will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting PLOS Genetics and open-access publishing. We are looking forward to publishing your work! 
With kind regards,
Zsofi Zombor
PLOS Genetics
On behalf of:
The PLOS Genetics Team
Carlyle House, Carlyle Road, Cambridge CB4 3DN | United Kingdom
plosgenetics@plos.org | +44 (0) 1223-442823
plosgenetics.org | Twitter: @PLOSGenetics