2992heliyonHeliyonHeliyonElsevierPMC1121932711219327112193273896198810.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e32372Research on the mechanism of leader-follower product sales competition based on market access restrictions and forward contract considerations
WangLiang CaoZiqiu LiPei 1School of Economics and Management, Xi 'an University of Technology, Xi 'an, 710048, China⁎Corresponding author. wangliang@xaut.edu.cn
4620241011e32372e32372372024© 2024 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Market access restrictions have been the focus of attention for various market players, but there are fewer studies on the competitive mechanism of market access restrictions on firms' product sales. This paper investigates the competitive mechanism of leader-follower product sales based on market access restrictions and forward contracts. First, the mechanism of leader-follower sales decisions based on market access restrictions and forward contracts is clarified. Second, it models the forward default risk suffered by followers and the profit rate of leader-follower based on market access restrictions and forward considerations by Bayes' posterior probability method. Moreover, it severely explores the impact mechanisms of the degree of market access restrictions on leaders and followers when followers do not adopt and adopt forwards and makes a simulation analysis. The results show that: (i) When followers do not employ forward contracts, the less restrictive degree of market access increases the supply of leaders, and leaders' competition for product sales further leads to a decrease in the provision of followers. (ii) When followers use forwards, leaders' and followers' expected discounted profit rates decrease with the total supply of products in the market increases. (iii) If the degree of market access restrictions is low, the followers suffer an increased forward default risk, resulting in their rate of revenue decrease. The findings of this paper have some practical significance and policy implications for the regulator to adjust the degree of market access restriction in each restricted access area, to establish a reasonable and efficient competitive environment for product sales, as well as for firms to choose the optimal way of competing for product sales.
Keywords: Forward, Bayes posterior probability, Profit rate, Market access restrictions

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 May 6; Revised 2024 May 30; Accepted 2024 Jun 3; Collection date 2024 Jun 15.

1.

## Introduction
On October 19, 2015, the State Council of the People's Republic of China issued the “Opinions on the Implementation of the Negative List System for Market Access” which proposes that market players in forbidden access matters shall not enter. Those in restricted access items shall enter the access conditions and modalities. Furthermore, the regulatory authorities have taken several preventive measures to limit market access strictly. For example, in 2019, the National Development and Reform Commission of China issued the “Negative List of Market Access (2019 Edition)" which rigorously restricts the production and sale of pesticides and measuring instruments in the manufacturing industry. In 2020, the State Administration of Market Regulation of China issued the “Notice of the General Office of the General Administration of Market Supervision on Matters Relating to Further Strengthening the Quality Supervision of Non-Medical Mouthpieces” which put forward new requirements for the supervision of the non-medical mouthpiece industry. Market access restrictions may impact firms' product sales and competition under these circumstances [ ]. For example, Zhao & Liu [ ] show that market access restrictions significantly affect the quality of products supplied by suppliers. Meanwhile, Rahman, Uddin & Lodorfos [ ] indicate that market access restrictions influence firms' product sales performance and competition. It is clear that market access restrictions are a significant means for regulators to control the product sales of market players, but how can market players manage their product sales to achieve the goal of profit maximization?
Victor & David [ ] and Liski & Montero [ ] conclude that as an essential derivative in the financial market, market players can speculate or hedge through it, thus improving the efficiency of product sales. Nevertheless, forward contracts have non-standardized characteristics, which may bring default risk and cause irreparable losses to enterprises [ ]. For example, in 2008, China Ocean Shipping Company bought forward freight agreements (FFAs), but the freight rates plummeted near the expiration date of the forward contracts, and its dry bulk carrier incurred a loss of RMB 5.38 billion on its FFAs. The Tangshan's steel billet prices were robust in 2020. However, three steel traders sold about 200,000 tons of Tangshan steel billet forward contracts at lower values, and the three companies have since defaulted on their agreements, resulting in massive losses for multiple forward contract buyers. In 2021, the Contemporary Amperex Technology Co., Limited (SZ300750) signed forward contracts to hedge based on sales of spots, which has since led to a loss of RMB 602.728 million in the first quarter of that year due to forward contract price fluctuations and defaults. Nevertheless, if the types of market players are varied, the impact of forward contracts on the sales of their products may also be different.
Economic globalization and homogenization of products make the sales competition between companies increasingly fierce. However, the leader-follower sales entry model has become the norm of market competition due to the heterogeneous impact of factors such as R&D investment and market environment [ ]. For example, in the field of communication electronics, Apple developed the first cell phone in 2007, followed by Samsung, Huawei and other implementers of the follower strategy began to focus on the phone communication field, but Apple's leadership position has not changed. The company's profits reached 60.5 % of the total industry profits in 2020. Furthermore, in the appliance online sales market, Haier was the first to sell products through the network in 2012, while Gree started online sales in 2014 as a follower. In conclusion, market access restrictions have become a frequent means of state regulation of the industry, and forwards are an essential tool for enterprises to hedge and avoid the risk of price fluctuations, and both will affect the leader-follower competition in product sales. Therefore, by studying the degree of market access restrictions and the mechanism of forward contracts affecting leader-follower product sales competition, this paper facilitates regulators and enterprises to establish a reasonable and efficient product sales competition environment.

2.

## Literature review and research issues
2.1.

## Product market competition under the leader-follower market sales entry model
The literature has already studied that there are multiple leaders and multiple followers in a product market. Sherali, Soyster & Murphy [ ] argue that a leader-follower competitive equilibrium exists, and the equilibrium point is unique under certain assumptions. However, if the above assumptions do not exist, the leader-follower competitive balance is not single [ ]. Some scholars have analyzed leader-follower product sales from the Stackelberg competition model. For example, Ding & Huang [ ] investigate that leaders and followers may simultaneously invest money and complete new product development only if leaders sell products with a larger revenue share. Pakseresht et al. [ ] use a multiple-leader, multiple-follower Stackelberg-Nash-Cournot competition model, and the study concludes that it can determine the optimal supply can take as an objective the maximization of the total profit of the leader, the follower, as well as customer benefits. Moreover, some scholars have studied leader-follower competition from a psychological perspective and found that followers are least efficient when leaders' psychological capital is high while followers' psychological capital is low [ ]. It is evident that the leader-follower literature generally considers competition between the two as the focus of research [ ]. Nevertheless, market access restrictions are the basis for leaders and followers to enter the market to compete in product sales. Therefore, it is necessary to clarify their impact on leader-follower product sales competition, and this paper introduces market access restrictions based on exploring leader-follower competition, analyzes the effect of this perspective on the competition between the two parties, and fills in the gap in the research on leader-follower competition under market access restrictions.

2.2.

## The extent of market access restrictions and their efficiency
There is no consensus on the findings of the studies on the degree of market access restrictions and their efficiency. Some scholars believe that market access has a positive impact on the market. Gyau et al. [ ] think that market failure affects the marketing of small-scale agricultural producers. Several market restrictions can reduce their market risk. While some scholars believe that market access restrictions have both advantages and disadvantages, Liu & Wang [ ] examine the access policy of China's agricultural market based on a general equilibrium model, which finds that the level of protection in agri-products markets rises and market restrictions are strict during the economic crisis, while the level of access protection decreases when economic development recovers. Meanwhile, Lee, Ready & Seguin [ ] study the limit on the rise and fall of China's securities market from the perspective of magnetic and cooling effects and show that the appropriate relaxation of this limit can enhance the effectiveness of its impact on China's securities market. Moreover, some scholars argue that market access hurts the market. For example, when Boehmer, Jones & Zhang [ ] investigate the impact of equity pledge ratio restriction on the stability of the stock market through empirical analysis, they find that the limitation affects individual stock returns and volatility in the short term, leading to a decrease in the stability of the stock market. Nandi, Nedumaran & Ravula [ ] discover that improving market access conditions is an essential way to promote the food industry development and that food diversity is positively related to market access. The most similar study to this paper is Gyau et al. [ ], both of which explore the impact of market access restrictions on firms' selling efficiency. However, this paper divides enterprises into leaders and followers when compared to it, finds further that the mechanism of the impact of market access restrictions on the sales of leader and follower products is different through the Bayes method, and obtains more detailed and comprehensive conclusions.

2.3.

## Forward sales strategy's efficiency and its impact
There is a debate in the existing literature about the impact of forwards on a firm's product sales, with some scholars arguing that forwards make a firm's product sales less efficient. For example, Allaz & Vila [ ], based on a Cournot competition model, think that the forward market makes the seller's product sales less efficient. Brandts, Pezanis-Christou & Pschram [ ] argue that forward contracts' introduction results in a significant reduction in the price of the spot product compared to the introduction of a rival, and a decrease in the firm's product sales revenue. Cai, Agarwal & Wierman [ ] establish a linear profit function to find that forward contracts reduce the sales profit of both firms when considering the leader-follower competition. However, other scholars take the opposite view. Yamey [ ], in the context of agricultural products hedging through forward contracts, discovers that the forward markets' presence facilitates the marketing efficiency of the overall market for agri-products. Bayer & Loch [ ], when studying forward trading in the fish market, observe that forward contracts significantly increase the production efficiency of fish products, and forward contracts' advantage increases further with the expected reduction in the total water supply. Meanwhile, Mohsen et al. [ ] investigate forward trading in the wind power market based on a uniform market pricing model and find that forward contracts can help producers in the bazaar obtain stable sales profits. Most similar to the modeling framework of forward sales in this paper is Cai, Agarwal & Wierman [ ], both of which modeled the profits of leaders and followers before and after the adoption of forward contracts, respectively. Nevertheless, this paper extends the leader and follower profit measure method by introducing market access restrictions based on a Bayesian posterior probability model in contrast to its linear profit model.

2.4.

## Literature review and research issues
The existing literature has adopted the linear profit function, Stackelberg competition model, etc., and separately investigated the effects of leader-follower competition, forward sales strategy, and the degree of market access restrictions on firms' product sales. This paper further introduces a Bayesian posterior probability model based on the linear profit function and Stackelberg competition model. Meanwhile, these explorations have not analyzed the impact of the degree of market access restrictions on leader-follower competition, the different effect paths of market access restrictions on leaders and followers before and after the forward contracts' adoption, forward contracts' effects on leaders' and followers' product sales outcomes when it fixes market access restrictions.
Therefore, it argues that the following issues should be clarified: (i) Does forward contracts' adoption by followers increase the returns of all market participants? (ii) What is the mechanism by which the degree of market entry restrictions and forward contracts affect competition in the sale of leader and follower products in the leader-follower market sales entry model?
This paper attempts to study the competition in product sales under the leader-follower entry model from the perspective of forward contracts and market access restrictions. First, it plans to analyze the diverse sales mechanisms of leaders and followers when there are different degrees of market access restrictions and before or after forward contracts' adoption. Second, it constructs a profit rate model and a forward default risk model based on market access restrictions, focusing on the relationships between the degree of market access restrictions, product quality, forward default risk, and the revenue rate of leaders and followers in the model. Third, it intends to compare and study the changes in the impact of the degree of market access restrictions on the sales of leaders' and followers' products when not and use forward contracts through simulation analysis.
The main contributions of this paper are the following four points: Firstly, according to the time of selling spot, it divides enterprises into leaders and followers, based on the perspective of forward contracts and market access restrictions, it establishes a theoretical analysis framework of leader-follower product sales competition, which enriches the related research in the field of leader-follower product sales competition. Secondly, based on the Black-Scholes model, Bayes posterior probability model, systematic contingent equity analysis, etc., the return functions of leaders and followers under the degree of market access restrictions and the forward default risk model suffered by followers under the conditions of market access restrictions are constructed, in the meantime the relationships among parameters such as the degree of market access restrictions, forward default risk, and rate of return are determined. Thirdly, it investigates the changes in product sales revenue of leaders and followers before or after forward contracts' adoption by followers and under different levels of market access restrictions through simulation analysis. The mechanisms of market access restrictions and forward contracts on leader-follower product sales competition are clarified. Fourthly, a comparative study of the followers' adoption and non-adoption of forward contracts demonstrates that forward contracts' adoption may lead to an oversupply of products in the market and increased competition in sales, thus leading to the leaders' weakening of absolute pricing power.
The main structure of this paper is as follows: the first part is a literature review and proposes a research issue. The second part constructs a forward default risk model based on market access restrictions, a discounted expected profit rate model, and a competitive analysis of leader-follower product sales. The third part provides a simulation analysis to compare and investigate the impact mechanism of leaders' and followers' product sales under different degrees of market access restrictions before or after forward contracts' adoption and the revenue changes. The fourth part is the conclusion.

3.

## Analysis and model construction of leader-follower sale mechanism based on market access restrictions and forward contracts considerations
3.1.

## Analysis of leader-follower selling mechanism based on market access restrictions and forward contracts considerations
Drawing on the studies of Hinojosa, McCauley & Randolph-Seng [ ] and Cai, Agarwal & Wierman [ ], based on the difference in the order in which supplier firms enter the market to sell their spot, it intends to classify supplier companies in the market into two types of leaders and followers. It assumes here that suppliers only sell but do not produce products, and there is only one product in the market that the products supplied by both are not necessarily from the same producer. The suppliers that enter the market and sell off-the-shelf are leaders at t = 0, and only one type of spot sale is available to such firms. Followers are subsequent suppliers that sell the spots, who can also use forward sales. Followers can enter the market with the leaders by selling forwards at t = 0. They make spot delivery at t > 0 based on the forwards sold earlier and sell spots. Furthermore, it assumes that the regulator has strict market access restrictions and subsequently assessment penalties for the quality of products to reduce forwards' default risk and control the total product market supply. The specific decision-making process shows in .
 Since forward contracts are non-standardized and have late delivery dates, there is a risk of default. The followers enter the market simultaneously with the leaders through forwards at t = 0. If the regulator's market access restrictions degree is low, the leaders' market competition pressure increases. The latter will increase the supply in the market to gain more market share so that the leaders' original market share decreases, which may ultimately result in the followers' market share being gradually larger than the leaders'. Moreover, an increase in the supply of followers further leads to supply exceeding demand and the market prices falling. Therefore, when the product's purchase and sales costs remain the same, the presence of a forward market at this time makes the leaders' revenue decrease.
While followers may be able to sell products by entering forward contracts, their returns may not increase. First, market demand may not change in a short period. If market access is less restrictive, the larger the number of forward contracts ordered at t = 0, the fewer in spot demand at t > 0, so the followers' returns may not necessarily increase. Second, since the default risk of a forward contract increases as the degree of market access restrictions decreases, the return to the followers may also decrease. Third, if the degree of market access restrictions is high, this may result in the actual market supply being less than the demand. It eventually causes the market price of the settlement date to rise above the agreed price of the forward contract, which may also cause losses to the followers.
It means that under the conditions of less restrictive market access by regulators, followers using forward contracts to enter the market increases the competitive pressure on the leaders' products. It will force the leaders to expand their sales, which eventually leads to a decrease in the equilibrium market price of the product and may make the leaders achieve less than they gain if the followers had not used forward contracts. Meanwhile, a lower degree of market access restrictions may increase forwards' default risk and lead to the possibility that the future returns of followers may be smaller than they have not forward contracts. It follows that forward contracts may have implications for leaders' and followers' returns under market access restrictions, as analyzed later.

3.2.

## The competitive model of leader-follower product sales based on market access restrictions and forward contracts considerations
Jamali & Rasti-Barzoki [ ] have mainly established a product market competition model based on vendor profits. Meanwhile, the forward is a financial derivative product that directly influences adopters' profits, and market access restrictions indirectly affect forwards' default risk and company returns [ ]. Therefore, this section intends to construct the discounted profit rate models for leaders and followers respectively first, then will analyze the forwards' default risk based on the degree of market access restrictions, whereby it further determines the discounted profit rate models for leaders and followers based on market access restrictions and forwards by the Bayesian posterior probability method, and conducting a study [ , ].
3.2.1.

## Discounted profit rate models for leaders, followers
Since investments require consideration of opportunity costs and uncertainty of returns, it should discount the cash flows at different time points when calculating the return to the enterprise. Discounting can make the value or utility of the funds at various time points unchanged when they convert to the base date. Drawing on the study of Cai, Agarwal & Wierman [ ], profit rate directly reflects the product sales results of leaders and followers, so this paper intends to analyze the product sales revenue of leaders and followers through discounted profit rate models.
According to the above analysis, there are two main types of transactions in the market: leaders and followers. The leaders start selling spots, and followers may sell forward contracts at t = 0. After a certain period, followers also begin making spot sales at t > 0. Assuming the market exists in L leader enterprises and N follower firms, the unit cost of sales of leaders and followers are C, c, respectively. The followers can sell forwards and spots, and forward contracts are equivalent to selling spots after a certain period, so it assumes that the unit selling costs of followers selling forwards and spots are c. They mainly include the costs of purchase, advertising, transportation, labor, and innovation.
According to the theory of market pioneer advantage in traditional economics, since the leaders are the first to enter the market, it can obtain consumer demand premium through advertising and other methods, and consumers have a strong impression of it, brand identity effect. Furthermore, in terms of product supply, the leaders have the advantage of product innovation, so it is the first to supply the spot, constituting a barrier to entry effect, which gives it a competitive advantage and cost advantage. If the followers enter the market and compete for market share after the leaders form barriers to entry, they need to have more capital and unique competitive advantages, which usually come from the enterprise's process innovation, market innovation, industrial organization innovation, or business model innovation, for example, the followers develop the market and gain more market share through the improvement of services or after-sales services and other innovations [ ]. It means that the leaders have the cost advantage of supplying products, forming barriers to entry, leading that the followers need to build their core competitive advantage from market innovation and other aspects, thus paying more innovation costs, so there is C
 
c.
Based on the Black-Scholes model and the studies of Kwon et al. [ ] and Sunar, Yu & Kulkarni [ ], leaders' and followers' discounted expected profit rates are first derived. Let denote the white noise scale, and represent the Brownian motion process. Meanwhile, this paper uses the subscripts of the variables to express the participating agents supplying the product in the market. Let indicate the discounted expected profit rate when the product supply of participating agent j is y, where y
 {Q1, q2, Q2}, j
 {1, 2}. Here Q1, q2, and Q2 express leaders' spot supply, followers' forward contract order quantity, and followers' spot supply, with 1 and 2 denoting leaders and followers, respectively. The leaders' rate of return at the time is
(1)dRQ1,t={rQ1,tdt+ςdBQ1,tt>00t=0Where and are the leaders' earnings and expected rate of return in Eq. , respectively. Assuming that the discount rate λ > 0, it can obtain the discounted expected rate of profit of leaders accordingly as
(2)HQ1，1=E[(∫0∞e−λtdRQ1,t−CQ1)/CQ1]Since followers can trade both spots and forwards and the timing of their sales does not coincide, their discounted expected profit rates differ, i.e.
(3)H2={HQ2,2t≥τHq2,2t≥0Where , and are the discounted expected profit rates when the followers sell forward contracts and spots, respectively. The rate of return and the discounted expected profit rate when followers sell forward contracts at are shown in Eqs. , .
(4)dRq2,t={rq2dt+ςdBq2,tt>00t=0(5)Hq2，2=E[(∫0∞e−λtdRq2,t−cq2)/cq2]The followers' rate of return and discounted expected profit rate at the moment are shown in Eqs. , .
(6)dRQ2,t=rQ2dt+ςdBQ2,t(7)HQ2,2=E[(∫τ∞e−λtdRQ2,t−e−λτcQ2)/e−λτcQ2]After determining the leaders' and followers' rate of return functions (1), (4), and (6) at time t, it obtains the discounted expected profit rate models (2), (5), and (7) for leaders and followers accordingly. Where forwards and their default risk impact the rates of return of both suppliers, it will further explore forwards' default risk under the market access restrictions below.

3.2.2.

## Analysis of the forwards' default risk for followers based on market access restrictions considerations
There are certain restrictions for companies to enter the market, including explicit systems such as regulatory requirements and implicit constraints like crowding-out effects from peer competition that has already entered the market. For example, regulators have strict access restrictions on the energy industry, the shipping market, the steel industry, commercial banks, and the interbank lending market. Moreover, such industries are the essential foundation of China's national economy, and their development is affected by the international situation, politics, and economy. Forwards, as an effective risk management tool, are also more actively traded in such industries, e.g., according to the statistics of the Shanghai Clearing House, the shipping market has a large volume of trading in forward freight agreements, and the price fluctuates drastically. However, the risk of default is correspondingly higher due to the flexibility and non-standardized nature of forward contracts. If the regulatory authorities have strict market access restrictions, there are differences in the risks that companies suffer when using forward contracts.
The degree of market access restrictions , k is a constant greater than 0. When closes 0, it means the number of enterprises willing and having the opportunity to enter the market is higher. Otherwise, approaches k indicates that firms enter the market under stringent conditions, and the number of firms may be less. It assumes that the relationships between the degree of market access restrictions and the number of enterprises are
(8)L=d1−k1υ(9)N=d2−k2υWhere and are positive integers, which denote the number of leader and follower firms in the absence of market access restrictions, and are positive numbers, which indicate the degree of impact of market access restrictions on the number of leader and follower firms, respectively. Furthermore, the magnitude of market access restrictions degree affects the risk of default in the forward period, which further affects the rate of revenues and profit rates of leaders and followers.
Theorem 1The followers suffer less forward default risk if the degree of market entry restrictions is higher under a "leader-follower" market entry model.
The complete proof is in appendix. A higher degree of market access restrictions by the regulator may lead to a decrease in the number of firms in the market, as shown in Eqs. , . Kaganova & Nayyar-Stone [ ] concluded that under market access restrictions, the degree of market access restrictions has a positive relationship with the level of firm operations, asset and liability. Firms entering the market when market access restrictions are strict have good asset and liability statuses. Meanwhile, according to the study in Section , followers are the principal participants in the forward market, so they suffer from default risk. Combining Gray & Jobst's [ ] systematic contingent claims analysis (SCCA), which is known to be used to assess the expected losses of creditors in the event of a financial institution's default during periods of extreme risk, it deduces that the relationship between the level of forward default risk suffered by followers and the degree of market access restrictions is
(10)φ=Φ(−[lnk3υ+(r−1/2ε2)×t]/εt)Where t is time, is volatility, r is the expected profitability of the followers' forward counterparty, is a normal distribution function, k3 is the impact coefficient and greater than 0, indicating the impact of the degree of market access restrictions on the asset-liability ratio of both sides of the forward transaction. An increase in the degree of market access restrictions increases and decreases in Eq. when t is fixed, leading to a decrease in the level of forward default risk suffered by the followers. It means that under the “leader-follower” market entry model, an increase in market access restrictions leads the asset and liability positions of the followers' forward counterparties to be good, and the likelihood of default decreases, so followers suffer less risk of forward default.
China's forward market started late, and there are many risks due to imperfections in the legal system and trading mechanism, for example, the risk of default. In 2011, the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) issued the “Assessment Contents and Scoring Criteria for Banks' Implementation of Foreign Exchange Management Provisions (2011)", which stipulates the accuracy, timeliness, and completeness of the data of the bank's forward settlement and sale business, and requires banks to keep the default rate of their sale and purchase business within the prescribed standards. Moreover, for forward housing mortgages, since houses in China are often pre-sold, home buyers bear huge forward risks. If they apply for mortgages from the bank, the bank shares this risk with them, so the bank usually registers the characteristics of the borrower, collateral information, and so on, and thus can estimate the default probability of the forward housing mortgages based on this information [ , ]. Meanwhile, Coudert & Mignon [ ] quantified it by substituting sovereign credit default swap premiums for default risk when studying the relationship between forward currency trading strategies and the global financial cycle. Upton & Lentz [ ] quantified the default risk of this type of forward contract by collecting its' subject matter, price, value, and delivery quantity when they explored the World Food Program's Purchase for Progress pilot program in three East African countries.
However, due to the non-standardized characteristics of forward contracts, their underlying assets, quantity, delivery date, and delivery location are generally negotiated and agreed upon by the two parties in the over-the-counter market, so the existing types of forward contracts are relatively plentiful, where it is not possible to compile statistics on the size and returns of each kind of forward contract, resulting in the overall default probability of the forward contract not being able to be estimated, making it difficult to quantify the risk of default of forwards. Several studies have been conducted on forward default risk, and few scholars have quantified the overall default risk. For example, in terms of the effect of default time of forward contracts on default risk premiums, Brigo, Buescu & Morini [ ] portrayed default risk by assuming variables and did not quantify it. Peña & Rodriguez [ ] explored the forward default risk premium in the electricity market by using a small amount of data on the price of forward contracts and cannot directly infer the overall default risk. Brown & Eckert [ ] only empirically examine forward default prices and competitive retail prices and do not straightforwardly quantify forward default rates and default risk in retail markets when investigating the impact of forward contract default rates on the development of competitive retail markets and retailers' pricing decisions.
With the improvement of China's financial and legal system, it can quantify the overall default risk if the state requires all kinds of enterprises to disclose information about their forward business, such as banks' forward foreign exchange business. Although it is currently impossible to accurately portray its' whole, for critical areas of national importance, the risk of default will reduce if the regulatory authorities increase the degree of market access restrictions for companies using forward contracts, such as strict access regulations on the financial status, shareholding structure and corporate governance structure, internal control system, and financial information disclosure system of the companies allowed to enter. Hence, it is a vital part of the decision-making process to determine which firms should be subject to what degree of market access restrictions. It is a better strategy to obtain the prior and posterior probability of market access restrictions based on experience, which can further reduce firms' default risk in the forward market. The following section further explores the leaders' and followers' profit rate models under market access restrictions based on the Bayesian posterior probability approach.

3.2.3.

## Profit rate models for leaders and followers based on Bayes posterior probability and market access restrictions considerations
Bayes first proposed hypothesis-based prior probabilities, probabilities under given hypotheses, and the method of calculating assumptive probabilities, which is called Bayesian analysis. A priori probability is based on previous experience and analysis, while a posteriori probability is the probability of recalibration after obtaining information about the “outcome”, i.e., based on the former to gain the latter. The primary role of the Bayes method is to deal with the prior and posterior probability, and it can perfectly solve some real-life uncertainty problems. For example, Sahu et al. [ ] studied the most detailed mechanism to improve software reliability through the software reliability model based on the Bayes method. The sellers usually forecast and correct the future based on historical data in practice, which is consistent with the fundamental characteristics of posterior probability, so the profit rates of leaders and followers under market access restrictions conform to the posterior distribution, and the method can make decisions about them. This paper denotes the posterior probability by and obtains
(11)Θ=P(A|θ)=P(θ|A)P(A)P(θ)Where in Eq. is the posterior probability of event , is the prior probability of event A, and is the prior probability of event . Let be the demand, be the mean, be the variance, and y be taken as Q1, Q2, and q2, respectively. Assume that the market product supply conforms to a stochastic demand distribution, as shown in Eq. .
(12)Fy(δ)=∫−∞δ12πσe−(t−μ)22σ2dtBesides the initial market access restrictions for leaders and followers in different industries in practice, regulators also conduct follow-up assessments of the actual quality of products they have sold. Leaders and followers should pay certain fines to ensure the follow-up effect of market access if it is a failed evaluation. Suppose the assessment standard of product quality of the regulatory authority is M, , and the quality of the same product sold by leaders and followers at the time of their subsequent evaluation by the regulator is m. The parameter of penalty intensity , the probability of the product sold by leaders and followers being sampled is , and is the particular case of no penalty as described in Eqs. , , , the regulatory authority will not punish leaders and followers when , otherwise will punish them, and the relationship between the penalty and the product quality is shown in Eq. .
(13)W(m)=w×max(M−m,0)According to Colaneri, Middleton & Chen [ ] on the influence of government regulation methods on sellers' quality choices, if leaders and followers improve the quality of their products to avoid fines, and the cost they pay for this is given in Eq. .
(14)Cy(m)=(m2/2)×∫−∞δ12πσe−(t−μ)22σ2dtAccording to the principle of incentive compatibility, considering the probability of sampling and the cost of punishment, leaders and followers should make the sum of the penalty and product quality cost-optimal, the sum of the cost of the penalty and product quality is shown in Eq. .
(15)Ωy=ey×w×max(M−m，0)+(m2/2)×∫−∞δ12πσe−(t−μ)22σ2dtThe derivative of concerning m yields
(16)dΩydm={m×∫−∞δ12πσe−(t−μ)22σ2dt−ey×wm≤Mm×∫−∞δ12πσe−(t−μ)22σ2dtm>MThe relationship between product quality m and assessment criteria M in Eq. shows when the regulator's parameter of penalty is heavier and , leaders or followers reach the minimum cost, respectively. When the regulator's parameter of penalty is lower, is a monotonically increasing function of product quality m, i.e., the worse the quality of leaders and followers supply products, the less the sum of their fines and product quality costs.
Moreover, from Section 2.2.1, the cost of sales of the leaders and followers mainly includes the cost of purchase, transportation, advertising, labor, and innovation. Let , , and be the cost of purchase and transportation, advertising and labor cost, and innovation cost of the leaders or followers, respectively. It can show that , , and are any functions of supply , time t, and demand , respectively, i.e., the other costs Cy of the leader or follower are arbitrary functions of , t, and .
Market access restrictions affect the number of firms in the market, the supply of products, and the risk of default in the forward period, so it should first consider the impact of market access restrictions on the profit rates of leaders and followers. According to the discounted expected profit rate model of Sunar, Yu & Kulkarni [ ], this paper establishes the discounted expected profit rate models based on market access restrictions and forward contracts by the Bayes posterior probability method based on the Black-Scholes model. According to the study in Section , there are only leaders and followers in the market, and the leaders trade only spots whose discounted expected profit rate after considering market access restrictions is
HQ1，1=E[(∫0∞e−λt(rQ1,tdt+ςdBQ1,t)⏟Thefirstpart−(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))Q1−eQ1×w×max(M−mQ1，0))(17)/(mQ122+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))Q1|υ]Where , , and are arbitrary types of cost functions concerning the leaders' supply , time t, and demand , respectively. According to Eq. , the discounted expected profit rates if the follower uses both forward and spot sales when considering the market access restrictions are
Hq2，2=E[(∫0∞e−λt(rq2dt+ςdBq2,t)⏟Thefirstpart−(mq22/2+Cq21(q2)+Cq22(t)+Cq23(δ))q2−eq2×w×max(M−mq2，0))(18)/(mq222+Cq21(q2)+Cq22(t)+Cq23(δ))q2|υ]HQ2，2=E[(∫τ∞e−λt(rQ2dt+ςdBQ2,t)⏟Thefirstpart−e−λτ(mQ22/2+CQ21(Q2)+CQ22(t)+CQ23(δ))Q2(19)−eQ2×w×max(M−mQ2，0))/e−λτ(mQ222+CQ21(Q2)+CQ22(t)+CQ23(δ))Q2|υ]Where the followers' input and transportation costs and , advertising and labor costs and , and innovation costs and are arbitrary functions. The leaders' pioneer advantage gives them a cost advantage in supplying products, so the leaders' cost of purchase and transportation , advertising and labor cost may be less than or equal to the followers' cost of purchase and transportation and , advertising and labor cost and . The cost advantage of the leaders through product innovation to enter the market first constitutes an entry barrier. If the followers enter the market to compete with the leaders for market share, they need to carry out market innovation or business model innovation, etc., so they need to pay more market innovation costs, i.e., the leaders' innovation cost is less than or equal to the followers' innovation costs and .
The first part of Eqs. , , represent the total discounted revenue when leaders sell spots, followers sell forward contracts and spots, respectively, and the rest denote the total discounted cost. The difference between them is the discounted profit. The expected value of the post-discounted profit rate of leaders and followers under the market access restrictions is their discounted expected profit rate. Since leaders and followers sell the same product and there is sales competition, this situation will affect their revenue rate and profit rate. Therefore, the following is a further analysis of the profit rates of leaders and followers when they compete for their product sales.

3.2.4.

## Competitive analysis of leader-follower product sales based on market access restrictions and forward contracts considerations
The above section has determined the discounted expected profit rate models for the leader and the follower by considering the market access restrictions and the forward contract condition. This section will analyze the supplies and revenues of both parties when followers do not adopt and adopt the forward contracts, and it will define the competitive relationship between them for product sales accordingly.
3.2.4.1.

## Competitive analysis of leader-follower product sales when followers do not use forward contracts
When followers do not use forward for product sales, there are only leaders selling spots in the market at the moment t = 0, so leaders have the absolute pricing power of the product. While followers can only start selling spots at t > 0 after a certain period.
Theorem 2The leaders' discounted expected profit rate varies inversely with the degree of market access restrictions when followers do not use forward contracts for product sales.
The complete proof is in the appendix. According to the relevant study in Section , when followers do not use forward contracts for product sales, there are only leaders selling spots in the market at the moment t = 0, and followers cannot compete with them, so leaders have no external competitive pressure and have absolute product pricing power. The relationship between the leaders' supply Q1 and the rate of revenue is
(20)rQ1，1=P(Q1)Q1CQ1=a[Q1(C)+Q1(S)]×(d1−k1υ)+b(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))Where a and b are constants larger than 0, which denote the leaders' supply and the degree of influence of cost on price, respectively, C is the leaders' unit cost of sales, is the function of the effect of cost on the leaders' supply, S is the other variables affecting the leaders' supply, is the function of the other factors on the leaders' supply, and P is the market price of the product, , , and , respectively, are arbitrary cost functions about the supply of the leaders , the time t, the demand . From Eq. , the relationship between the leaders' discounted expected profit rate and the degree of market access restrictions can be further obtained, as shown in Eq. .
HQ1，1=E[(∫0∞e−λt([a[Q1(C)+Q1(S)]×(d1−k1υ)+b(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))]/(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))dt+ςdBQ1,t)−(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))Q1(21)−eQ1w×max(M−mQ1，0))/(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))Q1]The leaders' supply increases when the degree of market access restrictions decreases, and leaders have absolute pricing power as there is no competition from followers at t = 0. Hence, leaders' rate of revenue increases with the increase in supply, and the degree of market access restrictions varies inversely with the discounted expected profit rate. Furthermore, when the quality m of the leaders' supply product is lower than the regulator's subsequent assessment criterion M, it is further known that is constantly less than 0 from the first-order derivative of leaders' discounted expected profit rate on the regulator's assessment criterion M, i.e., the leaders' discounted expected profit rate is negatively related to the regulator's subsequent assessment criteria.
Theorem 3When followers do not sell using forward contracts and regulatory market access is less restrictive, there is increased competitive pressure on followers to sell and a relevant decrease in supply.
The complete proof is in the appendix. Constrained by technology, resources, labor, and other factors, the market supply capacity of followers is limited, and in this paper, let D represent the supply capacity of followers. Assuming that the unit cost of sales of leaders and followers are equal, combining the study of Cai, Agarwal & Wierman [ ] and Eq. , it can obtain the spot supply of followers as
(22)Q2=[1+ψ(1d2−k2υ)]D2Because in Eq. is the number of follower firms in the market, given the large number of this type of firms, is a function of convergence to 0. Since suppliers have limited supply capacity, there is an optimal supply in the market, and when the supply is less than the optimal supply, the return varies in the same direction as the supply, and vice versa when the supply exceeds the optimal supply, the two vary inversely. Drawing on the yield function of Song & Lu [ ], this paper assumes that the rate of revenue on spot sales by followers is related to the supply of the spot as
(23)rQ2,2=[−α(Q2−β)2+z]/tWhere are all constants larger than 0, is the degree of influence of followers' supply on the rate of revenue, is the optimal supply of followers, and is the rate of revenue when followers' supply is optimal. Assuming that the supply capacity of followers is D = 1, the first-order partial derivative of Eq. with respect to yields
(24)∂rQ2,2∂υ=−αk22t[[1+ψ(1/d2−k2υ)]/2−β](d2−k2υ)−32According to Eq. , when the optimal supply , the rate of revenue to followers' spot sales is a decreasing function of the degree of market access restrictions , i.e., the degree of market access restrictions by the regulator decreases and the rate of revenue to followers' sales of spot increases accordingly. When the optimal supply , only if the degree of market access restrictions is large enough, i.e., , at which time the rate of revenue on followers' sales of the spot is a decreasing function of the degree of market access restriction. However, when the degree of market access restrictions is low, i.e., , may be greater than 0. If the regulator further reduces the degree of market access restrictions at this time, the rate of revenue on spot sales by followers may decrease.
The first-order and second-order partial derivatives of Eq. concerning the optimal supply yield that the optimal supply satisfies
(25)1+ψ(1/d2−k2υ)2=βThe optimal supply of followers is close to 50 % for a low degree of market access restrictions, i.e., , while it is close to 100 % for a high degree of market access restrictions, . The reason is when the degree of market access restrictions is low, the competition is fierce, and the total supply of products in the market is high, which exceeds demand, so the optimal supply of followers is small. When the degree of market access restrictions is high, the number of products that enterprises supply reduces. The followers can provide more products to meet the market demand in this case, so their optimal supply is higher. Where in Eq. is a function that tends to 0, closes to 50 %. It assumes the optimal supply of followers to be 50 % in the latter part for the sake of the research. According to Eq. , the relationship between the discounted expected profit rate of followers and the degree of market access restrictions is
HQ2，2=E[(∫τ∞e−λt([−α([1+ψ(1/d2−k2υ)]/2−β)2+z]/tdt+ςdBQ2,t)−e−λτ(mQ22/2+CQ21(Q2)+CQ22(t)+CQ23(δ))Q2−eQ2×w×max(M−mQ2，0))(26)/e−λτ(mQ22/2+CQ21(Q2)+CQ22(t)+CQ23(δ))Q2]Where , , and are arbitrary cost functions concerning the followers' spot supply , time t, and demand , respectively. Eq. can be seen when the degree of market access restrictions decreases, the spot supply of followers relatively reduces and is close to the optimal supply, their revenue increases as the spot supply tends to be optimal, and the discounted expected profit rate of followers also tends to increase, i.e., the degree of market access restrictions has an inverse relationship with the discounted expected profit rate of followers.
Market participants can hedge or arbitrage through forwards, but since there is no fixed trading venue for forward contracts and the default rate is high, there may be cases in practice where suppliers do not use forward contracts for sales. When no supplier in the market sells using forward contracts, it is clear from the study in Section that followers can only sell spot after leaders, who are already supplying the product at t = 0, hence may lead to increased pressure on followers to gain market share. If the degree of market access restrictions by the regulator decreases in this case, it is beneficial for followers to converge the supply to the optimal, and their discounted expected profit rate increases, which may further lead to increased competition for the sale of the leaders' and followers' products.

3.2.4.2.

## Competitive analysis of leader-follower product sales when followers adopt forward contracts
When followers adopt forward contracts, they can also use a spot sale at the same time, at which point both supply and the rate of revenue change, as shown in .
Theorem 4In the case of followers selling products using forwards, with a higher degree of regulatory market access restrictions, followers suffer less forward default risk and have access to optimal supply, so their discounted expected profit rate increases.
The complete proof is in the appendix. The followers sell the product through forward contracts at the moment t = 0. Their spot supply at this point changes somewhat. Combining Cai, Agarwal & Wierman [ ] and Eq. , it can obtain the spot supply of followers at this point as
(27)Q2=[1−ψ(1d2−k2υ)]×DWhere is a function converging to 0. Assuming that the followers' supply capacity D = 1, it can obtain the relationship between the followers' rate of revenue on spot sales and the degree of market access restrictions from and by combining Eqs. , as
(28)rQ2，2=[−α(1−ψ(1d2−k2υ)−β)2+z]/tThe first-order partial derivative of Eq. on the degree of market access restrictions shows is constantly greater than 0, the rate of revenue on the sale of spots by followers is an increasing function of the degree of restrictions on market access . The followers can enter the market to sell the product through forward contracts at the moment t = 0, if the degree of restrictions on market access by the regulator decreases at this time, the risk of default on the forward contract increases, while the supply of followers, the probability of loss increases, and the rate of revenue decreases. It can derive the relationship between the discounted expected profit rate of followers and the degree of market access restrictions from Eq. , as shown in Eq. .
HQ2，2=E[(∫τ∞e−λt([−α(1−ψ(1/(d2−k2υ))−β)2+z]/tdt+ςdBQ2,t)−e−λτ(mQ22/2+CQ21(Q2)+CQ22(t)+CQ23(δ))Q2−eQ2×w×max(M−mQ2，0))(29)/e−λτ(mQ22/2+CQ21(Q2)+CQ22(t)+CQ23(δ))Q2]According to Eq. , when followers can sell using forward contracts, the higher the degree of market access restrictions reduces the risk of forward default, and when , the closer the followers' spot supply from Eq. is to the optimal supply from , the higher the discounted expected profit rate of the followers' spot sales, i.e., the discounted expected profit rate of followers varies in the same direction as the degree of market access restrictions.
When followers use forward contracts to sell, the market is highly competitive between leaders and followers. As the competition among firms decreases and the spot supply of followers approaches the optimal supply if the degree of regulatory market access restrictions is higher, the actual market situation is consistent with the derivation of Eq. . Furthermore, combined with , it deduces that when the degree of market access restrictions is higher, the asset quality and default risk tolerance of firms improve accordingly, and the forward default risk decreases at this time. Hence, the rate of revenue and discounted expected profit rate of followers improve, and the sales competition among leaders and followers may increase again.
It can obtain the followers' supply of the product when they sell through and without forwards from and , from which the difference between the supply in the two ways, as well as its forward contract signing volume , discounted expected profit rate , as shown in Eqs. , .
(30)q2=12−ψ(1d2−k2υ)−12ψ(1d2−k2υ)Hq2，2=E[(∫0∞e−λt(rq2dt+ςdBq2,t)−(mq22/2+Cq2)q2)/(mq22/2+Cq2)q2|υ]=E[(∫0∞e−λt([−α(12−ψ(1d2−k2υ)−12ψ(1d2−k2υ)−β)2+z]/tdt+ςdBq2,t(31)−(mq22/2+Cq21(q2)+Cq22(t)+Cq23(δ))q2))/(mq222+Cq21(q2)+Cq22(t)+Cq23(δ))q2]Where , , and are arbitrary cost functions concerning the follower's forward contracting volume , time t, and demand , respectively. The followers enter the market at t = 0 through forward contracts to sell the product, the supply and demand in the market change, and leaders' and followers' supplies and rate of revenues change compared to Eqs. , in 2.2.4.1. Furthermore, the use of forward contracts by the followers gives leaders no absolute pricing power at t = 0. The total supply in the market exceeds the demand, the product's price decreases, and the degree of influence of the leaders' supply on price a in becomes negative, as shown in .
Corollary 1When followers use forward contracts, the increase in the spot supply of followers Q2 reduces the extent to which leaders' supply affects the price a, and leaders' discounted expected profit rate varies in the same direction as the degree of market access restrictions.
If followers sell products using forward contracts, the supplies of leaders and followers are higher than 0 at t = 0. From to 4, if followers do not use forward contracts, then at t = 0, and leaders have absolute pricing power. When forward contracts are adopted, , and their market share increases, the competition between leader-follower increases, and the absolute pricing power of leaders decreases. Hence, the influence degree of the leaders' supply on price decreases with the enhancement of the followers' supply . Meanwhile, since the market demand will not change in the short term, their market share also gradually increases to more than leaders if followers' supply rises to a certain extent. So the leaders lose absolute pricing power, and the supply will further make the market supply exceed demand, resulting in the price of the product decline, i.e., the influence degree of leaders' supply on price a<0, which is the opposite of the conclusion of .

4.

## Simulation analysis
In the leader-follower market entry model, the coexistence of different market access restrictions, using forward contracts, and the characteristics of forward contracts can make it hard to analyze the revenues and product sales competition between leaders and followers. Therefore, this paper proposes to compare the results of the two sales competitions due to the degree of market access restrictions, the use of forward contracts, and other factors with the help of simulation analysis and random assignment of variables within the range of intervals according to the actual situation.
4.1.

## Changes in the degree of market access restrictions and the impact of forward contracts on leaders' sales spot revenue
This section will analyze the impact of the degree of market access restrictions and forward contracts on the sales of the leaders' products through their spot revenue. First, it determines the relationship between the degree of market access restrictions and the leaders' revenue when followers do not adopt and adopt forwards. Second, it compares and analyzes the impact of the two cases on the leaders' revenue.
4.1.1.

## Impact of the degree of market access restrictions on leaders' revenue when followers do not use forward contracts
When followers do not use forward contracts to sell their products, leaders enter the market at the moment t = 0 with only intra-firm competition, and followers cannot compete with it. To accurately describe the relationship between the degree of market access restrictions and the change in the leaders' rate of revenue, the variables are here randomly assigned values within the range of the interval according to the actual situation, assume that the leaders' unit cost of sales , the discount rate  = 0.3, the number of leader firms when the regulator does not impose market access restrictions, the degree of influence of market access restrictions on leader firms , the degree of influence of the leaders' supply on price a = 1, the degree of influence of cost on price b = 1, and other factors on leaders supply as a function of  = 0.2. According to the principle of incentive compatibility constraint, the unit sales costs of leaders and followers may be equal, i.e., the impact of unit sales costs on leaders and followers may be the same, let the impact function of unit sales cost on leaders' supply and product quality m = 0.5, it can obtain the relationship between the degree of market access restrictions and leaders' rate of revenue as shown in . The horizontal axis in the figure represents the degree of market access restrictions and the vertical axis represents the leaders' rate of revenue.
 As shown in , the leaders' rate of revenue increases when the degree of market access restriction decreases and is negatively correlated. When the degree of market access restrictions reaches around 1, the leaders' rate of revenue is 0. The reason is when followers do not use forward contracts, followers cannot enter the market at t = 0 even if the market access restrictions of the regulator decrease, and leaders do not have competitive pressure from followers, so they have absolute pricing power over the product. Since the total market demand remains unchanged in the short term, and only leaders supply products when followers do not use forward contracts, it cannot meet the market demand. The increase in the number of the leaders' companies and the supply will not lead to an oversupply and a decrease in the product's price, which will consolidate their absolute pricing power, causing the product's market price to remain unchanged or increase. When it fixes the cost per unit sold, the supply increases, and the price of the product is favorable to leaders, so leaders' rate of revenue increases.
The relationship between the leaders' rate of revenue and the degree of market access restrictions and product quality when the product quality changes is further analyzed on this basis, as shown in . The x-axis represents the degree of market access restrictions, the y-axis represents product quality, the z-axis represents leader's rate of revenue, and the surface plot reflects the relationship between the three variables. shows that when the degree of market access restrictions is low, the increase in product quality decreases the leaders' rate of revenue, which shows that the surface rises and gradually changes from blue to yellow. The reason is that at low levels of market access restrictions, even if the leaders' product quality takes a small value, i.e., it may qualify for market access restrictions and subsequent evaluations if the product quality is poor. It may lead to increased cost but not enhanced revenue if leaders improve the product quality. Furthermore, when market access restrictions are high, improved product quality leads to an increase in the leaders' rate of revenue. The reason is that leaders may not be able to enter the market if their product quality does not meet regulatory standards, or they may have to pay more fines for subsequent assessments, resulting in a lower rate of revenue. If product quality is improved, leaders are more likely to meet market entry restrictions and avoid paying fines, which leads to higher revenue for leaders.
 
4.1.2.

## Impact of the degree of market access restrictions on leaders' revenue when followers use forward contracts
When followers use forward contracts, they can compete with leaders by forward selling at t = 0. Let the degree of influence of the leaders' supply on the price a = −1 in this case, the product quality m = 0.5, and the other variables take the same values as in Section 3.1.1, at which point the relationship between the degree of market access restrictions and the leader's rate of return to be as shown in .
 From , it is clear that the leaders' rate of revenue is positively related to the degree of market access restrictions. The reason is that when followers use forward contracts, there are both leaders and followers in the market at time t = 0. When market access restrictions are relaxed, the number of leaders entering the market increases, while the number of forwards sold by followers increases, and both suppliers and supply in the market increase. If leaders do not increase the provision at this time, the market share of the followers gradually increases to the point where it exceeds that of the leaders, leading to the leaders' complete loss of pricing power. In this case, leaders can only increase the supply to consolidate the market through sales competition. As the market demand remains unchanged in the short term, leaders and followers increase the supplies of the product at the same time, which will lead to oversupply and make the market price decrease, and the rate of revenue of leaders tends to decrease at this time, i.e., when followers use forward contracts to sell their products, the reduced degree of market access restrictions leads to oversupply, lower product prices, and a subsequent decrease in the leaders' rate of revenue.
When followers use forward contracts, illustrates the relationship between the leaders' rate of revenue and the degree of market access restrictions and product quality. It shows that higher product quality makes the leaders' rate of revenue less sensitive to the degree of market access restriction. The reason is when the leaders' product quality is higher, the market access restrictions by the regulator have less impact on the leaders' product sales status and rate of revenue, and the subsequent assessment is not penalized, i.e., the degree of market access restrictions and their succeeding assessment have less impact on the leaders' rate of revenue when followers use forward contracts at t = 0 if the leaders' product quality improves.
 
4.1.3.

## Analysis of the difference in leaders' revenue when followers use and do not use forward contracts
Comparing Section 3.1.1 with Section 3.1.2, it appears that leaders' rate of revenue increases if market access restrictions decline when followers do not adopt forward contracts. Leaders' rate of revenue decreases if market access restrictions reduce when the followers adopt forward. The reason is that compared to followers who do not use forward contracts to sell their products when they use forward contracts, the supplies of leaders and followers in the market at the moment t = 0 exceed 0. The competition in peer sales increases at this time, which leads to the weakening of the leaders' absolute pricing power, and the greater the supply of followers, the smaller the influence of the leaders' supply on the price of the product. Meanwhile, due to the market demand fixes in the short term, the reduction of market access restrictions by the regulatory authority will increase the supplies of both leaders and followers, which will lead to oversupply to a certain extent, a decrease in the price of the product, such a situation makes the relationship between the supply of leaders and the price inverse. If leaders increase supply, the product price decreases. However, leaders may continue to augment the provision of the product to maintain the market share to avoid competition from the market share of followers.

4.2.

## Impact of changes in the degree of market access restrictions on the volume and revenue of followers' products of forward sales
Section shows that followers can adopt both forward and spot sales methods, and the quantity of the product using forward contracts affects the followers' spot returns. It intends to analyze the impact of changes in the degree of market access restrictions on the number of forward contracts ordered by followers and their return.
4.2.1.

## Effect of market access restrictions on the number of products sold forward by followers
When followers sell products using forward contracts, assuming that the followers' discount rate is 0.3, the number of follower firms when the regulator does not impose market access restrictions, the degree of impact of market access restrictions on follower firms , and the followers' supply capacity D = 1, the relationship between the number of their forward contracts ordered and the degree of market access restrictions to be as shown in .
 From , the number of followers' forward contracts ordered increases when the degree of market access restrictions decreases, and the number of forward contracts ordered is close to 50 % of the optimal supply when the degree of market access restrictions approaches 0. The reason is that at t = 0, the followers enter the market by signing forward contracts to sell the product at the same time as leaders, and then it competes with the leader for the market share at the same time. If the degree of market access restrictions of the regulator decreases, the number of followers that can enter the market increases, and the number of followers' forward contract orders increases to obtain more market share, i.e., the number of followers' forward contracts ordered increases as the degree of market access restrictions decreases.

4.2.2.

## Impact of changes in the degree of market access restrictions on followers' revenue from products of forward sales
When followers use forward contracts, the supply of products from leaders and followers in the market increases, leading to oversupply, and there is a risk of forward default in such a case. Let the rate of revenue parameters of followers , , time t = 0.5, the degree of influence of followers supply on the rate of revenue , and other variables are consistent with section , which leads to the relationship between the variation of the rate of revenue of followers forward sales and the degree of market access restrictions as shown in .
 As shown in , the rate of revenue on followers' forward sales is positively related to the degree of market access restrictions, i.e., a decrease in the degree of market access restriction by the regulator makes the rate of revenue on followers' forward sales decline. The reason is that when market access restrictions are lower, the risk tolerance and qualifications of forward contract participants entering the market may be poor, resulting in an increased forward default risk for followers. Meanwhile, the number of forward contracts entered into by followers increases when the degree of market access restrictions drops, resulting in increased costs for followers to pay in advance. The default of counterparties to forward contracts or price fluctuations may increase the cost loss and decrease the rate of revenue for followers. Therefore, when the degree of regulatory market access restrictions is low, the number of followers' forward contracts ordered increases, and forward default risk may also increase, which makes the revenue rate on followers' forward sales fall.
When , it can further introduce the relationship between their rate of revenue, time, and the degree of market access restrictions by the number of forward contracts entered into by followers, as shown in . It is clear that the sensitivity of the followers' forward sales rate of revenue to the degree of market access restrictions decreases as time increases, i.e., the closer the time is to 1, the smaller the impact of changes in the degree of market access restrictions on the followers' forward sales rate of revenue. It may be because followers enter into forward contracts at t = 0, spend the ordering cost, and receive the return at the forward contract delivery date when the degree of market access restrictions has a more significant impact on their rate of revenue.
 

4.3.

## Changes in the degree of market access restrictions and the impact of forward contracts on sales proceeds of followers' products
In the case of leader-follower product sales competition, it first separately determines when followers do not adopt and adopt forward contracts the impact of changes in the degree of market access restrictions on their earnings situation, followed by a comparative analysis of the two cases.
4.3.1.

## Impact of changes in the degree of market access restrictions on followers' product sales revenue when followers do not use forward contracts
When followers do not use forward contracts, they can only sell spot after leaders. When exploring the followers' revenue, factors such as product supply and demand, changes in unit selling cost, and opportunity cost all affect the profit rate of the followers. To facilitate a comparative analysis of the situation when followers do not adopt and adopt forward contracts, here it only considers the effect of the degree of market access restrictions on followers' revenue so that the discount rate , the number of followers' firms when the regulator does not impose market access restrictions , the degree of impact of market access restrictions on followers' firms , and the supply capacity of followers D take values consistent with Section , it shows such case the followers' variation of spot supply with the degree of market access restrictions in .
 It is clear from that the spot provision of followers is close to the optimal supply (50 %) when the degree of market access restrictions is close to 0. An increase in the spot supply of followers follows with an increase in the degree of market access restrictions. The reason is that the number of leaders and followers in the market increases simultaneously when the market access restrictions of the regulator decrease. The competition in product sales increases. Moreover, since the followers sell the spot at a later time, and this paper assumes that the market sells the same product, in this case, the leaders are the first to enter the market, forming barriers to entry, which leads to the followers can only enter the market through market innovation and other ways to compete for market share with them, and are at a competitive disadvantage, so that the follower's spot supply decreases with the reduction of the degree of market entry restriction. Combining the above numerical assumptions, let time t = 3, the followers' rate of revenue parameters , , , and the variation of the followers' rate of revenue with the degree of market access restrictions when it does not use forward contracts to sell the product shows as .
 As can be seen from , the rate of revenue for the followers decreases with the increase in the degree of market access restrictions. The reason is that when the followers do not use forward contracts if the degree of market access restrictions by the regulator is high, both leaders and followers have less access to the market, the number of suppliers in the market decreases, and the competition for internal and external sales of the followers weakens, so the spot supply of followers increases with the increase of the degree of market access restrictions. If the followers do not enter the market through market innovation to form a supply advantage, the competition from the leaders may reduce the market share of the followers. They cannot catch up with the leaders, so the followers will choose to increase their supply in this case, which may lead to it exceeding the optimal supply, and thus the rate of return will decrease.
Since this section mainly considers the case where followers do not use forward contracts at t = 0, to facilitate the study, let the time t
 [ , ] for followers to sell spot and the relationship between the rate of revenue of followers, time, and the degree of market access restrictions show as . It illustrates that followers' return rate decreases as time increases. The reason is that followers may continue to increase their supply to consolidate their market share as time increases, which eventually leads to their provision exceeding the optimal supply, so their rate of revenue decreases accordingly.
 
4.3.2.

## The effect of changes in the degree of market access restrictions when followers use forward contracts on the sales revenue of followers' products
When the followers use forward contracts to sell products, they can enter the market at the same time as the leaders, and the leaders cannot form barriers to entry, so the followers do not need to compete with the leaders for market share through subsequent market innovation and other ways to increase the competitiveness of the product sales, its spot supply will be affected to a certain extent. Let the values of each variable be the same as when followers do not use forward contracts, and it shows the variation of the followers' supply with the degree of market access restrictions in this case in .
 It is clear from that a decrease in the degree of market access restrictions leads to an increase in the supply of followers and that the supply of followers approaches their maximum supply capacity as the degree of market access restrictions approaches 0, the risk of forward default increases with a decrease in the degree of market access restrictions, contrary to the situation when followers do not use forward contracts. This may be due to the number of followers' ordered forward contracts increasing when the level of regulatory market access restrictions reduces. Meanwhile, a decrease in the degree of market access restrictions leads to an increase in the number of followers available to enter the market and a consequent increase in the supply of followers. Therefore, the supply of followers increases as the degree of market access restrictions decreases, their provision approaches the maximum supply capacity as the degree of market access restrictions approaches 0, and the relationship varies inversely.
Let the rate of revenue parameters of followers be consistent with Section 3.3.1, at which point it shows the discounted expected profit rate of followers varies with the degree of market access restrictions in . It indicates that the degree of market access restrictions is positively related to discounted expected profit rate of followers. The reason may be the followers' supply being close to their maximum supply capacity when they sell forward contracts, and the reduction in the degree of regulatory market access restrictions causes the followers' supply to increase further. Combined with Section 2.2.4.1, it is clear that the supply of followers has exceeded the optimal supply, and the rate of revenue of followers decreases instead if the provision continues to increase. However, they will gradually lose market share and cause higher losses if followers do not increase the supply, so they choose to augment the provision. Meanwhile, due to the limited demand in the market, the number of leaders and followers, and their supply increase simultaneously when the market access restrictions are low, the enhanced competition in peer sales may lead to a decrease in the product price and revenue. Furthermore, since forwards are particular spots, the risk of default on forwards increases when market access is less restrictive, and the failure of followers to deliver forward contracts on time leads to cost losses and lower revenue from product sales.
 Let the time parameter be consistent with Section 3.3.1. shows the relationship between the followers' rate of return, time, and the degree of market access restrictions. It illustrates that for a certain degree of market access restrictions, followers' rate of return decreases gradually as time increases. This may be due to a fixed degree of market access restrictions, followers gradually increase their supply to prevent losing market share as time increases, which leads to increased competition for product sales and lower product prices, so their rate of return declines.
 
4.3.3.

## Analysis of the difference in revenue when followers use and do not use forward contracts
According to sections 3.3.1 and 3.3.2, it can know the variation of followers' supply with the degree of market access restrictions when they do not and adopt forward contracts, respectively. The decrease in the degree of market access restrictions by the regulator increases the followers' revenue when they do not adopt forward contracts and decreases the followers' revenue when they adopt forwards. The possible reason is that when followers do not use forward contracts, they enter the market and sell the spot after leaders. Since leaders already occupy a definite share of market spot sales at t = 0, resulting in a limited supply to followers, the provision from followers is only likely to be close to the optimal supply. When followers use forwards, they can enter the market simultaneously with leaders through the contracts, the market share of followers increases, and they can provide more products. Therefore, the supply of followers is close to their maximum capacity and may exceed the optimal number. If the supplies of the leader and the follower increase, there will be more competition in the market. However, excessive competition will lead to lower product prices and the rate of revenue for followers, i.e., the followers use forward contracts to sell their products, resulting in a lower return.
It is clear from the above that an increase in the leaders' supply leads to the followers' supply decrease. While an increase in the followers' supply negatively affects the leaders' supply when the followers adopt forward contracts, the followers' market share may exceed that of the leaders, which results in the leaders losing their pricing power completely, and there is a negative correlation between the leaders' supply and the price. Moreover, leaders' and followers' revenues decrease when followers adopt forward contracts.

5.

## Conclusion
It is to investigate the leader-follower product sales competition based on market access restrictions and forward contracts. First, it determines the discounted profit rate models for leaders and followers, the forward default risk model based on market access restrictions, and then further determines the profit rate models for leaders and followers based on market access restrictions and forward contracts by Bayes' posterior probability method. Second, the mechanism of the impact of the change in the degree of market access restrictions on the sales of leaders' and followers' products when followers do not adopt and adopt forward contracts is analyzed. Third, the relationships between the variables of leaders' and followers' supply, degree of market access restrictions, and the rate of revenue are further explored through simulation analysis, and the effects of forwards on the sales outcomes of both products are analyzed through comparative studies. The specific conclusions are as follows.
(i)If followers do not use forward contracts, the total supply of the product in the market decreases. In this case, if the market access restrictions are down, the supply of leaders increases, and such sales competition leads to a decline in the supply of followers.
(ii)When followers use forward contracts and market access is less restrictive, the total supply of the product in the market increases, which leads to oversupply to a certain extent and lower prices for the product, and the expected discounted profit rates of both leaders and followers decrease.
(iii)If the market access is less restricted by the regulator under the “leader-follower” market entry model, the forward default risk suffered by followers increases, leading to a decrease in the rate of return for followers.
(iv)If the quality of the leaders' products is high, then the increase in the degree of market access restrictions by the regulator has less impact on the quantity and cost of the leaders' products, which makes the leaders' rate of revenue less sensitive to the degree of market access restrictions.
Based on the analysis in this paper, the degree of market access restrictions by regulators and the adoption of forwards by followers or not influence the competition in the sale of products by both leaders and followers, which fills in the research gap of the leader-follower product sales competition under the background of the market access restrictions and the forward contracts, and has definite theoretical significance. Moreover, this paper also has powerful practical implications at the national and corporate levels. On the one hand, it provides some policy references and theoretical support for regulators on the mechanism construction of market access restrictions, reform of the regulatory system, and formulation of relevant regulations. On the other hand, it helps corporate managers pay attention to the potential shock risks brought by forward contracts and market access restrictions and enhances the ability to resist external shocks.
Meanwhile, it can apply the conclusions to various areas where regulators adopt restrictive access policies and actively trade forwards, including the energy industry, the shipping market, the iron and steel industry, commercial banks, etc. The regulatory authorities can adjust the degree of market access restrictions in such sectors based on our mechanism analysis, affecting their risks of forward defaults and the supply of leaders' and followers' products, and thus the outcome of product sales in both.
This paper considers the impacts of market access restrictions and forward contracts of leader and follower product sales competition. It is only possible to statistically measure the default risk of specific types of forward contracts due to the diversified and non-standardized nature of the latter, so the default risk of overall forwards is not accurately quantified here, the impact of other financial derivatives, such as futures and options, as well as digital technology are not paid attention to. Therefore, the use of futures, options, or digital technology to accurately quantify the default risk of forwards and apply it to the study of leader-follower product sales competition is the future research's focus.

## Data availability statement
This study has been conducted relies on the simulation. The program code can be available at Mendeley Data, an open repository (https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/sn9hcj8mjh/1).

## Funding statement
This work was supported by the [National Social Science Foundation of China] under Grant [No. 20XGL003], and [2023 Natural Science Basic Research Project of Shaanxi Province] under Grant [No.2023-JC-YB-618], [Social Science Fund Project in Shannxi Province] under Grant [No. 2023R045].

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Liang Wang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Ziqiu Cao: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Data curation. Pei Li: Resources, Data curation.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Biography
Liang Wang* (1974-), Ph. D, wangliang@xaut.edu.cn. He is a professor of School of Economics and Management at Xi'an University of Technology in China, and his research is focused on financial engineering. Ziqiu Cao (1998-) (2212523013@stu.xaut.edu.cn), master degree candidate of School of Economics and Management at Xi'an University of Technology in China, her research direction is financial engineering. Pei Li (1991-) (2022213665@mail.nwpu.edu.cn), master degree candidate of School of Management at Northwestern Polytechnical University in China, her research direction is corporate finance.

Appendix A.Proof of Theorem 1. A higher degree of market access restrictions by the regulator may lead to a decrease in the number of firms in the market, as shown in Eqs. , . Meanwhile, Kaganova & Nayyar-Stone [ ] concluded that under market access restrictions, the degree of market access restrictions has a positive relationship with the level of firm operations, asset and liability status. Firms entering the market when market access restrictions are strict have good asset and liability statuses. Therefore, the relationship between the average asset-liability ratio of firms on both sides of the forward transaction and the degree of market access restrictions is assumed to be , where V is total assets and B is total liabilities. k3 is the impact coefficient and is greater than 0, indicating the impact of the degree of market access restrictions on the asset-liability ratio of both sides of the forward transaction.
According to the relevant study in Section , followers are the principal participants in the forward market, so they suffer from default risk. Combining Gray & Jobst's [ ] systematic contingent claims analysis (SCCA), which is known to be used to assess the expected losses of creditors in the event of a financial institution's default during periods of extreme risk. The study deduces that the relationship between the level of forward default risk suffered by followers and the degree of market access restrictions is
φ=Φ(−[ln(V/B)+(r−1/2ε2)×t]/εt)(A-1)=Φ(−[lnk3υ+(r−1/2ε2)×t]/εt)Where t is time, is volatility, r is the expected profitability of the followers' forward counterparty, and is a normal distribution function. An increase in the degree of market access restrictions increases and decreases in Eq. (A-1) when t is fixed, leading to a decrease in the level of forward default risk suffered by the followers. It means that under the “leader-follower” market entry model, an increase in market access restrictions leads the asset and liability positions of the followers' forward counterparties to be good, and the likelihood of default decreases, so followers suffer less risk of forward default.
Proof of Theorem 2. According to the relevant study in Section , when followers do not use forward contracts for product sales, there are only leaders selling spots in the market at the moment t = 0, and followers cannot compete with them, so leaders have no external competitive pressure and have absolute product pricing power. The relationship between the leaders' supply Q1 and the rate of revenue is
(A-2)rQ1，1=P(Q1)Q1CQ1=a[Q1(C)+Q1(S)]×(d1−k1υ)+b(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))(A-3)Q1=∑i=1LQ1，i=Q1‾×L=Q1‾×(d1−k1υ)(A-4)Q1‾=Q1(C)+Q1(S)Where a and b are constants larger than 0, which denote the leaders' supply and the degree of influence of cost on price, respectively, is the leaders' average supply, C is the leaders' unit cost of sales, is the function of the effect of cost on the leaders' supply, S is the other variables affecting the leaders' supply, is the function of the other factors on the leaders' supply, and P is the market price of the product, , , and , respectively, are arbitrary cost functions about the supply of the leaders , the time t, the demand . The partial derivative of Eq. (A-2) concerning the degree of market access restrictions yields
(A-5)∂rQ1，1∂υ=−ak1[Q1(C)+Q1(S)](mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))It deduces that , i.e., the leaders' rate of revenue is a decreasing function of the degree of market access restrictions , implying that the leaders' rate of revenue increases as the degree of market access restrictions by the regulator decreases. From Eq. (A-2), the relationship between the leaders' discounted expected profit rate and the degree of market access restrictions can be further obtained as
HQ1，1=E[(∫0∞e−λt([a[Q1(C)+Q1(S)]×(d1−k1υ)+b(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))]/(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))dt+ςdBQ1,t)−(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))Q1(A-6)−eQ1w×max(M−mQ1，0))/(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))Q1]The leaders' supply increases when the degree of market access restrictions decreases, and leaders have absolute pricing power as there is no competition from followers at t = 0. Hence, leaders' rate of revenue increases with the increase in supply, and the degree of market access restrictions varies inversely with the discounted expected profit rate. When the quality m of the leaders' supply product is lower than the regulator's subsequent assessment criterion M, the first-order derivative of leaders' discounted expected profit rate on the regulator's assessment criterion M is
(A-7)∂HQ1，1∂M=−eQ1w/(mQ12/2+CQ11(Q1)+CQ12(t)+CQ13(δ))Q1It is further known from Eq. (A-7) that is constantly less than 0, i.e., the leaders' discounted expected profit rate is negatively related to the regulator's subsequent assessment criteria.
Proof of Theorem 3. Constrained by technology, resources, labor, and other factors, the market supply capacity of followers is limited, and in this paper, let D represent the supply capacity of followers. Assuming that the unit cost of sales of leaders and followers are equal, combining the study of Cai, Agarwal & Wierman [ ] and Eq. , it can obtain the spot supply of followers as
(A-8)Q2=[1+ψ(1d2−k2υ)]D2Because is the number of follower firms in the market, given the large number of this type of firms, is considered in this paper as a function of convergence to 0. Since suppliers have limited supply capacity, there is an optimal supply in the market, and when the supply is less than the optimal supply, the return varies in the same direction as the supply, and vice versa when the supply exceeds the optimal supply, the two vary inversely. Drawing on the yield function of Song & Lu [ ], this paper assumes that the rate of revenue on spot sales by followers is related to the supply of the spot as
(A-9)rQ2，2=[−α(Q2−β)2+z]/tWhere are all constants larger than 0, is the degree of influence of followers' supply on the rate of revenue, is the optimal supply of followers, and is the rate of revenue when followers' supply is optimal. Assuming that the supply capacity of followers is D = 1, it obtains the relationship between the followers' spot sales revenue rate and the degree of market access restrictions by combining Eqs. (A-8) and (A-9) as
(A-10)rQ2，2=[−α([1+ψ(1/d2−k2υ)]/2−β)2+z]/tAccording to Eq. (A-10), the first-order partial derivative of on as
(A-11)∂rQ2，2∂υ=−αk22t[[1+ψ(1/d2−k2υ)]/2−β](d2−k2υ)−32According to Eq. (A-11), when the optimal supply , the rate of revenue to followers' spot sales is a decreasing function of the degree of market access restrictions , i.e., the degree of market access restrictions by the regulator decreases and the rate of revenue to followers' sales of spot increases accordingly. When the optimal supply , only if the degree of market access restrictions is large enough, i.e., , at which time the rate of revenue on followers' sales of the spot is a decreasing function of the degree of market access restriction. However, when the degree of market access restrictions is low, i.e., , may be greater than 0. If the regulator further reduces the degree of market access restrictions at this time, the rate of revenue on spot sales by followers may decrease.
The first-order and second-order partial derivatives of Eq. (A-10) concerning the optimal supply are given by
(A-12)∂rQ2，2∂β=2αt[[1+ψ(1/d2−k2υ)]/2−β](A-13)∂2(rQ2，2)∂β2=−2αtIt can show that and is a decreasing function of the optimal supply , so the rate of revenue to followers selling spot is a convex function of the optimal supply. From Eqs. (A-12) and (A-13), it is clear that the optimal supply satisfies
(A-14)1+ψ(1/d2−k2υ)2=βThe optimal supply of followers is close to 50 % for a low degree of market access restrictions, i.e., , while it is close to 100 % for a high degree of market access restrictions, . This is because when the degree of market access restrictions is low, the competition is fierce, and the total supply of products in the market is high, which exceeds demand, so the optimal supply of followers is small. When the degree of market access restrictions is high, the number of products that enterprises supply reduces. The followers can provide more products to meet the market demand in this case, so their optimal supply is higher. Where is a function that tends to 0, closes to 50 %. It assumes the optimal supply of followers to be 50 % in the latter part for the sake of the research. According to Eq. (A-10), the relationship between the discounted expected profit rate of followers and the degree of market access restrictions is
HQ2，2=E[(∫τ∞e−λt([−α([1+ψ(1/d2−k2υ)]/2−β)2+z]/tdt+ςdBQ2,t)−e−λτ(mQ22/2+CQ21(Q2)+CQ22(t)+CQ23(δ))Q2−eQ2×w×max(M−mQ2，0))(A-15)/e−λτ(mQ22/2+CQ21(Q2)+CQ22(t)+CQ23(δ))Q2]Where , , and are arbitrary cost functions concerning the followers' spot supply , time t, and demand , respectively. Eq. (A-15) can see when the degree of market access restrictions decreases, the spot supply of followers relatively reduces and is close to the optimal supply, their revenue increases as the spot supply tends to be optimal, and the discounted expected profit rate of followers also tends to increase, i.e., the degree of market access restrictions has an inverse relationship with the discounted expected profit rate of followers.
Proof of Theorem 4. The followers sell the product through forward contracts at the moment t = 0. Their spot supply at this point changes somewhat. Combining Cai, Agarwal & Wierman [ ] and Eq. , it can obtain the spot supply of followers at this point as
(A-16)Q2=[1−ψ(1d2−k2υ)]×DWhere is a function converging to 0. Assuming that the followers' supply capacity D = 1, it can obtain the relationship between the followers' rate of revenue on spot sales and the degree of market access restrictions from and by combining Eqs. (A-9) and (A-16) as
(A-17)rQ2，2=[−α(1−ψ(1d2−k2υ)−β)2+z]/tThe first-order partial derivative of Eq. (A-17) on the degree of market access restrictions as
(A-18)∂rQ2，2∂υ=2αk2t[1−ψ(1d2−k2υ)−β](d2−k2υ)−2Where are known to be greater than 0, is a function of convergence to 0 and , so is constantly greater than 0, the rate of revenue on the sale of spots by followers is an increasing function of the degree of restrictions on market access . The followers can enter the market to sell the product through forward contracts at the moment t = 0, if the degree of restrictions on market access by the regulator decreases at this time, the risk of default on the forward contract increases, while the supply of followers, the probability of loss increases, and the rate of revenue decreases. It can derive the relationship between the discounted expected profit rate of followers and the degree of market access restrictions from Eq. (A-17) as
HQ2，2=E[(∫τ∞e−λt([−α(1−ψ(1/(d2−k2υ))−β)2+z]/tdt+ςdBQ2,t)−e−λτ(mQ22/2+CQ21(Q2)+CQ22(t)+CQ23(δ))Q2−eQ2×w×max(M−mQ2，0))(A-19)/e−λτ(mQ22/2+CQ21(Q2)+CQ22(t)+CQ23(δ))Q2]According to Eq. (A-1), when followers can sell using forward contracts, the higher the degree of market access restrictions reduces the risk of forward default, and when , the closer the followers' spot supply from Eq. (A-16) is to the optimal supply from , the higher the discounted expected profit rate of the followers' spot sales, i.e., the discounted expected profit rate of followers varies in the same direction as the degree of market access restrictions.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
This study has been conducted relies on the simulation. The program code can be available at Mendeley Data, an open repository (https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/sn9hcj8mjh/1).