pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC13170891PMC13170891.113170891131708914212703510.1371/journal.pone.0348707PONE-D-25-470641Research ArticlePeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsAge GroupsPhysical SciencesChemistryChemical ElementsOxygenMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineVirus TestingMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsCardiovascular DiseasesCardiovascular Disease RiskMedicine and Health SciencesCardiologyCardiovascular MedicineCardiovascular DiseasesCardiovascular Disease RiskMedicine and Health SciencesMedical ConditionsCardiovascular DiseasesMedicine and Health SciencesCardiologyCardiovascular MedicineCardiovascular DiseasesMedicine and Health SciencesPublic and Occupational HealthPhysical ActivityBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBody LimbsLegsMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBody LimbsLegsPeople and PlacesPopulation GroupingsEthnicitiesEuropean PeopleNorwegian PeopleAerobic capacity and muscular strength in 179 Norwegian men and women aged 20–59 years with a substance use disorder: A cross-sectional study
Aerobic capacity and muscular strength in Norwegians with a substance use disorderhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6918-4467LoeHenrikConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionVisualizationWriting – original draft FlemmenGreteConceptualizationData curationFunding acquisitionInvestigationProject administrationWriting – review & editing WisløffUlrikConceptualizationWriting – review & editing AnderssonHelle W.Writing – review & editing MostiMats P.ConceptualizationMethodologyWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Research and Development, Clinic of Substance Use and Addiction Medicine, St. Olav’s University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway2
Department of Public Health and Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, ‌‌Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway3
Department of Mental Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim,‌‌ Norway4
Department of Circulation and Medical Imaging, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, NorwayEspadaMárioEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
Maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max), the highest rate at which oxygen can be transported and utilized by the cardiovascular system and peripheral tissues [ – ], has consistently demonstrated a robust inverse association with prevalence of non-communicable diseases (i.e., cardiovascular disease [ – ], metabolic syndrome [ – ] certain cancers [ – ], type II diabetes [ , ], hypertension [ , ] and all-cause mortality [ , – ]. Maximal Oxygen pulse (max O2pulse), a noninvasive surrogate measure of left ventricular stroke volume that denotes oxygen pumped per heartbeat [ ], also possess significant prognostic value for cardiovascular disease as well as being a potent mortality predictor [ ]. More recently, muscular strength has emerged as an important forecaster of somatic health, showing inverse association with cardiovascular disease [ , ], type II diabetes [ ], cancer [ ], as well as serving as an independent predictor of all-cause mortality [ , – ].
Individuals with substance use disorder (SUD) show a higher prevalence of lifestyle-related diseases [ – ], and their life expectancy is estimated to be 15–30 years shorter than that of the general population. This reduced longevity is largely attributed to poor mental and somatic health [ , , ]. Findings indicate that a significant proportion of individuals with a SUD lead a sedentary lifestyle [ ], with insufficient levels of physical activity [ ]. This lack of activity has a direct negative impact on both aerobic capacity and muscular strength.
There is a notable paucity in the literature of objectively measured reference materials on these key variables in patients with a SUD. The main purpose of this study was to contribute to establish reference values for directly measured aerobic capacity- and muscular strength variables in patients with SUD, and to compare these data to normative values in the HUNT3 cohort consisting of apparently healthy age matched controls.

## Materials and methods

## Study design
This clinical study utilized cross-sectional baseline data from an ongoing prospective cohort study conducted at the Clinic of Substance use and Addiction Medicine, St Olav’s University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway. The study was approved by the Regional Committee for Medical and Health Research Ethics (2019/501/REK midt), registered in Clinical Trials (NCT04141202), and carried out in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki (WMA Declaration of Helsinki 2013). Participants were insured by the Norwegian patient compensation claim.

## Settings and participants
This study included, 179 inpatients (26% women) aged 20−59 years, diagnosed with SUD in accordance with the International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision (ICD-10, F10-19) [ ]. The primary SUD diagnosis is detailed in . Participants were recruited successively upon admittance to the clinic of Substance Use and Addiction Medicine, St. Olavs University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway. A detailed study description (oral and written) was provided to eligible volunteers, and informed consent was secured. Inclusion criteria: being able to perform exhausting endurance- and strength training and all-out testing, not been abstinent from drugs last 6 months, being in residential treatment at our clinic, free from known cardiovascular- or pulmonary disease and cancer. Patients that fulfilled the inclusion criteria, and agreed to participate, were tested and measured onsite in our clinic. All participants successfully completed both the VO2max and maximal muscular strength test in compliance with preset max criteria (specified under the heading: Physical testing and measurements). No adverse events occurred. Of 207 eligible candidates, 28 declined to participate, resulting in an ⁓87% inclusion rate. Recruitment commenced January 1st, 2020, with conclusion December 22st, 2023, paused from mid-March 2020 through primo October 2020 due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
 

## Physical testing and measurements
Resting heart rate (HRrest) was measured, using a SunTech Tango M2 (SunTech Medical, Morrisville, NC, USA), sitting in an upright position subsequent a 5-minute resting period. Bodyweight was measured with an M-420 Marsden (Marsden Weighing Machine Group Ltd, Rotterham, England).

## Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET)
Detailed information on the CPET procedure was provided before the test. We used a PPS 55 Med treadmill (Woodway USA, Waukesha, WI, USA) for the all-out physical performance test. HR data and respiratory kinetics were continuously recorded using Polar H7 (Polar Elektro Oy, Kempele, Finland) and a Vyntus CPX fitted with an ambient air mixing chamber (Jaeger, Hockenberg, Germany), respectively. A 10- minute treadmill warmup and familiarization phase preceded the all-out test. Participants were instructed not to grab the handrails, if not necessary, as it would reduce the oxygen cost at a fixed workload. Warmup workload was individually adjusted to induce a moderate increase in HR. Initial treadmill velocity during test was determined based on HR, subjectively perceived exertion and workload during warmup. Treadmill velocity was increased by one km∙hour-1 per minute until the participants reached volitional exhaustion, and the test was terminated. Slope inclination remained fixed at five % throughout the test. Seven participants, unable to run, utilized a test protocol where slope inclination was increased by two % per minute and the velocity remained fixed. VO2max/VO2peak was logged as the average of the three highest sequential VO2 measurements. Attaining VO2max presupposed complying with the following criteria. (I) Observation of a stable VO2 plateau, even with an increased workload [ ], (II) reaching volitional exhaustion and (III) registering a respiratory exchange ratio (R) of 1.05 or higher coinciding with the time of measuring VO2max [ ]. The CPET equipment (Vyntus CPX, Jaeger, Hoechberg, Germany) was validated against an iron lung (Metabolic Simulator with mass flow controller, Vacumed, Ventura, CA, USA). An inconsistency was observed in the highest minute ventilations (VE > 180 Lmin-1), presenting with a 5.5% error (being in excess of the predefined acceptable error of 5%). No relevant deviations are expected in this minute ventilation range among SUD patients based on previous observations [ ]. Two participants displayed VE > 180 L/min (184 L/min and 213 L/min), which were unlikely to influence the results. All other measurements were inside acceptable range. The Vyntus CPX was calibrated prior to testing each day. A multistep process was performed, (1) gas calibration using a gas mix (15.99% O2 and 5.00% CO2 mixed with N2) and ambient air, (2) calibrating the Digital Volume Transducer (DVT). A default volume calibration was performed between each test. The PPS 55 Med treadmill was calibrated (velocity (km∙hour-1 and slope angle (%)) prior to study start and controlled regularly.

## HUNT 3 reference material

## Test specifics.
The HUNT 3 study utilized a very similar protocol, calibration procedures and direct VO2 measurement as in the present study and a CPET was accepted as VO2max if test was terminated upon volitional exhaustion, R ≥ 1.05 and the registering of a stable VO2 plateau despite increased workload. Cortex Metamax II (Cortex, Leipzig, Germany) with a built-in mixing chamber was used. Characteristics of the HUNT 3 reference material are presented in .
 

## Risks in using CPET
A maximal CPET is regarded as safe practice. Nevertheless, adverse events and severe complications occur [ , ]. Incidents of sudden death is reported in the range of 0–5 for every 100,000 tests, in mixed populations of apparently healthy and patients [ , ]. Risk of adverse occurrences, including death and potentially life-threatening events (e.g., ventricular fibrillation and myocardial infarction) increased to 6–10/100,000 when including high-risk patients [ , ]. Even so, CPET it is considered safe [ ]. American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) and the American Heart Association (AHA) advocate not overstating potential ill health effects related to vigorous exercise, since health benefits significantly overshadows the risks [ ]. However, being observant to symptoms indicative of test termination is paramount (e.g., acute chest pain, great dyspnea, mental confusion, loss of coordination and sudden paleness) [ ]. Trained staff conducted CPET.

## Oxygen pulse (O2pulse)
Maximal O2pulse was calculated from the three consecutive highest VO2 measurements (i.e., VO2max) divided by the corresponding HR measurements.

## Maximal muscular strength testing (1RM)
Participants performed a maximal strength test using muscles in the lower extremities. Major muscles involved being m. quadriceps, m. hamstrings and m. gluteus maximus. One-repetition maximum (1RM), the highest achievable torque or force produced in a maximal voluntary concentric muscle contraction [ ], was measured in a hack squat machine (Impulse Fitness IT7006, Impulse (Qingdao) Health Tech, Shandong, China). The hack squat movement cycle: (1) starting in an upright position – (2) eccentric muscle contraction braking downward movement and briefly stopping at a 90◦ knee joint angle – (3) returning to initial upright position by concentric muscle contraction. Warm-up consisted of two sets of five repetition at 50%, and one set of 70% of expected 1RM based on observation. The initial test-load was set somewhat lower than anticipated 1RM, with 5–10 kg load increments per subsequent attempt, expecting real 1RM achieved in 6–9 attempts [ ]. The highest completed load lifted was registered as 1RM.

## Allometric scaling
Allometric scaling was used to more accurately compare VO2max/peak and 1RM values between individuals with different body size, since neither the oxygen cost of running at a fixed workload nor muscular strength increases in linear proportion to bodyweight [ – ]. It has been shown that inter-individual comparison of VO2max is more appropriate when bodyweight is raised to the power of 0.75 (i.e. mL ∙ kg-0.75 ∙ min-1) [ , ]. Likewise, muscular strength should be conveyed as bodyweight raised to the power of 0.67 (i.e., kg ∙ mb-0.67) [ ]. Failing to utilize allometric scaling in expressing relative- strength and endurance will result in a consistent over- and under estimation of performance in lighter- and heavier persons, respectively [ ].

## Statistical analysis
The assumption of normally distributed data was supported by QQ-plots, variance homogeneity in key variables was supported by Levene’s test. Thus, parametric statistics were applied for the analysis. Data are presented as arithmetic mean ± standard deviation or 95% confidence interval, Eta-squared is reported for effect sizes. To maintain the probability of a Type I error at < 5% (0.05) [ ] an analysis of variance (One-way Anova), with a Bonferroni post-hoc test was used to correct for multiple comparisons. A two-sided Independent-Samples T-test was used to identify differences between men and women, with p < 0.05 viewed as statistically significant. Regression analysis was deployed to improve methodological rigor by displaying the impact of anthropometrical variables on the dependent variable (VO2max). Pearson correlation coefficient was used to measure strength between variables. SPSS 29.0.1 (Statistical Package for Social Sciences, Chicago, IL, USA) and GraphPad Prism 10.1.2. (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA) were used for data analysis and graphics.

## Results

## Sex differences in VO2max, maximal O2pulse, HRrest and 1RM
Women had a 15% (p < 0.001), 32.1% (p < 0.001) and 19.5% (p < 0.001) lower relative, absolute and scaled VO2max than men, respectively (36.4 ± 7.1 mL ∙ kg-1 ∙ min-1 vs. 42.8 ± 7.1 mL ∙ kg-1 ∙ min-1, 2.43 ± 0.39 L ∙ min-1 vs. 3.58 ± 0.52 L ∙ min-1 and 103.8 ± 17.3 mL ∙ kg-0.75 ∙ min-1 vs. 129.0 ± 18.0 mL ∙ kg-0.75 ∙ min-1). Maximal O2pulse was 31.1% (p < 0.001) lower among women than men (13.3 ± 2.1 mL∙beat-1 vs. 19.3 ± 2.9 mL∙beat-1). There were no significant sex differences in HRmax or HRrest (women: 190 ± 11/ 85 ± 12; men: 192 ± 13/ 82 ± 13). Women obtained 38.2% (p < 0.001) and 28.2% (p < 0.001) lower 1RM and scaled 1RM strength, respectively, compared to men (70.8 ± 26.4 kg vs. 114.5 ± 36.3 kg and 4.25 ± 1.76 kg ∙ mb-0.67 vs. 5.92 ± 1.89 kg ∙ mb-0.67) ( ).
 

## Age group differences in VO2max, maximal O2pulse and 1RM among men
Among men the highest relative- and scaled VO2max (45.9 ± 5.2 mL ∙ kg-1 ∙ min-1 and 136.7 ± 13.1 mL ∙ kg-0.67 ∙ min-1) was observed in the youngest age group (20–29 years), with a ⁓10% (p < 0.001) lower average VO2max per subsequent decade throughout the age groups. Between the two most senior age groups (40–49 years and 50–59 years) a steeper deterioration gradient of ⁓ 18% (p = 0.02) was observed. The absolute VO2max was 3.65 ± 0.50 L ∙ min-1 with no significant difference between subsequent age groups. The maximal O2pulse was 19.9 ± 3.9 mL∙beat-1, with no significant differences between any age groups. The highest HRmax (197 ± 9 beats∙min-1) was found in the youngest age group (20–29 years), whereupon an average ⁓ 5% (p < 0.001) lower HRmax was observed between each succeeding age group. We observed no differences in HRrest between consecutive age groups. On average body mass was ⁓ 8% (p < 0.001) higher with each following decade, with the highest body mass (100.4 ± 17.6 kg) found in the most senior age group (50–59 years). 1RM was 120.5 ± 35.1 kg in the youngest age group (20–29 years), with no significant difference between the following age groups. The highest scaled 1RM (6.36 ± 1.80 kg ∙ mb-0.67) was in the youngest age group (20–29 years), with an average 13% (p = 0.002) lower scaled 1RM observed between subsequent decades ( ). Overall effect sizes Eta-squared for relative and scaled VO2max, respectively (η2 = 0.329; 0.327, p < 0.05), and scaled 1RM (η2 = 0.108, p < 0.05).
 

## Age group differences in VO2max, maximal O2pulse and 1RM among women
Among women the highest relative- and scaled VO2max (38.4 ± 6.1 mL ∙ kg-1 ∙ min-1 and 108.7 ± 14.7 mL ∙ kg-0.67 ∙ min-1) was observed in the youngest age group (20–29 years), with an average ⁓ 11% (p = 0.006) and ⁓10% (p = 0.005) lower VO2max per subsequent decade, respectively. The absolute VO2max was 2.51 ± 0.40 L ∙ min-1 with no significant difference between subsequent age groups. The maximal O2pulse was 13.4 ± 2.1 mL∙beat-1, with no significant differences between age groups. The highest HRmax (194 ± 10 beats∙min-1) was found in the youngest age group (20–29 years), whereupon an average ⁓ 4% (p < 0.001) lower HRmax was observed between each succeeding age group. We observed no differences in HRrest between consecutive age groups. The highest body mass (76.2 ± 15.8 kg) was found in the oldest age group (40–49 years), with no significant difference between age groups. 1RM and scaled 1RM was 74.8 ± 25.4 kg and 4.55 ± 1.70 kg ∙ mb-0.67 in the youngest age group (20–29 years), with no significant difference between the two youngest age groups (20–29 years and 30–39 years), whereupon ⁓ 42% (p = 0.016) and ⁓ 48% (p = 0.011) lower values were observed between the two oldest age groups, respectively ( ). Overall effect sizes (Eta-squared) for relative and scaled VO2max, respectively (η2 = 0.111; 0.119, p < 0.05), and 1RM and scaled 1RM, respectively (η2 = 0.034; 0.044, p < 0.05).
 

## Regression analysis of VO2max
Age and BMI are dominant independent predictors for VO2max in our data, whereas smoking status has miniscule predicting power ( ).
 

## Association between VO2max, maximal O2pulse, 1RM and age in men and women
For men there was a weak (r = − 0.26, p = 0.003) and strong (r = − 0.58, p < 0.001) negative association between VO2max (absolute and relative, respectively) and age ( ). The corresponding negative correlations for women were moderate (r = − 0.32, p = 0.03) and (r = − 0.49, p < 0.001) ( ). No correlation was observed between maximal O2pulse and age in men (r = − 0.04, non-significant) ( ) or women (r = − 0.15, non-significant) ( ). There was a weak (r = − 0.23, p = 0.01) and moderate (r = − 0.36, p = 0.02) negative correlation between 1RM and age in men ( ) and women, respectively ( ).
 

## Discussion
The present study constitutes the most comprehensive reference material of objectively measured aerobic capacity- and muscular strength variables in a cohort of SUD patients. Key findings underscore this group’s substantially lower cardiorespiratory fitness (VO2max) and muscular strength (1RM) compared to age-matched healthy controls, consequently, placing SUD patients at increased risk of lifestyle related disease and all-cause mortality [ , , , ].
Previous findings generally demonstrate a higher VO2max in Norwegian [ , ] and former Scandinavian healthy populations [ , , ] than in comparable international reference materials [ – ]. Nomadic Lapps [ ] tending reindeer, and contemporary hunter-gatherer societies [ ] present with VO2max values coinciding well with the Scandinavian data, suggesting that a higher VO2max may be attributed to a more physically active living, as well as genetic predispositions [ ]. To maintain the integrity of the analysis, methodology should be identical when comparing results from different studies (i.e., the use of treadmill as test modality and CPET utilizing a mixing chamber). Failing in these important prerequisites results in a consistent 6–15% lower VO2max/VO2peak measurement when testing on bicycle ergometer compared to treadmill with an incline [ , , ], a probable consequence of a lower cardiac output using cycle ergometer [ , ]. Furthermore, VO2 respiratory kinetics measured with breath-by-breath systems present with significantly higher relative error and is less stable than systems using a mixing chamber [ ], as well as yielding substantially lower VO2max measurements [ ]. In the literature, there are two Norwegian reference materials [ , ] presenting aerobic capacity variables that consist of apparently healthy populations. We believe comparing our findings to the HUNT3 [ ] reference material, rather than the reference material from Edvardsen and colleagues [ ] opens for a more correct interpretation of differences of aerobic capacity data for several reasons. First, our study participants were recruited from the same geographical region and population base, in the middle part of Norway, as the HUNT3 participants. Second, the HUNT3 sample size is significantly larger, n = 3816 [ ] vs. n = 759 [ ]. Third, the latter study collected data in nine test venues throughout Norway, thus, having a relatively small population sample from the middle part of Norway when stratified for sex, age group and venue.

## Age group differences in VO2max
The highest relative VO2max in this study was found in the youngest age group (20–29 years) in both men and women, which is consistent with the HUNT3 reference material with healthy adults [ ]. We observed a drop of approximately 1-Metabolic equivalent (1-MET = 3.5 mL ∙ kg-1 ∙ min-1 of oxygen) per decade between the first three male age groups, which increased to a 2-MET drop between the two oldest age groups. In women, no significant change in relative VO2max was observed between the two youngest age groups. However, a non-significant, but clinically relevant approximately 2-MET (⁓ 19%, p = 0.09) lower VO2max was observed between the two oldest age groups (30–39 years and 40–49 years). In comparison, the HUNT3 reference material [ ] demonstrated a more linear drop of ⁓ 1-MET average between and throughout all age groups among both men and women. This steeper drop in relative VO2max among the older SUD patients may partially be attributed to an increase in bodyweight. This could be caused by a general tendency of SUD patients leading a sedentary lifestyle [ ], with a likely further decrease in physical activity with increasing age compared to a normal reference population, which will deteriorate VO2max even further. Adding to this challenge is the occasional use of medication causing weight gain as a side effect. Conversely, the HUNT3 reference material [ ] displays increased body weight only between the two youngest age groups, after which it remains stable, with a decrease between the two most senior age groups.
Relative VO2max in this study was generally lower throughout the age groups, among both men and women, with an evident growing difference with increasing age compared to the HUNT3 reference material [ ]. The highest differences were found in men, with an average of 2-MET lower relative VO2max between our findings and the HUNT3 study [ ] in the first 3 age groups (20–49 years), accelerating to a more than 3-MET difference between the two oldest age groups (40–59 years). Among women, the relative VO2max was on average1 MET lower compared to HUNT3 [ ] in the two youngest age groups (20–39 years), increasing to a ⁓ 2.5-MET difference in the oldest age group (40–49 years). However, for women one should bear in mind the relatively small sample size when interpreting the results. It is still interesting to point out tendencies in the data. The considerably lower relative VO2max in the two youngest male age groups (20–39 years), compared to the HUNT3 reference material [ ], can likely be ascribed a sedentary lifestyle [ ], heralding a low level of physical activity [ ], not taxing the aerobic energy system sufficiently to even maintain their VO2max level. In the two oldest male age groups (40–59 years) the even higher difference in relative VO2max can additionally be explained by a substantially higher body weight among our participants compared to the HUNT3 material. The pattern for women is the same, although smaller differences was demonstrated.
Compared to HUNT3 [ ], male SUD patients in the first 3 age groups (20–49 years) had a relative VO2max corresponding to being in excess of 20 years older than their actual age, further attenuated to a more than 30 years difference in the oldest age group (50–59 years). A comparable trend is apparent among women, where the two youngest age groups (20–39 years) showed a relative VO2max corresponding to more than 10 years of ageing compared to HUNT3 [ ], which further deteriorated to a 25 year difference in the oldest age group (40–49 years).
No significant differences in absolute VO2max (L ∙ min-1) were found between any of the age groups among men and women in the SUD data. This is probably due to the limited sample size, since there is an evident tendency towards lower values among the oldest age groups in both sexes. The decline rate between the two oldest age groups of men- (40–49 yrs. and 50–59 yrs.) and women (30–39 yrs. and 40–49 yrs.) were approximately 12% and 6%, respectively. This is comparable to the tendency in the HUNT3 reference material [ ] in similar age groups. However, absolute VO2max was in our material substantially lower in each age group compared to the HUNT3 material [ ], being on average ⁓ 14% lower among both men and women. In other words, the youngest SUD patients had an absolute VO2max similar to HUNT3 participants 20- and 30 years their seniors, in women and men, respectively.
Scaled VO2max deteriorated by a similar trajectory as relative VO2max, in both sexes in the SUD population and is comparable to the HUNT3 reference material [ ]. However, the SUD measurements were approximately 10 and 15% lower in each age group for women and men, respectively, and increased to in excess of 20% in the oldest age groups. This difference is lower than in the relative VO2max (⁓ 25%), and ascribed the effect of bodyweight being less dominant in scaled data.

## Age groups differences in maximal O2pulse
There were no significant differences in maximal O2pulse between subsequent age groups among men and women in our data. However, our slope trajectory demonstrated a ⁓ 7% non-significant (probably attributed limited sample size) reduction in O2pulse between the two oldest male age groups (40–49 yrs. and 50–59 yrs.). This drop in maximal O2pulse corresponds well with the findings in the HUNT3 reference material [ ] comparing similar age groups. We observed an average ⁓ 9% and ⁓ 12% lower maximal O2pulse in each SUD patient age group compared to the HUNT3 material [ ] in women and men, respectively.

## Age group differences in 1RM
In our data, there were no significant differences in 1RM between the youngest age groups in both sexes. Between the oldest male age groups (40–49 yrs. and 50–59 yrs.), a clinically relevant ⁓ 20% (non-significant) reduction in 1RM and ⁓ 25% in scaled 1RM were observed, with corresponding reductions of ⁓ 40 and ⁓ 50% between our oldest age groups among women (30–39 yrs. and 40–49 yrs.). Direct comparison between our findings and other research is difficult given the vast diversity in methodology in the literature, e.g., muscular strength measured as a ratio: weight pushed in leg press/ body weight, ordinary leg press (kg), peak torque (Nm) in knee extension or leg extension denoted as power (W) [ , – ]. Additionally, leg press and single joint movements hold several disadvantages compared to hack squat. Hack squat initiates from an upright position, with a movement cycle more comparable to walking, thus, enabling a more functional movement pattern. Furthermore, it is more demanding on the stabilization of the truncus, which is also more in resemblance with walking [ ]. Regardless of measuring method, the general tendency in previous studies is either a lowering of muscular strength between each consecutive older age group, or peaking in muscular strength in the 20–39 yrs. age groups, followed by an 8–15% decline between subsequent age groups [ , – , , ]. Comparing our findings in muscular strength, within each age group, to a normative material from the U.S. [ ] demonstrated that our data was on average ⁓ 15% and 25% lower in the younger age groups in women and men, respectively, diverging to ⁓ 48% and ⁓40% in the oldest age groups when applying identical measuring methodology (ratio: 1RM/bodyweight). However, presenting data this way is highly impacted by bodyweight, enabling a biased interpretation given the increasing of body weight throughout all age groups in our data, contradictory to the bodyweight trajectory in the HUNT3 reference material [ ]. Nevertheless, results in a previous study from this research group [ ], measuring 1RM in hack squat, demonstrated a 30% and 33% lower 1RM in men and women (all ages combined), respectively, compared to healthy controls.

## Sex differences in VO2max, maximal O2pulse and 1RM
For a more accurate comparison of the weighted average between men and women only the 3 youngest age groups are used in the analyzes (20−29 years, 30−39 years, 40−49 years), since no women older than 49 years were included. Women make up only one third of patients in SUD treatment, which is consistent with previous research [ ]. In this study women presented with ⁓ 17% and ⁓ 33% lower relative (mL ∙ kg-1 ∙ min-1) – and absolute (L ∙ min-1) VO2max than men, respectively, and ⁓ 21% lower scaled (mL ∙ kg-0.67 ∙ min-1) VO2max accounting for differences in bodyweight enabling a more accurate comparison [ , ]. This is expected, and explained by a lower hemoglobin count, smaller heart and lungs in women [ ]. In addition, tentative data in a parallel ongoing study in our clinic display a lower self-reported physical activity level in women than in men, which could in part explain the lower cardiorespiratory fitness. However, one should consider the inherent possibility of misreporting when utilizing self-reporting [ , ]. HUNT3 reference data [ ] display sex differences in VO2max coinciding fairly well with the findings in our SUD patient population, i.e., women in HUNT3 show a ⁓ 19%, ⁓ 34% and ⁓ 24% lower relative- absolute- and scaled VO2max, respectively. This is also in agreement with a previous study (n = 44) on SUD patients from our clinic [ ].
Sex differences in our maximal O2pulse data corresponds well with those of healthy Norwegians [ ], i.e., women scoring approximately 32% lower than men, which can be explained by women generally having a smaller heart, therefore a smaller left ventricular stroke volume, as well as a lower blood hemoglobin concentration [ ]. Women also have a smaller area of peripheral oxygen extraction (i.e., mitochondrial surface area), evident when utilizing dimensional scaling, connected to women generally being of shorter stature than men [ ].
In muscular strength women obtained a roughly 38% lower 1RM in hack squat than men, which is in agreement with previous findings among both SUD patients as well as healthy controls in our clinic using hack squat [ ]. A U.S. normative material [ ], including apparently healthy persons, showed ⁓ 25% lower muscular strength among women aged 20–49 years compared to men, reported as the ratio between 1RM in leg press/ body weight, which is comparable to our findings (⁓ 24% lower) when applying similar calculations. Another U.S. normative material [ ], with an apparently healthy population, demonstrated a ⁓ 33% lower peak torque (Nm) among women (20–49 years) performing a concentric knee extension (i.e., using m. quadriceps). Reviews [ , ] point out an expected 30–50% lower muscular strength among women in the lower extremities compared to men. Sex differences in muscular strength are caused by differences in muscle biology (i.e., men having a larger muscle- cross sectional area and fiber density, higher levels of testosterone) [ , ] and biomechanical traits (i.e., men having longer lever arms yielding higher torque) [ ].

## Risk of disease and all-cause mortality related to low- VO2max, maximal O2pulse and 1RM
Three percent of our male SUD participants displayed VO2max values below 8-MET (28 mL ∙ kg-1 ∙ min-1) which is associated with higher prevalence of all-cause mortality and cardiovascular disease in healthy populations [ ]. It is noteworthy that more than 80% of these male SUD participants were in the two youngest age groups (20−39 yrs.), and that low MET was present already in the 30−39 yrs. group for half of the cases contrary to HUNT3 data, where approximately one percent displayed a MET associated with elevated risk [ ]. More importantly, in the HUNT3 material none were under 50 years, with the majority (80%) being in the most senior age groups (60−90 yrs.). Only one woman in our study had an aerobic capacity below 6-MET (21 mL ∙ kg-1 ∙ min-1), the value associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality in women [ ]. The prevalence of MET values associated with increased risk of poor health and mortality is lower among women than in men, which coincide with HUNT3 findings. Furthermore, a 1-MET (3.5 mL ∙ kg-1 ∙ min-1) higher relative VO2max is associated with a 12% and 17% improved survival rate in men and women, respectively [ , ]. This is supported by recent findings where every 1-MET higher VO2max was associated with 11% lower relative risk for all-cause mortality [ ]. When extrapolating the current decline rate in the SUD population, the average VO2max for men > 60 years appears to be below the cut-off score, signaling increased risk of ill health and all-cause mortality [ ]. The tendency was similar for women.
Peak O2pulse has also been demonstrated as a forecaster of cardiovascular disease and mortality [ , ], where a low peak O2pulse signifies a worse cardiorespiratory function, and by the same token better when it is higher [ ]. Approximately three percent of our male participants presented with a maximal O2pulse < 13.5 mL∙beat-1, which in a Finnish study with males signified a 2.45-fold higher relative risk (RR) of death caused by cardiac heart disease, and a 1.79-fold higher RR in overall death, compared to those with a maximal O2pulse > 17.8 mL∙beat-1 [ ]. Furthermore, O2pulse at maximal exercise in a male population was shown to have a linear inverse relationship with all-cause mortality [ ]. When categorizing our male participants by the maximal O2pulse quartiles as displayed in a paper by Laukkanen and colleagues [ ] ⁓ 20% are in the highest maximal O2pulse (21.9–42.7 mL∙beat-1) quartile, ⁓ 60% are evenly distributed in the two following quartiles (19.3–21.9 mL∙beat-1 and 16.8–19.3 mL∙beat-1) and ⁓ 20% in the lowest quartile (6.4–16.8 mL∙beat-1). Attenuated maximal O2pulse across quartiles denotes an increased hazard ratio compared to the previous quartile.
While a plethora of research has consistently cemented the strong association between cardiorespiratory variables (e.g., VO2max and maximal O2pulse) and adverse health outcomes and mortality over the past 4–5 decades, more contemporary findings demonstrate that maximal muscular strength holds many of the same prognostic properties. Similar to cardiorespiratory variables (e.g., VO2max and maximal O2pulse), maximal muscular strength is inversely connected to several lifestyle related diseases, such as type II diabetes [ ], cancer [ ], cardiovascular disease [ , ] as well as being an independent forecaster of all-cause mortality [ , – ]. Thus, the lower muscular strength capacity observed in the present study likely constitutes yet a health-related risk factor for these patients. The generally lower- relative VO2max, maximal O2pulse and 1RM throughout all age groups, compared to reference materials of healthy age-matched populations [ , ] are probably important factors in explaining the higher level of morbidity and comorbidity, as well as the15–30 years shorter life expectancy in the SUD population [ , , ].
Selection bias is an inherent risk in all data collections involving physical testing to volitional exertion, where those least fit could chose not to partake. This potential bias is probably amplified among SUD patients where the fraction of less fit individuals is considerably higher than in a healthy population. Additionally, the least fit SUD patients are often unable to complete vigorous testing due to physical- or mental constraints and side effects of medication. Consequentially, the actual VO2max, maximal O2pulse and 1RM in SUD patients is probably lower than presented in our data, potentially making the difference between our results and other reference materials with healthy participants even bigger. Accordingly, the risk of lifestyle related diseases and all-cause mortality is probably underestimated‌‌ in our data.

## Clinical implications
Physical activity and exercise training has generally been implemented as an adjunctive intervention in SUD clinics; however, adherence remains low and attrition rates are high. Moreover, the physical activity provided in clinical settings appears to lack structure and systematic progression and is insufficiently demanding to adequately challenge the aerobic and neuromuscular systems, thereby limiting their potential to produce clinically meaningful improvements in physical fitness [ ]. Given the increased risk of lifestyle-related diseases associated with poor VO2max and muscular strength, our findings underscore the importance of structured physical training being an integrated activity in rehabilitation and health promotion programs in SUD populations.

## Strengths and limitations
A key strength of this study is the use of direct measurement of VO2max and maximal O2pulse by the use of treadmill testing, employing the Vyntus CPX system with a mixing chamber. This approach offers a more accurate assessment of aerobic capacity compared to prediction models or submaximal testing methods. All included participants are diagnosed with SUD applying the (ICD-10, F10-F19). However, the study is limited by a relatively small sample size, particularly in the oldest age groups among both men and women. This limitation hinders the ability to perform robust subgroup analyses and reduces the generalizability of our findings. Additionally, the possibility of a selection bias must be acknowledged, as physical testing to volitional exhaustion may deter participation among individuals with lower fitness levels. To enhance the validity and applicability of these findings, future studies should involve larger and more diverse samples drawn from various populations with SUD.

## Conclusions
This study represents the most comprehensive reference material on key aerobic- and muscular strength variables in patients with a SUD and constitutes a significant and more complete addition to the existing literature. Patients with SUD generally demonstrated lower aerobic capacity across all age groups compared to healthy age-matched Norwegians, particularly among men, translating to a three-fold higher prevalence of low aerobic capacity. Also, maximal muscular strength was lower compared to healthy controls. Notably, these deficits were observed at a considerable younger age than in healthy controls.

## Supporting information
S1 Raw Data

## Raw data.
(SAV)

The authors thank the employees in our training facility for their excellent contribution in conducting parts of the testing in the study.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0348707.r001Decision Letter 0
EspadaMárioAcademic Editor© 2026 Mário Espada2026Mário Espadahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
14 Oct 2025

-->-->PONE-D-25-47064-->-->Aerobic capacity and muscular strength in 179 Norwegian men and women aged 20-59 years with a substance use disorder: A cross-sectional study-->-->PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Loe,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Nov 28 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:-->
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Mário Espada, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure:
“This work is supported by Ekstrastiftelsen Helse og Rehabilitering (Stiftelsen DAM) grant number 2019/F0235306 and The Joint Research Committee between St.Olavs hospital and the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology   grant number 2023/36515”
Please state what role the funders took in the study. If the funders had no role, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed.
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. When completing the data availability statement of the submission form, you indicated that you will make your data available on acceptance. We strongly recommend all authors decide on a data sharing plan before acceptance, as the process can be lengthy and hold up publication timelines. Please note that, though access restrictions are acceptable now, your entire data will need to be made freely accessible if your manuscript is accepted for publication. This policy applies to all data except where public deposition would breach compliance with the protocol approved by your research ethics board. If you are unable to adhere to our open data policy, please kindly revise your statement to explain your reasoning and we will seek the editor's input on an exemption. Please be assured that, once you have provided your new statement, the assessment of your exemption will not hold up the peer review process.
4. If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
-->Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.-->
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
-->2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?-->
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
-->3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.-->
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
-->4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.-->
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
-->5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)-->
Reviewer #1: The research question is clearly defined, and the study design—a cross-sectional assessment using direct cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) and muscular strength testing—is suitable to meet the stated objectives. The methodology is described in detail, with careful calibration of equipment and the use of standardized testing protocols. The statistical analysis was correctly selected and applied (ANOVA, Bonferroni correction, t-tests, Pearson correlations), ensuring the reliability of the results. The findings show consistently lower aerobic capacity and muscular strength in SUD patients compared to healthy reference populations. The conclusions are well aligned with the data presented. Data Availability While the manuscript states that “all relevant data are within the manuscript and its supporting information files” and that data will be made available upon acceptance, this does not fully comply with the PLOS ONE Data Availability Policy. The raw data underlying the results (e.g., individual-level data points behind the means, standard deviations, and figures) are not currently included in the submission. To ensure transparency and reproducibility, the authors should provide anonymized individual-level data in a public repository or as supplementary files. Language and Presentation The manuscript is clearly written in standard English. The language is professional, understandable, and suitable for publication. Minor typographical and formatting errors can be corrected during revision, but overall the text is clear, concise, and unambiguous. Additional Comments The study’s strengths include its relatively large sample of patients with SUD, the use of objective and direct measurements of VO₂max and muscular strength, and the comparison with large normative reference datasets. Limitations are acknowledged, including small subgroup sizes in older age groups, potential selection bias (where less fit participants may have opted out), and the lack of female participants above 49 years. The authors may consider further discussion on the clinical implications of their findings for rehabilitation and health promotion programs in SUD populations. Overall Recommendation This is a well-conducted study that provides valuable new reference data. The main revision needed is compliance with the PLOS ONE Data Availability Policy by providing the raw data underlying the findings. Once this is addressed, the manuscript will be suitable for publication.
Reviewer #2: Manuscript ID: PONE-D-25-47064
Title: Aerobic capacity and muscular strength in 179 Norwegian men and women aged 20–59 years with a substance use disorder: A cross-sectional study
This study assesses aerobic capacity (VO₂max) and muscular strength (1RM) in adults with substance use disorders (SUD) using direct physiological testing. A total of 179 inpatients (aged 20–59 years) from a Norwegian clinic were compared with normative data from healthy populations. The results show substantially lower aerobic capacity and strength across all age groups, highlighting a potential link between physical deconditioning and elevated health risks in this population.
The topic is relevant and timely. Direct measurement of VO₂max and 1RM in people with SUD is uncommon, and this dataset provides valuable clinical and public-health insight.
1. Strengths
- The study addresses a clear evidence gap and offers meaningful clinical reference data for a vulnerable group.
- The use of direct CPET with calibration and a standardized strength protocol adds credibility. The application of allometric scaling is also commendable.
- Ethical approval, recruitment period, and trial registration are clearly reported.
- Tables and descriptions are generally well structured, and the discussion connects the results with existing literature.
2. Major Comments
1. Selection bias and representativeness
Because participation required maximal testing, the sample may represent the fitter segment of the SUD inpatient population. Please provide the number of screened, excluded, or non-participating individuals and, if possible, basic characteristics (e.g., age, sex, BMI) to help readers assess representativeness.
2. Statistical adjustment for confounders
The analyses are largely descriptive. Consider including regression models that adjust for potential confounders (age, BMI, smoking, type/duration of substance use, medications, comorbidities). Even simple adjusted models would enhance analytical rigor.
3. Limited subgroup power
Some subgroups (notably older women) are small. Report confidence intervals and effect sizes to aid interpretation and explicitly discuss this limitation.
4. Comparability of reference values
The use of the HUNT3 dataset as reference data is appropriate geographically, but readers need clarity on differences in testing protocols, calibration, and population characteristics. A brief summary table or paragraph would help contextualize the comparisons.
5. Data availability statement
PLOS ONE requires data to be available at publication unless legal or ethical barriers apply. Please clarify exactly how and when data will be shared (e.g., through an anonymized repository, with DOI or controlled access).
6. Adverse events and test completion
Given the maximal CPET and 1RM protocols, please report whether any participants failed to complete testing or experienced adverse events, and how these cases were handled.
7. Instrumentation note
The manuscript mentions a 5.5% error at very high ventilation rates (VE > 180 L/min). Indicate how many participants this affected and whether this could meaningfully influence results.
3. Minor and Editorial Comments
- Report 95% confidence intervals and effect sizes (Cohen’s d, η², etc.) for key comparisons.
- Verify assumptions of normality and variance homogeneity; note if any nonparametric approaches were used when appropriate.
- Streamline sections of the discussion to reduce redundancy and focus on the main messages.
- Adding scatterplots (e.g., VO₂max vs. age, strength vs. age) would help visualize inter-individual variability.
- Clarify technical terms (e.g., “O₂ pulse,” “allometric scaling”) for non-specialist readers.
- A light proofreading for grammar and flow would further improve readability.
4. Are the Conclusions Supported by the Data?
In general, yes. The observed reductions in VO₂max and strength among participants with SUD are consistent with prior knowledge. However, the conclusions should remain descriptive rather than causal, given the cross-sectional design and absence of adjustment for potential confounders. Emphasizing this limitation would make the interpretation more balanced and scientifically precise.
5. Recommendation : Major Revision
This is a valuable and well-conducted study that could make a meaningful contribution once some clarifications and analytical refinements are addressed.
The issues identified—mainly regarding statistical adjustment, transparency about sample selection, and data-sharing details—are entirely fixable within a reasonable revision process.
With these improvements, the manuscript would be strong enough for publication in PLOS ONE.
Reviewer #3: I would like to appreciate the efforts of the authors in implementing the project and writing this article “Aerobic capacity and muscular strength in 179 Norwegian men and women aged 20-59 years with a substance use disorder: A cross-sectional study”.
The main objective of this study was to contribute to the establishment of reference values for directly measured parameters of aerobic capacity and muscular strength in patients with SUD and to compare these data with normative values consisting of apparently healthy age-appropriate controls.
The submitted article contains valuable data on aerobic capacity and muscular strength in patients with addiction and provides the most extensive set of reference values in this population.
I have the following comments or questions:
- How was it determined in the selection of participants who is able to perform exhaustive endurance and strength training and total testing. I recommend describing the selection criteria in more detail.
- I believe that the study would benefit greatly from reporting the differences in measured VO2max values in the general population This would facilitate readers interpretation of the results given
- I recommend to deepen the discussion on the possible biochemical and psychosocial causes of the observed deficits.
**********
-->6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.-->
Reviewer #1: Yes: Hala Awad Ahmed
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
-->
10.1371/journal.pone.0348707.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
25 Mar 2026

Dear Editor,
Thank you for your patience with our delay, and for giving us the opportunity to revise and re-submit an improved version of our manuscript. All comments and concerns from the editor and reviewers have been addressed with corresponding amendments in the manuscript. We thank you and the reviewers for valuable comments, surely making the manuscript better. We do hope that the revised version of the manuscript is satisfactory for publication in PLOS ONE.
Sincerely,
Henrik Loe
Response to Journal and Reviewers:
Journal:
The amended role of funder statement is now included in the cover letter as requested.
Thank you for the information on the potentially time consuming data availability process. We prefer to make the data freely accessible if the manuscript is accepted for publication.
Reviewer #1:
Thank you for taking the time to review our manuscript. We believe that your suggestions and comments have contributed to improve it. Please find the changes highlighted in the revised version of the manuscript.
• Addressing your concern regarding data availability: In line with PLOS ONE guidelines, all individual raw data underlying the results will be made freely available if the manuscript is accepted for publication. Data Availability Policy, so that all statistical analysis can be scrutinized.
• Response to your input on clinical implications. This is clearly a relevant and important factor and has now been addressed in an added section under the Discussion (lines 554-563)
Reviewer #2:
Thank you for your comprehensive feedback. Your comments and concerns are hopefully addressed adequately. Please find the changes highlighted in the revised version of the manuscript.
2. Major Comments
1. Selection bias and representativeness
Comment: Because participation required maximal testing, the sample may represent the fitter segment of the SUD inpatient population. Please provide the number of screened, excluded, or non-participating individuals and, if possible, basic characteristics (e.g., age, sex, BMI) to help readers assess representativeness.
Reply: Those who declined to partake when eligible for participation (Non-participants) and inclusion rate are now included under the heading: Settings and participants in the methods section (Lines 88-93). Unfortunately, basic characteristics were not collected from those who declined.
As you point out, participants may represent the fitter segment. This has been noted in the strength and limitation section (Lines 573-575), and in the discussion with a brief elaboration of consequences (Lines 543-550).
2. Statistical adjustment for confounders
Comment: The analyses are largely descriptive. Consider including regression models that adjust for potential confounders (age, BMI, smoking, type/duration of substance use, medications, comorbidities). Even simple adjusted models would enhance analytical rigor.
Reply: Thank you for this notice. We agree that a regression analysis for the key variable VO2max will improve analytical rigor. This has been included in a new table (Table 6) in the Results section (Lines 306-311). This analysis is also described in the Statistical analysis section (Lines 218-219). Unfortunately, we did not have access to the patients’ medical records and were therefore unable to assess individual substance use, medication, or comorbidities.
3. Limited subgroup power
Comment: Some subgroups (notably older women) are small. Report confidence intervals and effect sizes to aid interpretation and explicitly discuss this limitation.
Reply: Confidence intervals are now reported in the revised version of table 4 and 5. Overall effect sizes from the one-way ANOVA are reported at the end of the paragraphs describing “age group differences” in the results section (Lines 268-269 and 291-293).
4. Comparability of reference values
Comment: The use of the HUNT3 dataset as reference data is appropriate geographically, but readers need clarity on differences in testing protocols, calibration, and population characteristics. A brief summary table or paragraph would help contextualize the comparisons.
Reply: Thank you for this suggestion. This has been rectified in a new paragraph in the Methods section named HUNT 3 reference material (Lines 147-154). We have also provided a new table (Table 2) summarizing basic characteristics (age group, sample size, VO2max, body mass, R-value).
5. Data availability statement
Comment: PLOS ONE requires data to be available at publication unless legal or ethical barriers apply. Please clarify exactly how and when data will be shared (e.g., through an anonymized repository, with DOI or controlled access).
Reply: In response to data availability. If the manuscript is accepted for publication all individual raw data underlying the results will be made freely available to be in compliance with the PLOS ONE Data Availability Policy, so that all statistical analysis can be scrutinized.
6. Adverse events and test completion.
Comment: Given the maximal CPET and 1RM protocols, please report whether any participants failed to complete testing or experienced adverse events, and how these cases were handled.
Reply: No adverse events occurred and everyone who partook completed tests. This is now specified under the heading: Settings and participants (Lines 88-93) in the Methods.
7. Instrumentation note.
Comment: The manuscript mentions a 5.5% error at very high ventilation rates (VE > 180 L/min). Indicate how many participants this affected and whether this could meaningfully influence results.
Reply: Two participants exceeded the predefined acceptance for error in the highest minute ventilations. This is now addressed in the Methods in the CPET section (Lines 138-140).
3. Minor Editorial Comments.
Comment: Report 95% confidence intervals and effect sizes (Cohen’s d, η², etc.) for key comparisons.
Reply: Amended as suggested. As noted in our previous reply, confidence intervals are now reported in the revised version of table 4 and 5. Overall effect sizes from the one-way ANOVA are reported at the end of the paragraphs describing “age group differences” in the results section (Lines 268-269 and 291-293).
Comment: Verify assumptions of normality and variance homogeneity; note if any nonparametric approaches were used when appropriate.
Reply: The assumption of normally distributed data was supported by QQ-plots, and variance homogeneity by Levene’s test. No nonparametric approaches were applied. This information is now added in the Statistical analysis section (Lines 211-212).
Comment: Streamline sections of the discussion to reduce redundancy and focus on the main messages.
Reply: We have made an effort to streamline sections of the discussion.
Comment: Adding scatterplots (e.g., VO2max vs. age, strength vs. age) would help visualize inter-individual variability.
Reply: Thank you for this notice. All figures have been revised accordingly, now including scatterplots.
Comment: Clarify technical terms (e.g., “O2 pulse,” “allometric scaling”) for non-specialist readers
Reply: In the revised manuscript, this is addressed in the Introduction- (Lines 50-52) and Allometric scaling paragraph of the Methods (Lines 200-201).
Comment: A light proofreading for grammar and flow would further improve readability.
Reply: Proofreading has been performed.
4. Are the conclusions supported by the data?
Comment: …the conclusions should remain descriptive rather than causal, given the cross-sectional design and absence of adjustment for potential confounders.
Reply: Revised as suggested. The conclusion is made more descriptive in the revised manuscript.
Reviewer #3:
Thank you for reviewing our manuscript. Your comments and concerns are hopefully addressed adequately. Please find the changes highlighted in the revised version of the manuscript.
Comment: How was it determined in the selection of participants who is able to perform exhaustive endurance and strength training and total testing. I recommend describing the selection criteria in more detail.
Reply: This is now elaborated on under the heading: Settings and participants in the Methods (Lines 88-93). In brief, everyone who fulfilled the inclusion criteria and were able to complete the physical tests were regarded as eligible.
Comment: I believe that the study would benefit greatly from reporting the differences in measured VO2max values in the general population. This would facilitate readers interpretation of the results given.
Reply: We do agree that key descriptives from the HUNT 3 study will make comparisons more accessible. This has been rectified in the Methods section, where a new paragraph and table (Table 2) display test specifics and characteristics of HUNT 3, respectively (Lines 147-154).
Comment: I recommend to deepen the discussion on the possible biochemical and psychosocial causes of the observed deficits.
Reply: These are no doubt important and interesting factors to discuss. Unfortunately, we have not collected any biochemical or psychosocial data, but we have addressed the possible causes of the observed deficits in the third paragraph of the discussion (Lines 375-381). This is certainly a relevant issue and should be implemented in future research.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0348707.r003Decision Letter 1
EspadaMárioAcademic Editor© 2026 Mário Espada2026Mário Espadahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
2 Apr 2026

-->PONE-D-25-47064R1-->-->Aerobic capacity and muscular strength in 179 Norwegian men and women aged 20-59 years with a substance use disorder: A cross-sectional study-->-->PLOS One
Dear Dr. Loe,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by May 17 2026 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript.-->
A letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
-->
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
As the corresponding author, your ORCID iD is verified in the submission system and will appear in the published article. PLOS supports the use of ORCID, and we encourage all coauthors to register for an ORCID iD and use it as well. Please encourage your coauthors to verify their ORCID iD within the submission system before final acceptance, as unverified ORCID iDs will not appear in the published article. Only the individual author can complete the verification step; PLOS staff cannot verify ORCID iDs on behalf of authors.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Mário Espada, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS One
Journal Requirements:
If the reviewer comments include a recommendation to cite specific previously published works, please review and evaluate these publications to determine whether they are relevant and should be cited. There is no requirement to cite these works unless the editor has indicated otherwise.
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
Dear Authors,
Congratulations on your work.
Please revise the manuscript in light of the reviewers' minor suggestions.
Thank you.
Best regards.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
-->Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.-->
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
-->2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. -->
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
-->3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
-->4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.-->
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
-->5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.-->
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
-->6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)-->
Reviewer #2: The revised manuscript substantially addresses the concerns from the first review round and is now suitable for PLOS ONE with minor revisions.
- Strengths: Added non-participant count (87% inclusion), HUNT3 reference section/Table 2, CIs in Tables 4-5, effect sizes (η²), scatterplots, and VO2max regression (Table 6). Conclusions appropriately descriptive.
- Remaining issues:
*Data availability: Specify repository (e.g., Figshare/Zenodo), DOI, or exact mechanism.
*Tables 4/5: Reformatting needed—align columns, fit on one page if possible, consistent CI notation (e.g., 45.9 [44.5–47.3]).
- Minor language/formatting (e.g., "was tested" → "were tested"; effect sizes like "20.329 0,327" need decimal fix).
**Recommendation**: Minor revision. Core science solid and valuable.
Reviewer #3: The work is very interesting, all my comments have been incorporated and resolved. I have no further questions or comments.
**********
-->7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.-->
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
To ensure your figures meet our technical requirements, please review our figure guidelines: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures
You may also use PLOS’s free figure tool, NAAS, to help you prepare publication quality figures: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-tools-for-figure-preparation.
NAAS will assess whether your figures meet our technical requirements by comparing each figure against our figure specifications.
-->
AttachmentSubmitted filename: review report .docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0348707.r004Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
13 Apr 2026

Dear Editor,
Thank you for giving us the opportunity to re-submit a minor revision of our manuscript. Comments and concerns from the reviewers have been addressed with corresponding amendments in the manuscript. We do hope that the revised version of the manuscript is satisfactory for publication in PLOS ONE.
Sincerely,
Henrik Loe
Response to Journal and Reviewers:
Reviewer #2:
Comment: Data availability: The commitment to share raw data "freely if accepted" aligns with PLOS ONE policy in principle, but lacks specifics on repository (e.g., Figshare, Zenodo), DOI, or timeline—please clarify this before acceptance to fully comply
Reply: All relevant data will be included in Supporting Information files if manuscript is accepted for publication, an option in compliance with PLOS ONE data availability policy.
Minor edits:
Comments: Table 4 (and likely Table 5 for women) needs reformatting for clarity—ensure columns align properly, full data visible on one page if possible, and consistent CI notation (e.g., 45.9 [44.5–47.3])
Reply: These concerns have now been rectified in Table 4 (lines 270-273) and Table 5 (lines 293-296).
Comment: Some phrasing remains awkward (e.g., "Patients that fulfilled the inclusion criteria, and agreed to participate, was tested" should be "were tested"; "oxygen pumpedheartbeat" needs spacing/formatting).
Reply: The verb (was) is corrected to plural (were) (line 89). “oxygen pumped/heartbeat” changed to “oxygen pumped per heartbeat” (line 52)
Comment: Ensure consistent formatting for CIs and effect sizes across text/tables (e.g., η² values like "20.329 0,327" appear malformed).
Reply: Consistent formatting for CI implemented in Table 4 (lines 270-273) and Table 5 (lines 293-296) and effect sizes (lines 268-269 and lines 291-292).
Comment: The CPET ventilation note (two participants >180 L/min) is clear but could be more concise.
Reply: Amended the sentence with a more concise formulation as suggested (lines 138-139).
Journal:
No references have been added or retracted.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_Reviewers_auresp_2.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0348707.r005Decision Letter 2
EspadaMárioAcademic Editor© 2026 Mário Espada2026Mário Espadahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
21 Apr 2026

Aerobic capacity and muscular strength in 179 Norwegian men and women aged 20-59 years with a substance use disorder: A cross-sectional study
PONE-D-25-47064R2
Dear Dr. Henrik Loe,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. For questions related to billing, please contact billing support.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Mário Espada, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS One
10.1371/journal.pone.0348707.r006Acceptance letter
EspadaMárioAcademic Editor© 2026 Mário Espada2026Mário Espadahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-25-47064R2
PLOS One
Dear Dr. Loe,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS One. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Mário Espada
Academic Editor
PLOS One