pmcHealth Policy PlanHealth Policy Plan738heapolheapolHealth Policy and Planning0268-10801460-2237Oxford University PressPMC12605767PMC12605767.112605767126057674097407610.1093/heapol/czaf063czaf0631Original ArticleImplementation Research and EvaluationAcademicSubjects/MED00860Nursing student training as a novel approach to increasing community-based access to contraception in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: evaluation of outcomes
AkilimaliPierre
Department of Nutrition and Centre de Recherche Patrick Kayembe (CRPK), Kinshasa School of Public Health, University of Kinshasa, PO Box 11850, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the CongoComptaGael
Cecilia Scott Weatherhead School of Public Health, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70112, United StatesNgondoDenise
Department of Biostatistical Epidemiology and Patrick Kayembe Research Center, Kinshasa School of Public Health, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the CongoKobaTesky
Centre de Recherche Patrick Kayembe (CRPK), Kinshasa School of Public Health, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the CongoKayembeDynah
Centre de Recherche Patrick Kayembe (CRPK), Kinshasa School of Public Health, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the CongoKabasubaboFrancis
Centre de Recherche Patrick Kayembe (CRPK), Kinshasa School of Public Health, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the CongoAkambaFranck
Tulane International, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the CongoMujaniZenon
Programme National de la Santé de Reproduction (PNSR), Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the CongoLusambaPaul
Department of Biostatistical Epidemiology and Patrick Kayembe Research Center, Kinshasa School of Public Health, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the CongoBinangaArsene
Tulane International, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the CongoHernandezJulie
Cecilia Scott Weatherhead School of Public Health, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70112, United StatesSauterSydney
Cecilia Scott Weatherhead School of Public Health, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70112, United Stateshttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-5482-787XBertrandJane T
Cecilia Scott Weatherhead School of Public Health, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70112, United States ). The reasons are well documented on both the supply side (limited access to contraception, especially in rural areas) and demand side (societal norms favoring large families, low levels of education, spousal opposition, and gender inequality). Family planning (FP) in the DRC is managed in patchwork fashion across the 26 provinces and 519 health zones (“zones de santé”) in the country the size of Western Europe ( ).
The DRC government supports FP, although the program is highly donor dependent; less than half of health zones receive support. Access to a full range of contraceptives delivered by trained personnel differs markedly by location. As of 2017–18, only 68% of health facilities in the DRC had the commodities and trained staff necessary to provide FP services ( ). To increase contraceptive use and reduce barriers to access, alternative approaches—community-based distribution (CBD), contraceptive social marketing, and social franchising—have been developed to complement clinic-based services.
In 2015, a new model of CBD was pilot tested for feasibility and acceptability: training of nursing students in FP service delivery, coupled with a year-long field practicum in which students offered a range of contraceptive methods during intermittent outreach events and door-to-door distribution. Clients expressed satisfaction with DMPA-SC as a method and with students as providers ( ). It revealed the potential of the model to increase access to low-cost contraception in the short run and create future cadres of experienced health-care providers ( ).
Scale-up is defined as a “deliberate effort to increase the impact of successfully tested health innovations to benefit more people and foster policy and program development on a lasting basis.” The nine-step ExpandNet framework ( ) used for scaling up this intervention is described in .
Multiple entities within the Ministry of Health (MOH) participated in scaling up the model: the DESS (Directorate for Training in Health Sciences, responsible for the national network of nursing schools) and its provincial offices (BESS), PNSR (National Program for Reproductive Health) and its provincial offices, staff from participating health zones, and SNIS (National Health Information System). Before 2018, FP was taught superficially in nursing schools using didactic methods with no practical field experience, by persons with limited expertise. Clinical personnel often required additional in-service training by the PNSR to deliver FP services to the public. In 2018, the DESS and PNSR developed a competency-based FP curriculum and introduced it during Year 3 of the 4-year nursing school training in ITMs (“Instituts des Techniques Médicales”). Eight days of classroom instruction were followed by a 2-day field practice where nursing students counseled clients and administered methods under instructor supervision. Students then served as CBDs at periodic community outreach events and other venues. describes the model.
Box 1.

## Details of the nursing school model used to test fidelity to design across six elements

Training. The cascade approach is used for training, whereby a training of trainers occurs at the national level; these individuals return to the province to train a pool of provincial trainers who, in turn, provide training to both instructors at the nursing schools and local health zone personnel. The instructors in turn impart the family planning curriculum in selected nursing schools to students in the third year of training, using a competency-based approach. The training runs for 10 days: 8 days of classroom, 2 days of field practice under the supervision of their instructor. They are trained to counsel interested clients in contraceptive methods and their side effects; to deliver the full range of contraceptives (except DMPA-IM, IUDs, and permanent methods), to remove implants, and to teach interested clients to self-inject DMPA-SC.

Service delivery. Once trained, third-year and fourth-year nursing students are expected to participate in family planning counseling and service delivery at the community level. Two main approaches include mini campaigns and “routine” distribution. Mini campaigns refer to community outreach (scheduled 3–4 times a year, adapted to the school calendar established by the DESS), at which a group of the nursing students with their instructor make services available in a central location near an existing health facility. The students provide group talks and/or individual counseling, present the range of contraceptive methods as well as their side effects and management of side effects, conduct a pregnancy test if medically indicated, discuss the client’s preference for method, and then administer that method on site. Contraceptives are given free of charge during mini campaigns. “Routine” distribution refers to this same type of counseling and delivery of methods outside of campaign days, during household visits or through sales to family and friends from their homes, at school, or other location. The CBD may charge a small fee during routine distribution, which further incentivizes them to deliver services in their community. In cases where the client wants a method not available from the CBD (e.g. an IUD, DMPA-IM) or presents with persistent side effects, the CBD refers her to the nearby health facility.
Each school appoints a focal point responsible for overseeing all aspects of the family planning work on behalf of the school. In most cases, the focal point is also the instructor of the FP curriculum for that school. He/she is also responsible for contraceptive logistics, data collection, and data transfer to the health zone (described below).

Contraceptive logistics. Contraceptive logistics involves forecasting the needs of the program, obtaining/importing the contraceptives from abroad, shipping them from the port of entry to the provinces, distributing them from the provincial depots to the nursing schools, and supplying the nursing students who will then deliver the methods to the eventual user. Based on a fixed quantity of each contraceptive (adjusted for urban vs. rural settings), the DESS works to procure these quantities of contraceptives from the government, UNFPA, DKT International, or another source. UNFPA and DKT procure and import specific quantities of a range of contraceptives into the country. They deliver them to one of three central warehouses (known locally as CDRs), or in a minority of cases, to the Provincial Health Division (Division Provinciale de la Santé—DPS). It is then the responsibility of the provincial division of DESS to ensure the transfer of the contraceptives and supplies to the health zones or nursing schools for use in campaigns and routine service delivery.
Once on site at the nursing school, the focal point is responsible for managing the inventory (receipt and outflow) of contraceptive methods and for suppling/resupplying the nursing students with contraceptives to be used for campaigns and routine delivery.

Information systems. The primary indicator used to monitor outputs for the nursing school model is CYP, calculated by multiplying the number of contraceptive commodity units distributed to clients over a 1-year period by a conversion factor that quantifies the duration of contraceptive protection provided per unit distributed ( ). CYP is the most widely used measure of output in international family planning programs.
The circuit of reporting begins with the nursing students, who use paper forms to record the number of users and the quantity of contraceptive methods distributed to clients during campaign events or routine service delivery. The students then submit these forms to the focal point for their school.
Each month, the focal point at each school compiles data, obtains approval of the numbers from the school director, and forwards the data to the data manager at the corresponding health zone. Either the focal point or the data manager enters the data into the dedicated module of the SNIS for nursing schools, supported by the DHIS2 platform. (Focal points who do not have access to a computer, stable internet connectivity, or the necessary skills often rely on the data manager.) The health zone convenes a monthly “monitoring meeting” to validate the service statistics provided by the nursing schools, as well as health facilities in the health zone, following established data management standards.
A DHIS2 data bridge (passerelle) is used to aggregate family planning data from a module for the schools and another module for health facilities, to arrive the total volume of contraceptive methods distributed and number of users for the health zone each month. Standard conversion factors are applied to data on the volume of contraceptives distributed to calculate volume of CYP per school, per health facility, and for the health zone each month.
In theory, this system should produce accurate data on the volume of CYP for participating nursing schools. Due to obstacles encountered in this process, the numbers in DHIS2 do not always accurately reflect the contraceptives distributed or the number of clients served by nursing students.

Finance. In the DRC, primary health programs are heavily donor-financed, and family planning is no exception. The government through the MOH is responsible for paying government salaries and providing (in some but not all cases) the physical infrastructure of nursing schools and health facilities. In addition, the government makes periodic contributions to the procurement of contraceptives, which is important symbolically but represents a fraction of the total needs of the country for contraception, including the needs of the nursing schools.
Both public and private nursing schools have integrated the family planning module into their training. In either case, the salaries of the instructors are covered by the state or a private source. Similarly, the nursing schools make their classrooms available for training free of charge. However, the implementing partners that support the nursing school model provide supplemental funding needed to field the campaigns.
The students provide contraceptives free of charge to the clients during campaign days. During “routine” delivery, they are allowed to charge a minimal sum for their services. The revenue from user fees in this model is trivial (and not monitored).

Governance and leadership. The PNSR is the program under the MOH responsible for oversight of all family planning activity in the country. However, it does not have direct management or budgetary control over donor-sponsored projects. It does play a major role in the training of clinical service providers, including in the training of trainers for the nursing school model.
The DESS manages the network of nursing schools in the DRC, numbering over 500. As a Directorate within the MOH, it is responsible for the curriculum within nursing schools across the country. A partner in the development of the nursing school model since 2015, the DESS participated in creating the family planning module that was incorporated into the nursing school training in selected provinces starting in 2018.
Both the PNSR and the DESS have offices at the provincial level—PNSR Provincial and the Bureau d’Enseignement des Sciences de la Santé (BESS)—that are engaged in the nursing school model. In addition, the MOH has established 519 health zones across the country. Most nursing schools report to the health zone in which they are located (although some schools operate in more than one health zone). The MCZ or designated staff at the BCZS coordinate with the nursing schools to schedule the venue and dates for the mini campaigns. They assist with contraceptive logistics. And they are responsible for receiving data from the nursing schools on the volume of contraceptives distributed each month, to be uploaded to the national health information system (SNIS) on the DHIS2 platform.
Areas for coordination include decisions on the provinces, schools, and health zones to adopt the model; the schedule for trainings and campaign events; the provision of contraceptives to the nursing schools; supervision of field activity; and transfer of the data from the schools to the health zones for uploading into the SNIS.
This study assesses the outcomes of the scale-up, using the framework of ( ). It focuses on two of the framework’s three outcomes: implementation (fidelity, acceptability, sustainability, adoption, and penetration) and client outcomes (satisfaction), examined from multiple stakeholder perspectives at the national and provincial levels, using quantitative and qualitative methods.
 

## Materials and methods

 summarizes the eight categories of stakeholders interviewed at the national- and provincial-level, data collection methods used, number of respondents, and six domains of health system strengthening (HSS) used to assess fidelity to design. Most surveys were conducted by phone. To reduce costs, data collection was limited to the three provinces with the largest programs: Kinshasa, Haut Katanga, and South Kivu. Other selection criteria were accessibility and security.
 Interviewers received 2–4 days training on research ethics, informed consent, interviewing techniques, and data collection instruments. Data were collected from October to December 2023 in French after obtaining informed consent. Telephone interviews took place between 8 a.m.-6 p.m., with up to six callbacks. In-depth interviews (IDIs) ran for 30–75 min and focus groups for 75–90 min. Both were recorded and transcribed in French. Client exit interviews (CEIs), averaging 20 min, occurred after clients received services from nursing students. Financial compensation for participation varied: $2 US in phone credit for phone interviews, $20 for focus group participation, and $50 per interview for national- and provincial-level officials.
Quantitative data were collected using preprogrammed smartphones, with data transferred directly to a secure server. The do-files underwent regular verification and cleaning for quick error correction. Analyses were performed using Stata version 17. Means and standard deviations were calculated for continuous variables; proportions with 95% confidence intervals were derived for categorical data. Chi-squared test and Fisher's exact test were used where appropriate.
For qualitative data, we double-coded the transcripts, identifying and addressing discrepancies to achieve consensus, then used thematic content analysis to develop a codebook. Inter-coder reliability was assessed on a random sample of transcripts (threshold set at 80%). Using NVivo 14, we determined overarching themes and subcategories.
We examined the acceptability and sustainability of the model from the perspective of those implementing it, whereas satisfaction is assessed from the clients receiving FP services. Finally, we document adoption of the model by other organizations, penetration (coverage), and output based on program data and service statistics.
Because results for multiple stakeholder groups appear across all six domains, we present the quantitative findings by stakeholder group rather than domain, as follows: Chief District Medical Officer (MCZ, ), focal points ( ), nursing students ( ), and FP clients ( ).
 For a full description of methodology, see .

## Results

## Sociodemographic profile of survey respondents

## Focal points
Of the 135 focal points interviewed via phone, 82% were male and 18% female (reflecting lower female labor force participation for paid employment). Average age was 44 years. The vast majority (93%) had completed some level of education beyond high school. Most (85%) were married; 91% had children. The two provinces with the most focal points interviewed—Kongo Central (33%) and Kinshasa (32%)—had used the model the longest ( ).

## Nursing students
Four hundred and twelve nursing students were interviewed by phone from participating schools in Kinshasa (n = 198), Sud Kivu (n = 120), and Haut Katanga (n = 94). Sixty-four percent were female and 36% were male. The mean age ranged from 21 to 23 years over the three provinces. The large majority (93%) were single; 89% did not have children. Almost all (96%) had a personal cell phone ( ).

## Family planning clients
Five hundred and ninety-three FP clients were interviewed in-person from the three provinces after receiving FP services from the nursing students. Clients’ average age differed slightly by province: Kinshasa (26.2 years), Sud Kivu (27.5), and Haut Katanga (28.9). Among clients in all three provinces, 86% had some level of secondary education and 42% had remunerated work. The majority were married, although this percentage was higher in South Kivu (92%) and Haut Katanga (85%) when compared with Kinshasa (53%). Clients had an average of three children, though one in 10 had none ( ). Overall, 41% of clients were first-time users, though this varied by province: Haut Katanga (56%), South Kivu (42%), and Kinshasa (32%).

## Fidelity to design

## Training
Different stakeholder groups generally praised the system of cascade training for multiple reasons. It creates a pool of trainers at the provincial level. It gives students both classroom instruction and practical experience at the field level in counseling and delivering methods to clients. Upon completing the program, students emerge with valuable expertise in providing FP services.A young person who undergoes this training not only studies but also practices at work if they’re called upon to do so. And if they find a job, they already have all the skills to carry out their work with ease. (Parents’ association member)

Virtually all focal points (99%) reported having trained nursing students in FP. However, only 72% felt confident in training students on the full set of methods and only 75% on entering data into the DHIS2 system ( ).
Among nursing students, the vast majority (98%) had been trained to insert implants. However, fewer (80%) reported being trained to remove implants, and just 56% had received training to teach women to self-inject DMPA-SC. Over 90% of students were satisfied with the training they had received, including 36% who were highly satisfied. Conversely, 7% were partially or not at all satisfied, the main reason being a lack of financial compensation. Almost all (98%) felt that their training in FP would be useful to their future.
However, several concerns surfaced from the qualitative findings. Provincial-level authorities cited the need for more refresher training; they lamented the loss to the health system that some of these students would not find jobs after graduation. One iNGO manager mentioned that the focus on FP would distract them from attention to other subjects in the curriculum. Some parents felt the training was too short, and more instruction was needed in the management of side effects.

## Service delivery
National-level authorities credited the model with strengthening the health-care system in the DRC, particularly in increasing contraceptive use in areas where it operated. Managers from implementing organizations echoed this sentiment, noting that the model expanded the trained workforce able to provide FP.
Provincial authorities emphasized the comparative advantage of nursing students to reach and effectively connect with adolescents, given that students are relatively young.This model has been effective, especially among adolescents. The students are young people who reach out to other young people, who easily approach them to try and avoid pregnancies and other sexual and reproductive health problems. (Provincial-level authority)

The provincial authorities also mentioned that the model reduces barriers to accessing services. Students have successfully reached women who generally do not attend community events or use the local health facility, and in some cases, they refer these women to health facilities.
Parents from ANAPECO (a parent-teacher association in the DRC) supported the approach, even suggesting that the community outreach events should occur more frequently to benefit a larger number of clients. However, two concerns emerged. In Kinshasa, parents worried for the safety of their children, given the presence of “Kuluna” (i.e. young street criminals). Also, nursing students were confronted by older men in the community who opposed the concept of birth spacing and by extension their work.
Whereas service delivery often constitutes a “black box” (little is known about its inner workings), the study yielded invaluable insights. Almost all the nursing students had delivered services at a community outreach event (99%), at which they counseled women, either in groups or individually, on a range of contraceptive methods. A similar percentage (98%) had gone house to house. Somewhat fewer distributed contraception among friends and family from their own homes (88%) or to other students at the school (61%). Students provided contraception outside of campaigns less frequently, the key reasons being lack of time, contraceptives, and financial incentive. Across the three provinces, students had participated in an average of four to five campaigns, distributing methods free of charge at community outreach events (99%), whereas they charged for methods when providing them from their homes (92%; ).
The model was intended to increase access to a wide range of methods, including implants, which have grown in popularity in recent years. Most students (96%, Kinshasa; ∼86% in the other two provinces) reported having inserted an implant at a community event. Far fewer (62%) had removed an implant. And only 56% had counseled women on self-injecting DMPA-SC ( ).
Almost all students reported feeling a sense of satisfaction from distributing contraceptives at the community level. They most appreciated the opportunity to acquire technical skills, improve interpersonal competence, and contribute to the well-being of the community. One in five also mentioned enjoying the respect garnered from members of the community for their CBD role ( ).
One early concern about the model was the relative youth of the nursing students (in their early twenties). Approximately one-third, ranging from 29% to 37% over the three provinces, reported that clients sometimes or often commented that they were too young to be distributing contraceptives, whereas two-thirds had rarely or never received that comment ( ).
Focal points reported that supervision was more likely to occur during outreach/campaigns (91%) than during door-to-door distribution (41%), although 80% had accompanied students outside of campaign days. The focal points (93%) confirmed that contraceptive distribution was free during campaigns ( ).
CEIs provided the perspective of those receiving the services ( ). Of the 593 clients interviewed after receiving services at an outreach event, 77% reported waiting <30 min for services, with only 4% having to wait more than an hour. They received a variety of methods, with four methods (CycleBeads, implants, DMPA-SC, and pills) each mentioned by at least 20% of clients, with distribution varying by province. The vast majority of clients (at least 89%) in all provinces reported receiving their method of choice, with over two-thirds mentioning that they had decided the method themselves (69%) or in conjunction with their partner (21%).
Three-quarters (74%) of clients reported having been informed of side effects, with the lowest percentage (65%) in Kinshasa. Of those informed, most were also told what to do in case of side effects. Over three-quarters (78%) were also informed of other methods available, though again the lowest percentage (61%) corresponded to Kinshasa.

## Contraceptive logistics
National- and provincial-level authorities, managers of implementing partners, focal points, and students all mentioned frequent contraceptive stockouts. Many cited the need for more rigorous forecasting of needs. Several advocated for relying on multiple sources—government, implementing partners, UNFPA—to resolve this problem. Others mentioned the need for better coordination among actors in the system: nursing schools, implementing partners, and the central bureau of the health zone (BCZS). Provincial authorities also recommended increasing the frequency of resupply, not just immediately before campaigns or in response to stockouts. And they suggested allocating more funds for contraceptive transport to ensure that all nursing schools, including those in remote areas, received an adequate supply of methods in a timely manner.
The need for more accurate forecasting was summarized by one implementing partner manager:The biggest challenge we've encountered is the lack of contraceptives. Why is that? Because right from the start, we worked based on forecasts. We hadn’t imagined that this approach could lead to very high contraceptive consumption. …over and above the question of the wide geographical area covered by the students, and because of their young age, they easily reach the community of adolescents and youth. There's also the effect of youthful energy. As students, they're still keen to learn, to master things. And that makes them work much harder, they go further into the community to reach even those who have been hard to reach. Another reason is the large number of nursing school enrollments. So, you can really feel that contraceptives are being used much more than expected. That's a real challenge. (Manager, implementing partner)

One manager also mentioned supply chain management issues faced by nursing schools, including inadequate storage facilities, a shortage of supply chain management tools, and challenges in utilizing these tools effectively.
Nursing students experienced the effects of these stockouts, although the problem varied by province. Students in Kinshasa were more likely to report experiencing them “often” (35%) than those in Sud Kivu (27%) or Haut Katanga (20%). Among those experiencing stockouts, the method most frequently stocked out was DMPA-SC in Kinshasa, emergency contraception in Sud Kivu, and oral pills in Haut Katanga. If a student experienced a stockout, they would ask the client to return later, offer a different method, or refer the client to a nearby health facility. The schedule for being resupplied with methods also differed by province. In Kinshasa, half the students mentioned just before a community outreach campaign,” whereas two-thirds in Haut Katanga reported “on demand” (whenever they ran out) or “no fixed schedule.”

## Information systems
As described in , data collection and entry into the SNIS occur in three steps: students collected service statistics on contraceptive distribution, focal points compiled these statistics for transfer to the relevant health zone, and the health zone data manager (in most cases) entered them electronically into the DHIS2. Findings from the IDIs and telephone surveys revealed several problems at each step.
Data collection by students: The model requires nursing students to submit their reports on the volume of contraceptives distributed every month and after each campaign. Around 60% of students reported doing so “at the end of each campaign day,” 10% did so weekly, and 19% reported doing it monthly. However, multiple stakeholders cited loss of data, given large volumes of information, multiple distribution locations, and large enrollments (that overwhelmed the capacity of focal points), resulting in underreporting of their contribution to FP service delivery in the HZ.… young people are so enthusiastic that when they offer these methods to the community, they do it routinely as well as during campaigns, they generate a large amount of data. But we have to be there to collect, compile, and ensure that these data… can be part of the information system and added to DHIS2. So, there's this whole problem of the data not being included in DHIS2. (National-level authority)

The students can generate data, and the focal point must compile it. Initially, as decided, we should have had one focal point per school. But unfortunately, we found ourselves in schools with more than 60 pupils. So, in compiling this data alone, some of it was lost. Also, some of it was already lost at the time of collection. (Manager, implementing partner).
(ii) Data compilation and transfer by focal points: Most focal points (62%) reported that students were supposed to submit their data to them at the end of each month, though a quarter answered “at the end of each campaign day,” possibly referring to different types of data ( ). Only 21% of the focal points participated regularly in the monthly validation meetings at the health zone; 59% never did. The majority felt very certain (57%) or certain (19%) that the data were then entered into the DHIS2. Six in 10 reported a mechanism in place for monitoring the validity, coherence, and completeness of the data.
Over half (64%) of the focal points had experienced difficulties in data reporting. Most frequently cited by far was the lack of internet connection or computer, followed by losing the password/getting access to the DHIS2, difficulties following the instructions in the manual, and challenges obtaining data from the students. Three-quarters (75%) of focal points had been trained on reporting data into the DHIS2, though two-thirds had received that training over 2 years ago. Two-thirds (68%) had received written instructions during training on the task of data collection. Questions arose over the HZ to which to attribute data when students worked across several health zones or in zones other than where their school was located.… the problem is not so much training. It's the support. We found that the people who took part in the training were enthusiastic, keen to learn, but the problems they encountered weren't that they didn't know how to use the DHIS2, but that they had problems with motivation, tools for data collection and entry, and internet connection. So, there are a lot of problems, and more resources need to be deployed to support the approach. (National-level authority)

(iii) Health zone data aggregation: The HZ (led by the MCZ) was responsible for transferring the data from the schools into the DHIS2. All 39 MCZ (or designated alternative respondents) reported that they were responsible for data processing. Over half (54%) were completely comfortable and 36% comfortable/neutral in doing so. They generally received the data from the schools weekly (46%) or monthly (41%), with 10% citing “after each activity.” Quality control mechanisms for the student data (to check validity, consistency, and completeness), cited by 62% of MCZ, included HZ monthly monitoring meetings, specific school validation meetings, or working sessions between the focal point and HZ data manager.
Yet but six in 10 acknowledged difficulties ( ). The primary data problems involved inconsistencies between the quantities of methods consumed versus the balance available at the end of each month (64%), delays in transmission (44%), and incomplete data (31%).
Others cited a lack of training and access to the DHIS2 teaching module.
Data transfer was to occur using a data bridge (“passerelle”) in the DHIS2. Most (82%) reported no problem with it. In contrast, others felt that problems with this mechanism resulted in an omission of nursing school data from the overall count for the health zone.… there was a problem with the data bridge because the schools are considered to be delivery points in their own right, but once they've entered these data, their data should be reconciled with the data generated by health facilities so that the health zones can know exactly the quantity of contraceptives distributed by the schools and by the health facilities. But during implementation, this data bridge didn't work very well and that caused a few problems, so that's another challenge. (Manager, implementing partner)

## Finance
Both national-level authorities and managers of implementing partners reported that the nursing school model incurred relatively lower costs, compared with other models for training CBDs. Costs associated with training, such as per diem for trainers, transportation, food for trainers and trainees, and room rentals, were greatly reduced.Where we used to rent rooms at $650, we no longer rent because we use classrooms for that purpose. We used to provide a $25 lunch to everyone if not more with 2 breaks, now instead we buy young people juice plus a sandwich just to raise their sugar level a bit. The trainers were previously paid per diem as trainers are now the instructors. (National-level authority)

Despite this model being less expensive, the informants stressed the importance of obtaining funding from sources other than the implementing partners. They cited the need to engage the government in financing aspects such as the purchase of contraceptives, for which there is a line item in the national budget (but funds are often not released), and to involve parents of nursing school students by increasing school fees.There is a cost that parents can bear, but as far as the contraceptives are concerned, we feel the government must step in to buy contraceptives for the system as a whole and also for the nursing schools. (National-level authority)

Most provincial-level informants reported that the model suffered from inadequate funding. They described multiple shortcomings: a lack of infrastructure and limited funding for the transportation of contraceptive supplies; also, the need for more supervision, nursing school instructors, and refresher training for instructors.
The discussion of finance often turned to the sustainability of the model, if the donors and implementing partners were to pull out. Two factors that would assist sustainability included the pool of provincial trainers and experienced instructors in selected provinces. However, informants stressed the importance of the government, at the national and provincial levels, to effectively disburse the funds under the line item for contraceptive procurement. Several informants argued that parents should support the model through increased school fees.To ensure sustainability, I think the best solution is for the government, the ministry, to take ownership of the approach and invest heavily in these schools. Because if we have to continue with project-based approaches, we'll create needs and these needs will fade away, because the project will come to an end one day. It could be 5 years, 10 years, but it will come to an end. (Manager, implementing partner)

Unsurprisingly, almost all ANAPECO parents disagreed with the suggestion of increasing school fees to cover a funding gap. They opined that the government should step forward, given their own limited financial means. They argued that, in addition to school fees, they already contribute to transportation costs due to insufficient transportation reimbursement. Additionally, they highlighted that their children serve as CBDs without receiving compensation from the government, further adding to the financial burden.Parents really don't have the means to pay these fees so that our children can benefit from this training, really, I'm personally against it. (ANAPECO parent)

## Governance and leadership
Both national and provincial health authorities emphasized the strength of the collaboration among the DESS, PNSR, implementing partners, and the MOH, providing examples of joint work on training and supervision of the instructors. They also highlighted the complementarity of the DESS, focusing on education, and the PNSR, focusing on FP. Yet others acknowledged the need for better coordination and more resources made available for supervision.
One informant mentioned tension between the staff at health facilities and the nursing students: that health-care providers viewed nursing students as possible competitors who could potentially take over their jobs. The informant recommended raising awareness among health providers about the complementarity of using the two approaches and their common goal of serving the community.The challenge remains that of bringing the two actors together. You know we started family planning with the health providers and others, the fact that other sectors are now getting involved with family planning creates malaise at the provider level. (Provincial-level authority)

Several managers emphasized the importance of standardizing the list of expenses to be covered by donors/implementing partners, to avoid discrepancies among schools. One informant proposed involving the government as the entity to determine which expenses should be financed within the model.Each organization has a different donor, so sometimes there are organizations with flexible donors for whom giving money is not a problem. But for us, with our donor, there are certain restrictions. We can't go beyond a certain amount. … Some donors spend perhaps twice or one-and-a-half times the budget of others. (Manager, implementing partner)

## Results: volume of contraception distributed
Results were measured in terms of couple-years of protection (CYP), which is roughly equivalent to one couple being protected from pregnancy for 12 months. Over the 4 years from 2020 to 2023, the nursing school model generated 2 723 092 CYP and trained almost 15 000 nursing students ( ).
 

## Acceptability
Acceptability is a multi-faceted construct that reflects the extent to which people delivering or receiving a health-care intervention consider it to be appropriate, based on anticipated or experienced cognitive and emotional responses to the intervention ( ).
Key informants across different groups highlighted benefits of the model for the nursing schools, nursing students, clients, and society. Numerous informants—national and provincial health authorities and implementation partners—underscored the advantages observed in schools that have implemented this program. These schools are more attractive to potential students and have higher enrollment rates than those that do not offer the FP curriculum.Another short-term effect is that in the schools where these models are available, I've seen enrollments increase. There's a high interest of students who now want to go to these schools, and so the schools that don't have this model have been emptied by this model, which is very much appreciated by students, parents, and the community. This encourages parents to use these schools. (National health authority)

Nursing students acknowledged their competitive edge over peers who had not received this curriculum, because of the knowledge and experience gained from the community-based practicum. Also, through this experience, students forged connections with potential future employers (e.g. health facilities in the public and private sectors, international and national NGOs).
Parents of nursing school students cited their important role in providing information about contraception and in reducing or spacing births in their communities. They emphasized that such efforts contribute to economic security, particularly in contexts where financial resources are limited.
Several comments reflected acceptance on the part of the community:[The nursing students] are well-known and well-accepted by the community. Because I see the mothers who come to look for them at times when they’re at school, asking: “UKO WAPI, MBONA NIKO NALAZIMA YA SERVICE YAKO” [“where are you? I need your services”] (Provincial health authority)

Intermingled with comments indicating widespread acceptance were occasional remarks on its limitations (described in the previous sections). Yet across the national- and provincial-level authorities, managers of implementing agencies, and ANAPECO parents, there was no major opposition or objection to the model.

## Sustainability
Sustainability, as defined by USAID, is “the capacity to maintain program services at a level that will provide ongoing prevention and treatment for a health problem after termination of major financial, managerial and technical assistance from an external donor” ( ). The concept requires building skills, knowledge, institutions, and incentives to make development processes self-sustaining.
Of all the topics covered in this study, the greatest point of consensus across stakeholder groups was the need for government to sustain the nursing school model in the long run. National and provincial authorities recommended advocating that the government adopt and finance the model, considering that education is one of its responsibilities and represents an investment in young people. Targets for advocacy included scaling up the model to additional provinces and nursing schools within provinces, increasing infrastructure spending for nursing schools, and releasing governmental funds earmarked for purchasing contraception.
Managers from implementing agencies expressed a similar need for advocacy, with three main objectives: to persuade the government to support further scale-up, to finance the project to reduce donor dependency, and to increase government purchase of contraceptive methods to supply the nursing schools involved in this model.

## Satisfaction
Client satisfaction is considered as one of the desired outcomes of health care, and it is directly related to utilization of health services ( ).
Overall, client satisfaction with the information received from the nursing students was high: 82% were completely satisfied, 17% somewhat satisfied, and 1% dissatisfied. Replies were very similar for satisfaction with the services received. Curiously, in response to the question “where would you prefer to receive services,” 55% stated a preference for health centers, compared with 38% for at home/in the community; 7% had no preference. Those mentioning community-based services gave multiple reasons: less expensive, lower transportation costs, more accessible, trust in the service provider, and more discreet. The vast majority would highly recommend (62%) or recommend (34%) this service to a friend or family member ( ).

## Penetration/coverage
We measured penetration (synonymous with coverage) by the number and percent of provinces and health zones in which the model was operating at the time of the study (late 2023).
When the model was first tested in 2015, 10 nursing schools in Kinshasa participated. Their outreach work benefited five health zones, with possible spillover to some others. By 2017, the model was operating in 48 health zones in three provinces (Kinshasa, Kongo Central, and Lualaba). By late 2023, it was functioning in 123 (of the 519) health zones in the country, located in 15 of the 26 provinces.

## Adoption of the model by other organizations
The original model was pioneered in 2015 by a single iNGO implementing partner Tulane International. By late 2023, the model was in use in 94 health zones located in seven provinces under the PROMIS project (managed by Tulane International and funded by CAFI/FONAREDD). In 2021, EGPAF, with USAID funding, tested the model in two HZ in Kinshasa (one in which the model was already operational, albeit in different schools). Then, in 2022, Pathfinder and SANRU (funded by the World Bank) and Pathfinder and EGPAF (funded by USAID) adopted the model for use in 28 additional health zones, corresponding to eight new provinces (see ).
 

## Discussion
Based on our literature search on FP task shifting in Sub-Saharan Africa, we believe the current study is unique in several ways. It is the first evaluation of a CBD model that uses six elements of HSS to evaluate fidelity to design. It examines multiple indicators of outcome, not just process, as has been done in other evaluations ( ). It uses mixed methods to obtain the perspectives of eight different stakeholder groups, useful in triangulating the results. Previously published research on scale-up in FP programs focuses largely on community health workers, midwives, and nurses ( , , , ), but not nursing students. Other research examines specific methods—long-acting reversible contraception or DMPA-SC—whereas the DRC model did not prioritize specific methods. The model evolved from a scarcity of government or donor resources to pay CHWs, in contrast to paid CHWs in Ethiopia. Yet it has benefited from the motivation of students to gain hands-on experience in service delivery. Finally, the model has yielded measurable results in a country considered to be among the most challenging for development work ( ).
Since its inception in 2015, FP professionals in the DRC have observed the evolution of the nursing school model for contraceptive delivery at the community level with interest, but its inner workings remained unclear. The current study documented details of program operations and the extent to which field implementation aligned with its design.
Unsurprisingly, sociodemographic characteristics differed by group. Focal points were mid-career professionals (married with children). Nursing students were young (average age 22 years) and unmarried; few had begun childbearing. Clients on average were 27 years old, had a mean of three children; only 11% had yet to begin childbearing. Of particular interest, 41% of clients were first-time users, the percentage being lower in Kinshasa (where services are more accessible) than in the other two provinces.
The use of eight different stakeholder groups yielded insights at two levels. The national- and provincial-level authorities spoke of the model’s effect on the health-care system (in macro terms), whereas the focal points, nursing students, ANAPECO parents, and FP clients provided observations on the daily operation of the model at the field level (a micro perspective). Managers from implementing partners gave both. This comprehensive data collection (four quantitative surveys, four qualitative instruments, programs, and service statistics) yielded an enormous amount of information that allowed for triangulation, confirming certain findings while bringing to light several key differences.
Overall, the findings indicated that in multiple domains, the model had been implemented as designed. Cascade training starting at the national level resulted in a pool of trainers at the provincial level, capable of preparing the instructors at the nursing schools to implement the FP curriculum. In turn, these instructors trained students in the third year of nursing school in selected schools in purposively selected provinces.
The major perceived benefits of the model were to increase access to and use of contraception, especially among youth; to make nursing schools with the FP curriculum more attractive to prospective students; and to provide students with marketable skills for future employment.
Generally, there appeared to be an effective collaboration between the main government players (the PNSR and the DESS/BESS) at the national and provincial levels, as well as with the BCZS and the implementing partners supporting the service delivery portion of the program. Indeed, the efficacy of the model hinges on the degree of integration of this specialized service into the health-care system.
Nursing students were generally satisfied with their training and the practical experience in providing services at the community level. Most had learned to insert implants and had done so at community events, although fewer had removed implants or taught self-injection of DMPA-SC. Removing implants is more complicated than inserting them, and if no clients request implant removal during a given campaign, students are less likely to have the opportunity for removal. With a dearth of real-life cases, students are limited to practicing on anatomical models. Before the rollout of the program, some areas previously lacked FP services altogether, making it difficult to find eligible clients for implant removal. Also, students are typically only allowed to perform simple removals; more complex cases are handled by experienced professionals. Regarding self-injection, it was not initially part of the nursing students’ curriculum, and only 56% of students were trained to teach clients to self-inject.
The findings showed widespread acceptability of the model among national and provincial leaders, who appreciated its effect on strengthening the health system, especially in increasing the pool of capable trainers and instructors, and in improving access to contraception for selected health zones. Clients expressed high levels of satisfaction with the services.
Yet the results revealed three major weaknesses in the model: (i) frequent stockouts, cited across stakeholder groups; (ii) difficulty with the information system (i.e. transferring students’ data on contraceptives distributed to the health zone and having it entered into the SNIS); and (iii) sustainability of the model.
Sustainability was a concern for multiple stakeholder groups. Although the country now has pools of trainers at the provincial level and experienced instructors in the schools, many informants stressed the need for the government to provide support to the model, including the purchase of sufficient contraception to cover the schools’ needs. The idea of increasing school fees—proposed by several national- and provincial-level officials and implementing partners—met with resistance from the ANAPECO parents. Even if they were to absorb a small increment in tuition, it would fall short of covering the gap; moreover, many respondents felt that the responsibility should fall to the government. However, given the paltry sums that the government invests in health programs, not just FP, this “call” for the government to assume responsibility for the model may not be realistic. The limited capacity of the national health system to employ newly trained graduates also diminishes the long-term effectiveness and sustainability of the model. As of 2025, several donors have continued to support the model, which assures its continuation for the next 4 years but does not guarantee sustainability beyond that.
The study revealed two other issues. First, a third of students reported that clients sometimes or often commented that they were too young to distribute contraceptive methods. (On average, the students were 5 years younger than the clients they served.) In a culture where young women are not expected to be knowledgeable about sexuality, this could be disturbing. However, these clients had chosen to receive services from the nursing students, suggesting it was not an insurmountable barrier. (Others have argued that their age makes the students more approachable for adolescents and young people, a target group most projects strive to reach.) Second, despite their seeking out services at a community outreach campaign, 55% of clients reported that they would prefer to receive future services at a health facility. In the absence of a probe, we are unable to explain this result (which has occurred in previous studies), but it may relate to deeper issues of privacy, trust, availability of a wider range of services, and cultural expectations (“If I need health services, I go to a health facility”).
Given that only 68% of health facilities were equipped to provide FP services, one might ask why the first line of intervention was not to strengthen the health-care system to the point where all health facilities provided contraceptive services. FP is highly donor dependent. The funding available for this work would represent a drop in the bucket for what would be needed to upgrade the health system in the DRC. Given this reality, the MOH works with international and national NGOs to find ways to complement the services offered by the government. Also, many donors specifically interested in increasing modern contraceptive prevalence would not allow their FP funding to be used for the more ambitious (and less focused) task of strengthening a fragile health-care system.

## Limitations of the study
For budgetary reasons, we limited data collection to the three largest provinces participating in the model; they may not represent the diversity of the country regarding cultural norms, health-care system efficacy, infrastructure, or service accessibility. The choice of provinces may fail to encompass distinct conditions in underrepresented locations, particularly rural, conflict-affected, or underdeveloped regions. Formulating recommendations for national programs based on results from a limited, potentially atypical sample of provinces may result in misguided policy or program decisions. We used purposeful sampling in selecting the national- and provincial-level authorities. We attempted to obtain the universe of focal points and nursing students in the three selected provinces via telephone. However, after six failed attempts, the person was excluded from the study. Self-report among health zone personnel, focal points, nursing students, and clients is subject to social desirability bias, especially on satisfaction questions.
In terms of contraceptive uptake, there may be some substitution between clients who obtained their methods from nursing students instead of fixed facilities. However, the study had no means to quantify the extent of such substitution.

## Conclusion
This study is unique in evaluating the outcomes of scale-up of an FP intervention 8 years postintroduction, implemented in an extremely resource-constrained environment (the DRC), from the perspective of eight stakeholder groups, using both qualitative and quantitative methods.
The scale-up of the nursing school model achieved many of its desired outcomes in terms of fidelity to design, acceptability, satisfaction, penetration, and adoption by other organizations. Three weaknesses revealed were pervasive contraceptive stockouts, difficulties in using the DHIS 2 platform for entering nursing schools’ data into the SNIS, and sustainability. Multiple key informants called for the government to take ownership of the model, especially for contraceptive procurement. The results will inform the further expansion of the model within the DRC and possibly to other countries facing similar challenges.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization and methodology: P.A., G.C., F.A., P.L., and J.T.B. Investigation: P.A., D.N., T.K., D.K., F.K., and Z.M. Data curation & formal analysis: P.A., G.C., D.N., D.K., T.K., F.A., Z.M., S.S., and J.T.B. Writing—original draft: J.T.B., G.C., J.H., P.A., and S.S. Writing—review & editing: P.A., G.C., P.L., A.B., J.H., S.S., F.A., and J.T.B. Final approval of the version to be submitted—all named authors have approved the paper prior to submission.

## Reflexivity statement
Of the 13 authors on this manuscript, nine are from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the first author, and four are from an American university (Tulane), including the corresponding/last author. Among this group, there are five women and eight men. The authors range in seniority from full professors (P.A., P.L., and J.T.B.) to doctoral students (D.N., T.K., F.K., D.K., G.C., and S.S.) at our two universities.

## Ethical approval
Ethical approval for this study was obtained from the Kinshasa School of Public Health “Comité d’Éthique” (#ESP/CE/063B/2023) and the Institutional Review Board at Tulane University (#2023-755).

## Funding
This study was supported by funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation # INV-033621.

## Data availability
The data underlying this article are available in the article and in open science framework (osf) at https://osf.io/rn6u2/.