pmc3815pheelsevierManagement Review0970-38960970-3896pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleElsevier - PMC COVID-19 CollectionPMC10239734PMC10239734.1102397341023973410.1016/j.iimb.2022.12.006S0970-3896(23)00054-X1ArticleFuture of workplace design from a socio-technical perspective
VenkatachalamParvathyMishraRajhans Department of Information Systems, Indian Institute of Management Indore, Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India⁎Corresponding author.562023437373276202271120223122022050620230506202312062023© 2023 Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Indian Institute of Management Bangalore.2023Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.Post-COVID-19, there is an ongoing discussion worldwide on the future of workplaces across organisations. This is a socio-technical system in transition, and we use a multi-level perspective (MLP) to identify the changing elements. We perform discourse analysis on the social media platform to gather stakeholders’ perspectives on the workplace to identify (a) changing dimensions of the workplace; (b) emerging challenges; (c) the necessity for adoption of new technologies; and (d) learnings from the pandemic with respect to the workplace. We propose a conceptual model through theories of socio-technical perspectives that shall inform practice on the design of workplace policy.

## Keywords
Hybrid workWorkplace transitionSocio-technicalFuture workplacePandemicpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfyespmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes

## Introduction
When the COVID-19 pandemic began to spread, governments across the globe announced the suspension of most economic activities. This resulted in the online presence of all services that were not classified under essential categories ( ). Due to the uncertainty caused by the pandemic, its effects on the economy, workforce, and workplaces remain dynamic and futuristic. Under these circumstances, the future of the workplace has emerged as an essential issue for discussion.
Today, 
multinational corporations are focused on operational agility and technology to assure business continuity based on the lessons learnt from the pandemic. Additionally, it should be recognised that each stakeholder would have gained unique insights from enforced work-from-home policies. Discussions around the virtual workplace and the influence of digital technologies were prevalent even before the pandemic started ( ). Failed transitions to a virtual workforce despite technological capabilities and organisations’ reluctance to adopt remote work were investigated ( ). On the other hand, post-pandemic studies examined the influence of remote work ( ) and focused on problems such as psychological and societal aspects and digital inequalities in developing economies. However, there is a need to comprehend the growing conversation about the workplace and work practices that are likely to impact and shape the future of the workplace.
Workplace redesign with policy revisions comprises a change in organisational structure and work processes facilitated by the efficient application of digital technologies. Given that a policy shift on workplace redesign is imminent across most industries, the collective experience of mandatory work-from-home and the narrative that is set up as policy change ( ) can give a nuanced view on societal change and the impact of digital technologies.
We wished to observe talks on the future of the workplace in a public arena where people are free to express their perspectives. We believe that social media platforms facilitate direct interaction between leaders and stakeholders in the public domain . As a microblogging, real-time social networking platform, Twitter is a tool for rapidly distributing ideas, thoughts, forums, and events ( ). Public usage facilitates sensemaking during a social crisis. It promotes the flow of ideas amongst like-minded communities ( ) and accidental discoveries ( ).
In the case of corporates, Twitter usage has been multifaceted. Strategic usage accounts vary by business line ( ), and top executives’ activity on Twitter influences online conversations across business lines ( ). Since the impact of the lockdown has been felt at all levels of the workforce, discussion on the future of the workplace attracts varied categories of users on Twitter, such as employees, entrepreneurs, customers, executives, and organisations. It has a substantial long-term influence on the post-pandemic world. Hence, the topic is trending organically and not artificially ( ). Chief executives of leading firms continue to share their perspectives on the future of the workplace through various channels 
including interviews, industrial fora, conferences, and social media.
The current study's main objective is to explore the nature of discussions around the workplace and work practises during the pandemic and their influence on the conceptualisation of the future of the workplace. Given the interplay of social and technological factors in the discussion, the study will be approached from a socio-technical perspective. We use the multi-level perspective (MLP) ( ; ) theory on socio-technical transitions to understand the transition process in the workplace. We conducted discourse analysis on the Twitter platform to comprehend emerging trends in the workplace. To the best of our knowledge, there is no study that has analysed public debate on the topic from this standpoint post-pandemic. The following are the research questions of the study:
RQ1: What is the nature of discussions around the future of the workplace while experiencing enforced work-from-home (WFH) due to the pandemic?
RQ2: What learnings from the pandemic can influence the conceptualisation of the workplace in the future?
Before the pandemic, the digitalisation of work, innovative work practices, and workplace flexibility were already topics of discussion at the strategic level ( ). During the pandemic, however, the workforce experienced the same, and the importance of digital transformation and digital acceptability increased. We believe this to be a transitional period. Developments that have transpired during this phase are expected to have future implications for structural and functional changes in work, environment, roles, and processes, amongst others. Consequently, the research issues are pertinent considering the impending changes in the workplace. While RQ1 provides insight into the transition phase as change occurs, RQ2 indicates how past lessons will likely shape the future. Both research questions contribute to the foundational literature on the debate around the future of work and the workplace. Additionally, scholarly discourse on work and the workplace is likely to be interdisciplinary. We confine the scope of the study to focusing on transitions and, as a result, recording the developing narratives that define them.
Through the study, we aim to identify (a) the changing dimensions of the workplace and organisational norms and practices; (b) emerging challenges; (c) the need for adopting new technologies; and (e) learnings from the pandemic and their contribution to the notion of the workplace. We present a conceptual model of evolving workplace policy dialogues and a socio-technical standpoint from which the policy could be implemented.
Twitter was chosen as the social platform for the collection of data because of (a) the presence of a large number of like-minded members who discuss the topic; (b) even in the absence of sequential contact or interaction between or amongst chief executives and other stakeholders, open debates and free expression of ideas allow improved awareness of genuine challenges and issues as the discussion progresses; (c) publicly available discussions make the data collection process convenient ( ); and (d) with limited scope for public forums or gatherings during the pandemic, a more significant number of views were found to be exchanged on social platforms.
The paper is organised as follows: After the introduction section, there is a brief literature review and explanation of the theory used to understand the phenomenon. Next, the research methodology and data collection process are described, followed by the analysis. In the next section, we present the findings and discuss their implications for theory and practice. Finally, research limitations are acknowledged and potential research directions are suggested.

## Literature review

## Conception of workplace
Typically, organisations introduce work-related policies on ‘remote or distributed or virtual or co-located’ teams. Conversely, some organisations strictly enforce co-located structures ( ). In purely distributed teams, all the employees work from their respective locations, sharing no physical space ( ). Thus, remoteness varies by degrees, and ‘remote’ is not strictly equal to ‘work from home’. Every team member can be the sole member in a particular geographical location (and there would be several such locations), all such persons being part of a single team. On the contrary, a member may be physically in the office but would be part of a distributed team. As Martin Fowler, senior scientist at Thought Works, observed 
in 2015,“There is no single structural definition to describe both remote and co-locate team structures. In case of co-locating, there could be a single team in the same physical location, two or more co-located groups in multiple sites, or only a few members working remotely in a single group.”

The cohesiveness of team structure is mainly attributed to the proximity of the team members. To summarise, it can be considered a remote team structure if an employee cannot turn his/her head around or walk to a teammate to engage in collaboration. Working from outside office premises has been referred to as ‘telecommuting’ in the United States and ‘teleworking’ in Europe ( ).
The argument favouring ‘co-locate’ team preference has been that it helps increase creativity, protect copyrights, security and data privacy, better communication, collaboration, and hence, improved performance ( ). For instance, in 2013, Marrissa Mayer, then CEO of Yahoo!, sent out a memo 
to all the employees stating, “To become the best place of work, we must work side-by-side. It is critical that all are present at offices and to give up remote working.”
On the other hand, the remote structure is expected to offer benefits such as more access to specialised talents ( ). Similarly, when personal issues are sorted out, employees are based out of locations convenient for them and motivated to perform better ( ). As a result of technological advancements, work can be completed efficiently, and productivity may increase if people do not engage in non-work-related activities ( ). Moreover, the team's effectiveness and agility ( ) are determined by team members, their culture, access to resources, shared knowledge ( ), and the process ( ). This process has been successfully demonstrated by new-age technology companies ( ).
Prior works before the pandemic ( ; ) on workplace innovation posited the digital workforce as a grand challenge for the future. These works highlighted that the future of the workplace should focus on the execution of work and not on the location or workplace. The workplace design that emphasises interaction between humans, machines, and emerging technologies has garnered more attention. The innovative use of digital technology, the efficacy of the virtual workforce, its influence on organisational structure and practices, and its impact on emotional intelligence in humans have evolved as research subjects.
Thus, the influence of digitalisation on the workplace ( ) indicated a change in the nature and process of work. While the studies ( ) on the impact of automation focused on processes and workers, digital innovation-based studies brought out the influence of technology on the delivery of work ( ). With future workplaces expected to go digital, the current focus is on how and what work is done ( ), with no stress on where and when it is executed.

## Influence of COVID-19 on workplace
During the initial phase of the pandemic (March to April 2020), most of the workforce approached enforced WFH positively ( ) since it offered a safe workplace. However, there is sector-wise variation ( ) in the adoption of WFH, and there has been a loss of employment in several sectors. This suggests that the feasibility of WFH is dependant on the sector and the role of the worker. On the other hand, domestic pressure in managing WFH is seen to be temporarily high in many cases. Choice-based WFH is viewed as significantly different from imposed WFH because the former tends to be dependant on family arrangements; hence, the outcome (both employee satisfaction and productivity for the firm) tends to vary ( ).
Similarly, there is slow adoption of WFH policies in emerging economies ( ). Key factors for the same include underdeveloped technology infrastructure, lack of digital resource access and digital inequality, and lack of technical ability amongst the workforce in many sectors. Studies ( ) on employee wellness in the virtual workforce suggest that provision of psychological safety to the team is critical. Members of remote or virtual teams must be sensitised and trained to connect as a team, trust each other, and engage in work.
Thus, as the lockdown progressed, the influence of the pandemic on change in work practices, wellness of workers, and societal impacts such as unemployment and inequality ( ) was evident. Extant literature ( ) observes that while work might not be fully remote, it might not revert to a pre-COVID scenario either, and hence, reinvention of work and technology will guide the future of the workplace. Therefore, there is a need to document the change process as it unfolds. While the pandemic acted as a ‘thrust’ in the acceptance of remote work, technology emerged as the ‘enabler’ in ensuring business continuity. The future of the workplace tends to be influenced by both pandemic experience and emerging technologies, and it is critical to map elements of the workplace transition as the change unfolds. Hence, we propose to study the discourse about the workplace during the pandemic situation and its influence on the future of the workplace.

## Twitter as a discourse medium
Social media has developed a significant presence in detecting emerging trends ( ) due to the participation of individuals representing society in online discussions and debates. Popular corporate executives use social media as a marketing tool and a venue for brainstorming. The virtual workforce as a topic entails policy-level decisions, digital resource availability, visionary concepts, and sustainable policy execution and is frequently driven from the top down inside businesses ( ). In a pandemic situation, it has been further influenced by the long-term coexistence of professional and personal lives while working from home ( ). Given this, empirical surveys or interviews are likely to be moderated and tend to be biased by digital exhaustion, selective perception, optimism, personal experience, and social desirability. On the contrary, on Twitter, users can instantly and freely express their views voluntarily, and the biases could be offset on social networks due to multiple engagements.
Twitter has character limitations in its content, and this concise form helps the representative social discourse with simple words, abbreviations, emoticons, and unstructured noise elements, amongst others ( ). The connectedness amongst users is generated through hashtags (‘#’) and user ids (‘@’) ( ) on the platform. While the Twitter discourse cannot be construed as a reflection of an organisation's policies or employees’ opinions, it can indicate a trend. Hence, the importance of Twitter discourse cannot be ignored ( ).

## Theoretical foundation and conceptual framework
Notably, future of the workforce is not a result of technological developments that lead to societal transformation. Instead, focus is on how future or underdeveloped innovations disperse within society as they align with the continuing effects of the pandemic. Recent works ( ) on the influence of COVID-19 on the workplace emphasised acceptance of change amongst stakeholders and insisted that the ongoing reinvention of the workplace is likely to continue. As the future of the workplace is strongly related to social and technological progress, socio-technical theories are utilised to characterise impending transformations in the workplace ( ).
Our research focuses on features of the socio-technical subsystem of the workplace, where social and technical subsystems co-evolve. Research on the virtual workforce ( ) has classified the social subsystem as people, organisation of work practice, and the technical subsystem as technology and tasks. However, it takes decades for social and technical subsystems to become interdependent and function as a socio-technical system. Reasons that could account for such a long duration could range from lack of access to technology to resistance to change despite technological advances. Changes brought about by the pandemic tend to undermine conventional work practices, and the creation of new alternatives must be evaluated concurrently. Consequently, relational theories are necessary to show the societal impact of the pandemic, continuing process change, and the difficulties associated with old and new work practices by identifying interacting social groupings and their strategies, resources, and interests ( ).
Pre-pandemic conversations related to virtual workplaces revealed that the adjustments were difficult to implement. In contrast, we view the transition of work and workplace to a socio-technical subsystem as transitional, with change that is fluid rather than incremental (small changes) or transformative (swift fundamental changes). Due to the fact that the pandemic experience has expedited the shifting process, we refer to it as a transition. Further, observe that transitions tend to cause multiple changes, involve multiple actors, and are macroscopic, and that the scope of realised changes is radical, with a longer duration. We find all these characteristics associated with the future of workplace discussion as well. The enforced WFH owing to the pandemic raises questions about how organisational policies were implemented prior to the pandemic and how they have changed because of the pandemic, the influence of cultural and institutional parameters on work policies, and how they are envisioned for the future. We find that MLP or the theory of socio-technical transitions ( ) explains transitions involving social and technical subsystems. MLP as a relational theory helps us to capture these dimensions from a socio-technical perspective and inform the actors in the system ( ).
Ongoing discussions amongst stakeholders during the transition provide insights into the evolution of socio-technical subsystems. However, as the landscape change due to the pandemic takes precedence over actors in the system, we need to understand the structure of the system and its meaning for human subjects ( ) through these discussions. We consider social media as one of the sources of discussion. Hence, we perform socio-technical discourse analysis through social media platforms to identify the emerging structure of work.
Thus, in this study, theories are located neutrally to identify elements of the system and map the meaning of the system as it evolves. Given that the problem is global, the underlying assumption is that its influence on organisations has been comparable worldwide. With the presence of transnational corporations across all sectors, the study is relevant across all geographies and cultures. Since the unit of analysis for this study are inquiries connected to the system in transition and not a specific organisation, the MLP lens is applicable. Broader patterns of discussions on system transition are further captured through social media discourse. Moreover, since the study was conducted during a pandemic, the view that social media is a platform that reflects societal change seems feasible.

## Multi-level perspective
MLP or the theory of socio-technical transitions ( ) explains transitions involving social and technical subsystems as interaction between three levels through a current regime of practice, niche innovations that bring in radical changes in the regime, and the socio-technical landscape that includes emerging trends and exogenous shocks (e.g., wars, economic crises, natural disasters, and pandemics) in which actors of the regime have no control or influence. MLP views transitions as occurring through the alignment of processes within and amongst these three levels. Thus, the outlook of MLP is at the macro level—outsider insights on the socio-technical transitions. This position does not give due importance to the actors of the regime and the strategies involved ( ). In this study, our interest is in identifying macro-level changes in the future of the workplace and mapping the elements that emerge through social discussions as changes unfold. Research studies using MLP have attempted to explain how changes that trigger at landscape level pressurise regimes to respond to changes. This, in turn, forces the actors at both the regime and niche levels to act and change the current system of practice.
The theory has limitations with the definition of the scope of landscape ( ). In the pandemic era, with enforced work from home, the landscape due to the pandemic is universal. Moreover, as the study is not from a historical perspective, the role of actors in the system in transition is not clear. Instead, we use the ‘inside’ opinions of the actors associated with the system to appreciate the system's transition process from an ‘outsider’ perspective. However, niches and regimes comprise a network of actors who adhere to specific rules, but they do not have defined boundaries in terms of size, shape, or effectiveness.
Further, the ‘transition pathway’ ( ) of MLP suggests that the timing and nature of interaction amongst the three levels can lead to four different alignments: (1) Technological Substitution – when the landscape changes but niche innovations are not advanced yet; (2) Transformation – when the landscape changes and moves actors in the regime to adjust, even when niche innovations are not advanced; (3) Reconfiguration – when landscape changes occur and symbiotic niche innovations present in the regime foster better technology acceptance; and (4) Dealignment and Re-alignment – when landscape changes result in destabilisation of the regime and niche innovations are not advanced enough. We notice that the pandemic era and advances in technology will make future workplace transitions with multiple innovations and system reconfigurations. Changes involved in workplace reconfiguration tend to be incremental or gradual, as system acceptance has several implications. This also means that the existing regime can co-exist with new changes.

## Discourse analysis
Discourses can be defined as ‘an ensemble of ideas, concepts, and categorisations that is produced, reproduced, and transformed in a particular set of practices and through which meaning is given to physical and social realities’ ( ). Discourse is regarded as empirically measurable material (Alejandro, 2021). Some discourse approaches include discourse theory, critical discourse analysis (CDA), narrative policy analysis (NPA), deliberative discourse analysis (DDA), and argumentative discourse analysis (ADA), amongst others ( ). All approaches interpret the meaning and implications of the discourse by focusing on its underlying patterns. Usually, the type of discourse analysis is determined by the analytic methodologies and context of the discipline in which the analysis is conducted.
Typically, studies with a normative-deliberative view use discourse analysis, as it observes free discussions amongst participants in the public space to overcome a crisis or conflict ( ). The objective of open deliberation is to reach a consensus that is convenient and acceptable for all stakeholders involved in the system. However, in the course of debate, participants do not reach a rational agreement as many issues tend to remain unresolved. But discourse analysis produces ‘thought collectives’ and shows how employees or organisations think and act ( ) and reflects reality ( ).
We will approach the study using CDA, which focuses on the use of language in a social context and discovers concealed ideologies. The CDA recognises stakeholder participation in decision-making and the need to critically assess language usage in the public domain. The purpose of discourse analysis in our study is to comprehend the shift in discourse and demonstrate the changing orientation of society towards the future of work and the workplace. It involves identifying conflicting thoughts around the topic while mutually engaging in connective discourse ( ). Hence, the discourse on the future of the workplace requires substantive analysis of public views on systems that are in transition and provides insight into changes in policy, technology, and acceptance of the system.
Traditionally, the CDA has been applied in institutional contexts such as media or speeches where there is structured textual communication. However, social media has emerged as an alternate mode of communication ( ) amongst organisations. The usage of text in social media is not streamlined and is short in length, with a mix of abbreviated text, images, and videos, amongst others. Interpretation of the text includes analysis of expressions, emotions, and sentiments of the users interacting with the platform. However, the views on social media are about communities of opinion that are more expressive and diverse. Twitter, as a social media platform, is evolving as a tool of collective intelligence ( ), where a social group shares and solves its own problems. Research ( ) highlights the need for adopting analytic approaches to manage the large amounts of data generated by social media and to attempt to interpret the conversation. As content and content delivery mechanisms have evolved, the approach to analysing discourse necessitates using technology to comprehend the significance of a large volume of data ( ).

## Conceptual framework
 , in their research on mobile work, admit that although technological advancements influence the delivery of work, social and cultural factors determine the efficacy of distant work. The authors identify key elements of the social (organisation and stakeholders) and technical (technology and task) subsystems of the workplace and highlight how social and technical subsystems co-exist and interact to build an effective workplace (inner box of ). However, the approach to this framework has been more from a corporate or organisational perspective, without considering external elements. 
We adapt and extend the framework proposed by for the workplace. Our research is placed in the pandemic environment, with the existing regime in transition, and we consequently adopt a multi-level approach (MLP). Through MLP, we see that the pandemic has had a significant impact on the landscape and that the organisation's current work practices (regime) are subject to change. We observe that digital technologies have facilitated business continuity, and as a result, innovations (niches) in products, services, and practices have been profoundly influenced by the same. is the proposed conceptual framework on dimensions of the workplace that extends to elements of the landscape in transition.
In our study, we are interested in the changing social perspective on workplace and technology. The impact of digital technology and the pandemic have been the most significant external forces influencing future workplace conversations. We have added to the framework dimensions that were not significant or existent in the original framework ( ).
The social subsystem of the workplace includes the organisation and its stakeholders as primary components. This subsystem's interactions concern the organisational dynamics involved in establishing and implementing policies, controlling the structure and culture of the workforce, and prioritising employee well-being. In the context of structural change, the subsystem's objective should be to retain the connection of the workforce and boost overall efficiency and productivity. Additional organisational responsibilities that are not included in the scope could include a focus on the community and policies with a positive impact on society. The technical components of the workforce are about deploying infrastructure, effective adoption, and usage of technological advances ( ). Identifying these components enables us to describe opportunities and problems associated with the transitional phase of the shift. In addition, the course of the conversation that occurs during this socio-technical transition, including the influence of landscape, acceptance of the included regime changes, and development of niches, must still be investigated. Documenting these elements can provide a more detailed understanding of conceptualisation of the workplace.

## Methodology
Social media analytics ( ) have been used to understand emerging phenomena, especially if the social impact is high.
Their study proposes a three-stage process (the CUP Framework, 
): (1) capture – gather data; (2) understand – infer; and (3) present the examined data. 

## Capture
We identified the conversations in two steps. The first set of data was based on hashtags. Hashtags related to workplace and future of the workplace were ‘#workfromhome’, ‘#wfh’, ‘#remotework’, ‘#workremote’, ‘#futureofwork’, ‘#fow’, and ‘#hybridwork’. These hashtags had more trending popularity than other tags referring to virtual and distributed teams or workforces. The hashtags were collected between 01 March 2021 and 15 May 2021. Tweets (the text of the posted message) were collected using the Tweepy Python library. Open source code was used for the extraction of hashtags 
and user/screen names. 
We filtered with English as the language, and retweets were eliminated. We did not restrict the hashtags to any geographical location. The second set of data comprised tweets of selected executives. After the COVID-19 outbreak, these executives were engaged in active discussions at the workplace ( 
) in conferences and on social media platforms. The gathered data were stored in CSV format. 
We found that technology providers for the digital workplace, such as network technologies, web conferencing platforms, project management, team communication software, and so on, were actively engaged in conversations about remote work. We did not analyse these corporate Twitter handles, as they were intended for marketing and customer communication purposes.
The archived conversations were cleaned to remove noisy data and duplicates or repeated tweets. In all, 29,475 tweets were extracted. The final hashtag-based data processed after the first stage of cleaning were remote work (5000), future of work (3823), work from home (740), and hybrid work (830). We did not track other related hashtags such as #wfh, #rw, #fow. and #hw, because they were not popular and did not convey meaning on their own. Out of 8112 tweets made by executives, only 59 were relevant to opinions on the future of the workplace, and these were extracted. For instance, executives use Twitter for marketing communication for their respective organisations. This had no relevance to our study, and such tweets were ignored. In total, 10,444 tweets relevant to the workplace were taken up for analysis, and they were further analysed using the Python-based data mining tool Orange. 

## Understand

## Pre-processing of data
We used the archived data for analysis and pre-processed the data to remove stop words, punctuations, white spaces, special symbols, emoticons, and HTML tags. We proposed to understand opinions on the workplace; hence, textual analysis was initiated. In the case of text mining, sizeable unstructured data is often checked by identifying repeated words or sentences, categories of text or aspects, opinion or sentiment mining, topic modelling, and so on ( ).

## Word-cloud analysis
Word cloud is a visualisation of text with gradation in size and colour based on frequency of usage ( ). They are pure text summarisations and do not offer any linguistic meaning or interpretation. However, Twitter-based analysis indicates the overall picture of the topic being discussed and repeatedly used keywords in the public forum. We generated word clouds at two levels: (a) at the hashtag level to identify associated issues or subjects about workplace and (b) through Executive- level tweets to understand their preference for the terminology and also identify common industry usage. This study's hashtag-level word cloud analysis helped us identify keywords related to the hashtags. We further corroborated these findings against topics emerging from topic modelling.

## Topic modelling
The topic model helps to go through larger texts and captures the dominant discourse. It also aids in understanding the opinions of different stakeholders on social media as the discussion unfolds ( . We used Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) ( , ) to derive latent topics from the mined data. We used a bag of words (a collection of particular keywords that ignore grammar, word order, and sentence structure ( ) out of the corpus that acted as input to LDA, which is a generative probabilistic algorithm.
The algorithm identifies the topics from the distribution or repetition of words and does not consider order of occurrence. Since we aggregated the tweets by workplace concept (through hashtags #futureofwork, #workfromhome, #remotework, and #hybridwork) for a particular period, it can be termed as a combination of both temporal and hashtag-based pooling. Research ( ) shows that such pooled data often yields better topics using LDA. Studies ( ) suggest that interpretation of results is more significant in topic modelling than getting an accurate number of topics. The optimal number of topics was decided by re-running the LDA algorithm for 5, 10, and 20 topics, and we observed that a maximum of 6 topics offered an adequate representation of the data. Additional levels created topics unrelated to the study. We also verified the hierarchical dirichlet process (HDP) of modelling as there was uncertainty at the topic level and since the topics generated were below ten. But we observed that in the sample of tweets with multiple runs, both algorithms with LDA and HDP brought out a similar level of topics related to the workplace.
Prior studies on topic modelling have used manual human judgement ( ) and automatic labelling ( ). Studies ( ) also point out that the LDA algorithm requires domain knowledge to interpret associations amongst the topics generated. Since the data set used for the study is from Twitter, there is a possibility that the semantic meaning of the tweeted text may not be related to the hashtags despite cleansing the data. It should also be noted that we used a bag of words, and hence, there is no grammatical sentence structure for topic construction. Therefore, we adopted the manual method for identifying emerging topic labels.

## Sentiment analysis
Sentiment or opinion analysis helps predict sentiment emerging from the corpus data. We conducted sentiment analysis across the hashtags to understand the tone of the tweets and if they were in a negative, positive, or neutral context. We used the Python language-based tool ‘Orange’ to conduct this analysis. VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary for sEntiment Reasoning), a lexicon- and rule-based sentiment analysis, was used for analysis. ‘A sentiment lexicon is a pre-defined list of lexical features (e.g., words) that are labelled according to their semantic orientation as either positive or negative’ ( ). VADER supports English language lexicons, and its sentiment lexicon is domain-independent and enables microblog-like situations. Since our research was conducted on Twitter and the analysis language was English, we utilised VADER ( ).
We conducted sentiment analysis to answer RQ2, which aimed to identify lessons learnt from the epidemic that can influence future conceptualisation of the workplace. Learnings are the direct results of human experience; consequently, sentiments or opinions of lived experience are essential for providing meaningful interpretations of the subjects determined by word cloud and topic modelling techniques. In the context of the pandemic, all stakeholders experienced WFH uniformly. The experience has changed their perspective on the future of work and the workplace, as represented in the thoughts they expressed in public forums. In addition, the tweets of chief executives held weight since they were cognizant of their responsibilities and because their opinions expressed on Twitter were interpreted as dissemination ( ). Thus, when we collected text meanings and related emotions, we obtained the ‘real’ lessons learnt from the pandemic working experience.

## Present
Visual representation and interpretation of the analysis with details are handled in the following sections. The study's objective was to identify (1) the nature of discussions around the future of the workplace while experiencing enforced work from home (WFH) due to the pandemic; and, (2) learnings from the pandemic that can influence the conceptualisation of the workplace in the future. We inferred the findings for answering the research questions through hashtag analysis, topic modelling, and sentiment analysis.

## Hashtag analysis
The study's first objective was to gather information on the nature of discussions on the future of the workplace in the public sphere during the pandemic period. We observed that #remotework and #workfromhome were popular hashtags, with more tweets generated per day 
than the other hashtags used in the study. Due to the unstructured nature and informal text of the data on Twitter, pre-processing of the data was carried out. Typically, word analysis is seen as the starting point for content analysis, where frequency and n-gram help to identify critical points in documents. In this analysis, we used n-gram as 1, as all the hashtags were already contextual. For instance, we were not searching for ‘hybrid’ or ‘remote’, or ‘future’ separately, and these words provided relevant meaning only if explored with the word ‘work’ in this context. We examined the hashtags #hybridwork, #futureofwork, #remotework, and #workfromhome to see the context of evolving topics. All of them were referred to in combination or interchangeably ( 
). 
We observed the following: (a) The hashtag #hybridwork has reference to digital transformation and is mainly discussed in the context of workplace. (b) The #futureofwork is used in the context of future technologies at work and refers to remote work. (c) The #workfromhome has reference to freelancers or individual role-based jobs and has reference to the pandemic situation. (d) The #remotework is also used similarly, but additionally has technology, pandemic, and organisation policy-related discussions.
We then examined the tweets of chief executives who had recently been engaging in workplace discussions ( 
). Though the number of such tweets was minimal, they carried high weightage due to their power and influence on emerging workplace policies. It was observed that executives used limited hashtags for a given tweet. 
The chief executives used the terms hybrid work, remote work, and collaboration in relation to the future of work and the workplace and referred to digital transformation, innovation, and technology. It was observed that while executives did not use work from home, other users predominantly referred to work from home. Overall, the tweets of chief executives captured themes and trends related to the workplace. The hashtags used by them set the context indirectly. Word cloud analysis of a larger dataset based on hashtags indicated that #hybridwork and #futureofwork carried more relevance to evolving workplace discussions. These tags were discussed at strategic levels. The themes that emerged were workplace, culture, employees, and technologies.
On the other hand, #workfromhome and #remotework also talked about the workplace, albeit dominated by the status quo of the workplace due to pandemic situations rather than on future policies, jobs, or roles that can be executed remotely or at home. Thus, these tags were used at an operational level. Themes ( 
) emerged here around operational issues such as productivity, job opportunity, and more about executing work at home or a remote location. 

## Topic association
We classified topic words generated by the LDA algorithm for the dataset collected for hashtags, namely, #remotework, #hybridwork, #workfromhome, #futureofwork, and the dataset collected for executives. Next, we identified commonalities amongst each hashtag and the chief executives’ tweets and labelled them. Then, emerging topic words were identified, checked for relevance to the workplace, and labelled. We thus found a stream of topics related to workplace discussion. We observed that the topic words of executives, namely, future of work and hybrid work, could be grouped as Cluster 1 at the strategic level. The themes generated belonged to six streams, namely, work trend, people, culture, learning from pandemic, motivation, and technology ( 
). 
The popular hashtags #remotework and #workfromhome had five topics generated by LDA ( 
). Cluster 2 was about challenges at the operational level. We observed that there were repetitions, and we classified them into three themes. Thus, though the number of tweets per day was high, the variability in the topic discussed was not too high, and there seemed to be convergence on the topic discussed. 
Thus, Cluster 1 ( ) was a strategic discussion with long-term planning for organisation policy and people. The topics also identified learnings from the past and implementation challenges in the future. The influence of technology was highlighted in the themes. On the other hand, Cluster 2 ( ) captured the experience of enforced lockdown on employees, especially in times of crisis. The discussion recognised the situation, the kinds of roles that could accommodate work from home, and the challenges involved in the same; there was less discussion around future directions in the workplace.
The study's second objective was to understand the influence of the pandemic on future workplace conceptualisation. We derived learnings from the pandemic based on the topic labels generated in Cluster 1. We observed that there was an influence on the organisation's policies that would be people-focused (Topic 2), more empathetic-orientated, and culture-driven (Topics 3 and 5). The pandemic exposed the vulnerabilities of corporates in many areas. Through Topic 4, we identified areas to improve, including infrastructure, training of resources, organisational learning, and internal communication.
The sentiments expressed in tweets provide insight into the viewpoints of the discussion. All the hashtags created positive, negative, and neutral emotions within the same range. In contrast, the sentiments of top executives provided insight into pandemic lessons that are likely to be further developed and implemented as policies ( 
). In general, we can infer that the issues discussed have positively impacted future workplaces by highlighting the difficulties and obstacles experienced by employees in pandemic scenarios. We observed that one single text had a negative score, 11 texts were neutral, and others were positive towards conceptual change in the workplace. 
An interesting observation is that the negative sentiment is not against work-from-home or remote working policies. It was an expression of concern regarding WFH in a pandemic.
Our experience is based on a very different context to what's happening now. We didn't have to worry about children home from school, family members vulnerable to the growing pandemic, or general anxiety about our community's future. – Martin Fowler 

The statement differentiates between enforced work from home and preferred work from home situations. It acknowledges the apprehensions in society about the acceptance of working from home as a policy. It also observes that the collective experience of the crisis might influence future implementation and adoption of remote work-based policies. The text stresses the need for a change in organisational culture that is mindful and compatible with different remote working policies and the associated implementation challenges. In the case of neutral texts, we observed that it was more about enabling different communities to work remotely during lockdown and about marketing and communication on the technologies available to deliver the work.
The positive text was about the organisation's initiatives to embrace remote work. We observed different categories of positive sentiments regarding emerging workplace topics. The first was direct learning from the pandemic, which was about acknowledging 
the challenges of enforced lockdown, digital inequality, work-life balance, maintaining employee well-being, team building, and focusing on growth as well as business continuity.
The second category was the acceptance of a hybrid workplace that lays stress on flexibility. Google 
has taken the lead in bringing about changes in policy without anticipating the end of lockdown situations. The chief executive's tweet on the policy change brought out an optimistic sentiment 
and highlighted the need for a hybrid workplace that enables both work at an office and remote work, depending on the roles. The tweet also suggested that an employee's tasks or meetings planned for a week could determine the day to be on-premises. While policy and cultural level change may take longer, tweets made by the executives point out the need for technologies.. The last category of positive sentiment was about identifying the infrastructure gap.

## Discussion
Before COVID-19, virtual work ( ) was classified as work anywhere (‘telecommuting or teleworking’), distributed teams (‘virtual workforce’), the digital workplace (‘computer-mediated work’), mobile work (‘worker mobility or remote work’), and indicated two dimensions, namely, technology dependence and diffusion. Similarly, research ( ) advocates a virtual workforce implementation model. It recommended determining the boundary between employees’ private and professional lives during the initial stage of policy development. Due to enforced work from home in the pandemic crisis, employees’ location as a dimension has been analysed and experienced across organisations, with boundaries between private and professional lives interfering daily. Hence, the discussions progressed to the next stage of implementing a sustainable work policy.
Simultaneously, the pandemic exposed various dimensions of technology and its influence on creating an effective remote work model. Satya Nadella, the chief executive of Microsoft, through his tweet (“over the past year, no area has undergone more rapid transformation than the way we work and as the world recovers, there's no going back.”), corroborates our observations on the change of work and workplace as a significant development post-pandemic. Studies ( ) acknowledge that the workplace will be redesigned, policies will be ‘human-centric’, and technology will be an ‘enabler’. Our study corroborates this finding by observing the same themes and topics emerging in the analysis across hashtags.
We find that the hashtags #workfromhome, #hybridwork, #remotework, and #futureofwork were used in different contexts. The #workfromhome was a policy-level decision, and the crisis led to enforced work-from-home worldwide. The challenges identified were at a personal level in terms of motivation, lack of infrastructure and digital access, and ease of working at home. Similarly, #remotework could refer to geographically separated teams that work in different offices, individual workers working from home, or a combination of both. This topic discussed the experience of employees. We observed that #futureofwork discussed more technologies and the idea of a digital workplace. The challenges listed were about the workforce's availability, ease, and upskilling in technologies.
On the other hand, #hybridwork is the emerging model as the pandemic moves towards the next stage. Hybrid work and the workplace are interpreted differently by organisations. Overall, we gathered that the hybrid workplace is about the co-existence of remote and on-premises work. The fulcrum of the policy is flexibility. It depends on the sector, place, choice, role, nature of work, and technology. Based on the analysis, we identified challenges in implementing a hybrid workforce as team building, managing career advancement, promotion-related activities, building better infrastructure, upskilling employees, and managing synchronous communication.
Further, our analysis revealed positive experiences, learnings, and challenges in the remote work model experienced by organisations during the pandemic crises. We observed flexibility at work in terms of place, time of work, schedule, saving time on commuting, and access to global and diverse talents as positive experiences of the workforce during the pandemic. Thus, though technology is instrumental for virtual working and digital workplaces, the overall delivery of work is also dependant on these societal factors.
We also identified challenges emerging from the topics. This included a need for motivation and self-management leading to digital exhaustion ( ), distributed teams and challenges in communication ( ), and the sustenance of the remote work model for organisations ( ).
Future work trends 
reports based on a worldwide survey conducted at the beginning of 2021 termed work transformation as the next level of disruption after digital innovations and technological disruptions in the pre-COVID era. It raises three main issues, namely, (a) high productivity against an exhausted workforce; (b) lack of personal networking against a lack of mentorship effect on innovation; and (c) the need for leadership communication with employees. Though we got the discussions independently, the contradictory influence of the topics on the workplace did not emerge in the text analysis.
Our work informs on the factors to be considered when changing workplace policies. The analysis of tweets of chief executives indicates that recovery after the crisis and enforced lockdown would rely on experience gained during the phase. Reports 
also suggest that the remote level is likely to continue to be higher than the pre-crisis level in the coming years; hence, recovery across industries would tend to be digital. Therefore, organisations must realign their technologies based on business operations and customer expectations. This includes increased data-driven decision-making processes and identifying digital delivery channels in terms of operations and the role of workers. Remote work models should be agile, which calls for the upskilling of employees to enable the same. Hybrid work practices typically depend on several factors, such as work requirement, role, and sector. Therefore, the work process cannot mirror the existing on-premises work practices ( ). We observed through our Cluster 1 topics that strategic discussions revolved around technologies across all the hashtags. We also observed that cyber security is not viewed just as an IT policy or initiative but as critical for building digital resilience. Cluster 2 involved practical difficulties in executing enforced remote work. We anticipate that organisations adopting a hybrid model would design their work model from a socio-technical perspective ( 
). 
Through MLP, we identified that social and technical subsystems have challenges and opportunities intertwined across three levels. Our observation of the design of the workplace reveals that there is significant influence from the pandemic experience. The idea of a hybrid work culture at organisational level has to be considered from both social and technical perspectives. It manages the social subsystem by offering employee preference and comfort and maintaining organisational cultures such as workforce connectedness and team motivation. Conversely, technical subsystems are maintained by providing continuous infrastructures such as system bandwidth, internal security, and business continuity.
The policies should accommodate social needs such as privacy, social engagement, lack of digital access and infrastructure for certain parts of the workforce, and appropriate compensation. The key benefit of the hybrid model is seen to be access to global talents ( ) and inclusiveness in the workplace ( ). These topics were discussed sparingly in the analysed dataset. But policy design should include this factor as well. Thus, the study indicates social and technological discussions, their increased interdependencies, and how they impact the workplace and workforce.
Finally, we observed that there is sector-wise influence on work trends based on the profiles of the authors of tweets. The sectors already digitally enabled, or technology giants, are seen as opinion-makers and trendsetters in this context ( ). Mckinsey reports that workers in finance, management, information technology, education, and administrative support have a high potential to work in a remote work model. Moreover, the talent base is shared across similar sectors. Thus, industry or external influence could be the dominant factor in the change in workplace policies across organisations.

## Implications for theory and practice
The study used theories from a socio-technical perspective for factors to be considered in workplace design. Historically, studies on workplace digitalisation have emphasised the necessity for workplaces and organisations (social systems) to adapt to the evolving technology ecosystem (technical systems). However, our research demonstrates that socio-technical subsystems are interrelated and must be viewed concurrently. Implications of the theory is the conceptual model that can be used to explore policies and workplace design as they unfold in the next stage of the pandemic. The model could be further investigated based on geographical location and demographic data, through different research methodologies, and validated.
The practical implications of the study can be grouped into three different categories for framing sustainable policy on workplace design: (a) employees/workers/individuals, (b) organisations, and (c) technology providers. From the individual perspective, social factors such as flexibility, preference, comfort, privacy, wellness, safety, career growth, and socialisation emerge as the primary concerns of working from home. While users are influenced by each other on Twitter, the disparate views arising were also captured through the study. This enables firms to discover their internal goals and gaps, establish a new culture, determine the most suitable technological investments, and match their roadmap with the primary concerns of the vision change. On the other hand, the technology provider must be sensitive to the need for technologies for the difference in work processes, make the technology available, and meet customer expectations based on the changing policies of customer organisations. In addition, the study demonstrates that social and technical subsystems must collaborate to address the concerns of digital accessibility ( ), digital inclusivity ( ), and digital inequality ( ) in workplace design. Understanding these issues will allow firms to reinvent work based on a changing ecosystem and reconsider how workers should act, interact, and be structured in the new work environment.

## Limitations and directions for future research
Our study was based on opinions shared on social media platforms, with associated limitations in the inferred data. First, textual analysis does not elucidate the interdependencies and contradictory nature of the topics. For instance, positive tweets on productivity highlight the success of technology but do not bring out the exhaustion level of the workforce. Second, we did not categorise the tweets based on geographic locations, which could have implications based on the level of crisis and access to infrastructure, amongst others. Third, the demographic influence of users includes age, location, domain, the role of work, and technology awareness. In all these cases, a targeted study on work trends moving towards any new model could help us better understand emerging workplace preferences.

## Conclusion
Our research was conducted during the pandemic era. The study aims to identify the evolving aspects and practises of the workplace and the emerging difficulties as the workplace transitions. We also desired to comprehend the pandemic's contribution to the concept of the workplace and the lessons learnt. We utilised a socio-technical viewpoint to document changes occurring throughout the transition phase and identified the pertinent social and technological subsystem variables. We see that technology has become an integral component of workspaces and is no longer viewed as an external support system. We used sentiment analysis to sense the learnings from pandemic work experience and evaluate its contribution to workplace conceptualisation. Our data-driven research of the Twitter platform provides insights into the workplace elements mentioned by all stakeholders. In conclusion, transitional changes are precipitated by technological breakthroughs preceding a pandemic, and the pandemic experience profoundly influences the imminent changes. The necessity for integrating social and technical subsystems emerges from our study, highlighting their influence on the future of the workplace. Future research can investigate the subsystems in detail through in-depth case studies and analyse the competing facets of the themes that emerged from this study.

 1https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/02/the-post-pandemic-future-of-work-according-to-3-000-ceos-from-around-the-world-685436524a/
2https://www.inc.com/christine-lagorio/future-work-office-phil-libin-jason-fried-julia-hartz.html
3https://martinfowler.com/articles/remote-or-co-located.html accessed on 03-Jun-2021
4https://www.nbcbayarea.com/news/national-international/after-work-from-home-ban-yahoo-expands-maternity-leave/1940853/accessed on 25-May-2021
5https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/extracting-tweets-containing-a-particular-hashtag-using-python/
6https://gist.github.com/yanofsky/5436496
7https://orangedatamining.com
8https://socialalert.net/
9https://twitter.com/martinfowler/status/1239922838112534530?lang=en
10https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/i-pledge-support-my-fellow-ibmers-working-from-home-during-krishna/?linkId=87805422 through https://twitter.com/arvindkrishna/status/1256689673990217728?lang=en
11https://www.google.com
12https://twitter.com/i/web/status/1390110649934442498
13https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/worklab/work-trend-index/hybrid-work accessed on 03-Jun-2021.
14https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/the-covid-19-recovery-will-be-digital-a-plan-for-the-first-90-days accessed on 3 June 2021.