pmcMol Biol CellMol Biol Cell1mbc9201390mbocMolecular Biology of the Cell1059-15241939-4586American Society for Cell BiologyPMC11656473PMC11656473.111656473116564733960177310.1091/mbc.E24-11-0515E24-11-05151EditorialMBoC: An evolving champion of cell biology
AitchisonJohn D. aCenter for Global Infectious Disease Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Washington*Address correspondence to: John Aitchison (John.Aitchison@seattlechildrens.org)01122024271120243512477371ed4
21112024
21112024
11022025110220252012202411022025© 2024 Aitchison. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 Unported Creative Commons License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0).2024“ASCB®,” “The American Society for Cell Biology®,” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell®” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology.pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesWe live in an extraordinary era for cell biology, where remarkable technical and conceptual advances have allowed us to visualize, dissect, and manipulate the cell–-the fundamental unit of life–-with unprecedented precision. These advances allow us to uncover and understand many of the cellular mechanisms that underpin life, development, and disease, enabling solutions to some of society's most pressing challenges. It is this capacity for discovery that drives the field forward, and the journal Molecular Biology of the Cell (MBoC) stands at the forefront of this progress.
From its inception, MBoC embodied a visionary commitment to the field. Founders Erkki Ruoslahti, David Botstein, and Keith Yamamoto recognized the need for a journal capable of capturing the breadth and depth of cell biology by “describing substantial research progress in full.” They envisioned MBoC as a platform that would not only chronicle transformative discoveries but also catalyze scientific progress. This vision has guided the journal for over three decades, expanding its scope in step with the evolving field of molecular cell biology and cementing its role as the flagship journal of the American Society for Cell Biology (ASCB) as a leading venue for accessible, rigorous, and impactful science. MBoC today remains deeply committed to its mission: to inspire and facilitate conceptual innovation in cell biology through the effective and equitable dissemination of groundbreaking research.
However, MBoC faces considerable challenges in an evolving publishing landscape, one in which for-profit journals increasingly dominate. While these journals have enabled the publication of many impactful research advances, the proliferation of journals driven by a profit model that relies on free content, free writing, and free reviewing threatens to compromise a critical dimension of scientific publishing embodied by MBoC, challenging its role and reach. Throughout my career, I often empowered first authors to take the lead in deciding where to submit their papers. I believed this approach was fair, respecting their agency over choices that would directly impact their careers, job searches, and futures. However, in today's publishing landscape, I now see that this perspective may overlook an essential dimension of science and our collective responsibility as scientists: to intentionally consider and support efforts that align with our shared values and long-term vision for the advancement of science. Allow me to explain.
At its core, MBoC plays an essential role in communicating research advances to the cell biology community and driving progress in the field. As a mission-driven, non-profit journal run by scientists with editorial independence and strong ties to academia, MBoC upholds ethical publishing practices, accessibility, and transparency. Building on these principles, we will continue to strive for excellence in both the author experience and publication integrity. MBoC's review process will remain defined by transparency, rigor, and fairness ensuring timely, balanced, and well-considered constructive feedback for authors. Our publishing decisions will be guided by a commitment to advancing impactful science, rather than trends or revenue-driven goals.
MBoC's greatest strength is its contributors, with whom we will continue to engage to guide the field through solicited content, such as commentaries, reviews, and special issues. By partnering with pioneers and leading experts, MBoC will highlight emerging areas, foster interdisciplinary collaboration, and provide insights that shape the future of the field. This approach will reinforce MBoC's role as a catalyst for advancing cutting-edge research and visionary thinking in cell biology.
MBoC's partnership with ASCB is also a considerable strength, upon which we will continue to build. ASCB provides unique opportunities to amplify MBoC's global reach and to evolve to meet the needs of the cell biology community. Through this partnership, MBoC will foster an increasingly global exchange of ideas and insights, maintaining its commitment to expeditious and rigorous peer review. These efforts will strengthen the connection between MBoC and the ASCB community, while expanding the journal's influence and visibility on the international stage.
MBoC is more than a journal–-it represents a cornerstone of the cell biology community, advancing education, outreach, and policy advocacy while driving forward-looking efforts to strengthen global connections through its close partnership with ASCB. Together, MBoC and ASCB are committed to fostering a vibrant, inclusive, and innovative cell biology community for the challenges and opportunities of tomorrow. Beyond disseminating impactful research, MBoC plays a critical role in promoting diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI); empowering early-career scientists as the next generation of diverse voices in science; and advancing science advocacy. Solicited publications focused on DEI, sustainable research practices, and global collaborations will further elevate MBoC's leadership role in these areas. By publishing in MBoC, scientists support ASCB's transformative initiatives, which foster a diverse talent pool, cultivate new ideas, and inform public understanding of science to secure funding and promote evidence-based policy.
As its new Editor-in-Chief, I am honored to lead MBoC into its next chapter. My vision is to build on the journal's considerable strengths and history, working closely with the Editorial Board, ASCB leadership, and the cell biology community to ensure MBoC remains a highly respected, impactful, and globally recognized publication. By emphasizing quality, accessibility, and community engagement, we can differentiate MBoC from its for-profit competitors and amplify its role as a beacon for conceptual innovation in cell biology.
We are at a pivotal moment for both science and publishing, where the choices we make as a community will define the future of our field, and society itself; for, while metrics like journal impact factor often dominate discussions of success, true impact extends far beyond these numbers. MBoC's strength lies not only in being a trusted platform for rigorous and ethical research but also in its ability to influence the trajectory of science itself. Impact is seen in how research advances understanding, drives innovation, informs policy, and fosters collaboration across disciplines. By supporting MBoC, we champion a vision of science rooted in integrity, inclusivity, and a commitment to progress for the collective good. Together, we can ensure MBoC continues to inspire, empower, and transform the field of cell biology for decades to come.
DOI:10.1091/mbc.E24-11-0515