Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1518921PMC1518921.115189211518921854946110.1289/ehp.95103s61311Research ArticleUncertain risks and the risks of certainty.
RaloffJ91995103Suppl 6133121131133010919952807200604092018pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
Sue 0101991tji. 
 
Uncertain Risks and the Risks of Certainty 
Janet Raloff 
 
Science News, Washington, DC 
 
- Environ Health Perspect 103(Suppl 6):131-133 (1995) 
 
Key words: certainty, environmental hormones, hormone mimics, journalism 
 
There are few things as important to par- 
ents as their children, and in the search for 
tips on how to protect the health of their 
youngsters, parents often turn to the most 
user-friendly form of continuing education 
available-the news media. It can be a 
smart move, but there are also risks 
attached. This overview points to the 
media's strengths and 
weaknesses, with the goal of suggesting 
how educators might help to improve the 
natural symbiosis between science and 
journalism. 
 
While offering a window into how 
print journalism works, my focus will be 
on a topical example with special relevance 
to reproduction and child development- 
hormone-mimicking pollutants. 
 
Thirty years ago farmers liberally 
sprayed DDT on fields throughout 
America. At that time scientists had not yet 
recognized the devastating effect this toxic 
chemical could exert on animals, much less 
people. Then came troubling reports of the 
pesticide's feminizing effect on wildlife. 
Some heavily exposed male birds exhibited 
at least partially developed female sex 
organs (1). The most visible symptom of 
the pesticide's reproductive havoc was a 
lethal thinning of eggshells in bald eagles 
and other birds (2). In gulls, which are less 
susceptible to shell thinning, DDT-exposed 
females began cohabiting with other 
females-the so-called "lesbian gulls" (3). 
 
DDT appears to exert these changes by 
mimicking the female hormone estrogen 
(1). Although the United States banned 
the pesticide in 1972, DDT remains a very 
contemporary threat. Trace levels of the 
compound continue to contaminate pro- 
 
This commentary was presented at the Symposium 
on Preventing Child Exposures to Environmental 
Hazards: Research and Policy Issues held 18-19 
March 1994 in Washington, DC. Manuscript received: 
December 5, 1994; accepted: May 15, 1995. 
 
Address correspondence to Janet Raloff, Science 
News, 1719 N St., NW, Washington, DC 20036. 
Telephone (202)785-2255. Fax (202)659-0365. 
 
duce in U.S. groceries (4) and water in the 
Great Lakes. Women throughout the 
industrial world pass on low levels of this 
compound-or its even more toxic 
metabolite DDE-in the breast milk they 
are feeding the next generation (4). 
 
The pesticide also continues to rain 
down throughout North America-even as 
far north as the Arctic (5)-as a result of 
DDT's use throughout many developing 
nations (6). 
 
Twenty years ago when U.S. farmers 
were being asked to phase out their use of 
this chemical, most scientists suspected 
DDT was all but unique in its ability to 
exert a feminizing influence by mimicking 
sex hormones. But now, a wealth of new 
studies indicate that DDT may be only 
one of hundreds of environmental contam- 
inants, some still widely used in the United 
States, that possess a hormonal alter ego. 
These include dozens of pesticides, dozens 
of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 
dioxin, and certain combustion by-prod- 
ucts [AM Soto, personal communication; 
(7-9)]. 
 
Data collected in 1992 showed that one 
such pollutant is effectively "burning out" 
the reproductive tracts of male and female 
alligators living along Florida's fourth 
largest body of freshwater (10). DDT and 
PCBs are largely suspected of fostering the 
life-threatening congenital bill deformities 
identified last year in bald eagles around 
the Great Lakes (10). 
 
One of the most recently identified 
environmental estrogens is an ingredient in 
many plastics, dishwashing soaps, condoms 
and contraceptive jellies [AM Soto, per- 
sonal communication; (11)]. This pollu- 
tant, a nonionic surfactant, has found its 
way into waterways throughout the world 
(12). Moreover, new work indicates that it 
can stunt the growth of a trout's phallus 
(13). What it can do to the developing 
males of other species, including our own, 
remains unknown. 
 
While exposures to most environmental 
hormones today are small, perhaps at just a 
 
fraction of the potential active dose in 
humans, such contaminants are ubiqui- 
tous. We breathe them in urban air, drink 
them in tap water, consume them as trace 
contaminants in our food, and even pass 
them on to newborns via breastmilk. 
Though skeptics may argue that human 
exposures to any one of these hormone- 
mimicking compounds is likely to be 
insignificant, new research indicates their 
effects are additive (12). 
 
Many of these pollutants also persist in 
the environment for decades or more. 
Some scientists now suspect exposure to 
such agents might explain several recently 
observed and very troubling trends 
(12,14): a) an unexplained rise in testicu- 
lar cancer (15); b) falling sperm counts in 
men throughout the industrial world (12); 
c) increasing rates of undescended testicles 
and congenital penile abnormalities in boys 
(16); and d) increasing rates of nonsmok- 
ing-related cancers since World War II 
(17), including an apparent epidemic in 
breast cancers (18). New studies indicate 
that in humans, especially in males, the 
period of greatest sensitivity to these agents 
may be in utero (12). 
 
Although some of these findings have 
been published in peer-reviewed journals, 
others have emerged only at scientific 
meetings (where attendance has sometimes 
been restricted to "by invitation only"). As 
a result, many of these findings, and cer- 
tainly a synthesis of where the trends 
appear to point, have been available to the 
public-and policymakers-only through 
the media. 
 
How reliable are the media in reporting 
such stories and in getting the message 
across? Most would assume that the answer 
depends on the journalist, but in fact even 
the audience plays a role in determining 
how reliable-and truthful-a journalist's 
message becomes. 
 
It is a fact of human nature that people 
crave certainty: it drives our curiosity. 
Indeed, the certainty that comes from 
understanding our world and how it works 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
............- - -- -- --- --- - --- ---- ---- ---- --- -- I -- -- - - - - --- ----- 1. I - -- ---- 1 . - - - - -- ---- - I -- - - - ---- --- ---- -- 
 
131 
 
J. RALOFF 
 
provides comfort. By offering the promise 
of laying some issue to rest, that certainty 
seductively holds out the prospect that we 
can safely turn our attention to resolving 
other unknowns. 
 
Most of us who know nothing about an 
issue will sensibly express no certainty; 
once we are experts, we usually become 
very certain. However, on most topics we 
will all fall somewhere between these polar 
extremes. And this presents a potential 
danger because a little knowledge can be 
dangerous-if we allow it to lull us into 
thinking we know enough about a topic to 
feel certainty about it. 
 
Ironically, most of us not only allow 
certainty to precede true understanding, 
but also are willing to act on that certainty. 
 
Consider someone who reads a single 
magazine article about the types of agents 
responsible for emasculating wildlife. He 
or she then tracks down the list of known 
agents responsible. Upon realizing that 
none of these agents are in the house or on 
the shopping list, the reader breathes a 
sigh of relief. But is this person really safe? 
Can this person even understand the range 
of issues and caveats that define this 
field-and why its practitioners disagree 
with each other-after reading a single 
journalistic summary of research spanning 
a decade or more? 
 
Or consider a woman who recognizes 
that the spermicide with estrogenic attrib- 
utes that she read about is the same one in 
the contraceptive foam she uses and in the 
condom lubricant her partner uses. She 
and her partner promptly switch to alterna- 
tive products. But have they reduced their 
exposure to the active ingredient measur- 
ably-especially if they do not find out 
how much of the same agent they ingest 
monthly from drinking water, or deter- 
mine how its potency compares to the 
estrogenicity of pesticides whose residues 
taint the fruits and vegetables that they buy 
at the grocery? 
 
A woman might decide not to breast- 
feed her newborn after learning that mea- 
surable levels of DDT lace the breast milk 
of U.S. women. Do the potential neonatal 
risks from these compounds outweigh the 
nutritional and immunity benefits her 
breast milk would have offered? 
 
No one can tell any of these individuals 
whether the decision they made was wise. 
Sufficient data simply do not yet exist to 
make such assessments. But many of us will 
try to make those assessments anyway on 
the basis of what limited or poorly under- 
stood information we possess. What scien- 
 
tists, educators, the public, and journalists 
must keep in mind is that, while we relent- 
lessly hunt certainty-often characterized as 
truth-expecting to find it is unrealistic. 
There are simply too many factors that con- 
spire to keep truth beyond our grasp. 
 
Several of those factors are endemic to 
the news business. News reporters seldom 
get to say as much as they want due to print 
space. After collecting 150 facts and 20 great 
quotes, a reporter may have room or time to 
include just 20% of the information. 
 
To do a credible job, smart reporters 
will seek to limit the range of what they 
cover. In other words, instead of reporting 
on the whole pie, they tackle just a slice. 
How thin we cut that slice is quite arbi- 
trary; and while cutting the slice paper thin 
may permit us to be quite complete in our 
coverage of that selected facet, it also may 
leave our audience with the impression that 
we have actually described a much fatter 
wedge of the pie, or a much more universal 
picture of the truth. 
 
And what of the stories that do not 
lend themselves to slicing into manageable 
bite-size wedges? If space constraints 
remain, a writer will be forced to focus on 
highlights. 
 
Our audience will never know what has 
been left out-and therefore what caveats, 
exceptions or fudge factors should be 
applied. In other words, members of the 
audience cannot know how uncertain they 
should be about extrapolating beyond the 
highlights. 
 
Then there are our sources, which vary 
dramatically in reliability. For instance, 
researchers or environmental advocates 
may corner a reporter during a banquet 
dinner and share information that they 
perceive is both important and largely 
ignored. On a 10-point scale, the reliability 
of this information probably should be 
ranked between 1 and 2. Presentations at a 
scientific meeting or press conference may 
rate a ranking of 3 to 6. And the most 
trustworthy is perhaps a press release 
together with a faxed copy of a research 
paper scheduled to debut in next week's 
issue of a peer-reviewed journal such as 
Nature or the New England Journal of 
Medicine. These may warrant a ranking of 
7 or 8. 
 
Even the best sources rate only an 8 on 
the 10-point reliability scale. Why? None 
are infallible. More important, few offer all 
the facts needed to illustrate the full range 
of what is known and, at least as impor- 
tant, what is not known-for example, a 
scientific paper and interview of its princi- 
 
pal author will usually yield enough infor- 
mation for a news story, but calling a few 
independent experts on the topic may 
glean certain critical extras; such as the sta- 
tistical significance of the findings are mar- 
ginal and therefore not yet very reliable, or 
that the mechanism responsible for the 
observation seen in this experimental 
model (the rat) does not operate in 
humans, the venue that most people really 
care about. 
 
Assuming that all the information a 
reporter picks up from each source is accu- 
rate-and that is a big and dangerous 
assumption-then the more sources we 
use, the more facts we will acquire. That 
means that the farther we move away from 
certainty, the closer we inch toward truth. 
 
Now consider those infamous dead- 
lines. Newsmagazine writers can prepare a 
feature from research to completed manu- 
script in 4 to 6 days. Their news stories, by 
contrast, may be turned around in 24 to 36 
hours, and a really brief item may be fully 
prepared, start to finish, in 45 minutes. 
Newspaper reporters, by contrast, may 
have half a day or less to put together a 
routine news story and just a day or two 
for an in-depth feature. 
 
The shorter the deadline, the fewer 
facts that can be acquired-and presented. 
The resulting stories, prepared under 
deadline constraints, may convey far more 
certainty than the data justify. 
 
A reporter has far less control over the 
interest of the audience. Accuracy and 
thoroughness are moot if the subscribers of 
a magazine fail to read the story-or just 
skim it. Here, the readers' feeling of cer- 
tainty factors in. If they think they know 
all about some subject, they may skip over 
yet another story about it. Whether they 
have convinced themselves that it is a non- 
problem or one of the major banes of 
industrialized society, they may not risk 
wasting their time to reaffirm what they 
know. Reporters recognize this, and that is 
why they try so hard to make each story 
fresh, different, or dramatic. 
 
Perhaps we have the least control over 
the carefulness with which our audience 
reads (or in the case of broadcast media, lis- 
tens). Our audience frequently mentally 
edits out ideas or limitations that we have 
carefully inserted. We are dealing with 
qualifiers-phrases which might better be 
thought of as hedging terms or weasel words. 
 
Editors pray for the story that can make 
a simple and compelling declaration, like 
"legal levels of estrogenic pollutants have 
emasculated tens of thousands of American 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
132 
 
UNCERTAIN RISKS AND THE RISKS OF CERTAINTY 
 
men." Unfortunately, the best we usually 
can offer is something like: "legal levels of 
estrogenic pollutants may be capable of 
fostering changes that impair the fertility of 
men." Still, readers tend to distill such 
qualified statements back down to "hor- 
mone-mimicking pollutants emasculate 
males," and they remember the informa- 
tion that way. 
 
This gets them, and us, in trouble- 
particularly when later research indicates 
that one or more of these agents do not 
work that way in people. Indeed, readers 
may feel cheated if they are later told that 
they have worried needlessly about a major 
problem-that is not really a problem. 
 
Finally, journalists can't define the lim- 
its of certainty-and uncertainty-when 
the jury is still out. Research advances 
incrementally, often at a snail's pace, and is 
driven by politics, funding, or curiosity. 
We are forced to parcel our news in the 
same quanta that science delivers, and at 
the same, or slower pace. 
 
How can the research community help? 
* Work with reporters and encourage 
 
colleagues to do the same. A scientist 
can warn most journalists away from 
 
weak stories or dependence on unreli- 
able sources. Scientists also can empha- 
size the need for qualifiers-those 
necessary weasel words-in descrip- 
tions of the significance of research 
findings or the limits on how far new 
data can be extrapolated safely. 
 
Point journalists to other experts who 
not only can round out their under- 
standing of a field, but who are also 
articulate enough to communicate 
difficult subjects well. 
 
Offer to be available by fax or phone on 
deadline so that a reporter can check 
the nuances of language when para- 
phrasing difficult or sensitive informa- 
tion. 
 
Take the time to be both patient and 
courteous with reporters. A journalist 
may have only minutes to pick up the 
gist of what a specialist has gleaned over 
years or decades. Moreover, when the 
media regurgitate it back, it must be in 
plain English and not in jargon. 
Moreover, if scientists are abrupt or 
nasty when a journalist calls, that 
reporter may not be motivated to ask 
the follow up questions that facilitate 
 
understanding-such as what the limits 
of this work are, how reliable it is, how 
certain we should feel about its implica- 
tions. 
 
* Try to resist any innate desire to keep 
 
the public in the dark about ongoing 
work. If a scientist's peers can hear 
about it, then it should be available for 
sharing with those taxpayers who fund 
most university and government 
research and development. 
 
* Do not wimp out when reporters (and 
 
Congress) ask for implications of your 
findings or those of others. Who knows 
better than the experts in a given field 
how far to extrapolate results? Often, 
change can come swiftly and sensibly if 
policymakers and the public have been 
given compelling reasons to act. 
 
* Finally, be careful about what you 
 
accept as fact-much less truth. All of 
us do ourselves and our families a dis- 
service by groping for certainty. 
 
My motto: Seductive as certainty is, 
learn to live without it. You won't be dis- 
appointed. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Fry DM, Toone CK. DDT-induced feminization of gull 
 
embryos. Science 213:922-24 (1981). 
 
2. Rattner BA, Eroschenko VP, Fox GA, Fry DM, Gorsline J. 
 
Avian endocrine responses to environmental pollutants. J Exp 
Zool 232:683-689 (1984). 
 
3. Fry DM, Toone CK, Speich SM, Peard RJ. Sex ratio skew and 
 
breeding patterns of gulls: demographic and toxicological con- 
siderations. Stud Avian Biol 10:26-43 (1987). 
 
4. National Research Council. Pesticides in the diets of infants 
 
and children. Washington:National Academy Press, 
1993;240-241. 
 
5. Wilson R, Allen-Gil S, Griffin D, Landers D. Organochlorine 
 
contaminants in fish from an Arctic lake in Alaska, USA. Sci 
Total Environ 160,161:511-519 (1995). 
 
6. Iwata H, Tanabe S, Sakai N, Tatsukawa R. Distribution of per- 
 
sistent organochlorines in the oceanic air and surface seawater 
and the role of ocean on their global transport and fate. 
Environ Sci Technol 27:1080-1098 (1993). 
 
7. McLachlan JA, Newbold RR, Teng CT, Korach KS. 
 
Environmental estrogens: orphan receptors and genetic 
imprinting. In: Chemically Induced Alterations in Sexual and 
Functional Development: The Wildlife/Human Connection 
(Colborn T, Clement C, eds). Princeton:Princeton Scientific 
Publishing 1992; 107-112. 
 
8. Colborn T, vom Saal FS, Soto AM. Developmental effects of 
 
endocrine-disrupting chemicals in wildlife and humans. 
Environ Health Perspect 101:378-384 (1993). 
 
9. Mably TA, Moore RW, Goy RW, Bjerke DL, Gendron- 
 
Fitzpatrick A, Peterson RE. In utero and lactational exposure of 
male rats to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol 114:97-126 (1992). 
 
10. RaloffJ. The gender benders: are environmental "hormones" 
 
emasculating wildlife? Science News 145:24-27 (1994). 
 
11. Soto AM, Justicia H, Wray JW, Sonnenschein C. p-Nonyl- 
 
phenol: an estrogenic xenobiotic released from "modified" 
polystyrene. Environ Health Perspect 92:167-173 (1991). 
 
12. Raloif J. That feminine touch: are men suffering from prenatal 
 
or childhood exposures to "hormonal" toxicants? Science News 
145:56-58 (1994). 
 
13. Raloff J. Sperm changes linked to drinking water. Science News 
 
145:142 (1994). 
 
14. Davis DL, Bradlow HL, Wolff M, Woodruff T, Hoel DG, 
 
Anton-Culver H. Medical hypothesis: xenoestrogens as pre- 
ventable causes of breast cancer. Environ Health Perspect 
101:372-377 (1993). 
 
15. RaloffJ. Manhood's cancer. Science News 145:138-140 
 
(1994). 
 
16. Giwercman A, Carlsen E, Keiding N, Skakkebaek NE. 
 
Evidence for increasing incidence of abnormalities of the 
human testis: a review. Environ Health Perspect 1O0(Suppl 
2):65-71 (1993). 
 
17. Raloff J. Non-smoking-related cancers on rise. Science News 
 
145:102 (1994). 
 
18. Raloff J. EcoCancers: do environmental factors underlie a 
 
breast cancer epidemic? 144:10-13 (1993). 
 
Volume 103, Supplement 6, September 1995 133